The third kind of slippage is caused by criminal activities of floor traders.

3. THE ODDS AGAINST YOU

9

They have many ways of stealing money from customers. Some put their
bad trades into your account and keep good trades for themselves. This kind
of activity and other criminal games were recently described in a book,
Brokers, Bagmen and Moles, by David Greising and Laurie Morse.
When a hundred men spend day after day standing shoulder to shoulder in
a small pit, they develop a camaraderie-an "us against them" mentality.
Floor traders have a nickname for outsiders which shows that they consider
us less than human. They call us "paper" (as in "Is paper coming in today?").
That is why you have to take steps to protect yourself.
To reduce slippage, trade liquid markets and avoid thin and fast-moving
markets. Go long or short when the market is quiet. Use limit orders. Buy or
sell at a specified price. Keep a record of prices at the time when you
placed your order and have your broker fight the floor on your behalf when
necessary.

Total Damage

Slippage and commissions make trading similar to swimming in a sharkinfested lagoon. Let us compare an example from a broker's sales pitch to
what happens in the real world.
The "party line" goes like this: A contract of gold futures covers 100
ounces of gold. Five individuals buy a contract each from someone who sells
five contracts short. Gold falls $4 and the buyers bail out, losing $4 per
ounce or $400 per contract. The intelligent trader, who sold five contracts
short, covers his position and makes $400 per contract, for a total of $2000.
In the real world, however, each loser has lost more than $400. He paid at
least a $25 round-trip commission and was probably hit with $20 slippage
coming and going. As a result, each loser lost $465 per contract and, as a
group, they lost $2325. The winner, who sold 5 contracts short, probably
paid a $15 round-trip commission and was hit with $10 slippage coming and
going, reducing his gain by $35 per contract, or $175 for 5 contracts. He
pocketed only $1825.
The winner thought he made $2000, but he received only $1825. The
losers thought they lost $2000, but in fact they lost $2325. In total, fully
$500 ($2325 - $1825) was siphoned from the table. The lion's share was
pocketed by floor traders and brokers who took a much bigger cut than any
casino or a racetrack would dare!

10

INTRODUCTION

Other expenses also drain traders' money. The cost of computers and data,
fees for advisory services and books- including the one you are reading
now - all come out of your trading funds.
Look for a broker with the cheapest commissions and watch him like a
hawk. Design a trading system that gives signals relatively infrequently and
allows you to enter markets during quiet times.

Individual Psychology

4. WHY TRADE?
Trading appears deceptively easy. When a beginner wins, he feels brilliant
and invincible. Then he takes wild risks and loses everything.
People trade for many reasons- some rational and many irrational.
Trading offers an opportunity to make a lot of money in a hurry. Money
symbolizes freedom to many people, even though they often do not know
what to do with their freedom.
If you know how to trade, you can make your own hours, live and work
wherever you please, and never answer to a boss. Trading is a fascinating
intellectual pursuit: chess, poker, and a crossword rolled in one. Trading
attracts people who love puzzles and brainteasers.
Trading attracts risk-takers and repels those who avoid risk. An average
person gets up in the morning, goes to work, has a lunch break, returns
home, has a beer and dinner, watches TV,and goes to sleep. If he makes a
few extra dollars, he puts them into a savings account. A trader keeps odd
hours and puts his capital at risk. Many traders are loners who abandon the
certainty of the present and take a leap into the unknown.

Self-Fulfillment

Most people have an innate drive to achieve their personal best, to develop
their abilities to the fullest. This drive, along with the pleasure of the game
and the lure of money, propels traders to challenge the markets.

12

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

Good traders tend to be hardworking and shrewd men. They are open to
new ideas. The goal of a good trader, paradoxically, is not to make money.
His goal is to trade well. If he trades right, money follows almost as an
afterthought. Successful traders keep honing their skills. Trying to reach
their personal best is more important to them than making money.
A successful New York trader said to me: "If I become half a percent
smarter each year, I'll be a genius by the time I die." His drive to improve
himself is the hallmark of a successful trader.
A professional trader from Texas invited me to his office and said: "If you
sit across the table from me while I day-trade, you won't be able to tell
whether I am $2000 ahead or $2000 behind on that day." He has risen to a
level where winning does not elate him and losing does not deflate him. He
is so focused on trading right and improving his skills that money no longer
influences his emotions.
The trouble with self-fulfillment is that many people have a self-destructive streak. Accident-prone drivers keep destroying their cars, and selfdestructive traders keep destroying their accounts (see Section 7). Markets
offer unlimited opportunities for self-sabotage, as well as for self-fulfillment.
Acting out your internal conflicts in the marketplace is a very expensive
proposition.
Traders who are not at peace with themselves often try to fulfill their contradictory wishes in the market. If you do not know where you are going,
you will wind up somewhere you never wanted to be.

5. FANTASY VERSUS REALITY
If you hear from a friend with little farming experience that he plans to feed
himself with food grown on a quarter-acre plot, you will expect him to go
hungry. We all know that one can squeeze only so much blood from a turnip.
The one field in which grown-ups let their fantasies soar is trading.
Just the other day, a friend told me that he expected to support himself
trading his $6000 account. When I tried to show him the futility of his plan,
he quickly changed our topic of conversation. He is a bright analyst, but he
refuses to see that his "intensive farming" plan is suicidal. In his desperate
effort to succeed, he must take on large positions-and the slightest wiggle
of the market is sure to put him out of business.
A successful trader is a realist. He knows his abilities and limitations. He
sees what is happening in the markets and knows how to react to them. He

5. FANTASY VERSUS REALITY

13
I

analyzes the markets without cutting comers, observes his own reactions,
and makes realistic plans. A professional trader cannot afford illusions.
Once an amateur takes a few hits and gets a few margin calls, he becomes
fearful instead of cocky and starts developing strange ideas about the markets. Losers buy, sell, or miss trades thanks to their fantastic ideas. They act
like children who are afraid to pass a cemetery or look under their bed at
night because they are afraid of ghosts. The unstructured environment of the
market makes it is easy to develop fantasies.
Most people who have grown up in Western civilization have several similar fantasies. They are so widespread that when I studied at the New York
Psychoanalytic Institute, there was a course called "Universal Fantasies."
For example, most people have a fantasy in childhood that they were
adopted rather than born to their parents. A fantasy seems to explain the
unfriendly and impersonal world. It consoles a child but prevents him from
seeing reality. Our fantasies influence our behavior, even if we are not consciously aware of them.
In talking to hundreds of traders, I keep hearing them express several universal fantasies. They distort reality and stand in the way of trading success.
A successful trader must identify his fantasies and get rid of them.

The Brain Myth

Losers who suffer from the "brain myth" will tell you, "I lost because I
didn't know trading secrets." Many losers have a fantasy that successful
traders have some secret knowledge. This fantasy helps support a lively market in advisory services and ready-made trading systems.
A demoralized trader often whips out his checkbook and goes shopping
for "trading secrets." He may send money to a charlatan for a $3000 "can't
miss," backtested, computerized trading system. When that self-destructs, he
sends another check for a "scientific manual" that explains how he can stop
being a loser and become a true insider and a winner by contetnplating the
Moon, Saturn, or even Uranus.
The losers do not know that trading is intellectually fairly simple. It is less
demanding than taking out an appendix, building a bridge, or trying a case in
court. Good traders are often shrewd, but few of them are intellectuals. Many
have not been to college, and some have even dropped out of high school.
Intelligent and hardworking people who have succeeded in their careers
often feel drawn to trading. The average client of a brokerage firm is 50

14

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

years old, is married, and has a college education. Many have postgraduate
degrees or own their businesses. The two largest professional groups among
traders are engineers and farmers.
Why do these intelligent and hardworking people fail in trading? What
separates winners from losers is neither intelligence nor secrets, and certainly not education.

The Undercapitalization Myth

Many losers think that they would be successful if they could trade a bigger
account. All losers get knocked out of the game by a string of losses or a single abysmally bad trade. Often, after the amateur is sold out, the market
reverses and moves in the direction he expected. The loser is ready to kick
either himself or his broker: Had he survived another week, he might have
made a small fortune!
Losers take this reversal as a confirmation of their methods. They earn,
save, or borrow enough money to open another small account. The story
repeats: The loser gets wiped out, the market reverses and "proves" the loser
right, but only too late - he has been sold out again. That's when the fantasy
is born: "If only I had a bigger account, I could have stayed in the market a
little longer and won."
Some losers raise money from relatives and friends by showing them a
paper track record. It seems to prove that they would have won big, if only
they had had more money to work with. But if they raise more money, they
lose that, too - it is as if the market were laughing at them!
A loser is not undercapitalized - his mind is underdeveloped. A loser can
destroy a big account almost as quickly as a small one. He overtrades, and
his money management is sloppy. He takes risks that are too big, whatever
the size of his account. No matter how good his system is, a streak of bad
trades is sure to put him out of business.
Traders often ask me how much money they need to begin trading. They
want to be able to withstand a drawdown, a temporary drop in the account
equity. They expect to lose a large amount of money before making any!
They sound like an engineer who plans to build several bridges that collapse
before erecting his masterpiece. Would a surgeon plan on killing several
patients while becoming an expert at taking out an appendix?
A trader who wants to survive and prosper must control his losses. You do

5. FANTASY VERSUS REALITY

15

that by risking only a tiny fraction of your equity on any single trade (see
Chapter 10, "Risk Management"). Give yourself several years to learn how
to trade. Do not start with an account bigger than $20,000, and do not lose
more than 2 percent of your equity on any single trade. Learn from cheap
mistakes in a small account.
Amateurs neither expect to lose nor are in any way prepared for it. The
notion of being undercapitalized is a cop-out that helps them avoid two
painful truths: their lack of trading discipline, and their lack of a realistic
money management plan.
The one advantage of a large trading account is that the price of equipment and services represents a smaller percentage of your money. A manager of a million-dollar fund who spends $10,000 on computers and seminars is only 1 percent behind the game. The same expenditure would
represent 50 percent of the equity of a trader with a $20,000 account.

The Autopilot Myth

Imagine that a stranger walks into your driveway and tries to sell you an
automatic system for driving your car. Just pay a few hundred dollars for a
computer chip, install it in your car, and stop wasting energy on driving, he
says. You can take a nap in the driver's seat while the "Easy Swing System"
whisks you to work. You would probably laugh the salesman out of your
driveway. But would you laugh if he tried to sell you an automatic trading
system?
Traders who believe in the autopilot myth think that the pursuit of wealth
can be automated. Some try to develop an automatic trading system, while
others buy one from the experts. Men who have spent years honing their
skills as lawyers, doctors, or businessmen plunk down thousands of dollars
for canned competence. They are driven by greed, laziness, and mathematical illiteracy.
Systems used to be written on sheets of paper, but now they usually come
on copy-protected diskettes. Some are primitive; others are elaborate, with
built-in optimization and money management rules. Many traders spend
thousands of dollars searching for magic that will turn a few pages of computer code into an endless stream of money. People who pay for automatic
trading systems are like medieval knights who paid alchemists for the secret
of turning base metals into gold.

16

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

Complex human activities do not lend themselves to automation.
Computerized learning systems have not replaced teachers, and programs for
doing taxes have not created unemployment among accountants. Most
human activities call for an exercise of judgment; machines and systems can
help but not replace humans. So many system buyers have been burned that
they have formed an organization, Club 3000, named after the price of many
systems.
If you could buy a successful automatic trading system, you could move
to Tahiti and spend the rest of your life in leisure, supported by a stream of
checks from your broker. So far, the only people who have made money
from trading systems are the system sellers. They form a small but colorful
cottage industry. If their systems worked, why would they sell them? They
could move to Tahiti themselves and cash checks from their brokers!
Meanwhile, every system seller has a line. Some say they like programming
better than trading. Others claim that they sell their systems only to raise
trading capital.
Markets always change and defeat automatic trading systems. Yesterday's
rigid rules work poorly today and will probably stop working tomorrow. A
competent trader can adjust his methods when he detects trouble. An automatic system is less adaptable and self-destructs.
Airlines pay high salaries to pilots despite having autopilots. They do it
because humans can handle unforeseen events. When a roof blows off an airliner over the Pacific or when a plane runs out of gas over the Canadian
wilderness, only a human can handle such a crisis. These emergencies have
been reported in the press, and in each of them experienced pilots managed
to land their airliners by improvising. No autopilot can do that. Betting your
money on an automatic system is like betting your life on an autopilot. The
first unexpected event will destroy your account.
There are good trading systems out there, but they have to be monitored
and adjusted using individual judgment. You have to stay on the ball-you
cannot abdicate your responsibility for your success to a trading system.
Traders who have the autopilot fantasy try to repeat what they felt as
infants. Their mothers used to fulfill their needs for food, warmth, and comfort. Now they try to re-create the experience of passively lying on their
backs and having profits flow to them like an endless stream of free, warm
milk.
The market is not your mother. It consists of tough men and women who
look for ways to take money away from you instead of pouring milk into
your mouth.

6 . MARKET GURUS

17

The Personality Cult

Most people give lip service to their wish for freedom and independence.
When they come under pressure, they change their tune and start looking for
"strong leadership." Traders in distress often seek directions from assorted
gurus.
When I was growing up in the former Soviet Union, children were taught
that Stalin was our great leader. Later we found out what a monster he had
been, but while he was alive, most people enjoyed following the leader. He
freed them from the need to think for themselves.
"Little Stalins" were installed in every area of society-in economics,
biology, architecture, and so on. When I came to the United States and began
to trade, I was amazed to see how many traders were looking for a gurutheir "little Stalin" in the market. The fantasy that someone else can make
you rich deserves its own discussion later in this chapter.
Trade with Your Eyes Open

Every winner needs to master three essential components of trading: a sound
individual psychology, a logical trading system, and a good money management plan. These essentials are like three legs of a stool-remove one and
the stool will fall, .together with the person who sits on it. Losers try to build
a stool with only one leg, or two at the most. They usually focus exclusively
on trading systems.
Your trades must be based on clearly defined rules. You have to analyze
your feelings as you trade, to make sure that your decisions are intellectually
sound. You have to structure your money management so that no string of
losses can kick you out of the game.

6. MARKET GURUS*
Gurus have been with us ever since the public entered markets. In 1841, the
classic book on market manias, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the
Madness of Crowds, was published in England. It is still in print today. Its
author, Charles Mackay, described the Dutch Tulip Mania, the South Seas
Bubble in England, and other mass manias. Human nature changes slowly,
'This section originally appeared as an article, "Market Gurus," in the September 1990 issue of Fumres
and Options World London, U.K. (81990 by Alexander Elder.

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

18

and today new mass manias, including gum manias, continue to sweep the
markets.
Gum manias spring up faster now than they did centuries ago, thanks to
modern telecommunications. Even educated and intelligent investors and
traders follow market gums, like the devotees of the false Messiahs in the
Middle Ages.
There are three types of gurus in the financial markets: market cycle
gums, magic method gums, and dead gums. Some gums call important market turns. Others promote "unique methods '-new highways to riches. Still
others have escaped criticism and invited cult following through the simple
mechanism of departing this world.
9

Market Cycle Gurus

For many decades, the U.S. stock market has generally followed a four-year
cycle. Significant bear market lows occurred in 1962, 1966, 1970, 1974,
1978, and 1982. The broad stock market has normally spent 2.5 or 3 years
going up and 1 or 1.5 years going down.
A new market cycle gum emerges in almost every major stock market
cycle, once every 4 years. A gum's fame tends to last for 2 to 3 years. The
reigning period of each guru coincides with a major bull market in the
United States.
A market cycle gum forecasts all major rallies and declines. Each correct
forecast increases his fame and prompts even more people to buy or sell
when he issues his next forecast. As more and more people take notice of the
gum, his advice becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. When you recognize a
hot new guru, it pays to follow his advice.
There are thousands of analysts, some of whom are certain to be on a hot
streak at any given time. Most analysts become hot at some point in their
careers for the same reason a broken clock shows the right time twice a day.
Those who have tasted the joy of being on a hot streak sometimes feel
crushed when it ends and they wash out of the market. But there are enough
old foxes who enjoy their occasional hot streaks, yet continue working as
usual after their hot streak ends.
The success of a market cycle gum depends on more than short-term luck.
He has a pet theory about the market. That theory-cycles, volume, Elliott
Wave, whatever- is usually developed several years prior to reaching stardom. At first, the market refuses to follow an aspiring gum's pet theory. Then

6 . MARKET GURUS

19

the market changes and for several years comes in gear with theory. That is
when the star of the market guru rises high and bright above the marketplace.
Compare this to what happens to fashion models as public tastes change.
One year, blondes are popular, another year, redheads. Suddenly, last year's
blonde star is no longer wanted for the front cover of a major women's magazine. Everybody wants a dark model, or a woman with a birthmark on her
face. A model does not change - public tastes do.
Gurus always come from the fringes of market analysis. They are never
establishment analysts. Institutional employees play it safe and never
achieve spectacular results because each uses similar methods. A market
cycle guru is an outsider with a unique theory.
A guru usually earns a living publishing a newsletter and can grow rich
selling his advice. Subscriptions can soar from a few hundred annually to
tens of thousands. A recent market cycle guru was reported to have hired
three people just to open the envelopes with money pouring into his firm.
At investment conferences, a guru is surrounded by a mob of admirers. If
you ever find yourself in such a crowd, notice that a guru is seldom asked
questions about his theory. His admirers are content to drink in the sound of
his voice. They brag to their friends about having met him.
A guru remains famous for as long as the market behaves according to his
theory-usually for less than the duration of one 4-year market cycle. At
some point the market changes and starts marching to a different tune. A
guru continues to use old methods that worked spectacularly well in the past
and rapidly loses his following. When the guru's forecasts stop working,
public admiration turns to hatred. It is impossible for a discredited market
cycle guru to return to stardom.
The reigning guru in the early 1970s was Edson Gould. He based his forecasts on policy changes of the Federal Reserve, as reflected in the discount
rate. His famous rule of "three steps and a stumble" stated that if the Federal
Reserve raised the discount rate three times, that showed tightening and led
to a bear market. Lowering the discount rate in three steps revealed a loosening of the monetary policy and led to a bull market. Gould also developed an
original charting technique called speedlines-shallow trendlines whose
angles depended on the velocity of a trend and the depth of market reactions.
Gould became very hot during the bear market of 1973-1974. He vaulted
to prominence after correctly calling the December 1974 bottom, when the
Dow Jones Industrials fell to near 500. The market rocketed higher, Gould
presciently identified its important turning points using speedlines, and his
fame grew. But soon the United States was flooded with liquidity, inflation
