
Slingshot

123

Both concepts will lead to further losses as you break your discipline.
Perhaps you will stop trading altogether.
The point is that a series of losing trades, even small losers, or a losing
streak can break you psychologically. Chapter 9 will cover this in more
detail, but it is important to bring it up here.
One solution to psychological stress is to boost the number of winning trades. The potential for losing streaks decreases and the positive
reinforcement that comes from having a winning streak increases. Even
having the occasional small winner can create a much more positive emotional and psychological state of mind and thus enhance the profitability of
the trader through greater discipline.
Adding a smattering of winning trades can create a better mind-set to
make money. It will give the positive feedback that will help to create the
discipline to be consistent and persistent in the face of a losing streak.
Why? Because the losing streak will be reduced or limited by the addition
of some small winning trades.

CONFIRMATIONS
A confirmation comes when a signal occurs and there is another indicator
that agrees with the signal. The average directional index (ADX) Filter is
an example of a confirmation. The ADX must be climbing to confirm the
breakout signal of, say, channel breakout. In effect, there must be two signals before a trade is placed.
Confirmations are an important concept because you are effectively
making sure that the original signal is correct before taking action. This
reduces losing trades but at the cost of occasionally missing out on a winning trade. Generally speaking, this is a good tradeoff and net profits will
increase. In addition, you will trade less. This may be a good or a bad thing
depending on your psychology or situation. Will you get bored due to less
trading and have your discipline break down or will the reduction in trading losses increase your discipline?
I was working at a major bank running a trading desk. For the life of
me, I could not see any good trades. This drifted on for a couple of weeks.
Finally, my boss, the treasurer, came over to me and asked me why I wasn’t
trading. I told him that I couldn’t see any good trades. He thundered that
I was paid to trade. I was dumbfounded and retorted that I thought I was
paid to make money. As you can imagine, I lost the argument so I was
sentenced to trading trades I didn’t like in as small a size as possible so I
would lose as little as possible.

124

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

MAXIMUM EXCURSION ANALYSIS
I first ran across the idea of maximum excursion analysis (MEA) from Kent
Calhoun. He didn’t call it that but I took the idea from him and made it more
general than what he was doing. He basically looked at different types of
technical signals in futures, such as head and shoulders or breakouts, and
measured how much did the futures contract go after that signal.
For example, how far did the market move after breaking the 55-day
high? (It is actually more difficult to answer this question than it sounds.
What objective criteria will you use to determine the farthest that the price
went? Oh, it went up 500 pips. But what about the 5,000 pips it went up
over the next year? Do you count that as part of this signal or is that just
drift in the price?) However you determine this, it will form a classic bell
curve.
One of the problems in Kent’s method is that he plotted the absolute
price changes that came from a signal. That meant that a signal when
EUR/USD is 1.5000 was treated the same as when it was 0.8000. Clearly,
the moves will be bigger when the price is higher than when it is lower.
However, the percentage move will likely be about the same. So we need
to adjust the maximum excursion to the price level. This can be done by
simply tracking the maximum excursions as percents rather than as absolute price movements.
So now you have adjusted everything to percentages. You will now
have a nice bell curve that shows how much the price moves after breaking
a key technical pattern. Let’s assume for a moment that it shows that, given
current market levels, it will gain 100 pips 90 percent of the time, 200 pips
62 percent of the time, and 300 pips 32 percent of the time.
We could put in an order to take profits of 100 pips and we would gain
that profit about 90 percent of the time. We would take a profit of 200 pips
about 62 percent of the time if we put in a limit order to take profits at that
level and so on.
Note that 10 percent of the time, in our example, the price doesn’t even
go 100 pips after breaking this key technical level. Also remember that this
example is only an example, and is only for purposes of explanation.
We now know what the chances are of what amount of money that we
are going to make on a trade. We now can construct a strategy to take that
into account. For example, I now know that 90 percent of the time I can
make 100 pips when this particular technique is triggered. That means that
only 10 percent of the time do I run the risk of losing money and even part
or most of that 90 percent will actually be going past the 100 pips level and
going to a new level. Now I can put in an entry stop when the technical
trigger occurs and a limit order at the same time to take profits when the
market moves 100 pips.

Slingshot

125

There is another amazing idea that comes from MEA: You can turn
losing techniques into winners.
There are a million trading techniques out there. Most of them are
garbage. They are consistent losers. But the principle of MEA can turn them
into winners.
Typically, a trading method has an entry and an exit rule. They are
usually the same rule. For example, a moving average crossover method
will buy when the shorter moving average crosses above the longer moving
average and then reverse and go short when the shorter moving average
crosses below the longer moving average. This can be a profitable method
if the length of the moving averages are correct but can also be a losing
technique if the length is wrong.
I know that the 5/10 moving average crossover is a money-losing system. (Go long when the five-day moving average crosses above the 10-day
moving average and go short when the five-day moving average crosses
below the 10-day moving average.) You should never use this system. But
what if we apply MEA to it?
Now we can do the study and see if you can make money looking for
small profits when the shorter moving average crosses the longer moving
average. In fact, you can turn this losing system into a profitable system.
(I’m not giving you the exact parameters for making a profit because I don’t
want anyone to actually go out and do this. It’s still not particularly profitable.) This is astounding because we have turned an unprofitable trading
method into a profitable method.
I’ve not seen anyone really do any research into the use of MEA as a
means of creating and/or enhancing profits of trading techniques. In fact,
remember the multiunit tactic for the inside days technique (Chapter 6)
where we took a quick 20-pip profit? That was an example of MEA.

USING THE SLINGSHOT FOR PROFITS
I went through this preamble because I wanted to give some of the flavor
behind the concept of the slingshot. It was designed to not trade unless
there are multiple confirmations that the coast is clear to trade.
Every technique in this book is complementary with the other techniques. They may all be profitable by themselves but are far more profitable
when combined. For example, the main purpose of the channel breakout
is to ensure that we catch the big move.
One of the purposes of the slingshot is to take profits on strength. It is
there to boost the number of winners in relation to the number of losers.
In addition, it shows the concept of confirmation and how it can be used

126

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

in a trading method. It is similar to trend analysis in that we are always
looking for similar swing highs and lows and looking for breakouts using
those highs and lows. But it differs from trend analysis in that it is looking
for confirmations and also takes profits.
Let’s start to look at the rules. In Figure 8.1, the first data point is to
identify what I have labeled Key High. The key high is any high that is
higher than the previous high. So in this case the key high is the first swing
high since early December.
We then identify a Key Low. It is also a swing low. This key low must
be at least a two-bar swing low. My preference is a three-bar low but I’ll
take a two-bar low.
The Slingshot High is the critical high in the technique. Let’s examine
it a little closer. Note that this slingshot high is a failure. This had been a
strong bull market to this point but this bar failed to make new high. The
slingshot high doesn’t have to be a failure, but it helps.
There are two confirmations for the slingshot high. The first is that the
slingshot high must be at least three bars from a previous higher bar. In
this case, the previous bar with a higher high is actually the key high. It
won’t usually be the key high, but it was in this case. The second is that the
previous high bar must not be more than 20 days from the slingshot high.
Once again, the previous high bar is the key high bar and it is six days from
the slingshot high.
These two confirmations sharply reduce the risk in the trade by ensuring that you are only getting into the trade with the odds in your favor. The
first confirmation makes sure that you are not in a running market and that
the market is creating a solid formation. In effect, it is ensuring that you
are not buying the top of a formation but the beginning of a new trend. The
second confirmation makes sure that you are not trying to pick the bottom
in a market. Note that these two confirmations make sure that you are not
trying to get in on the key high but only after certain price action has shown
that the bull leg is over.
I haven’t put it on the chart but we are also going to use the ADX Filter
on this method (see Chapter 2 for more on ADX).
We now look to sell on a break of the key low. This confirms that the
trend is now down and we can get short. Your first protective stop loss is
the slingshot high. In fact, I like to make this a reversal stop so that we
not only exit our short position but go long. Remember, a failed signal is a
signal!
Unlike trend analysis, which is designed to try to stay in the position for as long as possible, we are going to enter a profit-taking limit
order.
The first profit objective is calculated this way. Take the difference between the slingshot high and the key low. Now subtract that value from

127

FIGURE 8.1 A Slingshot Trade

128

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

the key low. You will take profits at that point on half of your position.
Yes, you really should be using at least two contracts on this method
because we are using several methods to profit from this method. Let’s
carry on.
Raise the stop to a level that protects 25 percent of your profits when
you hit the first profit objective. In this case, the slingshot high was at
1.4363 and the key low was at 1.3826 so the difference was 537 pips. I call
this the profit target. We subtract 537 pips from the key low and we get a
profit objective of 1.3289, which we hit where I have placed an arrow labeled Take Profits. At this point, we would move the protective stop down
to 134 pips below the key low of 1.3826 or 1.3692.
We are now going to use a trailing stop based on the factors we have
just outlined. Move the stop to the original profit objective of 1.3289 if the
price moves down 1.5 times the profit target from the key low. Keep it
trailing after that by 50 percent of a profit target. In this example, the profit
target was 537 pips so use a trailing stop that is roughly 268 pips from the
low of the move.
We will also use the Bishop as an exit technique for slingshot. That will
often be the normal exit plan should we really get into a major bear or bull
market. We will also be taking profits as the market moves lower. But it
depends on how many contracts you have.
At the point where we have reached the profit target, we will have
liquidated half of our position. Liquidate another half if we reach a level
of two times the profit target. Liquidate another half if we reach a level
of three times the profit target and so on until you are left with just one
contract. The final contract will be exited only on a stop out or a Bishop
signal.

THE MINI-SLINGSHOT
The mini-slingshot is a shorter-term swing trader variation of the slingshot.
It does not have as much confirmation and it is designed to take a quick
profit. Take a look at Figure 8.2.
Here we are seeing a similar formation from the previous figure. However, we are going to eliminate the 20-day confirmation and leave just the
two-day confirmation. We are also going to take 100 percent of the position
off when we hit the profit target. We will raise our protective stop to break
even as soon as the price has moved 50 percent of the way from the Go
Long point to the Take Profits point.
This simple technique is clearly closer to trend analysis and can almost
be considered a profit-taking version of that method.

129

FIGURE 8.2 Mini-Slingshot Trade

130

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

THE BOTTOM LINE
The slingshot has a particular spot in our toolbox of trading techniques.
It is there to provide us with a low-risk trading method that will take a
higher number than normal profitable trades. It will not make us as much
money at the end of the year as other techniques, such as channel breakouts, but it will be profitable and it will create a positive psychological environment to help us have the right mind-set to make money in all the other
methods.

CHAPTER 9

The Psychology
of Successful
Trading

t is a well-known fact that roughly 90 percent of forex traders lose
money, about 5 percent break even, and 5 percent make money. Why?
And what can be done about it?
The answers to these questions may be the most critical for any forex
traders. This chapter explores these issues and attempts to highlight ways
that traders can become profitable in their forex trading. The psychology
of trading is the most important factor for determining the success of your
trading.
There are numerous trading systems on the market that are profitable.
There are numerous trading advisors and newsletters that have had longprofitable track records. Yet the average speculator is a losing trader. The
average speculator, when handed sound advice, will still lose money.
I have been writing on this subject since my book Commodity Spreads
(John Wiley & Sons) was published in 1982. I feel that understanding
the psychology of trading is vitally important for myself as a professional
trader and for you, the intelligent reader of this book.
I have given lectures on this subject mainly to futures and forex traders
though the years. The first thing that I do is ask how many people in the audience have made significant money over the prior two years. I have had
only one person raise their hand in the hundreds of people who have attended the lecture. I then ask how many had made significant money over
the prior year. I get a few hands. The point: The vast majority of traders
don’t make money.
I have often wondered why. After all, the vast majority of the people at
the lectures are successful people in their businesses. It costs about $500

I

131

132

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

to attend the conference, and the attendees may also be paying for travel
and hotels to attend the conference. It takes a certain amount of money to
spend a minimum of $500 to gain some insight into trading.
There are few people who attend these conferences that are not very
successful people. Why is it that they can be successful doctors, lawyers,
and business owners yet cannot trade forex? What is it about forex trading
that is so hard?

WHY DO YOU TRADE?
I ask the audience members why they trade. Of course, the answer is to
make money. I ask them if they are really sure. By this time, they are starting to second-guess their first answer. But, in the final analysis, they stick
with their answer: that they are trading so that they can make money. I
think that that is completely wrong. I think that people trade for tons of
other reasons and that making money is a relatively minor reason. Nobody
really knows why each individual person trades but there are many reasons
other than making money.
I first discovered this about 20 years ago. Back in the 1970s, I managed
futures money with a partner. We offered two different accounts to our
prospective clients. The first account traded only commodity spreads and
was making 200 percent per year while the second account traded only
outright positions and was making about 100 percent per year (please note
that these returns were so high because I didn’t know as much as I do
now about risk and money management and we were simply taking far too
much risk).
Of course, everybody opened up a spread account because it was
making 200 percent per year. Within six months, nearly everybody had
shifted their account to the outright program in spite of the fact that it
returned only half as much! This stunned us because we always assumed
that people invested in futures to make money. In fact, they were involved,
I believe, for the action. They would call us up when they were invested in
the spread account and ask how their account was doing. We would
respond that they made $12.50 the previous day because a back spread
in the corn market has moved one-quarter of a cent. On the other hand,
they would call about their outright account and we could say that the
value of the account had moved $1,000 because of some big move in the
bellies.
The point is that they wanted the action of the futures markets, not
the profits. Their primary motivation was action and making money was
secondary. It’s okay to pay to see a movie because of the entertainment

The Psychology of Successful Trading

133

value. To these traders, losing money trading was the price of admission to
a fun and exciting game.
This was my first clue that making money is secondary to other considerations with many people.
I believe that there are many other reasons why people trade. In the example just given, the clients were more interested in the excitement of trading than in the making of money. They wanted to feel that jolt of adrenaline
that comes from trading. They liked the high of having the account value
go up and perhaps even liked the adrenaline hit when the account value
went down.
In the lecture, I ask attendees how they feel when they have bought a
market and it is moving strongly higher. People in the audience said that
they felt great; they felt high! And they said that they felt terrible when they
were losing money.
It is common for people to equate the forex market to Las Vegas. People know that they will lose money when they go to Las Vegas and yet they
still go because of the excitement and entertainment they receive. Except
for card-counters in blackjack, nobody goes to Las Vegas to make money.
Nobody plays roulette with the idea that they will make a lot of money or
will be able to make a living doing it. They do it for the action.
Many people trade forex to provide a diversion from their regular life,
perhaps because they feel that it is boring or not stimulating enough. They
could call their bookie or they could call their broker. It beats sitting at
home and watching TV.
Another reason that many people like to invest in forex is because they
like to solve the puzzle of what makes the market go up and down. They
want to be able to predict the market.
It’s interesting to note that nearly all the articles and books written
about forex trading are about entry and exit techniques. Yet trading techniques developed by Richard Donchian in the 1960s have been shown to
make money for every year since then. We already know techniques that
make money, yet 90 percent of traders lose money. Odd? Yes! It is clear
to me that it is more important for many people to continue to figure out
what makes the market tick or to figure out new entry and exit techniques
than to make money. Rather than use the old tried-and-true techniques and
make money, they prefer to try to figure out new techniques.
There is a common desire in many to want to figure out puzzles. The
market is a very challenging puzzle to be solved and attracts many people
to do just exactly this. They are fascinated by the puzzle. They want to find
a new way to beat the market.
Many traders believe that there is an underlying truth to the market
or perhaps a powerful underlying pattern or force. They, therefore, believe
that they should spend a tremendous amount of time trying to understand

134

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

that underlying force. For example, many people spend countless hours
and days trying to understand Gann or Elliott on the assumption that if
they can just crack the code they will become rich beyond their wildest
dreams. Or that if they just study harder they will understand the teachings
of the guru that they are subscribing to.
These traders focus on trying to unlock the secrets of the universe as
the way of making money rather than go directly to the subject of making
money. They end up spending a tremendous amount of time on the study
of esoteric theory and not on trading the markets. When they do trade the
markets, they often stop trading after just a few losing trades because they
assume that they do not understand the secrets of the universe well enough
and should go back to studying.
Take a look at the popularity of the literature and lectures about trading systems. The basic concept behind trading systems is that there is a
mathematical model that will create profits. I agree that this is true. The
continuing success of Donchian’s basic systems, mentioned earlier, shows
that trading systems can make money. However, many people like to invent
their own systems or modify other systems that they have bought or read
about. One problem with this is that they spend all their time trying to perfect the system rather than make money. They often become obsessed with
fine-tuning their system rather than simply using an imperfect system. Of
course, no system is perfect so they end up spending all their free time on
the system instead of making money. The chase of the system is more important than making money. The perfection of the system becomes much
more important than the point of the system, which is supposedly to make
money.
A number of years ago, I had the opportunity to train traders from
Korea. I had six months to turn them into profit-making traders. They each
had $100,000 to trade. I had three groups of six traders for each six-month
period.
I decided to give the initial six trader-trainees a liberal arts education
about trading. I taught them everything about trading under the sun. I even
had guest lecturers teach them about subjects that I was not an expert in,
like Elliott Wave.
One of the guest lecturers was a good friend of mine who was an Elliott
Wave fanatic and had been trading using Elliott Wave for about eight years.
I left him with the students while he gave the lecture. At the end of the
lecture, I came back in and started to ask him some questions about his
trading that I thought would be informative to my students.
I asked him point-blank, “Why do you use Elliott Wave?”
He said, “There is no greater feeling in the world than to have analyzed
the wave structure of a move and to buy right at the absolute bottom of
Wave Two!”
