
264

Figure 11.26
What about quantitative easing? Yes, this creates a lot of new currency at the push of a button, and in theory this should push the dollar lower. This would be true if
so many dollars weren’t being destroyed by deflationary real estate pressures. For example, in 2009, there was $1.1 trillion in new dollars created by quantitative
easing. There was also $1.6 trillion in debt destroyed by falling real estate prices. This means that in 2009, despite quantitative easing, the supply of U.S. dollars
actually decreased by $500 billion, making the fewer dollars that were left more valuable. Luckily, a person doesn’t have to understand or even know about this. Just
look at the chart and follow the squeeze signals.
The two big factors that drive this currency higher these days are (1) the unwinding of the carry trade (see the Chapter 6 discussion of AUDJPY) and (2) global
economic recessions. In a global recession, when everything is slowing down, the U.S. dollar starts to look pretty good in comparison to other fiat currencies. Think of
it as “the least stinky piece of crap” floating to the surface.
In Figure 11.27, we have a weekly chart of the $DXY. At the start of 2010, a long squeeze fired off, and the Dixie had a fantastic rally. During this time, gold fell
from 1200 to 1000, the S&P 500 fell from 1215 to 1000, the euro got clobbered from 1.50 to 1.19—the list goes on and on. Even strong markets like oil could only
manage to trade sideways during this time. A strong dollar truly affects everything, just as a weak dollar also affects everything. The key is not to stick your head in
the sand and trust that the U.S. dollar will continue weakening in a straight line down. At point 2, there is a short squeeze, and during this time, as the U.S. dollar sold
off, nearly everything else rallied. Stocks, gold, oil, euros—you name it, it rallied. As I’m writing this on October 8, 2011, the U.S. dollar has recently fired off another
long squeeze (on fears of a global recession—but of course the reasoning doesn’t really matter; just follow the signal), sending the dollar higher. This has been a
powerful signal, as prices of gold, silver, stocks, and so forth continue to fall apart.
The weekly squeeze is also very useful for cutting through the noise, which is often confusing and contradictory. In September 2010, RAX (Rackspace), a web
hosting company, was getting a lot of negative press. The stock was too expensive, the P/E ratio was too high, and the short interest continued to climb as hedge funds
shorted the stock in anticipation of a great fall.

265

Figure 11.27
Figure 11.28 shows a weekly chart of RAX. During this time of negative “this stock is way overvalued” press, a weekly squeeze slowly and quietly started to
develop. By the time it fired off at point 2, it launched the stock into a move that would more than double the price of the stock. For weekly squeezes, a trader can buy
the stock outright or buy in-the-money call options a few months out. For RAX, those who listened to the negative press sold the stock or, worse, shorted the stock.
Those who watched the weekly squeeze and brainlessly followed the signal enjoyed an awesome run higher in the price.

266

Figure 11.28

267

Figure 11.29
One thing about the squeeze is that it doesn’t really care what market you watch. Figure 11.29 is a weekly chart of soybeans. As a trader, getting long soybean
futures at point 1 turned into an incredibly profitable trade. And there are other uses for this type of information. For a farmer who is trying to decide whether to
hedge his crop at $10.00 (by shorting soybean futures), this squeeze proves to be very useful information. “Don’t hedge yet,” it screams. “At least wait till the
squeeze is done.” When it’s done, soybeans are closer to $13.50. The farmer can hedge his cash crop here and lock in that profit. This can also be done with gold and
silver bullion. Selling physical gold and bullion can be a huge pain. However, hedging physical holdings is super easy if you know how to read the squeeze.

What Is the Best Way to Filter Out Squeezes That Might Not Work Out?
On the weekly chart of silver in Figure 11.24, we saw a squeeze signal at point 1 that was tepid at best. It worked, but it didn’t work great. There are also squeezes
that just plain don’t work. This is not common on weekly and monthly charts, but it can be a factor on intraday charts, such as a five-minute chart, or something a
little longer, like a 39-minute chart (I like 39-minute charts on individual stocks, since the chart shows 10 equal-sized bars, as the cash stock session has 390 minutes of
trading activity). What is the best way to filter out the potentially bad trades?
As I said earlier in the chapter, it really is important to know what is going on in the larger time frames, even if your trading plan doesn’t have you actually trading
these time frames. Figure 11.30 shows a weekly chart of the e-mini S&P 500 futures. This squeeze signal fired off long at the end of September, 2010, pushing the
index nearly straight up for 300 plus points. The move was ferocious, and fighting this move proved disastrous to many a trader’s health.
In Figure 11.31, we drill down to an hourly chart of the e-mini S&P 500 futures toward the end of November 2010, while the weekly chart in Figure 11.30 remained
in the strong upward squeeze. The trading process now becomes extremely simple. Is the hourly chart firing off a short squeeze, in the opposite direction of the
weekly chart? Like at point 1? Yes? Pass on this trade. It’s a low-probability trade that is fighting the predominant larger trend. On the other hand, is the next squeeze
that is setting up firing off long? In the direction of the weekly squeeze? Like at points 2 and 3? Yes? Then take those trades because they are great signals aligned with
the weekly trend. This is why it’s always important to understand what the larger time frames are doing. These act as great filters for the smaller time frames.

268

Figure 11.30

269

Figure 11.31
There is also another filter that can be used. Figure 11.32 shows a 39-minute chart of AAPL. At point 1, a short squeeze fires off, indicating that shorting AAPL
here would be a good idea. AAPL does not sell off and in fact starts to rally … hard. Although the next signal at point 2 did great, that first signal at point 1 failed
utterly. If we weren’t looking at the larger times frames such as a daily or weekly chart, is there a way to filter out these potentially false signals?

Figure 11.32
Yes. At the bottom of the chart is something called the “TTM Wave C,” which works as a directional filter. The key is that if it is above zero, as it is on this entire
chart, then you ignore short squeezes. The opposite is also true. If, on this chart, the TTM Wave C were below zero, then you would ignore all long squeeze signals.
This is a handy tool if you are looking at a lot of charts and find it hard to keep track of all the larger time frames for the instruments you are trading. We’ll dive into
this tool in the next chapter.
For updated information and examples on the TTM squeeze setup, including live trades, go to www.tradethemarkets.com/squeeze to see it in action.

270

12
Catching the Wave:
What Is the easiest Way to
Stay on the right side of
the Trend on any Market,
on any time frame?
Why Is It Critical to Understand the Concept of Anchor Charts?
I watched the squeeze for a long time without any hard-core filters. I felt comfortable with the risk/reward ratio, and I knew that not all signals would work out. I did
notice, however, that there were times, especially on intraday charts, when the squeeze wasn’t consistent. And it didn’t seem random. It happened in blocks of trades,
sometimes two or three in a row before a really good one fired off again. What was going on? How could I pinpoint the common denominator? Looking at “anchor
charts” helped. This is the process of looking at a larger time frame and referring to that larger time frame before taking a trade on a smaller time frame. For example, if
I’m using an hourly chart as my anchor, and it’s bearish and everything is pointed lower, why would I take a long signal on a five-minute chart? In this case, by looking
at the hourly “anchor,” I can see that it would be better to be patient and wait for a short signal on the five-minute chart, in the direction of the larger “anchor.”
Figure 12.1 shows two charts. The one on the left is an hourly chart of the ES, while the one on the right is a five-minute chart of the ES. At point 1 on the hourly
chart, a squeeze fires off short. During this signal, the market goes into consolidation mode at point 2. If we zoom in on this consolidation on a five-minute chart at
point 3, we can see that this action is slightly bullish. And, look, a squeeze is setting up … maybe it is worth a shot on the long side? Grab a couple of ticks? During
the heat of the moment, that might seem like a great idea. Why not try to make a little extra money?

Figure 12.1
This rally failed miserably starting on the next bar, falling 50 ES points ($2,500 per contract) in rapid succession. Looking at the hourly chart, there was clearly no
reason to get long, as the squeeze to the downside was still unfolding. Zoom in on that five-minute chart, however, and it looked as if a real rally was taking shape. This
is why anchor charts are so important. They keep the overall market movement in perspective. M ore important, they prevent a trader from getting tied up in a bad
trade and then completely missing the good trade that was unfolding before her eyes. That is one of the main dangers of hanging on to a losing trade—it closes your
eyes to all of the wonderful opportunities that are setting up around you, as all your concentration is diverted to watching the disintegrating P&L on your screen. As
one of my former trading mentors told me numerous times, “Why dick around with ticks when you can tally up the points?” Indeed. Some of the best trades are the
ones in which we decide to pass.
Figure 12.2 shows the same charts with the “TTM Wave C” (I just call it the “C wave” and will refer to it as that throughout the rest of the chapter) added to the
271

bottom of the chart. On the hourly chart, we already know from Figure 12.1 that the signals are to the downside. The added C wave reinforces this by crossing below
zero while the squeeze is firing off short. The downside of the anchor chart is that there are times when it is easy to forget to refer to it, especially if a trader is looking
at many markets, and especially in the heat of the moment. This is where the TTM Wave C comes in handy. At point 2 on the five-minute chart, we can see that the C
wave is clearly below zero. This means, in essence, that the longer-term trend on this market, on this time frame, in bearish. In other words, there is no reason to get
long. This is known as “riding the waves.”

Figure 12.2

What Exactly Are the Waves, and How Do They Work?
The waves were introduced to me by a fellow trader, Rodney Julian. I had spent a few hours explaining to him my concept of anchor charts, and after I was through, he
just looked at me and said, “John, this is a simple math problem. You should just be using these.” He showed me “these,” which was a series of indicators he had
developed over the last decade. There are three of them, which he calls waves. They are as follows:
• Short-term trend: A wave
• M edium-term trend: B wave
• Long-term trend: C wave
The waves essentially measure various trends on whatever market and whatever time frame a trader is observing. An A wave measures the trend of the prior six or
so bars, the B wave measures the trend of the prior 15 or so bars, and the C wave measures the trend of the prior 30 or so bars (this is my best guess, as Rodney won’t
tell me the specifics).
Figure 12.3 shows a daily chart of GS (Goldman Sachs) with a C wave. Although Rodney likes to watch the ebbs and flows of the waves, I really just focus on
whether they are above zero or below zero, and how that all lines up with the current squeeze.
At point 1, the C wave starts to edge below zero. This is a “heads-up” for me that the uptrend in GS might be coming to an end. When the C wave goes fully below
zero at point 2, then the longer-term trend on GS has officially rolled over to the downside.
Figure 12.4 goes one step further and adds the A and B waves to the chart, as well as the squeeze. At point 1, a squeeze fires off a short signal. The A, B, and C
waves all cross below zero at this time, which is a great sign for the short side. The squeeze, as is typical, runs out of gas shortly after six bars. It would be possible at
this point for a trader to take his profit and move on to the next trade. Another strategy would be to take off half his position, move his stop loss to the entry point,
and hold on for as long as the C wave (the bottom wave) is trading below zero. This is, after all, measuring the longer-term trend of this market. Why fight it?

272

Figure 12.3

273

Figure 12.4
Figure 12.5 shows a 39-minute chart of BIDU. Point 1 represents what I call a “Porsche setup,” as everything has come together for a nice trade. The squeeze fires
off long. The C wave is well above zero, as is the B wave. The A wave has dipped below zero, but immediately is back up above zero. In other words, the short-,
medium-, and longer-term trends on this chart are all in alignment for this signal. And the signal works great, as BIDU kicks off a 10 point plus move.

274

Figure 12.5
At point 2, a one-dot squeeze sets up to the short side. Do we take this signal? No. The C wave is still well above zero, so there is no point in fighting that longerterm trend higher by trying to make a quick buck on the short side. Point 3 sets up a squeeze, and this one has the C wave above zero. Is it a good signal? This is where
understanding the waves can become very helpful. In this instance, the A wave is below zero and just can’t cross above zero. This is a flag that the short-term
momentum on this market isn’t ready to move higher. This squeeze fires off long, and BIDU fizzles quickly. Point 4 sets up another one-dot short squeeze, which of
course we pass on because the C save is clearly above zero.
This chart is a great example of having the patience to wait for a setup where “it all comes together.” I also call these Porsche setups. The remaining three setups are
all Pintos. If you had a choice, would you rather drive a Porsche or a car that could catch fire?
Figure 12.6 shows a two-hour chart of the euro. Point 1 shows a squeeze that fires off short. The A, B and C waves are all in alignment. Point 2 shows a squeeze
that fires off long. While the A and B waves are in agreement, the C wave is not. The trade pops higher, but the rally is short-lived. And this is one of the biggest
benefits I’ve found with using the waves. They tend to distinguish signals that will trend well from those that are the quicker countertrend moves. If I see a squeeze
like the one at point 2 and I decide to take it, then I’m looking to get a movement of 1 ATR (average true range) and then get the hell out. It’s a countertrend trade. I
know this in advance. I won’t be looking for a runner or a big move. With point 1, on the other hand, I’m looking for a longer-lasting trend movement, and I’ll know
that I can sit on my hands and let the trade unfold.

275

Figure 12.6

How Can I Use the Waves to Sneak into a Squeeze Before It Fires Off?
What I’ve found in watching the squeeze over the years is that it is very consistent on longer time frames, such as daily, weekly, and monthly charts, and that a trader
doesn’t really need the wave filters on these longer time frames. The filters are, however, extremely helpful and necessary for any intraday trading on shorter time
frames where it is critical to be on the right side of the trend, right now. That said, one of my favorite ways to use the waves is to sneak into squeezes on the bigger
time frames.
Figure 12.7 is a weekly chart of the gold ETF, GLD. This chart shows three clear squeezes, and they all fire off and push GLD nicely higher with each signal. Prior
to the waves, I would patiently wait for the squeeze to fire off, and then duly pile in. With the waves, I found that I could sneak into the squeeze before it actually
fired off. How so?
Once I see the first black dots at points 1, 3 and 5, I know that a squeeze is setting up. I don’t know how long it will take to unfold and “fire off,” but I do know
that this market has entered that special time of setting up for a potentially large move. But which way is it going to move? Is the squeeze going to fire off a long signal
or a short signal?
What I’ve found is the following. If, at the time the first black dot appears on the squeeze (at points 1, 3, and 5), the saves are above zero and trending higher, then
this squeeze has a 90 percent chance of firing off long. The opposite, of course, is also true for a downside move.
Knowing this, when this scenario sets up, I’ll start scaling into these positions early, and I will often have built up a full position before the squeeze even fires off.
For example, at point 5, I see that a squeeze has started and that the A, B, and C waves are all trending higher. (Note: it is important that the B and C waves are also
above zero. The A wave can be below zero, but it should be trending higher.) I see that this setup meets the criteria for sneaking in early, and I set about doing just that.
At the time for the first black dot, GLD is trading at $131.00. M y goal is to build up to a full position of 20 call options on GLD. Note that if the setup for sneaking in
early isn’t there, then I just wait for the squeeze to fire off as I normally would.

276

Figure 12.7
The first black dot occurs on February 4, 2011, at point 5. Since this is a weekly chart, I realize that this play could last for many months. Therefore, I want to get
options that have a few months still left before expiration. In this case, I look at the M ay calls, which will expire on M ay 20, 2011, the third Friday of the month. As
discussed in Chapter 5, when it comes to options, I prefer to buy them in the money. In this case, I look at the M ay 128 call options. I buy one-fifth of my position,
or four contracts, at current prices. At the end of the next week, GLD has moved up to $132, and I buy another four contracts. The next week, GLD pops higher, to
$135, and I pick up four more contracts. The next week, GLD pops again, up to $137, and I buy four more contracts. The next week, GLD edges up toward $139, and
I pick up the rest of my position. It is okay to buy different option strike prices. In this case, since GLD kept moving higher, I also kept buying slightly higher strike
prices, though they were all in the money.
I’m now five dots into the squeeze, and I have a full position. GLD pulls back a few dollars while the squeeze continues to form, and it eventually has eight dots,
meaning that this signal developed over eight weeks. When it does finally fire off, GLD is near $139. M y average price is well below this, and I’m locked and loaded
with a nice position. GLD proceeds to rally to $150 before it starts to lose momentum, at which point I take off half the position. But because the C wave is still
trending higher, I decide to hold on to the second half, and I scale out as GLD continues moving higher.
What is nice about this entry method is it allows scaling in and typically ends up with a better average price than if a trader had waited for the squeeze to fire off. In
this case, by the time the squeeze had fired off, GLD was trading at $139, well above the price level when the squeeze first started to form. I also utilize this strategy
for daily charts.
There are other ways to use the waves, and Rodney does like to watch the ebbs and flows of the waves on various time frames, initiating trades when they roll over.
His strategy is a little complicated to explain in a book, and it would sound better in his own words, although he does tend to get a tad esoteric. We’ve set up a free
video at www.tradethemarkets.com/waves to give you Rodney’s perspective on the waves as well as additional examples of how I use them.

277

13
What Is the Best Tool for
Staying in a Trade and Not
Jumping Out Too Early?
Entries Are a Dime a Dozen; It’s the Exits That Make You Money
This is going to be a short and simple chapter, and we are going to kick it off by looking at Figure 13.1. This shows two identical hourly charts of GC, the gold futures
contract. The chart on the left (Chart A) has regular candlestick bars, while the chart on the right (Chart B) has TTM trend bars. Otherwise, these two charts are
exactly the same, showing exactly the same price action over the three days from August 14 through August 17, 2011.
One of the biggest problems I hear from traders is, “How do I learn to hang on to a winning position? I always end up taking profits way too fast. I just can’t help
myself, and nothing I do seems to help.” The temptation to take profits too soon is great—remember, the market lures us into thinking that this is a good idea, when in
actuality it is one of the main reason traders struggle to make a consistent living from the markets. This is, simply put, a very bad habit. So how does a trader hang on
to a winner?
A lot of traders I know start their careers looking at candlestick bars, which are good for evaluating price action. The only thing I don’t like about them is that it is
easy, especially for newer traders, to get too caught up in the action on the current bar. It is easy to get tunnel vision and to place too much importance on what is
happening “right now” as opposed to looking at that action in the context of the prior six bars. One nasty-looking bearish engulfing candlestick is enough to drive most
traders out of a long position, or vice versa with a bullish engulfing candlestick while they’re in a short position. Those candlesticks are nerve-racking, to be sure. Yet
many times, the market continues moving in the intended direction shortly thereafter. Worse, many traders then “chase the market” in order to reestablish their
position, since it is still moving. “Oh, man,” they think. “It’s not done!” And that is yet another bad habit that will prevent a person from being able to do this for a
living. It truly is a vicious cycle. What happened in this instance is that a trader got “shaken out” of a perfectly good trade because she placed too much emphasis on
the action of a single bar. This is the issue that needs to be addressed.
