
+

Applying Technical Analysis to the Theory of Contrary Opinion 513

up in the excitement, especially after they had rallied significantly from the
level at which you first thought them irrationally high.

Under such an environment it becomes very difficult to think indepen-
dently from the accepted wisdom of the day.

Why Crowds Are Irrational

Neil wrote that there are several, what he terms as social, laws that determine
crowd psychology. These are:

1. Acrowd is subject to instincts that individuals acting independently would
never do.

2. People involuntarily follow the impulses of the crowd. (See the section
below on why it is difficult to be contrary.)

3. Contagion and imitation of the minority make individuals susceptible to
suggestion, commands, customs, and emotional appeals.

4. When gathered as a group or crowd, people rarely reason or question,
but follow blindly and emotionally to what is suggested or asserted.

Why then is the crowd wrong at turning points? The reason is that when
everyone holds the same bullish opinion, there is very little potential buy-
ing power left, very few people left who can perpetuate the trend. By the
same token, if the market is mispriced, to quote John Schulz, other invest-
ment alternatives are becoming more attractive. Little wonder that money
soon flows from the overvalued to the more realistically priced alternative.

The opposite would, of course, be true in a declining trend. Take, for
example, an economy deep in recession; business activity is declining
rapidly, and layoffs and high unemployment are getting headlines in the
nightly news. Stocks are extending the decline that began over a year ago,
and the whole situation appears to be out of control in a self-feeding down-
ward spiral. While everyone is looking down, it is the prerequisite of the con-
trarian to look up and ask the question, What could go right? This is where
the alternative scenario comes in. Remember, people are rational. When



514. Part I: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

they realize that hard times are coming, they adjust their plans accordingly.
Businesses will cut excessive inventories, lay off workers, and pay off debts.
Once this has been achieved, breakeven points drop, and they are ina great
Position to increase profits when the economy turns. All this economizing
means that the demand for credit declines, and so does its price—interest
rates. Falling rates encourage consumers to go out and buy houses, and a
new recovery gets underway.

As Neil has described it, “In historic financial eras, it has been significant
how, when conditions were slumping that, under the pall of discourage-
ment, economics were righting themselves underneath to the ensuing
revival and recovery.”

The same is true in markets. No one is going to hold stocks if they think
prices are in for a prolonged decline, so naturally they sell. When all the
selling is over, there is only one direction in which prices can go, and that’s
up! At that point, true contrarians have decided that enough is enough, that
an alternative, bullish outcome is likely, and that the underlying assumptions
of the bear market are no longer valid.

Knowing when to go contrary is a key to the whole process because the
crowd frequently moves to extremes, well ahead of a market turning point.
Many professionals knew the situation was getting out of hand in 1928 and
in 1999 (for Internet stocks). In both cases they had concluded that stocks
were very overvalued and discounted the hereafter. They were correct, but
their timing was early. Economic trends are often slow to reverse and
manias take prices well beyond reasonable valuations, often to ridiculous
and irrational ones. In a sense, crowd psychology can be reflected graphi-
cally as a long-term oscillator, such as a rate of change (ROC), moves to
extraordinary levels not seen for decades. In normal times a market turns
when the indicator reaches its overbought level, but on rare occasions the
curve can run up to stratospheric levels. An example is shown in Chart 27-
1 for the NASDAQ. The 18-month ROC in the lower panel moves up to a
level dwarfing anything seen in the previous 20 years of trading history.
Indeed, it was twice as high as the best reading for the S&P Composite in
200 years of history.

If crowd sentiment is reflected in oscillators constructed from the price,
it follows that there are various levels or extremes to which crowds gravitate.
The turn of the century peak in the NASDAQ, the 1980 top in gold, and
the 1929 stock market peak are all examples of an extreme. However, since
oscillators can be constructed from daily and weekly data, it follows that
forming a contrary opinion is just as valid for shorter-term turning points.
The difference is that the mood is not so all encompassing and intense as
it is just prior to the bursting of a financial bubble.

Applying Technical Analysis to the Theory of Contrary Opinion 515

Chart 27-1 The NADAQ Composite, 1974-2001, and an 18-month ROC. (From
www.pring.com.)

5004

NASDAQ Composite

18-month ROC.

Bearing these comments in mind, it is now time to examine the signs
that indicate when the crowd has moved to an extreme, either for small or
large trends, and then to see how technical analysis can be applied to such

situations.

Why It’s Difficult to Go Contrary

Reading and learning about forming a contrary opinion are one thing, but
actually applying it in the marketplace when your money is on the line is
definitely another. ;

There are several reasons why it is difficult to take a position that is oppo-
site to the majority:



516 Part Ill: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

1. It is very difficult for us to take an opposite view from those around us
because of our need to conform.

2. If prices are rising sharply and we have already told friends of our rea-
sons for being bearish, we are unlikely to continue in our contrarianism
out of a fear of being ridiculed.

3. We often meet hostility when we go against the crowd.
4. We gain a sense of comfort by extrapolating the recent past.

5. A certain sense of security can be had from accepting the opinions of
“experts,” instead of having the confidence of thinking for ourselves.
Chart 27-2 illustrates several quotations that three famous people prob-
ably wish they had never made. Never forget that most “experts” have a
vested interest in the opinions they give publicly.

6. We tend to believe that the establishment has all the answers. The U.S.
entry into Vietnam, the Soviets’ into Afghanistan, and Neville Chamber-

lain’s famous peace-in-ourtime speech, just before the outbreak of World
War I, should make us think twice about this assumption.

Chart 27-2 The S&P Composite, 1921-1935, and market comments. (From
www. pring.com.)

304 . "Lam certaily optimistic
Stocks are ata permanently ——-——> about this Fall." - Babson |
25 4 high plateau." - Fischer ol"
20 4
185
“This should go no |
40-4 further.” - Livermore -

“t have been purchasing sound
Stocks.” - John D. Rockefeller

1 p23 Pa bs ps br be bo Bo Bt ees)

Applying Technical Analysis to the Theory of Contrary Opinion 517

Three Steps to Forming
a Contrary Opinion

1. Figuring Out What the Crowd Thinks

The first step is to try and get a fix on the consensus opinion of the market
or individual security being monitored. If the crowd is not at an extreme,
nothing can be done because we are only concerned with identifying poten-
tial trend reversals when crowd psychology has swung sharply in one direc-
tion or another. Bear in mind that the crowd is often correct during a trend;
it is at the turning point that the herd is almost always wrong. One method
of gauging where the majority of market participants lie in their opinion is
to refer to the sentiment indicators discussed in the previous chapter, or
even an oscillator. Most often these indicators are not telling us very much,
but when they reach an extreme, a strong message is being given. Another
possibility is to monitor valuations. If they are within the accepted norm,
there is little to be learned, but if they are approaching an extreme, the
crowd is giving us a valuable clue as to the way it is leaning.

Alternatively, a study of the media, particularly the financial media, can
inform us of what people are thinking. If there is no clear-cut view, there is
not likely to be an extreme, and there is no action we can legitimately take.

However, as it becomes clear that a general consensus is forming, and that
consensus is approaching a dogma, it is then time to begin the creative
process by thinking in reverse, and that involves the second step.

2. Forming Alternative Scenarios

At this point we know what the crowd thinks, so it is up to us as true con-
trarians to come up with plausible reasons why it is likely to be wrong. In
effect, we have to remove ourselves from the crowd and think in reverse.
Such a process will involve an understanding of the market we are watch-
ing. For example, Chart 27-3 shows the gold market at its secular peak in
1980. At that time, gold had risen from obscurity, when it first started to rise
in 1968, to being quoted regularly on the nightly news. It seemed to the
majority at the end of 1979 that inflation and gold prices would continue
to rise forever. However, a realistic contrarian would have realized that the
inflation would breed its own deflation as the rising trend of short-term
interest rates would cause an economic recession and the high price would
attract more mining activity and superior technology that would more effi-
ciently mine higher-cost lodes. Once again technical analysis can come to
our rescue, as Chart 27-3 shows that the 12-month ROC for gold hit a


518 Part Il: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

Chart 27-3 Gold, 1970-1999. (From www.pring.com.}

Applying Technical Analysis to the Theory of Contrary Opinion 519

Chart 27-4 Commodities and bond yields, 1970-1998, (From www.pring.com.)

ee ae

High-price-encouraged exploration
in new mining technology

<+——_ A spike in the 12-month ROC aftera
150 4 strong rally often indicates that the
crowd has moved to an extreme

generational extreme. Silver also had a huge run-up in this period, from
next to nothing to over $50. The talk was of a cornering of the market by
Bunker Hunt and other operatives, so that the sky was the limit. In this
instance the contrarian may have come up with the scenario that a lot of
silver had already been mined and was available in the form of silverware,
which could easily be melted down and sold as silver bullion. As it turned
out the price was right, and the silver market was flooded, just at the time
when high rates of interest caused margin liquidation in the silver pits.

Chart 27-4 shows bond yields and commodity prices. When yields are ris-
ing and it appears this trend will never end, an alternative scenario is to use
the knowledge that peaks in yields are often preceded by peaks in com-
modity prices, which in turn precedes a slowdown in economic activity. This
is shown in the chart by the rightward sloping arrows. Thus, if it is possible
to spot a top in industrial commodity prices, the alternative scenario of
weaker business activity may well come to pass.

3. Identifying When the Crowd Reaches an Extreme

When the crowd reaches an extreme, the question is not usually whether, but when
and by how much? In other words, when the crowd truly reaches an extreme,
it is a forgone conclusion that the trend will continue. It is not even ques”
tioned; only the éémingand amount are in doubt. Such times are often asso-

4 Commodities

ciated with analysts making extreme forecasts that in the highly charged
emotional atmosphere appear credible, but that would previously have been
greeted with mirth or great doubt. The following represent some possibili-
ties for identifying when the crowd is at an extreme.

Sentiment Indicators and Oscillators Sentiment indicators or long-
term oscillators reaching an extreme represent one possibility for gauging
that the crowd has as well.

The Media Sentiment indicators are not available for every market, so
another useful exercise comes from a study of the popular and financial
media. For most of the time, the media are silent on financial markets or
individual stocks. It is when significant coverage appears that it is time to
pay attention. Major peaks and troughs are often signaled by cover stories
in the popular and financial press. Time, Newsweek, BusinessWeek, and The
Economist are my particular favorites. The more these magazines give space
to a particular market, the stronger the signal. It is not that the editors and
writers of these magazines are idiots for publishing bear stories right at the
low, or bullish ones close to the absolute high. It lies more in the fact that
they are journalists keeping the pulse of market conditions. As good



520 Part Ill: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

journalists, it is their duty to give more space to articles when the emotions
in and around the floors of the exchanges come close to reaching a
crescendo. Stories about quiet markets do not sell newspapers, but panic
does. Generally speaking, cover stories are a fairly reliable indication of an
impending turn, but they are not infallible and often lead turning points
by a week or so. As with any form of analysis, it is important to use a good
dose of common sense. For example, there is the famous “Birth of the Bull”
cover story in Time magazine several weeks from the 1982 market bottom
(see Chart 27-5). Just applying “contrary opinion” blindly would have led
to the conclusion that the bull market was over in the course of a few weeks.
However, it is important to remember that it takes time for crowds to reach
an extreme, as the long trend of rising prices adds more careless bulls to
the fold. Also, bear markets are usually preceded by rising interest rates. In
the fall of 1982, the Fed was following an easy money policy, not a tight one.

The exact opposite was true in 1990 (see Chart 27-5) when a BusinessWeek
cover featured the troubled brokerage industry. In this instance the prices
of brokerage stocks had fallen sharply, but the Fed was engaged in an easy
money policy, which is good for the equity market, and especially positive
for brokers, who get more underwriting fees and commissions in a bull mar-
ket. Moreover, the hard times they had just experienced would have resulted
in a dramatic lowering of breakeven points. Increased revenue from the bull
market would then go straight to the bottom line.

t

Chart 27-5 The S&P Composite and the discount rate, 1970-1999. (From www.pring.com)

Se

S&P Composite

§00 |
“Birth of the Bull” - Time Magazine

“Future of Wall Street"
- Business Week

Applying Technical Analysis to the Theory of Contrary Opinion 521

Another way in which the media can point to major turning points is when
we can observe what I call a misfit story, where a heretofore invisible market
is given the prominence it rarely if ever achieves. For example, the finan-
cial media are always featuring stories on the stock or bond markets. That
is a normal state of affairs and is offering us no contrary bones. On the other
hand, when we see a story in the popular press about an otherwise obscure
market, we have something to gnaw on. For example, in 1980 the sugar price
reversed from a long and strong bull market. Close to the day of the high
the CBS Evening News led with a story on how traders were forecasting
higher sugar prices. To my knowledge, sugar has never before or since been
featured so prominently in the news. It was unusual and highly significant
for the sugar market. Prominent stories in the U.S. press concerning spe-
cific foreign stock markets, currencies, and so on can also be valuable clues
that these markets have reached an extreme.

Best-Selling Books Another area to monitor is that of best-selling non-
fiction books. If a financial book appears on the list, it is usually a sign that
that particular market has attracted the attention of the majority and that
the good or bad news has been fully discounted. Thus, Ravi Batra’s book
on the coming depression became a bestseller just after the 1987 crash, a
classic sign of a bottom. Adam Smith’s The Money Game reached the same
list just as the mutual fund boom was ending in late 1968. Perhaps the most
unlikely of all was a book on money markets by William Donahue, just as
short-term interest rates were making a secular peak in 1981.

Politicians A classic contrary indicator is the attitude of politicians, espe-
cially to bad news that is likely to adversely affect their election possibilities.
Since they react to poll numbers and other trends in what we might term
constituent psychology, politicians are an excellent lagging indicator. They are
the last to take action, and when they do, the next trend has usually started.
For instance, Gerry Ford, at the end of 1974, introduced the famous
W(in)I(nflation) N(ow) buttons, but consumer price inflation had, for all
intents and purposes, peaked for that cycle. I remember watching the net-
work news in the fall of 1981, when the secular peaks of interest rates were
occurring. The news was full of stories of congressmen returning to
Washington “determined to do something about high interest rates.” They
had had earfuls of complaints from their constituents and were determined
to do something about it. The problem was that the economy was already
weakening and rates had peaked. When politicians promote price controls,
you can be fairly certain that the specific commodity is in the process of



522 Part Il: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

peaking. When cries of corporate gouging arise because of high prices, this
is also a sign of a top. Several case studies on the oil market bear this out.

Unrealistic Valuations A final pointer that the crowd has reached an’
extreme arises when a particular market reaches a historic level of over or
undervaluation (progressively more mispriced in John Schultz’s definition);
For example, at the height of the Japanese real estate boom, it was reported
that the real estate value of the Emperor's palace in Tokyo was worth as much
as all the land in California. In Psychology and the Stock Market, David Dreman
noted that during the 1920s real estate boom in Florida, it was reported that
there were 25,000 brokers in Miami, an equivalent of one third of the pop-
ulation. This was not a valuation measure, but the statistic showed that things
had clearly gotten out of hand. At one point during the 1990s tech boom,
priceline.com, an online travel service, had a capitalization greater than the

combined value of several of the airlines it represented. Atits peak, the stock

stood at around $160, but a year Jater it had fallen to just over $1.

Applying Technical Analysis

Since the crowd can and does move to an extreme, well beyond normal
experience, being early can be particularly harmful to one’s financial.
health. This is where the integration of technical analysis and the theory of
contrary opinion can be quite helpful. Let us consider a couple of exam-
ples. The Japanese bull market of the 1980s represents a classic mania where *
price/earnings ratios and other valuation methods reached incredible
extremes. The top had been called many times in the 1980s, but it never _
came. The crowd had clearly reached an extreme, but records continued .
to fall. In the end, the bubble was burst with the alternative scenario most

likely to undo stock market bubbles: rising rates. Chart 27-6 shows that just an

after the 1990 top both the Nikkei and Japanese short rates crossed their
12-month Mas for the first time in many years. Both series also violated
trendlines, thereby offering substantial technical evidence that the bubble
had burst. Eleven years later, the Nikkei was still struggling at just over on!
third of its 1990 high. .

Chart 27-7 shows two BusinessWeek cover stories in 1982 and 1984 com...

cerning the bond market. The fact that the bond market was featured so
prominently after prices had fallen significantly was a sign that the cr owd
was at or close to an extreme. The next step was to appraise the technical .
position to see if there were any signs of a reversal. In the 1982 case, the 18:
month ROG, in Chart 27-8, had already completed and broken out of a mas
sive 4-year base. Later, the price broke out as well. This secondary breakout

Applying Technical Analysis to the Theory of Contrary Opinion 523

Chart 27-6 The Nikkei and Japanese short-term rates, 1982~1997. (From www.pring.com.)

4000 -|
3000 =

2000 -

Nikkei

The first time the Nikkei
is below its MA and rates
are above their MA

Gig fe2_83_[b4 [e6_[b6_e7_ 68 [69 [90 91 (92 Jes 4 fos 96 7

1000 -
ae

Chart 27-7 U.S. government bond prices 1977-1990, and an 18-Month ROC. (From
www.pring.com.)

100 +
+——— "Disaster in Bonds”
- Business Week cover story
“Interest Rate Anguish"
60-5 - Business Week cover story
18-month ROC. Se 7 a Cee Oe Cr
an

7_|fe_ [ro BO Bi 2 63 eae [ee 7

took place several months later, but it is important to remember that we are
looking at the reversal of an extremely long trend and those sorts of things
take time.



524 Part Il: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

Chart 27-8 U.S. government bond prices 1977-1990, and an 18-Month ROC. (From
www. pring.com.}

government bond prices

100 5
Price is forming a base

¢—— At support

Irv |re 79 fo 1 bs (64 [65 jes [b7 |e

In 1984, the “Disaster in Bonds” cover story cumulated a 2-year decline.
In this instance, the ROC was close to an extreme oversold condition and
the price had reached support in the form of the extended trendline mark-
ing the previous breakout. The bear market trendline break was the trig-
gering mechanism that indicated the crowd had now moved away from the
bearish extreme and was now moving in the opposite direction. In both sit’
uations, the cover stories would have indicated that the bearish arguments
were now well understood and discounted, and the trendline breaks the sig-
nals that it was time to play the contrary “card.”

Distinguishing Between a Short-
or Long-Term Turning Point

Before we close our discussion on contrary opinion, it is important to under-
stand that the crowd can move to a smaller, less intense level of extreme.
This type of sentiment is associated with a price reversal of a short- or jnter-
mediate-term nature. An example might be a 2 to 8 week run-up in the com
price, cumulating in a lead article in the commodities section in The Wall”
Street Journal. Such features are not uncommon; after all, some commodity .
is featured every day. The idea here is that when a commodity is written
about, it usually comes after it has experienced a significant rally or reac:
