
* See p. 3.

192

The Intelligent Investor

importance do so because they have worked well over a period, or
sometimes merely because they have been plausibly adapted to the
statistical record of the past. But as their acceptance increases, their
reliability tends to diminish. This happens for two reasons: First,
the passage of time brings new conditions which the old formula
no longer fits. Second, in stock-market affairs the popularity of a
trading theory has itself an influence on the market’s behavior
which detracts in the long run from its profit-making possibilities.
(The popularity of something like the Dow theory may seem to create its own vindication, since it would make the market advance or
decline by the very action of its followers when a buying or selling
signal is given. A “stampede” of this kind is, of course, much more
of a danger than an advantage to the public trader.)

Buy-Low–Sell-High Approach
We are convinced that the average investor cannot deal successfully with price movements by endeavoring to forecast them. Can
he benefit from them after they have taken place—i.e., by buying
after each major decline and selling out after each major advance?
The fluctuations of the market over a period of many years prior to
1950 lent considerable encouragement to that idea. In fact, a classic
definition of a “shrewd investor” was “one who bought in a bear
market when everyone else was selling, and sold out in a bull market when everyone else was buying.” If we examine our Chart I,
covering the fluctuations of the Standard & Poor’s composite index
between 1900 and 1970, and the supporting figures in Table 3-1 (p.
66), we can readily see why this viewpoint appeared valid until
fairly recent years.
Between 1897 and 1949 there were ten complete market cycles,
running from bear-market low to bull-market high and back to
bear-market low. Six of these took no longer than four years, four
ran for six or seven years, and one—the famous “new-era” cycle of
1921–1932—lasted eleven years. The percentage of advance from
the lows to highs ranged from 44% to 500%, with most between
about 50% and 100%. The percentage of subsequent declines
ranged from 24% to 89%, with most found between 40% and 50%.
(It should be remembered that a decline of 50% fully offsets a preceding advance of 100%.)

The Investor and Market Fluctuations

193

Nearly all the bull markets had a number of well-defined characteristics in common, such as (1) a historically high price level, (2)
high price/earnings ratios, (3) low dividend yields as against bond
yields, (4) much speculation on margin, and (5) many offerings of
new common-stock issues of poor quality. Thus to the student of
stock-market history it appeared that the intelligent investor
should have been able to identify the recurrent bear and bull markets, to buy in the former and sell in the latter, and to do so for the
most part at reasonably short intervals of time. Various methods
were developed for determining buying and selling levels of the
general market, based on either value factors or percentage movements of prices or both.
But we must point out that even prior to the unprecedented bull
market that began in 1949, there were sufficient variations in the
successive market cycles to complicate and sometimes frustrate the
desirable process of buying low and selling high. The most notable
of these departures, of course, was the great bull market of the late
1920s, which threw all calculations badly out of gear.* Even in 1949,
therefore, it was by no means a certainty that the investor could
base his financial policies and procedures mainly on the endeavor
to buy at low levels in bear markets and to sell out at high levels in
bull markets.
It turned out, in the sequel, that the opposite was true. The

* Without bear markets to take stock prices back down, anyone waiting to
“buy low” will feel completely left behind—and, all too often, will end up
abandoning any former caution and jumping in with both feet. That’s why
Graham’s message about the importance of emotional discipline is so
important. From October 1990 through January 2000, the Dow Jones
Industrial Average marched relentlessly upward, never losing more than
20% and suffering a loss of 10% or more only three times. The total gain
(not counting dividends): 395.7%. According to Crandall, Pierce & Co., this
was the second-longest uninterrupted bull market of the past century; only
the 1949–1961 boom lasted longer. The longer a bull market lasts, the
more severely investors will be afflicted with amnesia; after five years or so,
many people no longer believe that bear markets are even possible. All
those who forget are doomed to be reminded; and, in the stock market,
recovered memories are always unpleasant.

194

The Intelligent Investor

market’s behavior in the past 20 years has not followed the former
pattern, nor obeyed what once were well-established danger signals, nor permitted its successful exploitation by applying old rules
for buying low and selling high. Whether the old, fairly regular
bull-and-bear-market pattern will eventually return we do not
know. But it seems unrealistic to us for the investor to endeavor to
base his present policy on the classic formula—i.e., to wait for
demonstrable bear-market levels before buying any common
stocks. Our recommended policy has, however, made provision
for changes in the proportion of common stocks to bonds in the
portfolio, if the investor chooses to do so, according as the level
of stock prices appears less or more attractive by value standards.*

Formula Plans
In the early years of the stock-market rise that began in 1949–50
considerable interest was attracted to various methods of taking
advantage of the stock market’s cycles. These have been known as
“formula investment plans.” The essence of all such plans—except
the simple case of dollar averaging—is that the investor automatically does some selling of common stocks when the market
advances substantially. In many of them a very large rise in the
market level would result in the sale of all common-stock holdings;
others provided for retention of a minor proportion of equities
under all circumstances.
This approach had the double appeal of sounding logical (and
conservative) and of showing excellent results when applied retrospectively to the stock market over many years in the past. Unfortunately, its vogue grew greatest at the very time when it was
destined to work least well. Many of the “formula planners” found
themselves entirely or nearly out of the stock market at some level
in the middle 1950s. True, they had realized excellent profits, but in
a broad sense the market “ran away” from them thereafter, and

* Graham discusses this “recommended policy” in Chapter 4 (pp. 89–91).
This policy, now called “tactical asset allocation,” is widely followed by institutional investors like pension funds and university endowments.

The Investor and Market Fluctuations

195

their formulas gave them little opportunity to buy back a commonstock position.*
There is a similarity between the experience of those adopting
the formula-investing approach in the early 1950s and those who
embraced the purely mechanical version of the Dow theory some
20 years earlier. In both cases the advent of popularity marked
almost the exact moment when the system ceased to work well. We
have had a like discomfiting experience with our own “central
value method” of determining indicated buying and selling levels
of the Dow Jones Industrial Average. The moral seems to be that
any approach to moneymaking in the stock market which can be
easily described and followed by a lot of people is by its terms too
simple and too easy to last.† Spinoza’s concluding remark applies
to Wall Street as well as to philosophy: “All things excellent are as
difficult as they are rare.”

Market Fluctuations of the Investor’s Portfolio
Every investor who owns common stocks must expect to see
them fluctuate in value over the years. The behavior of the DJIA
since our last edition was written in 1964 probably reflects pretty
well what has happened to the stock portfolio of a conservative
investor who limited his stock holdings to those of large, prominent, and conservatively financed corporations. The overall value
advanced from an average level of about 890 to a high of 995 in

* Many of these “formula planners” would have sold all their stocks at the
end of 1954, after the U.S. stock market rose 52.6%, the second-highest
yearly return then on record. Over the next five years, these market-timers
would likely have stood on the sidelines as stocks doubled.
† Easy ways to make money in the stock market fade for two reasons: the
natural tendency of trends to reverse over time, or “regress to the mean,”
and the rapid adoption of the stock-picking scheme by large numbers of
people, who pile in and spoil all the fun of those who got there first. (Note
that, in referring to his “discomfiting experience,” Graham is—as always—
honest in admitting his own failures.) See Jason Zweig, “Murphy Was an
Investor,” Money, July, 2002, pp. 61–62, and Jason Zweig, “New Year’s
Play,” Money, December, 2000, pp. 89–90.

196

The Intelligent Investor

1966 (and 985 again in 1968), fell to 631 in 1970, and made an
almost full recovery to 940 in early 1971. (Since the individual
issues set their high and low marks at different times, the fluctuations in the Dow Jones group as a whole are less severe than
those in the separate components.) We have traced through the
price fluctuations of other types of diversified and conservative
common-stock portfolios and we find that the overall results are
not likely to be markedly different from the above. In general, the
shares of second-line companies* fluctuate more widely than the
major ones, but this does not necessarily mean that a group of wellestablished but smaller companies will make a poorer showing
over a fairly long period. In any case the investor may as well
resign himself in advance to the probability rather than the mere
possibility that most of his holdings will advance, say, 50% or more
from their low point and decline the equivalent one-third or more
from their high point at various periods in the next five years.†
A serious investor is not likely to believe that the day-to-day or
even month-to-month fluctuations of the stock market make him
richer or poorer. But what about the longer-term and wider
changes? Here practical questions present themselves, and the psychological problems are likely to grow complicated. A substantial
rise in the market is at once a legitimate reason for satisfaction and
a cause for prudent concern, but it may also bring a strong temptation toward imprudent action. Your shares have advanced, good!

* Today’s equivalent of what Graham calls “second-line companies” would
be any of the thousands of stocks not included in the Standard & Poor’s
500-stock index. A regularly revised list of the 500 stocks in the S & P index
is available at www.standardandpoors.com.
† Note carefully what Graham is saying here. It is not just possible, but probable, that most of the stocks you own will gain at least 50% from their lowest price and lose at least 33% from their highest price—regardless of which
stocks you own or whether the market as a whole goes up or down. If you
can’t live with that—or you think your portfolio is somehow magically exempt
from it—then you are not yet entitled to call yourself an investor. (Graham
refers to a 33% decline as the “equivalent one-third” because a 50% gain
takes a $10 stock to $15. From $15, a 33% loss [or $5 drop] takes it right
back to $10, where it started.)

The Investor and Market Fluctuations

197

You are richer than you were, good! But has the price risen too high,
and should you think of selling? Or should you kick yourself for
not having bought more shares when the level was lower? Or—
worst thought of all—should you now give way to the bull-market
atmosphere, become infected with the enthusiasm, the overconfidence and the greed of the great public (of which, after all, you are
a part), and make larger and dangerous commitments? Presented
thus in print, the answer to the last question is a self-evident no, but
even the intelligent investor is likely to need considerable will
power to keep from following the crowd.
It is for these reasons of human nature, even more than by calculation of financial gain or loss, that we favor some kind of mechanical method for varying the proportion of bonds to stocks in the
investor’s portfolio. The chief advantage, perhaps, is that such a
formula will give him something to do. As the market advances he
will from time to time make sales out of his stockholdings, putting
the proceeds into bonds; as it declines he will reverse the procedure. These activities will provide some outlet for his otherwise
too-pent-up energies. If he is the right kind of investor he will take
added satisfaction from the thought that his operations are exactly
opposite from those of the crowd.*

Business Valuations versus Stock-Market Valuations
The impact of market fluctuations upon the investor’s true situation may be considered also from the standpoint of the shareholder as the part owner of various businesses. The holder of
marketable shares actually has a double status, and with it the
privilege of taking advantage of either at his choice. On the one
hand his position is analogous to that of a minority shareholder or
silent partner in a private business. Here his results are entirely
dependent on the profits of the enterprise or on a change in the
underlying value of its assets. He would usually determine the
value of such a private-business interest by calculating his share of
the net worth as shown in the most recent balance sheet. On the

* For today’s investor, the ideal strategy for pursuing this “formula” is rebalancing, which we discuss on pp. 104–105.

198

The Intelligent Investor

other hand, the common-stock investor holds a piece of paper, an
engraved stock certificate, which can be sold in a matter of minutes
at a price which varies from moment to moment—when the market is open, that is—and often is far removed from the balancesheet value.*
The development of the stock market in recent decades has
made the typical investor more dependent on the course of price
quotations and less free than formerly to consider himself merely a
business owner. The reason is that the successful enterprises in
which he is likely to concentrate his holdings sell almost constantly
at prices well above their net asset value (or book value, or
“balance-sheet value”). In paying these market premiums the
investor gives precious hostages to fortune, for he must depend on
the stock market itself to validate his commitments.†
This is a factor of prime importance in present-day investing,
and it has received less attention than it deserves. The whole structure of stock-market quotations contains a built-in contradiction.
The better a company’s record and prospects, the less relationship
the price of its shares will have to their book value. But the greater
the premium above book value, the less certain the basis of determining its intrinsic value—i.e., the more this “value” will depend
on the changing moods and measurements of the stock market.
Thus we reach the final paradox, that the more successful the company, the greater are likely to be the fluctuations in the price of its
shares. This really means that, in a very real sense, the better the

* Most companies today provide “an engraved stock certificate” only upon
special request. Stocks exist, for the most part, in purely electronic form
(much as your bank account contains computerized credits and debits, not
actual currency) and thus have become even easier to trade than they were
in Graham’s day.
† Net asset value, book value, balance-sheet value, and tangible-asset value
are all synonyms for net worth, or the total value of a company’s physical
and financial assets minus all its liabilities. It can be calculated using the balance sheets in a company’s annual and quarterly reports; from total shareholders’ equity, subtract all “soft” assets such as goodwill, trademarks, and
other intangibles. Divide by the fully diluted number of shares outstanding to
arrive at book value per share.

The Investor and Market Fluctuations

199

quality of a common stock, the more speculative it is likely to be—at
least as compared with the unspectacular middle-grade issues.*
(What we have said applies to a comparison of the leading growth
companies with the bulk of well-established concerns; we exclude
from our purview here those issues which are highly speculative
because the businesses themselves are speculative.)
The argument made above should explain the often erratic price
behavior of our most successful and impressive enterprises. Our
favorite example is the monarch of them all—International Business Machines. The price of its shares fell from 607 to 300 in seven
months in 1962–63; after two splits its price fell from 387 to 219 in
1970. Similarly, Xerox—an even more impressive earnings gainer
in recent decades—fell from 171 to 87 in 1962–63, and from 116 to
65 in 1970. These striking losses did not indicate any doubt about
the future long-term growth of IBM or Xerox; they reflected instead
a lack of confidence in the premium valuation that the stock market itself had placed on these excellent prospects.
The previous discussion leads us to a conclusion of practical
importance to the conservative investor in common stocks. If he is
to pay some special attention to the selection of his portfolio, it
might be best for him to concentrate on issues selling at a reasonably close approximation to their tangible-asset value—say, at not
more than one-third above that figure. Purchases made at such
levels, or lower, may with logic be regarded as related to the

* Graham’s use of the word “paradox” is probably an allusion to a classic
article by David Durand, “Growth Stocks and the Petersburg Paradox,” The
Journal of Finance, vol. XII, no. 3, September, 1957, pp. 348–363, which
compares investing in high-priced growth stocks to betting on a series of
coin flips in which the payoff escalates with each flip of the coin. Durand
points out that if a growth stock could continue to grow at a high rate for
an indefinite period of time, an investor should (in theory) be willing to pay
an infinite price for its shares. Why, then, has no stock ever sold for a
price of infinity dollars per share? Because the higher the assumed future
growth rate, and the longer the time period over which it is expected, the
wider the margin for error grows, and the higher the cost of even a tiny miscalculation becomes. Graham discusses this problem further in Appendix 4
(p. 570).

200

The Intelligent Investor

company’s balance sheet, and as having a justification or support
independent of the fluctuating market prices. The premium over
book value that may be involved can be considered as a kind of
extra fee paid for the advantage of stock-exchange listing and the
marketability that goes with it.
A caution is needed here. A stock does not become a sound
investment merely because it can be bought at close to its asset
value. The investor should demand, in addition, a satisfactory ratio
of earnings to price, a sufficiently strong financial position, and the
prospect that its earnings will at least be maintained over the years.
This may appear like demanding a lot from a modestly priced
stock, but the prescription is not hard to fill under all but dangerously high market conditions. Once the investor is willing to forgo
brilliant prospects—i.e., better than average expected growth—he
will have no difficulty in finding a wide selection of issues meeting
these criteria.
In our chapters on the selection of common stocks (Chapters 14
and 15) we shall give data showing that more than half of the DJIA
issues met our asset-value criterion at the end of 1970. The most
widely held investment of all—American Tel. & Tel.—actually sells
below its tangible-asset value as we write. Most of the light-andpower shares, in addition to their other advantages, are now (early
1972) available at prices reasonably close to their asset values.
The investor with a stock portfolio having such book values
behind it can take a much more independent and detached view of
stock-market fluctuations than those who have paid high multipliers of both earnings and tangible assets. As long as the earning
power of his holdings remains satisfactory, he can give as little
attention as he pleases to the vagaries of the stock market. More
than that, at times he can use these vagaries to play the master
game of buying low and selling high.

The A. & P. Example
At this point we shall introduce one of our original examples,
which dates back many years but which has a certain fascination
for us because it combines so many aspects of corporate and
investment experience. It involves the Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea
Co. Here is the story:

The Investor and Market Fluctuations

201

A. & P. shares were introduced to trading on the “Curb” market,
now the American Stock Exchange, in 1929 and sold as high as 494.
By 1932 they had declined to 104, although the company’s earnings
were nearly as large in that generally catastrophic year as previously. In 1936 the range was between 111 and 131. Then in the business recession and bear market of 1938 the shares fell to a new low
of 36.
That price was extraordinary. It meant that the preferred and
common were together selling for $126 million, although the company had just reported that it held $85 million in cash alone and a
working capital (or net current assets) of $134 million. A. & P. was
the largest retail enterprise in America, if not in the world, with a
continuous and impressive record of large earnings for many
years. Yet in 1938 this outstanding business was considered on
Wall Street to be worth less than its current assets alone—which
means less as a going concern than if it were liquidated. Why?
First, because there were threats of special taxes on chain stores;
second, because net profits had fallen off in the previous year; and,
third, because the general market was depressed. The first of these
reasons was an exaggerated and eventually groundless fear; the
other two were typical of temporary influences.
Let us assume that the investor had bought A. & P. common in
1937 at, say, 12 times its five-year average earnings, or about 80. We
