
[30]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

class time (and since my attention span is usually a matter
of seconds), I usually blurt out the answer. No! It makes
no sense that the values of most companies swing wildly
from high to low, or low to high, during the course of
each and every year. On the other hand, it seems pretty
clear that the prices of the shares in most companies swing
around wildly each and every year. All you have to do is
look in the newspaper to see that that’s true.
So I ask my room full of smart, sophisticated students to try to explain why. Why do the prices of all these
businesses move around so much each year if the values
of their businesses can’t possibly change that much?
Well, it’s a good question, so I generally let my students
spend some time offering up complicated explanations
and theories.
In fact, it’s such a good question that professors
have developed whole fields of economic, mathematical,
and social study to try to explain it. Even more incredible, most of this academic work has involved coming up
with theories as to why something that clearly makes no
sense, actually makes sense. You have to be really smart
to do that.
So why do share prices move around so much every
year when it seems clear that the values of the underlying
businesses do not? Well, here’s how I explain it to my
students: Who knows and who cares?

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[31]

Maybe people go nuts a lot. Maybe it’s hard to predict future earnings. Maybe it’s hard to decide what a fair
rate of return on your purchase price is. Maybe people
get a little depressed sometimes and don’t want to pay a
lot for stuff. Maybe people get excited sometimes and are
willing to pay a lot. So maybe people simply justify high
prices by making high estimates for future earnings when
they are happy and justify low prices by making low estimates when they are sad.
But like I said, maybe people just go nuts a lot (still
my favorite). The truth is that I don’t really have to know
why people are willing to buy and sell shares of most companies at wildly different prices over very short periods of
time. I just have to know that they do! Why is this helpful?
Let’s think about that.
Suppose you figured that a business (perhaps one like
Jason’s Gum Shops) was worth between $10 and $12 per
share, and at varying times during the year, its shares
could be purchased for between $6 and $11. Well, if you
were confident about your estimate of what the business
was worth, then deciding whether to buy shares when they
were trading near $11 might be a difficult decision. But
when shares in that same company during that same year
were available at close to $6, your decision might well
become much easier! At $6 per share, if your estimates of
value were close to correct, then you would be buying

[32]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

shares in Jason’s Gum Shops for only 50 or 60 cents on
the dollar (for 50 or 60 percent of what they were truly
worth).
One of the greatest stock market writers and
thinkers, Benjamin Graham, put it this way. Imagine that
you are partners in the ownership of a business with a
crazy guy named Mr. Market. Mr. Market is subject to
wild mood swings. Each day he offers to buy your share
of the business or sell you his share of the business at a
particular price. Mr. Market always leaves the decision
completely to you, and every day you have three choices.
You can sell your shares to Mr. Market at his stated
price, you can buy Mr. Market’s shares at that same
price, or you can do nothing.
Sometimes Mr. Market is in such a good mood that
he names a price that is much higher than the true worth
of the business. On those days, it would probably make
sense for you to sell Mr. Market your share of the business. On other days, he is in such a poor mood that he
names a very low price for the business. On those days,
you might want to take advantage of Mr. Market’s crazy
offer to sell you shares at such a low price and to buy Mr.
Market’s share of the business. If the price named by Mr.
Market is neither very high nor extraordinarily low relative to the value of the business, you might very logically
choose to do nothing.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[33]

In the world of the stock market, that’s exactly how it
works. The stock market is Mr. Market! If, according to
the daily newspaper, General Motors is selling for $37 per
share, you have three choices: You can buy shares in General Motors for $37 each, you can sell your shares in General Motors and receive $37 each, or you can do nothing.
If you think GM is really worth $70 per share, then you
might consider $37 a ridiculously low price and decide to
buy some shares. If you think GM is really worth only $30
or $35 per share (and you happen to own some shares),
you might decide to sell to “Mr. Market” at $37. If you
think each share of General Motors is worth between $40
and $45 per share, you may decide to do nothing. At $37
per share, the price is not at a big enough discount for you
to buy, nor is $37 a generous enough offer to make you
want to sell.
In short, you are never required to act. You alone can
choose to act only when the price offered by Mr. Market
appears very low (when you might decide to buy some
shares) or extremely high (when you might consider selling any shares you own to Mr. Market).
Graham referred to this practice of buying shares of a
company only when they trade at a large discount to true
value as investing with a margin of safety. The difference
between your estimated value per share of, say, $70 and
the purchase price of your shares of perhaps $37 would

[34]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

represent a margin of safety for your investment. If your
original calculations of the value of shares in a company
like General Motors were too high or the car business
unexpectedly took a turn for the worse after your purchase, the margin of safety in your original purchase price
could still protect you from losing money.
Even if you originally estimated fair value to be $70,
and it turned out that $60 or even $50 was closer to the
true value for each share, a purchase price of $37 would
leave enough margin for you to still make money on your
original investment! Graham figured that always using the
margin of safety principle when deciding whether to purchase shares of a business from a crazy partner like Mr.
Market was the secret to making safe and reliable investment profits. In fact, these two concepts—requiring a
margin of safety for your investment purchases and viewing the stock market as if it were a partner like Mr. Market—have been used with much success by some of the
greatest investors of all time.
But wait! There’s still a problem here. Okay, maybe a
few. First, as we discussed, how are you supposed to know
what a business is worth? If you can’t place a fair value on
a company, then you can’t divide that number by the number of shares that exist, and you can’t figure out what the
fair value of a share of stock is. So even if a share of General Motors sells for $30 on one day and $60 per share a

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[35]

few months later, you have no idea whether one of those
prices is cheap and one is expensive or both are cheap or
both expensive, or whatever! In short, from what we’ve
learned so far, you wouldn’t know a bargain price if it hit
you in the head!
Second, if you could figure out a fair price or price
range for the business, how would you know whether you
were right, or even close to right? Remember, in the
process of figuring out the value of a business, all you do
is make a bunch of guesses and estimates. Those estimates involve predicting earnings for a business for many
years into the future. Even experts (whatever that means)
have a tough time doing that.
Third, as we already covered, aren’t there tons of
smart, hardworking people trying to figure out all this
stuff, too? Aren’t there lots of stock market analysts and
professional investors who spend their time trying to figure out what companies are really worth? Even if I could
really teach you how to invest, wouldn’t these smart,
knowledgeable, and experienced people be better at it
than you? Wouldn’t these people scoop up all of the obvious bargains before you got there? How can you compete
with those guys? All you did was buy a book—a book that
says even kids (okay, teenagers) can learn how to make big
money in the stock market. Does that make sense? What
chance do you really have?

[36]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

Well, a sane person might start to feel a little foolish
about now. But you paid good money for this book! You
could already be a few cards short of a full deck. So at
least we’ve got that going for us! In any case, ready or
not, here comes the summary:
1. Stock prices move around wildly over very short
periods of time. This does not mean that the values
of the underlying companies have changed very
much during that same period. In effect, the stock
market acts very much like a crazy guy named Mr.
Market.
2. It is a good idea to buy shares of a company at a big
discount to your estimated value of those shares.
Buying shares at a large discount to value will provide you with a large margin of safety and lead to
safe and consistently profitable investments.
3. From what we’ve learned so far, you wouldn’t know
a bargain-priced stock if it hit you in the head.
4. Being a few cards short of a full deck, you might as
well keep reading.

Chapter Five

I LOVE MOVIES, and The Karate Kid is one of my favorites.
Of course, I would like any art form where eating popcorn
and candy are part of the deal. But there is one scene in
this particular movie that holds special meaning for me. In
it, the old karate master, Mr. Miyagi, is supposed to be
teaching his teenage apprentice, Daniel, how to fight.
The boy is new at school and being bullied by a group of
karate-trained toughs. Daniel hopes learning karate will
help him stand up to his tormentors and win the girl of his
dreams. But instead of teaching him karate, Mr. Miyagi
puts Daniel to work—waxing cars, painting fences, and
sanding floors.

[38]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

So after a whirlwind of scenes showing poor Daniel
working his fingers to the bone—waxing, painting, and
sanding—the youth has finally had enough. He confronts
Mr. Miyagi and essentially says, “Why am I wasting my
time doing these simple and menial tasks when I should be
learning karate?” Mr. Miyagi has Daniel stand up from his
sanding duties and starts throwing jabs at the young boy
while yelling “Wax on! Wax off!” Daniel deflects each jab
with the swirling motions he learned from so many hours
waxing cars. Next, Mr. Miyagi throws a punch while
yelling “Paint the fence.” Once again, Daniel deflects the
punch, this time using the up-and-down action of painting
a fence. Similarly, Mr. Miyagi’s karate kick is then stopped
by Daniel’s expert floor-sanding ability.
In effect, by learning these few simple techniques,
Daniel has unwittingly become a karate master. Now in
good movies, the viewer participates in something called
the willing suspension of disbelief. In other words, we kind of
know that Ralph Macchio, the actor who plays Daniel in
the movie, couldn’t really use that waxing thing to defend
himself in a dark alley. In the real world, before he could
finish his first coat, Mr. Macchio would probably get
smacked in the head and drop like a sack of potatoes. But
while caught up in a movie, we’re ready and more than
willing to believe that Mr. Miyagi’s simple methods can
truly work wonders.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[39]

Well, I’m going to have to ask you to do a little suspending of disbelief, too. Not because what you’re going
to learn doesn’t make sense. On the contrary, the two
concepts in this chapter are simple and obvious. It’s just
that these two concepts are so very basic, you’ll have a
hard time believing that such simple tools can turn you
into a stock market master. But pay close attention now,
and I promise you won’t get a smack in the head later.
When we last left Jason, the hero of our story, he had
just asked us to chew over an exciting proposal. His proposal was simple: Would we want to buy a piece of his
wildly successful chain of gum stores, Jason’s Gum Shops?
(You want some, you know you want some . . .) But as
much as Jason wanted to sell us a piece of his business, giving him an answer wasn’t turning out to be so simple.
By looking at the income statement that Jason had provided us, it turned out that Jason’s chain of 10 gum shops
had earned a total of $1.2 million last year—pretty impressive. Since Jason had divided his business into 1 million
equal shares, we had concluded that each share was therefore entitled to $1.20 in earnings ($1,200,000 divided by
1,000,000 shares). At Jason’s asking price of $12 for each
share, that meant that based on last year’s earnings,
Jason’s Gum Shops would have given us a 10 percent
return for each $12 share purchased ($1.20 divided by
$12 = 10 percent).

[40]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

That 10 percent return, calculated by dividing the
earnings per share for the year by the share price, is
known as the earnings yield. We then compared the earnings yield of 10 percent we could receive from an investment in Jason’s business with the 6 percent return we
could earn risk free from investing in a 10-year U.S. government bond. We concluded, without too much trouble,
that earning 10 percent per year on our investment was
better than earning 6 percent. Of course, although that
analysis was simple, we identified a bunch of problems.
First, Jason’s Gum Shops earned that $1.20 per share
last year. Next year’s earnings might turn out to be a completely different story. If Jason’s business earned less than
$1.20 next year, we wouldn’t earn a 10 percent return on
our investment and maybe we would be better off with a
sure 6 percent from the government bond. Second, even
if Jason’s business did earn the $1.20 per share next year,
or even more, that’s only one year. How do we know, or
how would we ever know, how much Jason’s Gum Shops
would earn in future years? It could be a lot more than
$1.20 per share, but it could be a lot less, and our earnings yield could drop significantly below the 6 percent we
could have earned risk free from the U.S. government.
Lastly, even if we had an opinion about future earnings,
how could we ever have any confidence that our predictions would turn out to be right?

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[41]

In short, all of our problems seem to boil down to
this: It’s hard to predict the future. If we can’t predict the
future earnings of a business, then it’s hard to place a
value on that business. If we can’t value a business, then
even if Mr. Market goes crazy sometimes and offers us
unbelievable bargain prices, we won’t recognize them. But
rather than focusing on all the things that we don’t know,
let’s go over a couple of the things that we do know.
As we discussed, Jason’s Gum Shops earned $1.20 per
share last year. At a price of $12 per share, our earnings
yield was therefore $1.20 divided by $12, or 10 percent—
easy enough. But what if Jason’s Gum Shops earned $2.40
per share last year? What if we could still buy a share for
$12? What would the earnings yield be then? Well, $2.40
divided by $12 equals 20 percent. Therefore, if Jason’s
Gum Shops had earned $2.40 per share last year, at a price
of $12 per share, the earnings yield would be 20 percent.
If Jason’s Gum Shops had earned $3.60 per share last
year, at a price of $12 per share, the earnings yield would
be 30 percent! But it gets easier.
Now follow closely because there are only two main
points in this chapter and here comes the question that
will determine whether you understand the first. All
things being equal, if you could buy a share of Jason’s
Gum Shops for $12, which of those earnings results
would you prefer? Would you prefer that Jason’s Gum

[42]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

Shops had earned $1.20 per share last year, $2.40 per
share last year, or $3.60 per share last year? In other
words, would you prefer that the earnings yield calculated
using last year’s earnings was 10 percent, 20 percent, or
30 percent? Drumroll, please. If you answered that 30
percent is obviously better than 20 percent and 10 percent, you would be correct! And that’s the point—you
would rather have a higher earnings yield than a lower
one; you would rather the business earn more relative to
the price you are paying than less! Wax on!
Now that wasn’t so hard, but here comes the second
point of the chapter, which focuses on something a bit different from the first (otherwise, I would be saying the
same thing twice, which would be wasting your time,
which is something I would never do unless I put it in
parentheses). The first point related to price—how much
we receive in earnings relative to our purchase price. In
other words, is the purchase price a bargain or not? But
beyond price, we might also want to know something
about the nature of the business itself. In short, are we
buying a good business or a bad business?
Of course, there are plenty of ways we could define
what makes a business either good or bad. Among other
things, we could look at the quality of its products or
services, the loyalty of its customers, the value of its
brands, the efficiency of its operations, the talent of its

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[43]

management, the strength of its competitors, or the longterm prospects of its business. Obviously, any of these criteria, either alone or in combination, would be helpful in
evaluating whether we were purchasing a good or a bad
business. All of these assessments would also involve making guesses, estimates, and/or predictions. As we already
agreed, that’s a pretty hard thing to do.
So once again it might make sense to first examine
some things that we already know. In fact, let’s not make
any predictions at all. Instead, let’s just look at what happened last year. For instance, what if we found out that it
cost Jason $400,000 to build each of his gum stores
(including inventory, store displays, etc.) and that each of
those stores earned him $200,000 last year. That would
mean, at least based on last year’s results, that a typical
store in the Jason’s Gum Shops chain earns $200,000
each year from an initial investment of only $400,000.
This works out to a 50 percent yearly return ($200,000
divided by $400,000) on the initial cost of opening a gum
store. This result is often referred to as a 50 percent
return on capital. Without knowing much else, earning
$200,000 each year from a store that costs $400,000 to
build sounds like a pretty good business. But here comes
the hard part (not really).
What if Jason had a friend, Jimbo, who also owned a
chain of stores? What if you had a chance to buy a piece

[44]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

of Jimbo’s store chain, Just Broccoli? What if it also cost
Jimbo $400,000 to open a new store? But what if each of
those stores earned only $10,000 last year? Earning
$10,000 a year from a store that costs you $400,000 to
build works out to a one-year return of only 2.5 percent,
or a 2.5 percent return on capital. So here’s the tough
question: Which business sounds better? Jason’s Gum
Shops, a business where each store earned $200,000 last
year and cost $400,000 to build, or Just Broccoli, a business where each store earned $10,000 last year but also
cost $400,000 to build? In other words, which sounds
better—a business that earns a 50 percent return on capital or one that earns a 2.5 percent return on capital? Of
course, the answer is obvious—and that’s the second
point! You would rather own a business that earns a high
return on capital than one that earns a low return on capital! Wax off (or paint the fence or sand something or
whatever)!*
But here comes the big finish. Remember how I told
you this chapter was going to be hard to believe? That by
using just two simple tools you could actually become a
“stock market master”? Well, believe it. You are a stock
market master.
*To find out what Jimbo should do, check out the box at the end of the
chapter!

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[45]

How? Well, as you’ll see next chapter, it turns out
that if you just stick to buying good companies (ones that have
a high return on capital) and to buying those companies only at
bargain prices (at prices that give you a high earnings yield),
you can end up systematically buying many of the good companies that crazy Mr. Market has decided to literally give away.
You can achieve investment returns that beat the pants off
even the best investment professionals (including the
smartest professional I know). You can beat the returns of
top-notch professors and outperform every academic
study ever done. In fact, you can more than double the
annual returns of the stock market averages!
But there’s more. You can do it all by yourself. You
can do it with low risk. You can do it without making any
predictions. You can do it by following a simple formula
that uses only the two basic concepts you just learned in
this chapter. You can do it for the rest of your life—and
you can choose to do it only after you are convinced that
it really works.
Hard to believe? Well, it’s my job to prove it. Your job
is to take the time to read and understand that the only reason this simple method actually works is that it makes perfect sense! But first, as always, here comes the summary:
1. Paying a bargain price when you purchase a share in
a business is a good thing. One way to do this is to

[46]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

purchase a business that earns more relative to the
price you are paying rather than less. In other
words, a higher earnings yield is better than a lower
one.
2. Buying a share of a good business is better than
buying a share of a bad business. One way to do
this is to purchase a business that can invest its own
money at high rates of return rather than purchasing a business that can only invest at lower ones. In
other words, businesses that earn a high return on
capital are better than businesses that earn a low
return on capital.
3. Combining points 1 and 2, buying good businesses
at bargain prices is the secret to making lots of
money.
And most important,
4. Don’t give money to guys named Jimbo.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[47]

In fact, unless Jimbo expects those Just Broccoli
stores to earn a lot more in the coming years (a presumption that would obviously involve making predictions about the future), it seems pretty clear that
Jimbo’s business is so bad he shouldn’t even be building Just Broccoli stores. If he has a choice of building
a new store for $400,000 that will earn him just 2.5
percent each year on his investment or buying a U.S.
government bond that will earn him 6 percent on his
investment—risk free—what’s the point of even building a store in the first place? By opening Just Broccoli stores, Jimbo is actually throwing money away!
(Even though it looks like he is earning 2.5 percent
on his investment in a new store, in reality he is
throwing away the added 3.5 percent he could earn by
simply buying a risk-free U.S. government bond!)
