 I get calls all the time from people who recommend solid companies for Magellan, and then, usually after they’ve lowered their voices as if to confide something personal, they add: “There’s this great stock I want to tell you about. It’s too small for your fund, but you ought to look at it for your own account. It’s a fascinating idea, and it could be a big winner.” 
 These are the longshots, also known as whisper stocks, and the whiz-bang stories. They probably reach your neighborhood about the same time they reach mine: the company that sells papaya juice derivative as a cure for slipped-disc pain (Smith Labs); jungle remedies in general; high-tech stuff; monoclonal antibodies extracted from cows (Bioresponse); various miracle additives; and energy breakthroughs that violate the laws of physics. Often the whisper companies are on the brink of solving the latest national problem: the oil shortage, drug addiction, AIDS. The solution is either (a) very imaginative, or (b) impressively complicated. 
 My favorite is KMS Industries, which, according to the 1980–82 annual reports, was engaged in “amorphous silicon photovoltaics,” in 1984 was emphasizing the “video multiplexer” and “optical pins,” by 1985 had settled on “material processing using chemically driven spherical implosions,” and by 1986 was hard at work on the “inertial confinement fusion program,” “laser-initiated shock compression,” and “visual immunodiagnostic assays.” The stock fell from $40 to $2½ during this period. Only an eight-for-one reverse split kept it from becoming a penny stock. Smith Labs fell from a high of $25 to $1. 
 I visited Bioresponse at its headquarters in San Francisco, after Bioresponse had first come to see me in Boston. There in an upper-floor office in a rather shabby section of San Francisco (this should be seen as a good sign) were the executives on one side of the hall, and the cows on the other. As I talked to the president and the accountant, technicians in lab coats were busily removing lymph from the animals. This was a low-cost alternative to removing lymph from mice, which was the usual procedure. Two cows could make all the insulin for the entire country, and one gram of cow lymph could support a million diagnostic tests. 
 Bioresponse was being closely followed by several brokerage firms, and Dean Witter, Montgomery Securities, Furman Selz, and J.C. Bradford had recommended it. I bought the stock in a secondary offering at $9¼ in February, 1983. It reached a high of $16, but now it’s a goner. Fortunately I sold at only a small loss. 
 Whisper stocks have a hypnotic effect, and usually the stories have emotional appeal. This is where the sizzle is so delectable that you forget to notice there’s no steak. If you or I regularly invested in these stocks, we both would need part-time jobs to offset the losses. They may go up before they come down, but as a long-term proposition I’ve lost money on every single one I’ve ever bought. Some examples: 
 —Worlds of Wonder; Pizza Time Theater (Chuck E. Cheese bought the farm); One Potato, Two (symbol SPUD); National Health Care ($14 to 50 cents); Sun World Airways ($8 to 50 cents); Alhambra Mines (too bad they never found a decent mine); MGF oil (a penny stock today); American Surgery Centers (do they need patients!); Asbetec Industries (now selling for ⅛ ); American Solar King (find it on the pink sheets of forgotten stocks); Televideo (fell off the bus); Priam (I should have stayed away from disk drives); Vector Graphics Microcomputers (I should have stayed away from microcomputers); GD Ritzys (fast food, but no McDonald’s); Integrated Circuits; Comdial Corp; and Bowmar. 
 What all these longshots had in common besides the fact that you lost money on them was that the great story had no substance. That’s the essence of a whisper stock. 
 The stockpicker is relieved of the burden of checking earnings and so forth because usually there are no earnings. Understanding the p/e ratio is no problem because there is no p/e ratio. But there’s no shortage of microscopes, Ph.D.’s, high hopes, and cash from the stock sale. 
 What I try to remind myself (and obviously I’m not always successful) is that if the prospects are so phenomenal, then this will be a fine investment next year and the year after that. Why not put off buying the stock until later, when the company has established a record? Wait for the earnings. You can get tenbaggers in companies that have already proven themselves. When in doubt, tune in later. 
 Often with the exciting longshots the pressure builds to buy at the initial public offering (IPO) or else you’re too late. This is rarely true, although there are some cases where the early buying surge brings fantastic profits in a single day. On October 4, 1980, Genentech came public at $35 and on the same afternoon traded as high as $89 before backing off to $71¼. Magellan was allocated a small number of shares (you can’t always get shares in hot public offerings). I did better with Apple Computer, which I sold on the first day for a 20 percent gain, because I was able to buy as many shares as I wanted. That was because a day before the offering, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts ruled that only sophisticated buyers could purchase Apple because the company was too speculative for the general public. I didn’t buy Apple again until after it collapsed and became a turnaround. 
 IPOs of brand-new enterprises are very risky because there’s so little to go on. Although I’ve bought some that have done well over time (Federal Express was my first and it’s gone up twenty-five-fold), I’d say three out of four have been long-term disappointments. 
 I’ve done better with IPOs of companies that have been spun out of other companies, or in related situations where the new entity actually has a track record. Toys “R” Us was one of those, and so was Agency Rent-A-Car and Safety-Kleen. These were established businesses already, and you could research them the same way you research Ford or Coca-Cola. 
 BEWARE THE MIDDLEMAN 
 The company that sells 25 to 50 percent of its wares to a single customer is in a precarious situation. SCI Systems (not to be confused with the funeral-home firm) is a well-managed company and a major supplier of computer parts to IBM, but you never know when IBM will decide that it can make its own parts, or that it can do without the parts, and then cancel the SCI contract. If the loss of one customer would be catastrophic to a supplier, I’d be wary of investing in the supplier. Disk-drive companies such as Tandon were always on the brink of disaster because they were too dependent on a few clients. 
 Short of cancellation, the big customer has incredible leverage in extracting price cuts and other concessions that will reduce the supplier’s profits. It’s rare that a great investment could result from such an arrangement. 
 BEWARE THE STOCK WITH THE EXCITING NAME 
 It’s too bad that Xerox didn’t have a name like David’s Dry Copies, because then more people would have been skeptical of it. As often as a dull name in a good company keeps early buyers away, a flashy name in a mediocre company attracts investors and gives them a false sense of security. As long as it has “advanced,” “leading,” “micro,” or something with an x in it, or it’s a mystifying acronym, people will fall in love with it. UAL changed its name to Allegis hoping to appeal to modern trendy thinkers. It’s a good thing that Crown, Cork, and Seal left its name alone. If they’d listened to the corporate-image consultants, they would have changed it to CroCorSea, which would have guaranteed a big institutional following from the start.

One Up on Wall Street 

 10 
 Earnings, Earnings, Earnings 
 Let’s say you noticed Sensormatic, the company that invented the clever tag and buzzer system for foiling shoplifters, and whose stock rose from $2 to $42 as the business expanded between 1979 and 1983. Your broker tells you it’s a small company and a fast grower. Or perhaps you’ve reviewed your portfolio and you’ve found two stalwarts and three cyclicals. What possible as-surance do you have that Sensormatic, or any of the stocks you own already, will go up in price? And if you’re buying, how much should you pay? 
 What you’re asking here is what makes a company valuable, and why it will be more valuable tomorrow than it is today. There are many theories, but to me, it always comes down to earnings and assets. Especially earnings. Sometimes it takes years for the stock price to catch up to a company’s value, and the down periods last so long that investors begin to doubt that will ever happen. But value always wins out—or at least in enough cases that it’s worthwhile to believe it. 
 Analyzing a company’s stock on the basis of earnings and assets is no different from analyzing a local laundromat, drugstore, or apartment building that you might want to buy. Although it’s easy to forget sometimes, a share of stock is not a lottery ticket. It’s part ownership of a business. 
 Here’s another way of thinking about earnings and assets. If you were a stock, your earnings and assets would determine how much an investor would be willing to pay for a percentage of your action. Evaluating yourself as you might evaluate General Motors is an instructive exercise, and it helps you get the hang of this phase of the investigation. 
 The assets would include all your real estate, cars, furniture, clothes, rugs, boats, tools, jewelry, golf clubs, and everything else that would go in a giant garage sale, if you decided to liquidate yourself and go out of business. Of course you’d have to subtract all outstanding mortgages, liens, car loans, other loans from banks, relatives, or neighbors, unpaid bills, IOUs, poker debts, and so forth. The result would be your positive bottom line, or book value, or net economic worth as a tangible asset. (Or if the result is negative, then you’re a human candidate for Chapter 11 .) 
 As long as you’re not liquidated and sold off to the creditors, you also represent the other kind of value: the capacity to earn income. Over your working life you may bring home either thousands, hundreds of thousands, or millions of dollars, depending on how much they pay you and how hard you work. Here again, there are huge differences in cumulative results. 
 Now that you’re thinking about it, you might want to put yourself in one of the six categories of stocks we’ve already gone over. This could be a halfway decent party game: 
 People who work in secure jobs that pay low salaries and modest raises are slow growers, the human equivalents of the electric utilities such as American Electric Power. Librarians, schoolteachers, and policemen are slow growers. 
 People who command good salaries and get predictable raises, such as the middle-level managers of corporations, are stalwarts: the Coca-Colas and Ralston Purinas of the work force. 
 Farmers, hotel and resort employees, jai alai players, summer-camp operators, and Christmas tree sales-lot operators who make all their money in short bursts and then try to budget it through long, unprofitable stretches are cyclicals. Writers and actors may also be cyclicals, but the possibility of sudden increases in fortune makes them potential fast growers. 
 Ne’er-do-wells, trust-fund men and women, squires, bon vivants, and others, who live off family fortunes but contribute nothing from their own labor are asset plays, the gold-mining stocks and railroads of our analogy. The issue with asset plays is always what will be left after all the debts are run up, and the creditors at the liquor store and the travel agency paid off. 
 Guttersnipes, drifters, down-and-outers, bankrupts, workers who’ve been laid off, and others in the unemployment lines are all potential turnarounds, as long as there’s any energy and enterprise left in them. 
 Actors, inventors, real estate developers, small businessmen, athletes, musicians, and criminals are all potential fast growers. In this group there’s a higher failure rate than there is among stalwarts, but if and when a fast grower succeeds, he or she may boost income tenfold, twentyfold, or even a hundredfold overnight, making him or her the human equivalent of Taco Bell or Stop & Shop. 
 When you buy a stock in a fast-growing company, you’re really betting on its chances to earn more money in the future. Consider the decision to invest in a young Dunkin’ Donuts such as Harrison Ford, as opposed to a Coca-Cola type such as a corporate lawyer. Investing in the Coca-Cola type seems a lot more sensible while Harrison Ford is working as an itinerant carpenter in Los Angeles, but look what happens to earnings when Mr. Ford makes a hit movie such as Star Wars. 
 The storefront lawyer isn’t likely to become a tenbagger overnight unless he wins a big divorce case, but the guy who scrapes barnacles off boats and writes novels might be the next Hemingway. (Read the books before you invest!) That’s why investors seek out promising fast growers and bid the stocks up, even when the companies are earning nothing at present—or when the earnings are paltry as compared to the price per share. 
 You can see the importance of earnings on any chart that has an earnings line running alongside the stock price. Books of stock charts are available from most brokerage firms, and it’s instructive to flip through them. On chart after chart the two lines will move in tandem, or if the stock price strays away from the earnings line, sooner or later it will come back to the earnings. 
 People may wonder what the Japanese are doing and what the Koreans are doing, but ultimately the earnings will decide the fate of a stock. People may bet on the hourly wiggles in the market, but it’s the earnings that waggle the wiggles, long term. Now and then you’ll find an exception, but if you examine the charts of stocks you own, you’ll likely see the relationship I’m describing. 
 During the last decade we’ve seen recessions and inflation, oil prices going up and oil prices going down, and all along, these stocks have followed earnings. Look at the chart of Dow Chemical. When earnings are up the stock is up. That’s what happened during the period from 1971 to 1975 and again from 1985 through 1988. In between, from 1975 through 1985, earnings were erratic and so was the stock price. 
 Look at Avon, a stock that jumped from $3 in 1958 to $140 in 1972 as earnings continued to rise. Optimism abounded, and the stock price became inflated relative to earnings. Then, in 1973, the fantasy ended. The stock price collapsed because earnings collapsed, and you could have seen it coming. Forbes magazine warned us all in a cover article ten months before the collapse began. 
 And how about Masco Corporation, which developed the single-handle ball faucet, and as a result enjoyed thirty consecutive years of up earnings through war and peace, inflation and recession, with the earnings rising 800-fold and the stock rising 1,300-fold between 1958 and 1987? It’s probably the greatest stock in the history of capitalism. What would you expect from a company that started out with the wonderfully ridiculous name of Masco Screw Products? As long as the earnings continued to increase, there was nothing to stop it. 
 Look at Shoney’s, a restaurant chain that has had 116 consecutive quarters (twenty-nine years) of higher revenues—a record few companies could match. Sure enough, the stock price has steadily moved up. In those few spots where the price got ahead of the earnings, it promptly fell back to reality, as you can see in the chart. 
 The chart for Marriott, another great growth stock, tells the same story. And look at The Limited. When earnings stumbled in the late seventies, so did the stock. When earnings then soared, the stock soared as well. But when the stock got way ahead of earnings, as it did in 1983 and again in 1987, the result was a short-term disaster. The same was true for countless other stocks in the October, 1987 market decline. 
 (A quick way to tell if a stock is overpriced is to compare the price line to the earnings line. If you bought familiar growth companies—such as Shoney’s, The Limited, or Marriott—when the stock price fell well below the earnings line, and sold them when the stock price rose dramatically above it, the chances are you’d do pretty well. [It sure would have worked with Avon!] I’m not necessarily advocating this practice, but I can think of worse strategies.)

One Up on Wall Street 

 THE FAMOUS P/E RATIO 
 Any serious discussion of earnings involves the price/earnings ratio—also known as the p/e ratio, the price-earnings multiple, or simply, the multiple. This ratio is a numerical shorthand for the relationship between the stock price and the earnings of the company. The p/e ratio for each stock is listed in the daily stock tables of most major newspapers, as shown here.

One Up on Wall Street 

 THE WALL STREET JOURNAL TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 13, 1988 
 73 

 52 Weeks 

 Yld P-E Sales 

 Net 

 High 
 Low 
 Stock 
 Div. 
 % 
 Ratio 
 100s 
 High 
 Low 
 Close 
 Chg. 

 43¼ 
 21 ⅝ 
 K mart 
 1.32 
 3.8 
 10 
 4696 
 35 ⅛ 
 34½ 
 35 
 +⅜

One Up on Wall Street 

 * Some people confuse dividends with the earnings we’ve been discussing in this chapter. A company’s earnings is what it makes every year after all expenses and taxes are taken out. A dividend is what it pays out to stockholders on a regular basis as their share of the profits. A company may have terrific earnings and yet pay no dividend at all.

One Up on Wall Street 

 Like the earnings line, the p/e ratio is often a useful measure of whether any stock is overpriced, fairly priced, or underpriced relative to a company’s money-making potential. 
 (In a few cases the p/e ratio listed in the newspaper may be abnormally high, often because a company has written off some long-term losses against the current short-term earnings, thus “punishing” those earnings. If the p/e seems out of line, you can ask your broker to provide you with an explanation.) 
 In today’s Wall Street Journal, for instance, I see that K mart has a p/e ratio of 10. This was derived by taking the current price of the stock ($35 a share) and dividing it by the company’s earnings for the prior 12 months or fiscal year (in this case, $3.50 a share). The $35 divided by the $3.50 results in the p/e of 10. 
 The p/e ratio can be thought of as the number of years it will take the company to earn back the amount of your initial investment— assuming, of course, that the company’s earnings stay constant. Let’s say you buy 100 shares of K mart for $3,500. Current earnings are $3.50 per share, so your 100 shares will earn $350 in one year, and the original investment of $3,500 will be earned back in ten years. However, you don’t have to go through this exercise because the p/e ratio of 10 tells you it’s ten years. 
 If you buy shares in a company selling at two times earnings (a p/e of 2), you will earn back your initial investment in two years, but in a company selling at 40 times earnings (a p/e of 40) it would take forty years to accomplish the same thing. Cher might be a great-grandmother by then. With all the low p/e opportunities around, why then would anybody buy a stock with a high p/e? Because they’re looking for Harrison Ford at the lumber yard. Corporate earnings do not stay constant any more than human earnings do. 
 The fact that some stocks have p/e’s of 40 and others have p/e’s of 3 tells you that investors are willing to take substantial gambles on the improved future earnings of some companies, while they’re quite skeptical about the future of others. Look in the newspaper and you’ll be amazed at the range of p/e’s that you see. 
 You’ll also find that the p/e levels tend to be lowest for the slow growers and highest for the fast growers, with the cyclicals vacillating in between. That’s as it should be, if you follow the logic of the discussion above. An average p/e for a utility (7 to 9 these days) will be lower than the average p/e for a stalwart (10 to 14 these days), and that in turn will be lower than the average p/e of a fast grower (14–20). Some bargain hunters believe in buying any and all stocks with low p/e’s, but that strategy makes no sense to me. We shouldn’t compare apples to oranges. What’s a bargain p/e for a Dow Chemical isn’t necessarily the same as a bargain p/e for a Wal-Mart. 
 MORE ON THE P/E 
 A full discussion of p/e ratios of various industries and different types of companies would take an entire book that nobody would want to read. It’s silly to get bogged down in p/e’s, but you don’t want to ignore them. Once again, your broker may be your best source for p/e analysis. You might begin by asking whether the p/e ratios of various stocks you own are low, high, or average, relative to the industry norms. Sometimes you’ll hear things like “this company is selling at a discount to the industry”—meaning that its p/e is at a bargain level. 
 A broker can also give you the historical record of a company’s p/e—and the same information can be found on the S&P reports also available from the brokerage firm. Before you buy a stock, you might want to track its p/e ratio back through several years to get a sense of its normal levels. (New companies, of course, haven’t been around long enough to have such records.) 
 If you buy Coca-Cola, for instance, it’s useful to know whether what you’re paying for the earnings is in line with what others have paid for the earnings in the past. The p/e ratio can tell you that. 
 (The Value Line Investment Survey, available in most large libraries and also from most brokers, is another good source for p/e histories. In fact, Value Line is a good source for all the pertinent data that amateur investors need to know. It’s the next best thing to having your own private securities analyst.) 
 If you remember nothing else about p/e ratios, remember to avoid stocks with excessively high ones. You’ll save yourself a lot of grief and a lot of money if you do. With few exceptions, an extremely high p/e ratio is a handicap to a stock, in the same way that extra weight in the saddle is a handicap to a racehorse. 
 A company with a high p/e must have incredible earnings growth to justify the high price that’s been put on the stock. In 1972, McDonald’s was the same great company it had always been, but the stock was bid up to $75 a share, which gave it a p/e of 50. There was no way that McDonald’s could live up to those expectations, and the stock price fell from $75 to $25, sending the p/e back to a more realistic 13. There wasn’t anything wrong with McDonald’s. It was simply overpriced at $75 in 1972. 
 And if McDonald’s was overpriced, look at what happened to Ross Perot’s company, Electronic Data Systems (EDS), a hot stock in the late 1960s. I couldn’t believe it when I saw a brokerage report on the company. This company had a p/e of 500! It would take five centuries to make back your investment in EDS if the earnings stayed constant. Not only that, but the analyst who wrote the report was suggesting that the p/e was conservative, because EDS ought to have a p/e of 1,000. 
 If you had invested in a company with a p/e of 1,000 when King Arthur roamed England, and the earnings stayed constant, you’d just be breaking even today. 
 I wish I had saved this report and had it framed for my office wall, to put alongside one that was sent to me from another brokerage firm that read: “Due to the recent bankruptcy, we’re removing this stock from our buy list.” 
 In the years that followed, EDS the company performed very well. The earnings and sales grew dramatically, and everything it did was a whopping success. EDS the stock is another story. The price declined from $40 to $3 in 1974, not because there was anything amiss at headquarters, but because the stock was the most overpriced of any I’ve ever seen before or since. You often hear about companies whose future performance is “discounted” in the stock price. If that’s the case, then EDS investors were discounting the Hereafter. More on EDS later. 
 When Avon Products sold for $140 a share, it had an extremely high p/e ratio of 64—though nowhere near as extreme as EDS’s. The important thing here is that Avon was a huge company. It’s a miracle for even a small company to expand enough to justify a p/e of 64, but for a company the size of Avon, which already had over a billion in sales, it would have had to sell megabillions worth of cosmetics and lotions. In fact, somebody calculated that for Avon to justify a 64 p/e it would have to earn more than the steel industry, the oil industry, and the State of California combined. That was the best-case scenario. But how many lotions and bottles of cologne can you sell? As it was, Avon’s earnings didn’t grow at all. They declined, and the stock price promptly plummeted to $18 ⅝ in 1974. 
 The same thing happened at Polaroid. This was another solid company, with 32 years of prosperity behind it, but it lost 89 percent of its value in 18 months. The stock sold for $143 in 1973 and dropped to $14 ⅛ in 1974, only to bounce up to $60 in 1978 and then stumble once again, back to $19 in 1981. At the market high in 1973, Polaroid’s p/e was 50. It got that high because investors expected an incredible growth spurt from the new SX-70 camera, but the camera and the film were overpriced, there were operating problems, and people lost interest in it. 
 Again, the expectations were so unrealistic that even if the SX-70 had succeeded, Polaroid would probably have had to sell four of them to every family in America to earn enough money to justify the high p/e. The camera as a rousing success wouldn’t have done much for the stock. As it was, the camera was only a moderate success, so it was bad news all around. 
 THE P/E OF THE MARKET 
 Company p/e ratios do not exist in a vacuum. The stock market as a whole has its own collective p/e ratio, which is a good indicator of whether the market at large is overvalued or undervalued. I know I’ve already advised you to ignore the market, but when you find that a few stocks are selling at inflated prices relative to earnings, it’s likely that most stocks are selling at inflated prices relative to earnings. That’s what happened before the big drop in 1973–74, and once again (although not to the same extent) before the big drop of 1987. 
 During the five years of the latest bull market, from 1982 to 1987, you could see the market’s overall p/e ratio creep gradually higher, from about 8 to 16. This meant that investors in 1987 were willing to pay twice what they paid in 1982 for the same corporate earnings—which should have been a warning that most stocks were overvalued. 
 Interest rates have a large effect on the prevailing p/e ratios, since investors pay more for stocks when interest rates are low and bonds are less attractive. But interest rates aside, the incredible optimism that develops in bull markets can drive p/e ratios to ridiculous levels, as it did in the cases of EDS, Avon, and Polaroid. In that period, the fast growers commanded p/e ratios that belonged somewhere in Wonderland, the slow growers were commanding p/e ratios normally reserved for fast growers, and the p/e of the market itself hit a peak of 20 in 1971. 
 Any student of the p/e ratio could have seen that this was lunacy, and I wish one of them had told me. In 1973–74 the market had its most brutal correction since the 1930s. 
 FUTURE EARNINGS 
