
73

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

Old Turkey would cock his head to one side,
contemplate his fellow customer with a fatherly smile, and
finally he would say very impressively, "You know, it's a
bull market!"
Time and again I heard him say, "Well, this is a bull
market, you know!" as though he were giving to you a
priceless talisman wrapped up in a million-dollar accidentinsurance policy. And of course I did not get his meaning.
One day a fellow named Elmer Harwood rushed into
the office, wrote out an order and gave it to the clerk. Then
he rushed over to where Mr. Partridge was listening
politely to John Fanning's story of the time he overheard
Keene give an order to one of his brokers and all that John
made was a measly three points on a hundred shares and
of course the stock had to go up twenty-four points in
three days right after John sold out. It was at least the
fourth time that John had told him that tale of woe, but
old Turkey was smiling as sympathetically as if it was the
first time he heard it.
Well, Elmer made for the old man and, without a word
of apology to John Fanning, told Turkey, "Mr. Partridge, I
have just sold my Climax Motors. My people say the
market is entitled to a reaction and that I'll be able to buy
it back cheaper. So you'd better do likewise. That is, if
you've still got yours."
Elmer looked suspiciously at the man to whom he had
given the original tip to buy. The amateur, or gratuitous,
tipster always thinks he owns the receiver of his tip body
and soul, even before he knows how the tip is going to turn
out.
"Yes, Mr. Harwood, I still have it. Of course!" said
Turkey gratefully. It was nice of Elmer to think of the old
chap. "Well, now is the time to take your profit and get in
again on the next dip," said Elmer, as if he had just made
out the deposit slip for the old man. Failing to perceive
enthusiastic gratitude in the beneficiary's face Elmer went
on: "I have just sold every share I owned!"
74

V

From his voice and manner you would have
conservatively estimated it at ten thousand shares. But Mr.
Partridge shook his head regretfully and whined, "No! No!
I can't do that!"
"What?" yelled Elmer.
"I simply can't!" said Mr. Partridge. He was in great
trouble. "Didn't I give you the tip to buy it?"
"You did, Mr. Harwood, and I am very grateful to you.
Indeed, I am, sir. But—"
"Hold on! Let me talk! And didn't that stock go op seven
points in ten days? Didn't it?"
"It did, and I am much obliged to you, my dear boy. But
I couldn't think of selling that stock."
"You couldn't?" asked Elmer, beginning to look doubtful
himself. It is a habit with most tip givers to be tip takers.
"No, I couldn't."
"Why not?" And Elmer drew nearer.
"Why, this is a bull market!" The old fellow said it as
though he had given a long and detailed explanation.
"That's all right," said Elmer, looking angry because of
his disappointment. "I know this is a bull market as well as
you do. But you'd better slip them that stock of yours and
buy it back on the reaction. You might as well reduce the
cost to yourself."
"My dear boy," said old Partridge, in great distress "my
dear boy, if I sold that stock now I'd lose my position; and
then where would I be?"
Elmer Harwood threw up his hands, shook his head and
walked over to me to get sympathy: "Can you beat it?" he
asked me in a stage whisper. "I ask you!"
I didn't say anything. So he went on: "I give him a tip on
Climax Motors. He buys five hundred shares. He's got
seven points' profit and I advise him to get out and buy
'em back on the reaction that's overdue even now. And
what does he say when I tell him? He says that if he sells
he'll lose his job. What do you know about that?"
75

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Harwood; I didn't say I'd lose
my job," cut in old Turkey. "I said I'd lose my position.
And when you are as old as I am and you've been through
as many booms and panics as I have, you'll know that to
lose your position is something nobody can afford; not
even John D. Rockefeller. I hope the stock reacts and that
you will be able to repurchase your line at a substantial
concession, sir. But I myself can only trade in accordance
with the experience of many years. I paid a high price for it
and I don't feel like throwing away a second tuition fee.
But I am as much obliged to you as if I had the money in
the bank. It's a bull market, you know." And he strutted
away, leaving Elmer dazed.
What old Mr. Partridge said did not mean much to me
until I began to think about my own numerous failures to
make as much money as I ought to when I was so right on
the general market. The more I studied the more I realized
how wise that old chap was. He had evidently suffered
from the same defect in his young days and knew his own
human weaknesses. He would not lay himself open to a
temptation that experience had taught him was hard to
resist and had always proved expensive to him, as it was to
me.
I think it was a long step forward in my trading
education when I realized at last that when old Mr.
Partridge kept on telling the other customers, "Well, you
know this is a bull market!" he really meant to tell them
that the big money was not in the individual fluctuations
but in the main movements that is, not in reading the tape
but in sizing up the entire market and its trend.
And right here let me say one thing: After spending
many years in Wall Street and after making and losing
millions of dollars I want to tell you this: It never was my
thinking that made the big money for me. It always was
my sitting. Got that? My sitting tight! It is no trick at all to
be right on the market. You always find lots of early bulls
in bull markets and early bears in bear markets. I've
76

V

known many men who were right at exactly the right time,
and began buying or selling stocks when prices were at the
very level which should show the greatest profit. And their
experience invariably matched mine—that is, they made
no real money out of it. Men who can both be right and sit
tight are uncommon. I found it one of the hardest things to
learn. But it is only after a stock operator has firmly
grasped this that he can make big money. It is literally true
that millions come easier to a trader after he knows how to
trade than hundreds did in the days of his ignorance.
The reason is that a man may see straight and clearly
and yet become impatient or doubtful when the market
takes its time about doing as he figured it must do. That is
why so many men in Wall Street, who are not at all in the
sucker class, not even in the third grade, nevertheless lose
money. The market does not beat them. They beat
themselves, because though they have brains they cannot
sit tight. Old Turkey was dead right in doing and saying
what he did. He had not only the courage of his
convictions but the intelligent patience to sit tight.
Disregarding the big swing and trying to jump in and
out was fatal to me. Nobody can catch all the fluctuations.
In a bull market your game is to buy and hold until you
believe that the bull market is near its end. To do this you
must study general conditions and not tips or special
factors affecting individual stocks. Then get out of all your
stocks; get out for keeps! Wait until you see—or if you
prefer, until you think you see the turn of the market; the
beginning of a reversal of general conditions. You have to
use your brains and your vision to do this; otherwise my
advice would be as idiotic as to tell you to buy cheap and
sell dear. One of the most helpful things that anybody can
learn is to give up trying to catch the last eighth or the
first. These two are the most expensive eighths in the
world. They have cost stock traders, in the aggregate,
enough millions of dollars to build a concrete highway
across the continent.
77

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

Another thing I noticed in studying my plays in
Fullerton's office after I began to trade less unintelligently
was that my initial operations seldom showed me a loss.
That naturally made me decide to start big. It gave me
confidence in my own judgment before I allowed it to be
vitiated by the advice of others or even by my own
impatience at times. Without faith in his own judgment no
man can go very far in this game. That is about all I have
learned to study general conditions, to take a position and
stick to it. I can wait without a twinge of impatience. I can
see a setback without being shaken, knowing that it is only
temporary. I have been short one hundred thousand
shares and I have seen a big rally coming. I have figured
and figured correctly—that such a rally as I felt was
inevitable, and even wholesome, would make a difference
of one million dollars in my paper profits. And I
nevertheless have stood pat and seen half my paper profit
wiped out, without once considering the advisability of
covering my shorts to put them out again on the rally. I
knew that if I did I might lose my position and with it the
certainty of a big killing. It is the big swing that makes the
big money for you.
If I learned all this so slowly it was because I learned by
my mistakes, and some time always elapses between
making a mistake and realizing it, and more time between
realizing it and exactly determining it. But at the same
time I was faring pretty comfortably and was very young,
so that I made up in other ways. Most of my winnings were
still made in part through my tape reading because the
kind of markets we were having lent themselves fairly well
to my method. I was not losing either as often or as
irritatingly as in the beginning of my New York
experiences. It wasn't anything to be proud of, when you
think that I had been broke three times in less than two
years. And as I told you, being broke is a very efficient
educational agency.
78

V

I was not increasing my stake very fast because I lived
up to the handle all the time. I did not deprive myself of
many of the things that a fellow of my age and tastes would
want. I had my own automobile and I could not see any
sense in skimping on living when I was taking it out of the
market. The ticker only stopped Sundays and holidays,
which was as it should be. Every time I found the reason
for a loss or the why and how of another mistake, I added a
brand-new Don't! to my schedule of assets. And the nicest
way to capitalize my increasing assets was by not cutting
down on my living expenses. Of course I had some
amusing experiences and some that were not so amusing,
but if I told them all in detail I'd never finish. As a matter
of fact, the only incidents that I remember without special
effort are those that taught me something of definite value
to me in my trading; something that added to my store of
knowledge of the game and of myself!

79

VI
In the spring of 1906 I was in Atlantic City for a short
vacation. I was out of stocks and was thinking only of
having a change of air and a nice rest. By the way, I had
gone back to my first brokers, Harding Brothers, and my
account had got to be pretty active. I could swing three or
four thousand shares. That wasn't much more than I had
done in the old Cosmopolitan shop when I was barely
twenty years of age. But there was some difference
between my one-point margin in the bucket shop and the
margin required by brokers who actually bought or sold
stocks for my account on the New York Stock Exchange.
You may remember the story I told you about that time
when I was short thirty-five hundred Sugar in the
Cosmopolitan and I had a hunch something was wrong
and I'd better close the trade? Well, I have often had that
curious feeling. As a rule, I yield to it. But at times I have
pooh-poohed the idea and have told myself that it was
81

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

simply asinine to follow any of these sudden blind
impulses to reverse my position. I have ascribed my hunch
to a state of nerves resulting from too many cigars or
insufficient sleep or a torpid liver or something of that
kind. When I have argued myself into disregarding my
impulse and have stood pat I have always had cause to
regret it. A dozen instances occur to me when I did not sell
as per hunch, and the next day I'd go downtown and the
market would be strong, or perhaps even advance, and I'd
tell myself how silly it would have been to obey the blind
impulse to sell. But on the following day there would be a
pretty bad drop. Something had broken loose somewhere
and I'd have made money by not being so wise and logical.
The reason plainly was not physiological but psychological.
I want to tell you only about one of them because of
what it did for me. It happened when I was having that
little vacation in Atlantic City in the spring of 1906. I had a
friend with me who also was a customer of Harding
Brothers. I had no interest in the market one way or
another and was enjoying my rest. I can always give up
trading to play, unless of course it is an exceptionally
active market in which my commitments are rather heavy.
It was a bull market, as I remember it. The outlook was
favorable for general business and the stock market had
slowed down but the tone was firm and all indications
pointed to higher prices.
One morning after we had breakfasted and had finished
reading all the New York morning papers, and had got
tired of watching the sea gulls picking up clams and flying
up with them twenty feet in the air and dropping them on
the hard wet sand to open them for their breakfast, my
friend and I started up the Boardwalk. That was the most
exciting thing we did in the daytime.
It was not noon yet, and we walked up slowly to kill
time and breathe the salt air. Harding Brothers had a
branch office on the Boardwalk and we used to drop in
82

VI

every morning and see how they'd opened. It was more
force of habit than anything else, for I wasn't doing
anything.
The market, we found, was strong and active. My friend,
who was quite bullish, was carrying a moderate line
purchased several points lower. He began to tell me what
an obviously wise thing it was to hold stocks for much
higher prices. I wasn't paying enough attention to him to
take the trouble to agree with him. I was looking over the
quotation board, noting the changes they were mostly
advances until I came to Union Pacific. I got a feeling that
I ought to sell it. I can't tell you more. I just felt like selling
it. I asked myself why I should feel like that, and I couldn't
find any reason whatever for going short of UP.
I stared at the last price on the board until I couldn't see
any figures or any board or anything else, for that matter.
All I knew was that I wanted to sell Union Pacific and I
couldn't find out why I wanted to. I must have looked
queer, for my friend, who was standing alongside of me,
suddenly nudged me and asked, "Hey, what's the matter?"
"I don't know," I answered.
"Going to sleep?" he said.
"No," I said. "I am not going to sleep. What I am going
to do is to sell that stock." I had always made money
following my hunches. I walked over to a table where there
were some blank order pads. My friend followed me. I
wrote out an order to sell a thousand Union Pacific at the
market and handed it to the manager. He was smiling
when I wrote it and when he took it. But when he read the
order he stopped smiling and looked at me.
"Is this right?" he asked me. But I just looked at him
and he rushed it over to the operator. "What are you
doing?" asked my friend.
"I'm selling it!" I told him.
"Selling what?" he yelled at me. If he was a bull how
could I be a bear? Something was wrong.
"A thousand UP," I said.
83

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

"Why?" he asked me in great excitement.
I shook my head, meaning I had no reason. But he must
have thought I'd got a tip, because he took me by the arm
and led me outside into the hall, where we could be out of
sight and hearing of the other customers and rubbering
chair-warmers.
"What did you hear?" he asked me. He was quite
excited. UP. was one of his pets and he was bullish on it
because of its earnings and its prospects. But he was
willing to take a bear tip on it at second hand. "Nothing!" I
said.
"You didn't?" He was skeptical and showed it plainly.
"I didn't hear a thing."
"Then why in blazes are you selling?"
"I don't know," I told him. I spoke gospel truth.
"Oh, come across, Larry," he said.
He knew it was my habit to know why I traded. I had
sold a thousand shares of Union Pacific. I must have a very
good reason to sell that much stock in the face of the
strong market.
"I don't know," I repeated. "I just feel that something is
going to happen." "What's going to happen?"
"I don't know. I can't give you any reason. All I know is
that I want to sell that stock. And I'm going to let 'em have
another thousand."
I walked back into the office and gave an order to sell a
second thousand. If I was right in selling the first thousand
I ought to have out a little more.
"What could possibly happen?" persisted my friend,
who couldn't make up his mind to follow my lead. If I'd
told him that I had heard UP. was going down he'd have
sold it without asking me from whom I'd heard it or why.
"What could possibly happen?" he asked again.
"A million things could happen. But I can't promise you
that any of them will. I can't give you any reasons and I
can't tell fortunes," I told him.
84

VI

"Then you're crazy," he said. "Stark crazy, selling that
stock without rime or reason. You don't know why you
want to sell it?"
"I don't know why I want to sell it. I only know I do
want to," I said. "I want to, like everything." The urge was
so strong that I sold another thousand.
That was too much for my friend. He grabbed me by the
arm and said, "Here! Let's get out of this place before you
sell the entire capital stock."
I had sold as much as I needed to satisfy my feeling, so I
followed him without waiting for a report on the last two
thousand shares. It was a pretty good jag of stock for me to
sell even with the best of reasons. It seemed more than
enough to be short of without any reason whatever,
particularly when the entire market was so strong and
there was nothing in sight to make anybody think of the
bear side. But I remembered that on previous occasions
when I had the same urge to sell and didn't do it I always
had reasons to regret it.
I have told some of these stories to friends, and some of
million. And Jim Fisk just looked at him and said, "Go
ahead! Do! Sell it short and invite me to your funeral."
"Yes," I said; "and if that chap had sold it short, look at
the killing he would have made! Sell some UP. yourself."
"Not I! I'm the kind that thrives best on not rowing
against wind and tide."
On the following day, when fuller reports came in, the
market began to slide off, but even then not as violently as
it should. Knowing that nothing under the sun could stave
off a substantial break I doubled up and sold five thousand
shares. Oh, by that time it was plain to most people, and
my brokers were willing enough. It wasn't reckless of them
or of me, not the way I sized up the market. On the day
following, the market began to go for fair. There was the
dickens to pay. Of course I pushed my luck for all it was
worth. I doubled up again and sold ten thousand shares
more. It was the only play possible.
85

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

I wasn't thinking of anything except that I was right 100
per cent right and that this was a heaven-sent opportunity.
It was up to me to take advantage of it. I sold more. Did I
think that with such a big line of shorts out, it wouldn't
take much of a rally to wipe out my paper profits and
possibly my principal? I don't know whether I thought of
that or not, but if I did it didn't carry much weight with
me. I wasn't plunging recklessly. I was really playing
conservatively. There was nothing that anybody could do
to undo the earthquake, was there? They couldn't restore
the crumpled buildings overnight, free, gratis, for nothing,
could they? AH the money in the world couldn't help much
in the next few hours, could it?
I was not betting blindly. I wasn't a crazy bear. I wasn't
drunk with success or thinking that because Frisco was
pretty well wiped off the map the entire country was
headed for the scrap heap. No, indeed! I didn't look for a
panic. Well, the next day I cleaned up. I made two hundred
and fifty thousand dollars. It was my biggest winnings up
to that time. It was all made in a few days. The Street paid
no attention to the earthquake the first day or two. They'll
tell you that it was because the first despatches were not so
alarming, but I think it was because it took so long to
change the point of view of the public toward the securities
markets. Even the professional traders for the most part
were slow and shortsighted.
I have no explanation to give you, either scientific or
childish. I am telling you what I did, and why, and what
came of it. I was much less concerned with the mystery of
the hunch than with the fact that I got a quarter of a
million out of it. It meant that I could now swing a much
bigger line than ever, if or when the time came for it.
That summer I went to Saratoga Springs. It was
supposed to be a vacation for me, but I kept an eye on the
market. To begin with, I wasn't so tired that it bothered me
to think about it. And then, everybody I knew up there had
or had had an active interest in it. We naturally talked
86

VI

about it. I have noticed that there is quite a difference
between talking and trading. Some of these chaps remind
you of the bold clerk who talks to his cantankerous
employer as to a yellow dog when he tells you about it.
Harding Brothers had a branch office in Saratoga. Many
of their customers were there. But the real reason, I
suppose, was the advertising value. Having a branch office
in a resort is simply high-class billboard advertising. I used
to drop in and sit around with the rest of the crowd. The
manager was a very nice chap from the New York office
who was there to give the glad hand to friends and
strangers and, if possible, to get business. It was a
wonderful place for tips—all kinds of tips, horse-race,
stock-market, and waiters'. The office knew I didn't take
any, so the manager didn't come and whisper
confidentially in my ear what he'd just got on the q. t. from
the New York office. He simply passed over the telegrams,
saying, "This is what they're sending out," or something of
the kind.
Of course I watched the market. With me, to look at the
quotation board and to read the signs is one process. My
good friend Union Pacific, I noticed, looked like going up.
The price was high, but the stock acted as if it were being
accumulated. I watched it a couple of days without trading
in it, and the more I watched it the more convinced I
became that it was being bought on balance by somebody
who was no piker, somebody who not only had a big bank
roll but knew what was what. Very clever accumulation, I
thought.
As soon as I was sure of this I naturally began to buy it,
at about $160. It kept on acting all hunky, and so I kept on
buying it, five hundred shares at a clip. The more I bought
the stronger it got, without any spurt, and I was feeling
very comfortable. I couldn't see any reason why that stock
shouldn't go up a great deal more; not with what I read on
the tape.
87
