
 That enormous profits should have turned into still more colossal losses, that new theories should have been developed and later discredited, that unlimited optimism should have been succeeded by the deepest despair are all in strict accord with age-old tradition. 20 

 Graham dissected common stocks, corporate bonds, and speculative senior securities (what Michael Milken would call junk bonds) as the biologist did the frog. At first blush, then, Security Analysis was a textbook for a profession still in the making. * But written during the madness of 1929 and its aftermath, the book was also a call to arms against the sins of speculation. In that sense, it was a total break. Loeb’s speculator regarded stocks as pieces of paper, worth however much or little the next fellow might pay. His aim was to anticipate that next fellow, and the fellow after that. The Graham-and-Dodd investor saw a stock as a share of a business , whose value, over time, would correspond to that of the entire enterprise. 

 It is an almost unbelievable fact that Wall Street never asks, “How much is the business selling for?” 21 

 That was the question Graham and Dodd proposed as a guide to valuing stocks. It was not an exact science, but (and this was key) one did not need exactitude—only the skill to identify the occasional company that was priced well below its value. 

 To use a homely simile, it is quite possible to decide by inspection that a woman is old enough to vote without knowing her age, or that a man is heavier than he should be without knowing his weight. 22 

 Left unresolved was the nagging question of what to do when a cheap stock, after its purchase, became even cheaper. For if prices were sometimes wrong, the authors admitted, it could take an “inconveniently long time” for them to adjust. 23 
 The answer appeared the year before Buffett arrived at Columbia. The Intelligent Investor boiled Graham’s philosophy down to three words—“margin of safety.” 24 An investor, he said, ought to insist on a gap—a big gap—between the price he was willing to pay and his estimate of what a stock was worth. This was identical to leaving room for error in driving an automobile. If the margin was great enough, the investor ought to be safe. But what if he was not? Suppose, that is, that the stock kept dropping. Assuming that nothing about the business had changed, Graham said, the investor should pay no heed to the ticker, no matter how grim its tidings. 
 Indeed, an investor who became unduly discouraged by a market drop and who allowed himself to be stampeded into selling at a poor price was “perversely transforming his basic advantage into a basic disadvantage.” 25 Basic advantage? Most investors did not know they had one. Graham explained in a parable: 

 Imagine that in some private business you own a small share that cost you $1,000. One of your partners, named Mr. Market, is very obliging indeed. Every day he tells you what he thinks your interest is worth and furthermore offers either to buy you out or to sell you an additional interest on that basis. Sometimes his idea of value appears plausible.… Often, on the other hand, Mr. Market lets his enthusiasm or his fears run away with him, and the value he proposes seems to you a little short of silly. 26 

 The true investor was in that very spot. He could take advantage of the daily market quote or choose to ignore it—Mr. Market would always return with a new one. 
 To Buffett, these ideas were the Rosetta stone. He had already run the gamut of speculative technique; he had done stock tips, Magee charts—one system after another in the name of keeping up with the trend. But here was an approach to investing that absolved him from having to imitate “B, C and D”—that required only the sweet independence that he had learned from his father. Buffett experienced it as a revelation, “like Paul on the road to Damascus.” 27 Quite simply, he had found his idol. 
 At Columbia, Buffett found that Graham was personally captivating. He looked a good deal like Edward G. Robinson, and his lectures had an air of drama. In one class, Graham depicted the vastly different balance sheets of Company A and Company B. It turned out that each was Boeing—at an up and down moment in the aircraft manufacturer’s history. 28 
 Graham had twenty students in 1950. Most were a good deal older than Buffett, and some were already working on Wall Street. But, almost comically, the lecture devolved into a two-way seminar. 29 Graham, who used the Socratic style, would pose a question, and even before he had the words out of his mouth the twenty-year-old from Omaha would shoot his hand skyward. 
 Graham would rarely say yes or no to Buffett’s answer. He wouldn’t wrap the universe in a ball. It was more like: “That’s interesting. What line of thought brought you to that conclusion?” 30 And Buffett would run with it. As recalled by Jack Alexander, a Buffett classmate: 

 Warren was probably the youngest person in the class—definitely the precocious pupil. He had all the answers, he was raising his hand, he was leading the discussions. He had tremendous enthusiasm. He always had more to say than anyone else. 

 Graham’s accent was on cheap stocks—“cigar butts,” or stocks that one could pick up almost for free, like spent cigars, and that might have a couple of valuable “puffs” left in them. One of his assignments that year was to research the performance of shares trading for less than $5. 31 
 Buffett also learned the details of reading a financial statement, and how to spot a fraud. In essence, Graham taught him how to get from a company’s published material to a fair value for its securities. 
 But he didn’t do it in merely a theoretical way. Graham lectured about live stocks. He was quite indifferent to the fact that students were profiting from his ideas. By 1950, the fifty-six-year-old Graham was prosperous, but his attitude had been no different in the 1930s. 
 “These smart Wall Street guys,” one of his students recalled, “they’d all go out and make a lot of money off Ben and he didn’t seem to mind.” 32 Graham was the sort of absentminded theoretician who would sleep with a notepad by his pillow—and then come to work in shoes of different colors. Marshall Weinberg, Buffett’s contemporary and later his broker and friend, took Graham’s course twice. He recalled: 

 He was giving you ideas. Youngstown Sheet & Tube I bought at 34 … and sold between 75 and 80. I bought GM on his recommendation, also Easy Washing Machine. He’d say, “This is a stock that looks cheap to me”—now, this morning . Real Silk Hosiery was another stock. The class paid for my degree. 

 Buffett was fanatical about following in Graham’s footsteps. He invested in stocks held by Graham-Newman Corp., Graham’s investment company, such as Marshall Wells and Timely Clothes. 33 He also looked up his professor in Who’s Who and discovered that Graham was chairman of the Government Employees Insurance Company. GEICO, as the company was known, was based in Washington. Buffett felt that anything that Graham was chairman of he wanted to know about, so he decided to pay a visit. 34 Conveniently enough, Warren’s father had been reelected to Congress in 1950, and was back in Washington by the spring of 1951, during Warren’s second term at Columbia. 
 Buffett took the train on a Saturday. Downtown Washington was desolate, but he went straight to GEICO’s offices, on 15th and K streets. Finding the door locked, he banged until a janitor appeared. 
 “Is there anybody here I can talk to besides you?” Buffett queried. 35 The janitor said there was a man working on the sixth floor, and agreed to take him there. Lorimer Davidson was taken aback to see a youngish student hovering at his desk—and stunned when he started peppering Davidson with questions. But the two of them talked for four hours. 

 After we talked for fifteen minutes I knew I was talking to an extraordinary man. He asked searching and highly intelligent questions. What was GEICO? What was its method of doing business, its outlook, its growth potential? He asked the type of questions that a good security analyst would ask. I was financial vice president. He was trying to find out what I knew. 

 Davidson knew plenty—about GEICO and about Graham. GEICO had been founded in Texas in 1936 by Leo Goodwin, who had the ingenious idea of selling automobile insurance via direct mail, thus cutting out the usual network of agents. Also, GEICO sold policies only to government employees, a group with fewer than average claims. Its one-two punch of low distribution costs and superior policyholders made it a winner. In 1947, the majority owner wanted to cash out, and he hired Davidson—then an investment broker—to sell it. At first, no one took the bait. Then, in 1948, he shopped it to Graham, who saw that it was a gold mine. Graham-Newman immediately put up $720,000—one-quarter of its assets—for a half-ownership in GEICO. Shortly thereafter, Graham-Newman divested its GEICO stock to its shareholders, and GEICO stock began to trade publicly. Davidson, meanwhile, had done such a good sales job that he had convinced himself and gone to work for GEICO. 
 Buffett returned to New York enamored with GEICO. With a little research, he discovered that its profit margins were five times that of the average insurer, and that its premiums and profits were soaring. 36 Then he went to see insurance experts—the B, C, and D of the day. Every one told him that GEICO’s stock was overpriced. Buffett’s reading of the facts was just the opposite, but he found them daunting. 37 They were experts; he was in B-school. 
 Every stockpicker worth his salt eventually comes to such a crossroads. It is extremely difficult to commit one’s capital in the face of ridicule—and this is why Graham was invaluable. He liked to say, “ You are neither right nor wrong because the crowd disagrees with you.” 38 Picking a stock depended not on the whim of the crowd, but on the facts. And Buffett took this to heart, partly because he saw Graham in idealized terms—as a “hero,” like his father. 39 
 Graham had a similar effect on others. Though generally reserved, he had an almost parental fondness for his students. 40 To Jack Alexander, Graham was “almost like a father figure.” In a way, it was a curious description—more likely to have been uttered by a student than by one of Graham’s offspring. 
 With his own family, Graham was remote, a condition exacerbated by his roving eye. He left his first wife for a young model, and by the time Buffett met him, Graham was on wife number three, his former secretary, Estelle. In an incident telling of Graham’s disregard for convention, the professor was lying in bed with Estelle one morning when a just-married young woman came calling. Graham suggested that she hop in with them. 
 Graham’s children found him distant, especially after he lost a nine-year-old son. 41 They knew him as a figure of ideas, strolling around Central Park with a hat and walking stick, reciting poetry. His son Benjamin, Jr., once asked him a simple question from high school Latin, and Graham responded by reciting an oration of Cicero’s from memory, as if giving a lecture. He lacked the patience for small talk, and would often disappear to read in the middle of his own dinner parties. 
 But to be Graham’s student in the 1950s was to inhabit a special place. Wall Street was lined with cigar butts; one needed only the tools, and the cast of mind, to spot them. For the would-be money manager, the Columbia of Graham and Dodd produced a kinetic and communal surge, akin to the jolt that a young writer of the twenties might have experienced at a table at the Café des Amateurs in Paris, within earshot of Hemingway. 
 Buffett quickly fell in with a nucleus of Graham stalwarts. He went home with Fred Stanback, a retiring classmate from North Carolina, who reported to his mother that Buffett “just eats hamburgers and drinks Pepsi-Colas” and hence would be no trouble. Then Buffett and Stanback went to Jersey City for the annual meeting of Marshall Wells, and there met Walter Schloss, a devotee who was working for Graham-Newman. The three went to lunch and talked stocks to the point of exhaustion. 
 On another excursion, to the downtown Wall Street Club, Buffett met Tom Knapp, an unassuming Long Islander who had switched from chemistry to stocks after taking a night class with David Dodd. Buffett also became close to William Ruane, an earnest Harvard Business School graduate who was auditing Graham’s class. Right off the bat, these students were united by their burning devotion to Graham. As Buffett would observe later, people either took to Graham right away or not at all. 42 For people of a certain temperament, no amount of persuasion worked. Buffett’s new pals were hooked immediately . They found the Graham strategy—in a nutshell, trying to buy $1 worth of securities for fifty cents—powerful and absurdly simple, whereas most of Wall Street seemed like shooting craps. They had the beginnings of tribe, and they gravitated to Buffett, who was witty, likable, and—they knew—a step ahead of themselves. Knapp’s first impression was that “Buffett knew almost every balance sheet on the New York Stock Exchange.” 
 Oddly, when Buffett graduated, in 1951, both Graham and his father advised him not to go into stocks. Each had the post-Depression mentality of fearing a second visitation. Graham pointed out that the Dow had traded below 200 at some point in every year, save for the present one. Why not postpone going to Wall Street until after the next crash, his heroes counseled, and meanwhile get a safe job with someone like Procter & Gamble? 43 
 It was awful advice—violating Graham’s tenet of not trying to forecast markets. The Dow, in fact, never went under 200 again. “I had about ten thousand bucks,” Buffett noted later. “If I’d taken their advice I’d probably still have about ten thousand bucks.” 44 
 Anyway, there was no way that Buffett was going to wait. Having racked up the only A+ that Graham had awarded in twenty-two years at Columbia, 45 Buffett made what seemed an irresistible offer: to work for Graham-Newman for free. 
 But Graham turned him down. These were the days when Jews were locked out of Wall Street’s gentile firms, and Graham preferred to hold his spots for Jews. 46 † (Morgan Stanley would not hire its first Jew until 1963.) 47 It is not clear whether Buffett discovered Graham’s reason then or a bit later, but when he did, it was a shocker. “It was sensitivity training for him,” one of his friends would comment. 48 
 It did not occur to Buffett to look anyplace else on Wall Street—that is, to work for someone he didn’t know. Once again, he headed home. The Omaha National Bank offered him work, but Buffett turned it down, preferring the familiar confines of Buffett-Falk & Co., his father’s brokerage. A friend of Howard’s asked: “Will you be known as Buffett & Son?” 
 “No,” Warren cracked. “Buffett & Father .” 49 
 In Omaha, Buffett began to court Susan Thompson, the daughter of a prominent Omaha minister and psychology professor. Her folks were friends of the Buffetts, and her father had managed one of Howard’s campaigns. Also, Susie had roomed with Warren’s sister Roberta at Northwestern University. 
 Susie had an enormous sparkling smile, round cheeks, and dark hair that fell to a curve at the neck—somewhat resembling Betty Boop’s. Bubbly and outgoing, on first impression she struck many as light-headed and even vacuous. 
 The truth was to the contrary. As a girl, Susie had been sickly. She had suffered from earaches, had frequently had her ears lanced, and had spent long stretches at home with rheumatic fever. William and Dorothy Thompson had tried to make up for it by showering their daughter with attention, tenderness, and physical demonstrativeness. 
 She grew up, she would say, with an awareness of being unconditionally loved. 50 And having overcome illness, she was conscious of a sensation of freedom. She felt not merely healthy, but released from pain. She would say, “To be free of pain is a great state of being. I learned that at a very young age.” 51 
 By the time she reached adulthood, Susie seemed to have been put together from all the emotional material that Warren did not have. She took an unusual interest in reaching out to other people—a deep interest. Instinctively empathetic, she had a soothing way of drawing people out, especially at a level of feelings. Faith Stewart-Gordon, a sorority sister and later proprietress of New York’s Russian Tea Room, said: 

 Susie had this otherworldly side. We took the same philosophy course. After, she sent me this book on Zen Buddhism. She was always trying to get past the mundane and get to the big issues. She’d look into my eyes and say, “How are you?” When Susie said that, she meant: “How are you doing in life? How is your soul?” 

 In particular, Susie had a fascination with death. But it was the mirror image of Warren’s obsession. Somewhere in her illnesses, Susie had lost the fear of dying, and now she was eager to be with people on their deathbeds and to ease their fears of passing on. Whereas Warren thought about dying logically and wanted to keep the whole terrifying subject as far away as possible, Susie related to death in spiritual terms and was eager to wrap her hands around it. 
 Once he started seeing Susie, in the summer of 1951, Warren immediately fell in love with her. But Susie was anything but in love with him. She was bored by his brainteasers and would slip out the back door when Warren came calling. He told her that he would be rich, which did not mean a thing to her. Besides, as Susie recalled, she was “madly in love with somebody else.” So Warren settled for courting Susie’s father. According to Susie, Warren 

 went over to my parents’ home every night and played the ukulele. My father [had] played the mandolin since he was 20, so he was really excited about having someone to play with. So Warren did that every night, while I went out with this other person. 52 

 The “other person” was Milton Brown, a Union Pacific mail handler’s son who had dated her in high school and also at Northwestern. Susie’s parents objected to her dating a Jew and wouldn’t invite Brown into the house. 53 The cash-strapped Brown wasn’t welcome at Susie’s sorority, either. To Susie, who was trying to break out of her sheltered, Waspish upbringing, this magnified Brown’s appeal. But eventually, she gave in to her father, broke off with Brown, and hastily left Northwestern. 54 
 Warren, meanwhile, was canny enough to see what was going on. He told “Doc” Thompson that he was the perfect compromise: “Jewish enough to suit Susie, and Christian enough to suit you.” 55 By Jewish enough for Susie, Warren surely meant that Susie would find plenty in him to empathize with, too. Susie’s sister, Dorothy, recalled: 

 My dad liked him right away. He’d come over after the family had dinner. She’d be doing the dishes and he’d be sitting on a stool and playing a ukulele or a little guitar and singing. Warren had a very nice voice. 

 The black-haired minister, who was used to getting his way, kept telling Susie that she ought to go out with Warren. And Susie looked up to her father and respected his judgment. 
 Eventually, she and Warren began to date. She liked his sense of humor, and their Pat-and-Dick courtship blossomed into romance. “They were so infatuated with each other,” said Warren’s Aunt Katie. “Kissing, sitting on each other’s laps. It was awful.” 
 Warren, as he had predicted, was indeed “Jewish enough” for Susie. He had his buried childhood traumas, such as his tormenting mother and his forced removal to Washington, just waiting for Susie to go to work on. And Susie had a depth of understanding that was unlike anyone’s in his experience. In retrospect, Warren said he had been lonely until he met her. 56 
 Hidden behind an illusion veil and a gown of Chantilly lace, Susie married Warren at Dundee Presbyterian on the third Saturday in April 1952. Driving to California for a honeymoon, they stopped at the Wigwam Café, outside of Omaha, for their first meal. According to one account—perhaps apocryphal—of the trip, on the first Sunday, Warren noticed a lone Cadillac parked outside a company headquarters. He stopped the car, ducked inside, and picked the brain of the company president while his nineteen-year-old bride waited in the car, reflecting on the verities of being married to Warren Buffett. 

 The Buffetts started out in a $65-a-month three-room apartment. 57 Given Warren’s promises of riches, Susie may have been a bit taken aback. The place was so run-down that mice crawled into their shoes at night. Warren was so tight about money that when the couple had a daughter—also named Susie—they made a bed for her in a dresser drawer. 
 At Buffett-Falk, Buffett was not the sort of stock salesman one meets very often. The first stock he sold was a tough sale, little-known security—GEICO. Buf Buffett, now over his own self-doubt, put $10,000—most of his savings—into it and pushed it on dubious customers all over Omaha. (His Aunt Alice got him started by buying one hundred shares.) He would cash out for a 50 percent profit the following year. 58 
 What was most unusual about the young salesman was his appetite for research. Searching for ideas, he read the heavy purple-bound Moody’s manuals page for page with the zest of a small boy reading comics. And he found small gems—unwanted and very cheap cigar butts such as Kansas City Life, Genesee Valley Gas, and Western Insurance Securities, all trading at three times earnings or less. It seemed too good to be true; if the stocks were so cheap, Buffett figured, somebody ought to be buying them. But slowly, it dawned on him. The somebody was him. Nobody was going to tell you that Western Insurance was a steal; you had to get there on your own. 59 
 But Buffett was in the wrong job. All that research was wasted on a salesman, who stood to make the same small commission regardless if the idea was any good or not. 
 And customers thought he was green. Many times, a fellow would listen to Buffett’s pitch, then check it out with his own, more seasoned broker and buy it from him. Daniel Monen, a friend of Buffett’s in Omaha, said, “It drove Warren wild.” 
 Buffett did learn a trick for getting in the door. He told Bob Dwyer, his old golf coach, “Just let ’em feel that you can save ’em something on taxes and nobody will keep you out.” ‡ 
 But he didn’t like persuading people to invest, particularly as he realized that his own interest—getting a commission—was not the same as theirs. It had an adversarial—almost a confrontational—aspect that made him highly uncomfortable. 60 Don Danly said, “I know that he abhorred it.” 
 On the side, Buffett bought a Texaco station—sort of a twenty-something version of Wilson Coin Op—and invested in real estate. But neither worked out. 61 Meanwhile, he dreamed up studies to do for Ben Graham and suggested a couple of stocks to him—anything to keep his chances of working for Graham alive. 62 
 Buffett’s biggest step at Buffett-Falk was not an investment at all; it was taking a Dale Carnegie course on public speaking. Buffett was terrified of it, but he desperately wanted to master his fear. 
 The interesting question is, why? Why would a twenty-one-year-old stockbroker have wanted to learn that skill? If Buffett’s only ambition was to be an investor, he would not have envisioned that he would need to speak in public. Much less would he have foreseen the day that he would deliver a narrative off-the-cuff so compelling, so concise, and so precisely to the point that his audience would swear it was scripted. But to what did Buffett aspire—aside from being a stockpicker—that prompted him to try? 
 After the Carnegie course, Buffett polished his skills by teaching a night class—“Investment Principles”—at the University of Omaha. The students were in their thirties and forties, and many of them were doctors. When the skinny, open-collared twenty-one-year-old teacher walked in, the doctors snickered. 63 
 Buffett immediately began to talk about Graham. “After he talked for five minutes you were sold,” said Leland Olson, an obstetrician. “And he wasn’t selling. He was laid back.” 
 Buffett, who taught several terms, based the lectures on The Intelligent Investor . But now and then he would spice the class with a homey story or word of wisdom, phrasing it simply and pacing it to perfection. 
