
were lashed by demons with a rod made of serpents or scorpions, as a punishment for
their inattention or want of punctuality.
In France and England, the witches were supposed to ride uniformly upon broomsticks;
but in Italy and Spain, the devil himself, in the shape of a goat, used to transport them on
his back, which lengthened or shortened according to the number of witches he was
desirous of accommodating. No witch, when proceeding to the Sabbath, could get out by
a door or window, were she to try ever so much. Their general mode of ingress was by
the keyhole, and of egress, by the chimney, up which they flew, broom and all, with the
greatest ease. To prevent the absence of the witches from being noticed by their
neighbours, some inferior demon was commanded to assume their shapes and lie in their
beds, feigning illness, until the Sabbath was over.
When all the wizards and witches had arrived at the place of rendezvous, the infernal
ceremonies of the Sabbath began. Satan, having assumed his favourite shape of a large
he-goat, with a face in front and another in his haunches, took his seat upon a throne; and
all present, in succession, paid their respects to him, and kissed him in his face behind.
This done, he appointed a master of the ceremonies, in company with whom he made a
personal examination of all the wizards and witches, to see whether they had the secret
mark about them by which they were stamped as the devil's own. This mark was always
insensible to pain. Those who had not yet been marked, received the mark from the
master of the ceremonies; the devil at the same time bestowing nicknames upon them.
This done, they all began to sing and. dance in the most furious manner, until some one
arrived who was anxious to be admitted into their society. They were then silent for a
while, until the new-comer had denied his salvation, kissed the devil, spat upon the Bible,
and sworn obedience to him in all things. They then began dancing again with all their
might, and singing these words,
"Alegremos, Alegremos! Que gente va tenemos!"
In the course of an hour or two, they generally became wearied of this violent exercise,
and then they all sat down and recounted the evil deeds they had done since their last
meeting. Those who had not been malicious and mischievous enough towards their
fellow-creatures, received personal chastisement from Satan himself, who flogged them
with thorns or scorpions till they were covered with blood, and unable to sit or stand.
When this ceremony was concluded, they were all amused by a dance of toads.
Thousands of these creatures sprang out of the earth; and standing on their hind-legs,
danced, while the devil played the bagpipes or the trumpet. These toads were all endowed
with the faculty of speech, and entreated the witches to reward them with the flesh of
unbaptized babes for their exertions to give them pleasure. The witches promised
compliance. The devil bade them remember to keep their word; and then stamping his
foot, caused all the toads to sink into the earth in an instant. The place being thus cleared,
preparation was made for the banquet, where all manner of disgusting things were served
up and greedily devoured by the demons and witches; although the latter were sometimes
regaled with choice meats and expensive wines from golden plates and crystal goblets;

but they were never thus favoured unless they had done an extraordinary number of evil
deeds since the last period of meeting.
After the feast, they began dancing again; but such as had no relish for any more exercise
in that way, amused themselves by mocking the holy sacrament of baptism. For this
purpose, the toads were again called up, and sprinkled with filthy water; the devil making
the sign of the cross, and all the witches calling out, "In nomine Patrica, Aragueaco
Petrica, agora! agora! Valentia, jouando goure gaits goustia!" which meant, "In the name
of Patrick, Petrick of Aragon, -- now, now, all our ills are over!"
When the devil wished to be particularly amused, he made the witches strip off their
clothes and dance before him, each with a cat tied round her neck, and another dangling
from her body in form of a tail. When the cock crew, they all disappeared, and the
Sabbath was ended.
This is a summary of the belief which prevailed for many centuries nearly all over
Europe, and which is far from eradicated even at this day. It was varied in some respects
in several countries, but the main points were the same in France, Germany, Great
Britain, Italy, Spain, and the far North of Europe.
The early annals of France abound with stories of supposed sorcery, but it was not until
the time of Charlemagne that the crime acquired any great importance. "This monarch,"
says M. Jules Garinet, ["Histoire de la Magie en France. Rois de la seconde race," page
29.] "had several times given orders that all necromancers, astrologers, and witches
should be driven from his states; but as the number of criminals augmented daily, he
found it necessary at last to resort to severer measures. In consequence, he published
several edicts, which may be found at length in the 'Capitulaire de Baluse.' By these,
every sort of magic, enchantment, and witchcraft was forbidden; and the punishment of
death decreed against those who in any way evoked the devil -- compounded lovephilters -- afflicted either man or woman with barrenness -- troubled the atmosphere -excited tempests -- destroyed the fruits of the earth -- dried up the milk of cows, or
tormented their fellow-creatures with sores and diseases. All persons found guilty of
exercising these execrable arts, were to be executed immediately upon conviction, that
the earth might be rid of the burthen and curse of their presence; and those even who
consulted them might also be punished with death. [M. Michaud, in his "History of the
Crusades," M. Guinguene, in his "Literary History of Italy," and some other critics, have
objected to Tasso's poem, that he has attributed to the Crusaders a belief in magic, which
did not exist at that time. If these critics had referred to the Edicts of Charlemagne, they
would have seen that Tasso was right, and that a disposition too eager to spy out
imperfections in a great work was leading themselves into error.]
After this time, prosecutions for witchcraft are continually mentioned, especially by the
French historians. It was a crime imputed with so much ease, and repelled with so much
difficulty, that the powerful, whenever they wanted to ruin the weak, and could fix no
other imputation upon them, had only to accuse them of witchcraft to ensure their
destruction. Instances, in which this crime was made the pretext for the most violent

persecution, both of individuals and of communities, whose real offences were purely
political or religious, must be familiar to every reader. The extermination of the
Stedinger, in 1234; of the Templars, from 1307 to 1313; the execution of Joan of Arc, in
1429; and the unhappy scenes of Arras, in 1459; are the most prominent. The first of
these is perhaps the least known, but is not among the least remarkable. The following
account, from Dr. Kortum's interesting history ["Entstehungsgeschichte der
freistadlischen Bunde im Mittelalter, von Dr. F. Kortum." 1827.] of the republican
confederacies of the Middle Ages, will show the horrible convenience of imputations of
witchcraft, when royal or priestly wolves wanted a pretext for a quarrel with the sheep.
The Frieslanders, inhabiting the district from the Weser to the Zuydersee, had long been
celebrated for their attachment to freedom, and their successful struggles in its defence.
As early as the eleventh century, they had formed a general confederacy against the
encroachments of the Normans and the Saxons, which was divided into seven seelands,
holding annually a diet under a large oaktree at Aurich, near the Upstalboom. Here they
managed their own affairs, without the control of the clergy and ambitious nobles who
surrounded them, to the great scandal of the latter. They already had true notions of a
representative government. The deputies of the people levied the necessary taxes,
deliberated on the affairs of the community, and performed, in their simple and
patriarchal manner; nearly all the functions of the representative assemblies of the present
day. Finally, the Archbishop of Bremen, together with the Count of Oldenburg and other
neighbouring potentates, formed a league against that section of the Frieslanders, known
by the name of the Stedinger, and succeeded, after harassing them, and sowing
dissensions among them for many years, in bringing them under the yoke. But the
Stedinger, devotedly attached to their ancient laws, by which they had attained a degree
of civil and religious liberty very uncommon in that age, did not submit without a violent
struggle. They arose in insurrection, in the year 1204, in defence of the ancient customs
of their country -- refused to pay taxes to the feudal chiefs, or tithes to the clergy, who
had forced themselves into their peaceful retreats, and drove out many of their
oppressors. For a period of eight-and-twenty years the brave Stedinger continued the
struggle single-handed against the forces of the Archbishops of Bremen and the Counts
of Oldenburg, and destroyed, in the year 1232, the strong castle of Slutterberg, near
Delmenhorst, built by the latter nobleman as a position from which he could send out his
marauders to plunder and destroy the possessions of the peasantry.
The invincible courage of these poor people proving too strong for their oppressors to
cope with by the ordinary means of warfare, the Archbishop of Bremen applied to Pope
Gregory IX. for his spiritual aid against them. That prelate entered cordially into the
cause, and launching forth his anathema against the Stedinger as heretics and witches,
encouraged all true believers to assist in their extermination. A large body of thieves and
fanatics broke into their country in the year 1233, killing and burning wherever they
went, and not sparing either women or children, the sick or the aged, in their rage. The
Stedinger, however, rallied in great force, routed their invaders, and killed in battle their
leader, Count Burckhardt of Oldenburg, with many inferior chieftains.

Again the pope was applied to, and a crusade against the Stedinger was preached in all
that part of Germany. The pope wrote to all the bishops and leaders of the faithful an
exhortation to arm, to root out from the land those abominable witches and wizards. "The
Stedinger," said his Holiness, "seduced by the devil, have abjured all the laws of God and
man; slandered the Church -- insulted the holy sacraments -- consulted witches to raise
evil spirits -- shed blood like water -- taken the lives of priests, and concocted an infernal
scheme to propagate the worship of the devil, whom they adore under the name of
Asmodi. The devil appears to them in different shapes; sometimes as a goose or a duck,
and at others in the figure of a pale, black-eyed youth, with a melancholy aspect, whose
embrace fills their hearts with eternal hatred against the holy church of Christ. This devil
presides at their Sabbaths, when they all kiss him and dance around him. He then
envelopes them in total darkness, and they all, male and female, give themselves up to the
grossest and most disgusting debauchery."
In consequence of these letters of the pope, the Emperor of Germany, Frederic II, also
pronounced his ban against them. The Bishops of Ratzebourg, Lubeck, Osnabruek,
Munster, and Minden took up arms to exterminate them, aided by the Duke of Brabant,
the Counts of Holland, of Cloves, of the Mark, of Oldenburg, of Egmond, of Diest, and
many other powerful nobles. An army of forty thousand men was soon collected, which
marched, under the command of the Duke of Brabant, into the country of the Stedinger.
The latter mustered vigorously in defence of their lives and liberties, but could raise no
greater force, including every man capable of bearing arms, than eleven thousand men to
cope against the overwhelming numbers of their foe. They fought with the energy of
despair, but all in vain. Eight thousand of them were slain on the field of battle; the whole
race was exterminated; and the enraged conquerors scoured the country in all directions - slew the women and children and old men -- drove away the cattle -- fired the woods
and cottages, and made a total waste of the land.
Just as absurd and effectual was the charge brought against the Templars in 1307, when
they had rendered themselves obnoxious to the potentates and prelacy of Christendom.
Their wealth, their power, their pride, and their insolence had raised up enemies on every
side; and every sort of accusation was made against them, but failed to work their
overthrow, until the terrible cry of witchcraft was let loose upon them. This effected its
object, and the Templars were extirpated. They were accused of having sold their souls to
the devil, and of celebrating all the infernal mysteries of the witches' Sabbath. It was
pretended that, when they admitted a novice into their order, they forced him to renounce
his salvation and curse Jesus Christ; that they then made him submit to many unholy and
disgusting ceremonies, and forced him to kiss the Superior on the cheek, the navel, and
the breech; and spit three times upon a crucifix. That all the members were forbidden to
have connexion with women, but might give themselves up without restraint to every
species of unmentionable debauchery. That when, by any mischance, a Templar infringed
this order, and a child was born, the whole order met, and tossed it about like a
shuttlecock from one to the other until it expired; that they then roasted it by a slow fire,
and with the fat which trickled from it anointed the hair and beard of a large image of the
devil. It was also said that, when one of the knights died, his body was burnt into a
powder, and then mixed with wine and drunk by every member of the order. Philip IV,

who, to exercise his own implacable hatred, invented, in all probability, the greater part
of these charges, issued orders for the immediate arrest of all the Templars in his
dominions. The pope afterwards took up the cause with almost as much fervour as the
King of France; and in every part of Europe, the Templars were thrown into prison and
their goods and estates confiscated. Hundreds of them, when put to the rack, confessed
even the most preposterous of the charges against them, and by so doing, increased the
popular clamour and the hopes of their enemies. It is true that, when removed from the
rack, they denied all they had previously confessed; but this circumstance only increased
the outcry, and was numbered as an additional crime against them. They were considered
in a worse light than before, and condemned forthwith to the flames, as relapsed heretics.
Fifty-nine of these unfortunate victims were all burned together by a slow fire in a field in
the suburbs of Paris, protesting to the very last moment of their lives, their innocence of
the crimes imputed to them, and refusing to accept of pardon upon condition of
acknowledging themselves guilty. Similar scenes were enacted in the provinces; and for
four years, hardly a month passed without witnessing the execution of one or more of
these unhappy men. Finally, in 1313, the last scene of this tragedy closed by the burning
of the Grand-Master, Jacques de Molay, and his companion, Guy, the Commander of
Normandy. Anything more atrocious it is impossible to conceive; disgraceful alike to the
monarch who originated, the pope who supported, and the age which tolerated the
monstrous iniquity. That the malice of a few could invent such a charge, is a humiliating
thought for the lover of his species; but that millions of mankind should credit it, is still
more so.
The execution of Joan of Arc is the next most notorious example which history affords
us, of the imputation of witchcraft against a political enemy. Instances of similar
persecution, in which this crime was made the pretext for the gratification of political or
religious hatred, might be multiplied to a great extent. But it is better to proceed at once
to the consideration of the bull of Pope Innocent, the torch that set fire to the longlaid
train, and caused so fearful an explosion over the Christian world. It will be necessary,
however, to go back for some years anterior to that event, the better to understand the
motives that influenced the Church in the promulgation of that fearful document.
Towards the close of the fourteenth and beginning of the fifteenth century, many witches
were burned in different parts of Europe. As a natural consequence of the severe
persecution, the crime, or the pretenders to it, increased. Those who found themselves
accused and threatened with the penalties, if they happened to be persons of a bad and
malicious disposition, wished they had the power imputed to them, that they might be
revenged upon their persecutors. Numerous instances are upon record of half-crazed
persons being found muttering the spells which were supposed to raise the evil one.
When religion and law alike recognized the crime, it is no wonder that the weak in reason
and the strong in imagination, especially when they were of a nervous temperament,
fancied themselves endued with the terrible powers of which all the world was speaking.
The belief of their neighbours did not lag behind their own, and execution was the speedy
consequence.

As the fear of witchcraft increased, the Catholic clergy strove to fix the imputation of it
upon those religious sects, the pioneers of the Reformation, who began about this time to
be formidable to the Church of Rome. If a charge of heresy could not ensure their
destruction, that of sorcery and witchcraft never failed. In the year 1459, a devoted
congregation of the Waldenses, at Arras, who used to repair at night to worship God in
their own manner in solitary places, fell victims to an accusation of sorcery. It was
rumored in Arras that in the desert places to which they retired, the devil appeared before
them in human form, and read from a large book his laws and ordinances, to which they
all promised obedience; that he then distributed money and food among them, to bind
them to his service, which done, they gave themselves up to every species of lewdness
and debauchery. Upon these rumours, several creditable persons in Arras were seized and
imprisoned, together with a number of decrepit and idiotic old women. The rack, that
convenient instrument for making the accused confess anything, was of course put in
requisition. Monstrelet, in his Chronicle, says that they were tortured until some of them
admitted the truth of the whole accusations, and said besides, that they had seen and
recognized, in their nocturnal assemblies, many persons of rank; many prelates,
seigneurs, governors of bailliages, and mayors of cities, being such names as the
examiners had themselves suggested to the victims. Several who had been thus informed
against, were thrown into prison, and so horribly tortured, that reason fled, and, in their
ravings of pain, they also confessed their midnight meetings with the devil, and the oaths
they had taken to serve him. Upon these confessions judgment was pronounced: the poor
old women, as usual in such cases, were hanged and burned in the market-place; the more
wealthy delinquents were allowed to escape, upon payment of large sums. It was soon
after universally recognized that these trials had been conducted in the most odious
manner, and that the judges had motives of private vengeance against many of the more
influential persons who had been implicated. The Parliament of Paris afterwards declared
the sentence illegal, and the judges iniquitous; but its arret was too late to be of service
even to those who had paid the fine, or to punish the authorities who had misconducted
themselves; for it was not delivered until thirty-two years after the executions had taken
place.
In the mean time, accusations of witchcraft spread rapidly in France, Italy, and Germany.
Strange to say, that although in the first instance chiefly directed against heretics, the
latter were as firm believers in the crime as even the Catholics themselves. In after times
we also find that the Lutherans and Calvinists became greater witchburners than ever the
Romanists had been: so deeply was the prejudice rooted. Every other point of belief was
in dispute, but that was considered by every sect to be as well established as the
authenticity of the Scriptures, or the existence of a God.
But at this early period of the epidemic the persecutions were directed by the heads of the
Catholic Church. The spread of heresy betokened, it was thought, the coming of
Antichrist. Florimond, in his work concerning the Antichrist, lets us fully into the secret
of these prosecutions. He says, "All who have afforded us some signs of the approach of
Antichrist agree that the increase of sorcery and witchcraft is to distinguish the
melancholy period of his advent; and was ever age so afflicted as ours? The seats
destined for criminals in our courts of justice are blackened with persons accused of this

guilt. There are not judges enough to try them. Our dungeons are gorged with them. No
day passes that we do not render our tribunals bloody by the dooms which we pronounce,
or in which we do not return to our homes, discountenanted and terrified at the horrible
confessions which we have heard. And the devil is accounted so good a master, that we
cannot commit so great a number of his slaves to the flames, but what there shall arise
from their ashes a sufficient number to supply their place."
Florimond here spoke the general opinion of the Church of Rome; but it never suggested
itself to the mind of any person engaged in these trials, that if it were indeed a devil, who
raised up so many new witches to fill the places of those consumed, it was no other than
one in their own employ -- the devil of persecution. But so it was. The more they burned,
the more they found to burn; until it became a common prayer with women in the
humbler walks of life, that they might never live to grow old. It was sufficient to be aged,
poor, and ill-tempered, to ensure death at the stake or the scaffold.
In the year 1487 there was a severe storm in Switzerland, which laid waste the country
for four miles around Constance. Two wretched old women, whom the popular voice had
long accused of witchcraft, were arrested on the preposterous charge of having raised the
tempest. The rack was displayed, and the two poor creatures extended upon it. In reply to
various leading questions from their tormentors, they owned, in their agony, that they
were in the constant habit of meeting the devil, that they had sold their souls to him, and
that at their command he had raised the tempest. Upon this insane and blasphemous
charge they were condemned to die. In the criminal registers of Constance there stands
against the name of each the simple but significant phrase, "convicta et combusta."
This case and hundreds of others were duly reported to the ecclesiastical powers. There
happened at that time to be a Pontiff at the head of the Church who had given much of his
attention to the subject of witchcraft, and who, with the intent of rooting out the crime,
did more to increase it than any other man that ever lived. John Baptist Cibo, elected to
the Papacy in 1485, under the designation of Innocent VIII, was sincerely alarmed at the
number of witches, and launched forth his terrible manifesto against them. In his
celebrated bull of 1488, he called the nations of Europe to the rescue of the church of
Christ upon earth, emperilled by the arts of Satan, and set forth the horrors that had
reached his ears; how that numbers of both sexes had intercourse with the infernal fiends;
how by their sorceries they afflicted both man and beast; how they blighted the marriage
bed, destroyed the births of women and the increase of cattle; and how they blasted the
corn on the ground, the grapes of the vineyard, the fruits of the trees, and the herbs of the
field. In order that criminals so atrocious might no longer pollute the earth, he appointed
inquisitors in every country, armed with the apostolic power to convict and punish.
It was now that the Witch Mania, properly so called, may be said to have fairly
commenced. Immediately a class of men sprang up in Europe, who made it the sole
business of their lives to discover and burn the witches. Sprenger, in Germany, was the
most celebrated of these national scourges. In his notorious work, the "Malleus
Maleficarum," he laid down a regular form of trial, and appointed a course of
examination by which the inquisitors in other countries might best discover the guilty.
