
TOP FIVE BEARISH SETUPS
If you are looking for trend trades on the short side, with
the expectation that price will fall after entry, then you will
be looking for one or more of the following setups. When
you come across a stock on your watch list ﬁtting one or
more of these setups, jot it down on a piece of paper. Once

194

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

you have ﬁnished eyeballing your primary watch list, you
should have a short set of stocks you will then do further
research on. You may also add to this list stocks that turn
up on your special screens.

The Relief Rally
Market Type

This setup is best used in:

• Bearish: strongly trending markets
• Bearish: weakly trending markets

Characteristics This setup is really the inverse of the
pullback setup mentioned previously. Here we are looking
for a stock that is strongly or weakly downtrending but has
rallied up off its lows to reach a major moving average,
which should act as resistance. We always wait to enter until
we get conﬁrmation of an overbought condition—as seen
in the stochastics indicator—and a conﬁrming bearish candlestick of some kind. The relief rally itself may just be a
spate of short-term proﬁt taking or a short squeeze (where
shorts are forced to cover their positions and buy back
shares due to a surprising reversal), or it may be in response
to news or an earnings announcement. Regardless, once the
reevaluation of shares plays itself out, the dominant trend
usually emerges again. The odds of this happening are
heightened when this play is put on when a bearish trend
is seen in the broader market.
Key Indicators
dients:

In this setup there are three key ingre-

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

195

• First, identify a strongly or weakly downtrending

stock that has rallied up into a downsloping
20 MA (strongly downtrending) or 50 MA
(weakly downtrending). If this moving average
coincides with, or is placed near, a downsloping
trendline placed over the highs of the downtrend,
so much the better.
Deﬁnition: A downtrending stock is deﬁned as a
stock that is consistently making lower highs (and
preferably lower lows, but, strictly speaking, this
is not necessary). A strongly downtrending stock is
a downtrending stock whose 20 MA is always
falling and below a falling 50 MA. The further
these two MAs are separated, the stronger the
downtrend. A weakly downtrending stock is a downtrending stock whose 20 MA is mostly falling and
is below a falling 50 MA.
• Second, there must be a sharp rise in stochastics

(ﬁve-period) to or above the overbought 80 line.
• Third, the price on the rally to that moving
average must have put in a bearish candle of some
kind (doji, engulﬁng, gravestone, hanging man,
evening star, etc.). If it has put in a green or
white candle (close above the open), then this is a
wait-and-see condition. You should make a note
to check that stock again the next trading day.
• Sell short signal: These three factors register a sell
short signal and the stock is ready to be shortlisted as a valid relief rally setup.

196

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

The Screening Tool There are occasions in the natural course of market cycles when relief rally setups do not
appear very often. If you fail to ﬁnd any decent relief
rallies on your primary watch list, you can try using a
special screen to search the universe of stocks for them.
When I do this, I input the following criteria into
Stockcharts.com’s screening tool:
• For the last market close:
• All stocks with . . .
• 60-day simple moving average of volume for to-

day is greater than 500,000.
• 60-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 10.
• The chart has a bearish engulﬁng pattern for
today.
• 20-day simple moving average of close for today
is less than 50-day simple moving average of
close for today.
• Daily close for today is greater than daily close
for ﬁve days ago times 1.15.
Normally, half a dozen stocks appear from this screen,
depending on market conditions. If the list is too large, I
will increase the volume to 1,000,000 and the daily close
ﬁve days ago multiplier to 1.20. If the list is too small, I will
decrease the multiplier to 1.10 or less.
Figure 10.1 is an example of a downtrending stock,
NVDA, that gave two relief rally sell short signals: the ﬁrst
during a weak downtrend with a rally into the 50 MA, and
the second after the trend got stronger with a relief rally only
into the 20 MA. Also note that we have two bearish candle

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

Figure 10.1

197

NVDA showing two relief rally setups.

formations in both cases: a bearish engulﬁng at the ﬁrst signal and a shooting star doji at the second signal. You will also
note that on July 9 there was an additional signal that failed
to yield the desired result, unless you used a wide stop-loss.
Figure 10.2 shows another example of a weakly becoming strongly downtrending stock, QLGC, which gave four
relief rally sell short signals within four months. It is rare to
get so many short signals in such a short time period, but
when they happen like this, it is a trader’s dream come true.
Note that tightly trailing stops would have done well to lock
in substantial proﬁts on at least three of the trades. A reasonable return on this sequence of trades is in the ⫹50 to
⫹60 percent range, while the buy-and-holder had to sit
through a very uncomfortable 55 percent drawdown.

198

Figure 10.2

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

QLGC showing four relief rally setups.

The Bearish Divergence
Market Type

This setup is best used in:

• Range-bound markets
• Bearish: weakly trending markets
• Bullish: weakly trending markets

Characteristics This setup is the ﬂip side of its bullish
cousin noted previously, and as such is also a great workhorse for us. We can use it in all sorts of markets, both
bearish and bullish. As trend traders, we use the bearish
divergence setup to pinpoint the tops of sharp rallies
(beyond the 50 MA) within long-range downtrends. We
will also use a version of it in another setup discussed later.

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

199

Truly, the divergence tool is a very handy one indeed. The
bearish divergence setup looks at a stock that is trading
within a long-range downtrend, but which is currently in
a substantial rally, and has just put in a series of higher
highs. This uptrending series needs to be at least two highs
long so that there is a basis for comparison. Of course, too
many higher highs will eventually negate the long-range
downtrend and thus nullify this setup.
Key Indicators This setup relies on both a price pattern
and a variety of technical indicators. Here are the speciﬁcs:
• First, we need to identify the stock as being in a

long-range downtrend (see deﬁnition). This
supports the idea that the sharp rally we enter on
is only a temporary aberration.
Deﬁnition: The easiest way to identify a longrange downtrend is to note on the daily chart that
the 50 MA, either rising or falling, is trading
below a falling 200 MA. Note: It is essential that
the 200 MA is falling; this signals the downtrend.
• Next, the bearish divergence setup is valid when

price does three things:
• It trades above the 50 MA.
• It puts in at least two clear price highs during
that rally, with at least ﬁve trading days between
the highs.
• The last price high corresponds with a lower
high in two or more of the following technical

200

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

indicators: MACD, MACD histogram, stochastics, OBV, CCI, or RSI.
• Note that if the last (higher) price high
corresponds with the 200 MA, trendline
resistance, or prior price resistance, so much
the better.
• Sell Short Signal: When the preceding conditions
have been met, a sell short signal is triggered
when a bearish candle of some kind (doji,
gravestone, engulﬁng, evening star, etc.) is
printed on the daily chart.
The Screening Tool When eyeballing your watch list
fails to turn up any relief rally setups, the following screen
inputted into Stockcharts.com’s stock screener should identify several possible candidates:
• For the last market close:
• All stocks with . . .
• 60-day simple moving average of volume for to-

day is greater than 500,000.
• 60-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 10.
• Daily high for yesterday is greater than daily
high for 20 days ago.
• Daily high for yesterday is greater than daily
high for three days ago.
• Daily MACD histogram (12,26,9) for today is
less than daily MACD histogram (12,26,9) for
15 days ago.
• Daily ROC (12) for today is less than daily
ROC (12) for 15 days ago.

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

201

• Daily RSI (14) for today is less than daily RSI

(14) for 15 days ago.
• 50-day simple moving average of close for today
is less than 200-day simple moving average of
close for today.
• Daily open for today is greater than daily close
for today.
In Figure 10.3, KLAC registers a bearish divergence
setup for a successful swing trade. Note that the 50 MA
is signiﬁcantly below the 200 MA, signaling a strong

Figure 10.3

KLAC showing a bearish divergence setup.

202

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

downtrend, and that bearish divergence is seen between
the two price highs and two key indicators (RSI and
MACD histogram). Also note the bearish candle formation (evening doji reversal), which conﬁrmed the sell short
signal.
In Figure 10.4, Agilent (A) registers a bearish divergence setup for a successful swing trade, with bearish
divergence seen between the two price highs (higher) and
both the RSI and CCI indicators (lower). Note that this
setup had the added attraction of price running up into a

Figure 10.4

A showing a bearish divergence setup.

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

203

downsloping 200 MA along with an area of former price
resistance (20.00 area).

The Gap Down
Market Type

This setup is best used in:

• Bullish strong trending markets
• Bullish weakly trending markets
• Range-bound markets

Characteristics The gap down setup employs a contrarian trading style. This setup trades stocks that are in
strong uptrends but have just printed an unﬁlled gap down;
that is, they gap down sharply at the open and fail during
the day to close the gap. This setup requires that the gap
down occur only after a signiﬁcant new high (highest price
for at least three months) has been established. This is the
reason they work best in bull markets. Any stock climbing
to new highs in a bear market is a safe-haven stock and
should be avoided by short sellers. Frequently this setup
signals a strong reversal of trend, as investors panic and
rush to the exits in order to lock in proﬁts in the wake of
bad news, disappointing earnings, proﬁt taking, and so on.
This setup has a tendency to take a few days to get started
as bears fend off the dip-buying crowd. But once they win
control, and they usually do after a gap down, the drop can
be sharp and fast.
Key Indicators This setup is very easy to spot and trade.
Here are the speciﬁcs:

204

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

• First, we need to identify the stock as being in a

steady uptrend. For the purposes of this setup, we
deﬁne a steady uptrend as follows:
• The 50 MA is rising steadily without any major
dips.
• Price has remained above the 50 MA for at least
the past 40 trading days (two months).
• Second, there needs to be an unﬁlled gap down on
the current candlestick (see deﬁnition).
Deﬁnition: An unﬁlled gap down is identiﬁed
when, on the market’s close, a stock’s intraday
high price remains below the intraday low of the
preceding day’s trading.
• Sell short signal: When these conditions have been

met, a sell short signal is triggered anytime after
the gap down day when price trades below the
intraday low of the gap down candlestick. Note: If
at any time price trades up into the gap prior to
triggering the sell signal, the setup is negated.
The Screening Tool Several premium charting packages, including eSignal and Quote.com, offer an unﬁlled
gap hotlist function, but this does not screen for uptrending stocks. However, the following screen parameters,
when inputted into Stockcharts.com’s stock screener, will
search daily for gap down setups in uptrending stocks.
• For the last market close:
• All stocks with . . .

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

205

• Breakaway gap down.
• 60-day simple moving average of volume for to-

day is greater than 500,000.
• 60-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 10.
• 20-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 50-day simple moving average of
close for today times 1.1.
The chart of EBAY in Figure 10.5 shows the gap
down setup following a strong uptrend. Note that the
intraday high on the gap down day remained below the low
of the previous trading day, and that the 50 MA is in a
steady uptrend.
In Figure 10.6, we see what happened to EBAY
shortly after the gap down setup was conﬁrmed. Note that
the day after the gap down setup was conﬁrmed, EBAY

Figure 10.5

EBAY showing a gap down setup.

206

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

Figure 10.6

EBAY triggers a sell signal in a gap down setup.

Figure 10.7

SWIR showing a gap down setup.

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

207

gapped down again. With an opening price below the previous day’s low, we had our entry signal. While it took a
few days to consolidate the new bearish posture, once price
resumed its new trend, it really took off.
The chart of SWIR in Figure 10.7 shows another gap
down setup following a strong uptrend. Note that the gap
down candlestick here is quite long, which may lead some
to conclude that the position has already gone too far to
warrant an entry. Never underestimate the power of a gap
down. It is truly a trend killer. All that is needed to complete this setup is a trade below the low of the unﬁlled gap
down day’s candle.
Although it took three days to get moving again after
that big red stick, and indeed to trigger our sell short entry
signal, SWIR shows just how powerful the gap down setup
can be (Figure 10.8). Note that SWIR’s gap down into a

Figure 10.8

SWIR triggers a sell signal in a gap down setup.

208

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

rising moving average may have looked tempting to the
“buy the dip” crowd. Consider this a warning: never buy a
dip to support in an uptrending stock that takes place after
an unﬁlled gap down, however strong the uptrend! You are
likely to get caught in a bull trap.

The Blue Sea Breakdown
Market Type

This setup is best used in:

• Bearish: strongly trending markets

Characteristics Think of this as a reverse cup-andhandle formation. Like its bullish cousin outlined in the
previous chapter, this setup is sometimes your only play
during prolonged bear markets when there just doesn’t
seem to be any relief in sight. Blue sea here refers to the new
low territory the stock trades down into as it clears at least
three months of prior price lows. We conﬁrm the breakdown by looking at an indicator that gives us a visual reference of recent trends in volume.
Key Indicators This setup relies on ﬁve price parameters combined with one technical indicator: on balance volume (OBV). Here are the rules:
• First, the closing price of the stock (not just the

intraday move) must register a new low following
a previous new low set within the past 20 trading
days. It is important that the new low be the

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

209

result of a recent and short-lived move in price
rather than a prolonged sell-off.
• Second, the current new closing price low must
be a signiﬁcant low; no low closing price low
should be recorded in at least the past three
months of trading.
• Third, the new closing price low cannot have run
too far below the 52-week high for the stock. We
don’t want stocks that are too overextended to the
downside. To prevent this, we calculate a multiple
by taking the 52-week high and divide it by the
new low closing price. This multiple should not
be more than 2.0. In other words, if a stock’s 52week high is 30.00, we would sell short a blue sea
breakdown only if the new closing low is greater
than 15.00.
• Fourth, the current breakdown into blue sea
territory (no price support within the previous
three months) should be accompanied by the
lowest OBV reading seen in at least the past three
months.
• Fifth, the candle on the day of the breakdown to
a new low must be a red or black candle (close is
lower than the open).
• Sell short signal: When all ﬁve of the these
parameters have been met on the same day, we
have a sell short signal.
The Screening Tool In bull markets this screen will not
return many candidates, but in a strong bear market it

210

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

should turn up several possible blue sea candidates. Since
that ﬁrst price parameter cannot be screened for, a further
eyeballing of the charts is usually required to weed out
invalid setups.
• For the last market close:
• U.S. stocks with . . .
• New 52-week low.
• 20-day simple moving average of volume for to-

day is greater than 500,000.
• 60-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 5.
• Daily close for today is greater than or equal to
maximum high over 260 days starting today
times 0.5.
• Daily OBV for today is less than daily OBV for
60 days ago.
In Figure 10.9, JNPR shows a blue sea breakdown signal as it passes below a three-month low with conﬁrming
new low in the OBV indicator. An entry at the open of the
next trading day could have been covered nine days later,
for a maximum gain of ⫹17 percent. The stock rallied
shortly after that, so you would likely have been stopped
out for something more like ⫹12 percent.
In Figure 10.10, we see XMSR conﬁrming a blue sea
breakdown with supportive OBV on the last day of April.
In this case, OBV ﬁrst broke down to a new three-month
low, and the stock price did not conﬁrm the breakdown
until the next day. However, once it conﬁrmed—BAM!—
the stock got a ⫺50 percent haircut. Note that the stock is

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

Figure 10.9

211

JNPR shows a blue sea breakout setup.

clearly in a steady downtrend as signaled by the steadily
downsloping 50 MA. Neither moving averages nor trendlines factor into this setup since a new three-month price
low is evidence enough that we are in a downtrend.
One further thing to note about the XMSR chart in
Figure 10.10 is just how abruptly the downtrend can end
in a blue sea breakdown. With no immediate support under
price, these trades tend to move down quickly and sharply.
But when bottom-feeding hedgies (hedge fund traders)
smell blood in the water, they like to move in with size, creating panic among the shorts. That is the power of shortcovering: it is price manipulation at its worst and can wipe
out weeks of gains on the short side in a matter of hours.

212

Figure 10.10

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

XMSR shows a blue sea breakout setup.

If you are on the right side of the trade it can be a beautiful thing, but if you are short it is your worst nightmare.
Still, with the right stop-loss, this trade could easily have
netted over a ⫹40 percent return in three months. Even a
shorter-term hold of four weeks would have netted a ⫹25
percent return on equity, and in a down market no less.
That truly is trend trading for a living!
Sometimes it can be scary to short a stock already trading at new near-term lows. It is counterintuitive to the “buy
low, sell high” mentality. One exercise I ﬁnd helpful is to
turn the chart I am looking at upside down, and then ask:
“Would I buy this stock?” If yes, then turn the chart right
side up again and short the heck out of it! To turn a chart

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

213

upside down, or invert it, is easy with Stockcharts.com: simply type “$ONE” before the symbol as you input it.

The Rising Wedge Breakdown
Market Type

This setup is best used in:

• Bullish: weakly trending markets
• Bullish: strongly trending markets
• Range-bound markets

Characteristics This ﬁnal setup is similar but not identical to the bullish base breakout mentioned previously.
Like its bullish cousin, this setup can be traded in a variety of markets. It is also a contrarian play. Here we are
looking for a stock that is in an uptrend but is ready to fall
out of that trend in dramatic fashion. The wedge is created
when the oscillations of the uptrend get narrower and narrower. To render the setup valid, we need to see indicators
tell us two things about price behavior within the wedge:
its momentum has to be slowing down and there needs to
be evidence that shares are being distributed (sold) more
than accumulated (bought). While longer holds of this
setup can return spectacular gains, there is often a quick
burst of selling activity at the point of breakdown that can
bring gains of ⫹10 percent or more within a few days,
making this an ideal trend trade setup.
Key Indicators This setup relies on a price pattern (rising wedge) combined with two technical indicators: MACD
and on balance volume (OBV). Here are the speciﬁcs:

214

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

• First, the stock must be clearly seen to be in an

uptrend of some kind, either strong or weak (see
preceding deﬁnition).
• Second, the up and down swings of the uptrend
must be trading within a narrower and narrower
range. When this happens, price prints a pattern
called a wedge. You can better visualize the
wedge by drawing in support and resistance
trendlines under the bottoms of lows and over
the tops of highs in the uptrend. To qualify as a
wedge, you must have at least three price point
touches (not high or low pivots, but simply
intraday touches) at each trendline, and the more
touches, the better.
• Rising wedges can have a ﬂat top like the ascending triangle shown in Figure 10.11.
• Or they can look like the pattern shown in Figure 10.12, where both trendlines are rising.
• Once we have identiﬁed a wedge pattern in an
uptrending stock, we need to conﬁrm that it is a
bearish rising wedge. We do this by referring to
two technical indicators: MACD and OBV.

Figure 10.11 Ascending
triangle wedge pattern.

Figure 10.12 Rising
triangle wedge pattern.

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

215

• MACD must be making a series of lower highs

while price is within the wedge (price may or
may not be making lower highs).
• OBV must fall below a trendline placed under
the lows of the indicator.
• Sell short signal: A sell short signal is triggered in a
rising wedge at the ﬁrst red or black candle (close
is lower than the open) after the candlestick on
which the OBV trendline broke to the downside.
You can also enter on the day of an OBV break if
that candle is red or black.
The Screening Tool It is not possible to screen for rising wedges using what is commonly available, but the following screen will turn up a few decent candidates among
many false hits that can be short-listed for further research.
Readers who are more adept at this sort of thing than I am
might want to ﬁddle around with these parameters to make
them more robust.
• For the last market close:
• U.S. stocks with . . .
• 20-day simple moving average of volume for to-
