tet’s assume that you have gone throu~gh a system, thoroughly
tested it, and determined it to be something you can trade.
Unfortunately, there are still more biases-biases that tend to cause
people to override their systems.
People want maximum performance, so there is always a
temptation to override your trading system. The few times you do
?omething to override your system and improve your perfor%mce, that work really stands out in your mind. However, you
&d to forget the times that don’t work and the day-in, day-out
f*Ppage (i.e., the cost of trading) that affects your bottom line.
If you don’t have a trading system, then numerous biases
@feet your trading. However, several key biases come into play

38

PART

1

The Most ,mpo*ant Factor in Your Success: YOU!

even when you have the best of systems. Let’s take a look at these
biases that tend to cause people to override their systems.
Bias of the Gambler’s Fallacy
The gambler’s fallacy is a natural consequence of the randomness
bias. The gambler’s fallacy is the belief that when a trend is established in a random sequence (or in the market, for that matter), the
trend will change at any time. Thus, after four consecutive up days
in the market we expect a down day. Even people who are wellrespected researchers of the market suffer from this bias. For example, Larry Williams, in my opinion, shows this bias in the following
quote: “After you have had three or four losing trades in a row, the
probability of the next trade being not only a winner but a substantial winner is way in your favor.“5
When you understand what’s involved in winning, as do professional gamblers, you’ll tend to bet more during a winning streak
and less during a losing streak. However, the average person tends
to do exactly the opposite: to bet more after a series of losses and
less after a series of wins.
Ralph Vince once did an experiment with 40 l’h.D.s.6 They
were asked to play 100 trials of a simple computer game in which
they would win 60 percent of the time. They were each given
$1,000 in play money and told to bet as much or as little as they
wished on each of the plays. None of the Ph.D.s knew about
money management (i.e., the effect of bet size) on the performance
of such a game.
How many of them made money? Only 2 of the 40 participants had more than their original $1,000 at the end of the gameor 5 percent. Yet if they had bet a constant 510 per bet, they would
have ended up with about $1,200. And if they had bet optimally for
achieving the maximum gain (which was to risk 20 percent of their
new equity each time-an approachnot advocated by this author),
they would have ended up with about $7,490 (on average).
What happens? The participants tend to bet more after an
adverse run and less after a favorable run. Let’s say the first three
bets are losers and you bet $100~ each time. Now you are down to
$700. You think, “Since I’ve had ~three lossesin a row and the odds
are 60 percent in my favor, I’m sure it’s time for a win,” As a result,

CHAPTER 2 Judgmental Biases

39

you bet $400. But you suffer another loss. Your stake is down to
$300 and your chances of making it back are almost nonexistent.
The gambler’s fallacy bias enters into how most people
develop trading systems, how they size their positions, and how
they trade. They totally ignore the randomness element. They look
for certainty and trade their systems as if they had it, not giving
themselves enough protection. Thus, they don’t even consider
position sizing as part of their system.
Conservative-with-Profits-and-Risky-with-Losses

Bias

Perhaps the number one rule of trading is to cut your losses short
and let your profits run. Those who can follow this simple rule tend
to make large fortunes in the market. However, most people have
a bias that keeps them from following either part of this rule.
Consider the following example in which you must pick one
of two choices:
Which would you prefer: (1) a sure loss of $9,000 or (2) a 5
percent chance of no loss at all plus a 95 percent chance of a
$10,000 loss?
Which did you pick, the sure loss or the risky gamble?
Approximately 80 percent of the population picks the risky gamble
in this case. However, the risky gamble works out to a bigger loss
(i.e., $10,000 * 0.95 + 0 * 0.05 = $9,500-which is larger than the
sure $9,000 loss). Taking the gamble violates the first part of the key
trading rule-cut your losses short. Yet most people continue to
take the gamble, thinking that the loss will stop and that the market will turn around from here. It usually doesn’t. As a result, the
loss gets a little bigger and then it’s even harder to take. And that
starts the process all over again. Eventually, the loss gets big
enough that one becomes forced to take it. Many small investors go
broke because they cannot take losses.
Now, consider another example:
Which would you prefer: (1) a sure gain of $9,000 or (2) a 95
percent chance of a $10,000 gain plus a 5 percent chance of
no gain at all?
Did you pick the sure gain or the risky gamble? Approximately, 80 percent of the population picks the sure gain. However,

CHAPTER 2 Judgmental Biases

the risky gamble works out to a bigger gain (i.e., $10,000 * 0.95 +

0 * 0.05 = $9,500-which is larger than the sure gain of $9,000).
Taking the sure gain violates the second part of the key rule of trading-let your profits run.
People, once they have a profit in hand, are so afraid of letting
it get away that they tend to take the sure profit at any sign of a
turnaround. Even if their system gives no exit signal, it is so tempting to avoid letting a profit get away that many investors and
traders continue to lament over the large profits they miss as they
take sure small profits.
These two common biases are well stated in the old saying:
“Seize opportunities, but hold your ground in adversity.” The good
trader had better use the adage: “Watcl~ profit-taking opportunities

carefully, but YWI like a deer at fhefirst sign of aduersity”

SUMMARY
The amount of information to which the average individual is now
exposed doubles every year. Consciously, however, we can only
process about seven chunks of information before it is lost. As a
result, we have developed a number of shortcuts or heuristics to
help us cope with the vast amount of information to which we are
exposed. These heuristics are useful under most circumstances, but
their implications for traders and investors are so strong that my
belief is that the average person has no probability of making
money in the markets unless he or she deals with them.
I’ve divided this chapter into three types of biases that are
summarized below:

Biases That Affect Trading System Development
.. Representation bias. People assume that when something

Bias That “My Current Trade or Investment Must Be a Winner”
What makes all these problems come to the forefront is the overwhelming desire of human beings to make current positions (those
you have right now) work out. What happens? First, when you
have a losing position, you’ll do anything to nurse it along, hoping
it will turn around. As a result, losing trades tend to become even
bigger. Second, profits are taken prematurely in order to make sure
they remain profits.
Why? People have an overwhelming desire to be right. 0ver
and over again, I hear traders and investors tell me how important
it is for them to be right when they make a market prediction or,
even worse, when they invest their money in the market.
I once worked with a client who publishes a daily fax that
gives predictions for a particular commodity. Big traders all over
the world subscribe to his fax because his accuracy is outstanding.
He’s known worldwide for his accuracy. However, despite the
fact that his accuracy is outstanding, his ability to trade that commodity is rather poor. Why? Because of the need to be right. Once
a person makes a prediction, the ego becomes involved in it, making it difficult to accept anything that happens in the process of
trading that seems to differ ~from your prediction. Thus, it
becomes very difficult to trade~anything
that you publicly predict
in any way.

is supposed to represent something, that it really is what g
is supposed to represent. Thus, we assume that the daily
bar chart is the market or that our favorite indicator is the
market. Instead, it is just a shortcut for representing a lot of
information.
Reliability bias. People assume that something is accurate
when it may not be. For example, market data that you use
in your historical testing or that come to you live are often
filled with errors. However, unless you assume that errors
can and do exist, you may make lots of mistakes in your
trading and investing decisions.
Lotto bias. People want to control the market, and so they
tend to focus on entry, where they can “force” the market
to do a lot of things before they enter. Unfortunately, once
they enter, the market is going to do what the market is
going to do. And the goldeM rule oftrading-“Cut your losses
short and let your profits run”-has nothing to do with entry

and everything to do with exits.
Law-of-small-numbers bias. People tend to see patterns

where none exists, and it only takes a few well-chosen
examples to convince someone that a pattern has meaning.
When you combine this bias with the conservatism bias
(below), you have a very dangerous situation.

42

PART 1

The Most Important Factor in You Success: YOU!

. Conservatism bias. Once you believe you have found a
pattern and become convinced that it works (by means of a
few well-chosen examples), you will do everything you can
to avoid evidence that it does not work.
. Randomness bias. People like to assume that the market is
random and has many tops and bottoms that they can
trade easily. Yet the markets are not random. Distributions
of prices show that markets over time have infinite
variance, or what statisticians call “long tails” at the end of
the bell curve. Furthermore, people fail to understand that
even random markets can have long streaks. As a result,
top and bottom fishing is the most difficult type of trading
there is.
. Need-to-understand bias. We attempt to make order out of
the market and find reasons for everything. This attempt to
find order tends to block one’s ability to go with the flow of
the markets, because we see what we expect to see rather
than what is really happening.
Biases That Affect How You Test Trading Systems
. Degrees-of-freedom bias. We want to optimize our
systems, and we believe that the more we manipulate the
data to fit history, the more we know about trading well.
Instead, you are much better off understanding how your
concept (that you are using to trade or invest) works and
only doing a minimum amount of historical testing.
. Postdictive error bias. We can inadvertently use data in
system development that, in real-life trading, will not have
yet occurred. For example, if you factor today’s close into
your analysis, then you will probably do very well in your
testing--especially when you tend to exit before the close.
. Not-giving-yourself-enough-protection bias. People fail to
consider that position sizing and exit strategies are a key
part of trading. Consequently, they often put too much of
their capital at risk in a given trade.
Biases That Affect How You Trade Your System
. Gambler’s fallacy bias. People assume that the probability

goes up for a win after a losing streak or up for a loss after
a winning streak.
. Conservative-with-profits-and-risky-with-losses bias.
People want to take profits quickly and give their losses
some room. This gives them the illusion of being right, but
what they are really doing is “cutting their profits short
and letting their losses run.”
. My-current-trade-or-investment-must-be-a-winner bias.
This bias may be at the root of all other biases. Yet being
right has nothing to do with making money.

NOTES
1. Karl Popper, Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1972).
2. Jack Schwager, “William Eckhardt: The Mathematician,” The Nero
Mm& Wizards: Conversations
with Americn’s Top Traders, p. 114. See the
Recommended Readings in Appendix I.
3. Burton G. Maikiel, A Random Walk Dozen Wall Street (New York:
Norton, 1996).
4 . These news stories were made up, but they are typical examples of
what you might read to explain the action of the market.
5. Larry Williams, The Definitive Guide to Futures Trading, Vol. II
(Brightwaters, N.Y.: Windsor Books, 1989), p. 202.
6. Ralph Vince, “The Ralph Vince Experiment,” in Lucas and Lebeau,
eds., Technical Traders’ Bulletin, March 1992, pp. l-2.

CHAPTER 3

SETTINGYOUROBJECTIVES

The crowd, the world, and sometimes even the grave, step aside
for the man who knows where he’s going, but pushes the aimless
drifter aside.
Ancimt Roman saying
Now you understand that the search for the Holy Grail is an internal search. In addition, you should have some idea of what might
be holding you back. Now it’s time to decide what you want. Sam
wanted a lo-minute consultation with me because he just couldn’t
seem to get results he was happy with. As a result, we met at
O’Hare Airport in Chicago at the end of one of my business trips.
The conversation went something like this:

What can I help you with, Sam?
Well, I just don’t think my trading results are on track?

What does “on track” mean?
I’m not happy with my results.

What are your goals for trading in the market this year?
Well, I really don’t have any goals.

What would you like to accomplish in the markets this
year?
(Affer LZ long pause) I’d like to buy my wife a car out of my
trading profits.
45

46

PART 1 The Most important Factor in Your Success: YOU!

Okay. What kind of car are we talking about? A Rolls
Royce? A Mercedes? A Lexus? A pickup truck? What do
you want to buy her?
Oh, an American car-one that sells for about 515,000.
Great. When would you like to buy this car?
September. In about 3 months!
Fine. How much money do you have in your trading
account?
About 510,000.
So you want to make 150 percent in your account in about 3
months?
Yes, I guess that’s right.
Do you realize that 150 percent return in 3 months is
equivalent to an annual rate of return of almost 1,000
percent.
No, I didn’t.
How much are you willing to lose in your account in order
to make that much?
I don’t know? I really haven’t thought about it.
Are you willing to lose $5,000?
No, I couldn’t do anything like that. That’s way too much.
Are you willing to lose $2,500? That’s 25 percent.
No, that’s still too much. Maybe 10 percent.
So you want to make 150 percent in the market in 3 months
and you’re only willing to take a 10 percent risk in the
process.
Yes.
Do you know of any trading method that will consistently
give you a reward-to-risk ratio of 15 to l?
No.
I don’t know of any either. Three-to-one is usually a very
good reward-to-risk ratio.
Although there are many trading and investing methods that
make good money, I don’t kt~ow of any *at meet those requirements. However, most beginning traders and investors with small

CHAPTER 3 Setting Your Objectives

47

amounts of money are constantly giving themselves similar expectations-expectations that they are unlikely to meet.
Why is it wrong for most traders to enter the market with too
little money? One of the biases discussed in the last chapter was the
“not-giving-yourself-enough-protection” bias. You can trade with
small amounts of money if you do it in such a way as to not guarantee your probable ruin. Most small traders cannot do that.

DESIGNINGOBJECTIVESISAMAJORPART
OFYOURSYSTEMWORK
I once worked with a man whose job was to give money to budding
CTAs. Part of his job was to assess the various systems that these
CTAs had developed, and many people considered him to be one
of the world’s experts in system development.
One day I said to him, “If you could give any particular suggestion to traders who are trying to come up with a new system,
what would it be?” His response was, “To spend at least 50 percent
of the system development time working out objectives.” He said
that objectives were a critical part of any system, and yet few people bother to spend time working on them. If you’re going to
develop a system for trading or investing in the market, then
decide exactly what it is you want to accomplish before you begin.
Until you know where you want to go, you can never get there.
Your objectives are a critical part of your system. How can you
develop a trading system if you have no idea what it’s supposed to
ado? You just can’t do it. So you need to decide what you want to
accomplish first. Once you’ve done that, you can decide if your
goals are realistic. If they are, you then can develop a trading system to accomplish those goals.
I took my friend’s advice to heart when we did our first seminar, “How to Develop a Winning Trading System to Fit You.” A
major portion of that seminar was devoted to objectives. However,
.F many people grumbled over including objectives as part of the
+‘minar that we now require seminar participants to complete the
$bjectives section prior to the seminar.
Typical comments included: “What does this have to do with
‘$ading in the markets.” ” This is private material. I don’t want to

CHAFTER 3

spend class time talking about my equity or anything like that.”
None of the participants seemed to realize that if they didn’t spend
time on their objectives, they wouldn’t really be able to develop a
system that “fit” them. They needed to assess themselves for
strengths and weaknesses; for time, resources, capital, and skills;
and for what they were trying to accomplish. What kind of returns
did they want to make? What kind of drawdowns were they willing to tolerate in order to make those returns? This is one of the real
keys in our search for the Holy Grail.
TOM BASSO ON OBJECTIVES
Tom Basso was a guest speaker at the first three system development seminars that we did. During those seminars, I frequently
interviewed him on his objectives in order to demonstrate how one
should approach this portion of the task. Tom was kind enough to
volunteer to do another of those interviews for this book.
Tom Basso is the president of Trendstat, Inc., located in
Scottsdale, Arizona. He is a professional money manager who is
qualified both as a CTA and as a registered investment advisor
(RIA). He is also a private investor in that he invests his own money
in his funds.
Tom was interviewed by Jack Schwager in his book The Nezu
Market Wizards at my suggestion. Schwager then named him “Mr.
Serenity” and considers him his best personal role model out of all
the market wizards he interviewed. Basso is also one of the most
logical, organized people I have ever met. As a result, I thought you
might like to learn how Tom thinks about trading system development.
The first part of the objectives exercise involves taking a selfinventory of your time, money, skills, and other resources. Tom’s
answers are in italics.
Tom, how much capital do you have?

We currently have about $95 million under management.’

How much money do you need to live on each year?

About $80,000.
How much of that must come out of your trading profits?
None of it. Iget a salary through Trendstat

Setting Your Objectives

49

I ask that question in order to determine what percentage of
one’s trading capital the person needs to make in order to just survive. This is important just to determine if it’s reasonable. For
example, those who need to make 30 percent or more just to survive are putting themselves in a rather untenable position, plus
giving little opportunity for the trading capital to grow.
I frequently get people who have about $100,000 of trading or
investment capital, but they need about $50,000 to live on each
year. In my opinion, they are putting themselves in a very difficult
position. They might believe they can make 100 percent every year,
and perhaps they can. But if they start out with a 30 percent drawdown-which is quite possible-their situation becomes very tenuous at best. That’s why it’s best to think about these situ&ions
before you get into them.
Obviously, none of these things is a problem for Tom
Basso.
Part I: Self-Assessment
Tom, how much time during the day do you have to devote
to trading? This is important because the amount of time
you have available almost dictates the kind of trading system
you must develop. Those who have a full-time job and just
look at the markets in the evening must, quite obviously, find
a fairly long term system to use.

I’vegot about 6 hours each day, but that time is mostly involved in
managing our trading business.
When you are trading, how many distractions can you
expect to have?

Many.
So obviously, you need a trading methodology that allows
you to deal with those distractions.
Yes.
How much time do you expect to devote to developing
your trading system, to doing your personal psychological
work,,and to working on your business plan for trading?
In my case, I’ve already put in a lot of time ow the last 20 years.

so

FART

1

The Most hnportant Factor in Your success: YOU!

However, we’re always planning and doing research. I put in
however much time it takes.
What are your computer skills? What skills did you need
before you began this trading venture?

I’m very good with computers. 1 custom-programmed all of
Trendstat’s early models myself. However, at this time 1 have a
fully automated ofj?ce and a stafloffull-time programmers. My job
is simply to lookfor inefficiencies and see to it that the staff takes
care of them.
What do you know about statistics?

1 understand and can use simple statistics. In addition, I’m
familiar mith some multivariate statistics.
How would you rate your market knowledge? Here you
should include what you know about trading mechanics,
what moves the markets, how to execute orders effectively
at low cost, which trading indicators you might need, etc.

I have extensive experience in options,futures, stocks, bonds,
mutualfunds, cash currencies. 1 am veryfamiliar -with trade
mechanics and low-cost execution. 1 also have my own perception
of how the markets work.
What are your psychological strengths and weaknesses,
especially in terms of trading system development?

I am very strategic and patient, which I believe is useful in
developing long-term strategies for trading. I’m self-confident,
which gives me a lot of psychological strength in trusting the
systems we develop. In terms of weaknesses, 1 guess I’m always
trying to get R lot done-perhaps too much. Sometimes that can
distract mefrom my primary mission as a trader.
How about your strengths and weaknesses in terms of
personal discipline?
