
Second-Generation Turtles

179

do anything with anybody.” Abraham was not deterred, and said, “This
guy at Shell Oil, he’s new there. I think he’ll do something.”
His grandfather responded with some attitude: “Tell you what, if you
get that deal done, I will kiss your butt out there in the middle of the
intersection under that stoplight right there.” Abraham replied to his
grandfather, “Pucker up, old man, because it’s going happen.” The
deal never happened.
However, it was that same entrepreneurial fearlessness that Abraham used to launch his trading career that last semester at Notre Dame.
It demanded burning the candle at both ends. He was trading twentyone markets and taking a grueling twenty-one semester hours. He was
cramming, and all of his classes had to be scheduled in the afternoon.
He would wake up at 7 a.m. and trade from 7 a.m. to 10 a.m. Then he
would put his stops in and go to class. After class he would check to see
if his stops had been hit.
The fall of 1987 was no ordinary time, especially for a brand-new
trader experiencing historic market volatility. During the last part of
September and the ﬁrst part of October, the interest rates started going
straight down. Abraham had come home for fall break on October 19,
1987. He recalled, “The Friday before fall break I made a lot of money.
My $50,000 was $66,000 as of Friday. I’m going home and I’m feeling
great.” Then, Monday morning, the stock market tanked.
These were big events. Things were going haywire. Abraham worried about his positions in Eurodollars. He called up his broker and
said, “So where are Eurodollars?” His broker replied, “They’re up
250.’ ” Abraham shot back, “Two ﬁfty, what do you mean, 25?” His
broker said, “No, 250.’ ” Abraham wanted to know if it was as bad as
what he was thinking. He immediately knew that that move was in the
neighborhood of 10+ standard deviations away from where Eurodollars
normally traded.
His $66,000 had dropped to $33,000. But by the end of the day, he
considered it all a great lesson. He had learned the signiﬁcance of
hanging in there to play another day. He felt that to survive at this point
in his trading career, with his own money on the line, and not blow
out, was “okay.” He recalled, “The one lesson I was clear on: always
know the thing that they say can never happen, can happen.”
Abraham took a short break after the 1987 October crash. He was

180

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

out of the markets for a week or so and then got back in. He traded during November and a little bit of December and then shut down for the
year. His account had bounced back to $45,000 from that $33,000 low.
He took $1,600 out of his account and went to Jim’s Guns, Gold, and
Diamonds to buy an engagement ring to propose to his now wife.
Commodities Corporation
Starting in 1988 Abraham wanted to trade full time, but he still had to
prove himself to his grandfather. He told his grandfather, “I want to do
this on the side. I know we’re not that busy. Will you let me do this on
the side?” He had $45,000, and his older brother Eddie agreed to put
up $15,000. His younger brother Jason put in $10,000 to get the “Abraham brother fund” up to $70,000. He wanted his grandfather to put in
$30,000 so he would have an even $100,000 trading account.
His grandfather was willing to play ball, but true to Abraham family
ethos there would be a deal. He announced, “Okay, here’s the deal. I’ll
put up $30,000. But if we get down to $50,000, we throw that quote
machine out the window and we stop all this trading nonsense.”
For a man in his early twenties, Salem Abraham was taking on some
serious risk and pressure. And as is often the case, just when he was out
of the gate with his $100,000 account for his new trading ﬁrm, the bottom dropped out.
The ﬁrst two weeks of May 1988 were horrible markets. Abraham
was downstairs in his ofﬁce when his grandfather stuck his head in one
morning and said, “Where are we today?” Abraham replied, “Sixtyeight thousand dollars.” In sarcastic glee, his grandfather said, “Just a
matter of time,” and he walked out the door.
Time never happened. The grain market drought of 1988 hit and
Abraham was long soybeans, corn, and wheat. The markets just exploded the second half of May and into June. He was very well positioned and rocked along to serious proﬁt.
How could Abraham have been certain that bigger things were
around the corner with the kind of volatility he had seen in his ﬁrst
eight months of trading? Plenty of people would have quit, chalking it
up to a failed business venture. In spite of the ups and downs, once he’d
shown his grandfather that he was on to a proﬁtable angle, the senior

Second-Generation Turtles

181

Abraham came on board in a big way. His grandfather walked in the
door one day with a “Dean Witter Principal Guarantee Fund 2” brochure and threw it on his grandson’s desk, declaring, “Hey, you did
better than these guys did.”
Commodities Corporation was the manager of the Dean Witter
fund, and they were in the process of raising $100 million and allocating it among eight to ten traders. Commodities Corporation had quite
a history. They were a prominent Princeton, New Jersey–based trading
incubator (now part of Goldman Sachs following a late-1990s buyout).
They were responsible for the early funding (and in some instances
training) of hedge fund greats such as Paul Tudor Jones, Louis Bacon,
Ed Seykota, Bruce Kovner, and Michael Marcus.
Abraham did not know all that history at the time. He just picked up
the phone and called Commodities Corporation. He got Elaine
Crocker on the phone late in the day. Crocker, who now runs Louis
Bacon’s Moore Capital and today may be the most powerful woman in
the hedge fund industry, said she would send some information. Abraham doubted Crocker was taking him seriously, because he had only a
one-year track record.
But eventually Commodities Corporation got back in touch with
him, announcing that they were going to be in Houston and inviting
him to meet with them. He jumped at the opportunity and ﬂew to the
Houston airport to meet Crocker and Michael Garﬁnkel.
Abraham had just celebrated his twenty-third birthday before the
meeting. Garﬁnkel did most of the talking. Crocker sat back and
watched the discussion. Garﬁnkel said, “Wow, last month was a tough
month. What happened?” Abraham pointed out that during the current month he was up 40 percent.
Crocker started laughing. Not seeing the humor in his response,
Abraham asked. “What’s so funny about up 40 percent?” Garﬁnkel,
sensing a disconnect, wanted to know what kind of returns Abraham
was shooting for. Abraham gave the Turtle-like answer of 100 percent a
year. And just like many of the original Turtles were told after leaving
Dennis, Crocker wanted Abraham to back off his riskier “shoot for the
moon” approach. She and Garﬁnkel made the same observation Jerry
Parker and others had heard: “If you make 30 percent a year, people
will beat a path to your door. You need to back off on the leverage.”

182

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

Commodities Corporation still wanted to see a ten-year simulation
of Abraham’s system—something he did not have. Their request forced
Abraham to learn programming to quickly test his trading system. The
pressure was on. It started Abraham down the path of developing a
whole new research and programming skill set. It was just one of the
many ways he was setting himself apart from the original Turtles.
There was one more consideration in the deal. Commodities Corporation wanted to invest Abraham’s minimum account size. Since he
had no minimum, he settled on $200,000, rightfully surmising that
Commodities Corporation would pony up to a reasonable number. He
was right, and they became his ﬁrst big client.
For a young man with no trading pedigree and no hedge fund experience, this investment was admission to the major leagues. Commodities Corporation invested the next $7 to $8 million in his ﬁrm as well.
That initial $30,000 investment from his grandfather? It’s worth $1.3
million today.
However, even with all that moneymaking success, Abraham was
still just a young guy, and his experiences with the establishment questioning his credibility were similar to those of the young Richard Dennis. Reminiscent of Dennis’s trip to the bank to cash the $250,000
check was Abraham trying to rent a car at age twenty-ﬁve, with no
luck since they had recently raised the minimum age requirement. He
was managing $15 million, but the Hertz counter was not budging on
renting to him. Salem, after attempting to negotiate, tried some attitude: “Do you know that I have people who entrust $15 million with
me, and I can buy and sell whatever I want to with this $15 million?
You won’t loan me a car? A $15,000, $20,000 car for the day?” The lady
at the counter was looking him up and down thinking, “Yeah, right,
I’m not believing you, punk.” Salem added, “I had to call Joe’s Rent-aWreck.”
Dennis and Eckhardt Training
Even people who are knowledgeable about the Turtles do not know
about an obscure third Turtle class after the 1983 and 1984 original
ones on which the Turtle legend was built. Abraham actually received
personal instruction from Dennis and Eckhardt several years after his

Second-Generation Turtles

183

trading ﬁrm was launched. In the early 1990s, Commodities Corporation asked Dennis and Eckhardt to hold a third Turtle class for their
stable of traders. Commodities Corporation was giving them money to
trade, and part of the deal was that they had to hold a seminar. The
seminar was supposed to simulate the Turtle trader experience, except
instead of two weeks, it was held over four days.
While Abraham was already trading by Turtle-style trend-following
trading rules, and while he found much of the training to reinforce
what he already knew (“What I got out of it was a lot of risk management ideas, position sizing ideas, and system analysis ideas.”), the classroom experience with thirty students from Commodities Corporation
was a memorable part of his education.
However, Abraham saw his learning process as a step-by-step journey, not just a lucky leap: “It’s like climbing a mountain. Which step
was the most important? Every step is needed to get to the top of the
mountain. Each individual step is not that much.” This makes him far
more the “average guy” than Parker, Rabar, or any of the other original
Turtles, who had four years of Dennis covering the overhead costs.
The seminar opened Abraham’s eyes though. He was very impressed
by William Eckhardt. All of the students had also been given an advance copy of Eckhardt’s interview in the New Market Wizards. Abraham added, “I went into that meeting thinking, ‘Oh yeah, Richard
Dennis, he’s the guy and Eckhardt is the sidekick’ kind of deal.” Just as
the original Turtles had learned during their training, Abraham discovered that he was wrong: “However when I got through, I really appreciated the math and the objective data. The statistics of this works, this
doesn’t work. It’s all odds. I actually got more useful information from
Eckhardt. But of course Richard Dennis is clearly a brilliant trader.”
Dennis would basically tell the class, “The system is a nice thing to
guide you, but it’s okay to set the system aside.” Eckhardt was saying
something a little different: “These are the odds; it’s all a math game.”
Nothing had changed about the two teachers since the original Turtle
experiment.
Eckhardt challenged the Commodities Corporation traders with a
series of questions. There were ten questions the traders had to answer
within a range. The goal was to get nine of the ten correct. Eckhardt
asked, “What does a 747 plane weigh?” The answer could be as big a

184

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

range as the traders wanted it to be, but the goal was to be 90 percent
certain that they were right. It tested their conﬁdence and their ability
to estimate. Everyone missed four or ﬁve questions. Eckhardt said that
the majority of people missed about 45 percent of the questions because they were overconﬁdent in their ability to estimate reality.
Trend trading thrives on that overconﬁdence. Abraham made this
point using the recent surge in the price of oil over the last few years:
“What you see in trend following is people’s mistaken mindset of what’s
a high price and what’s a low price. It all has to do with a very limited
set of experiences. People make assumptions for a small sample size.
To think that crude oil could go from $20 to $70, you say, ‘that’s nuts.’
To buy crude oil at $55? That’s a hard bet to do when it’s never been to
$56. Never in the history of the world has it been to $56 and you say, ‘It
hit $55 today, I’m buying it.’ ”
Can you imagine buying a market that is making an all-time high,
without any knowledge that it will keep going up or come crashing
back down? Abraham put the focus where it really counts: “I care
about the statistics.” He gave me an example. Pretend a physicist walks
in with a coin and says, “This coin will always come up 50–50 heads
or tails.” A statistician, however, walks in and says, “Yes, but I ﬂipped
it one million times and 65 percent of the time it came up heads.”
The Harvard-trained physicist says, “That is impossible; it’s a 50–50
coin.”
Abraham asked, “Who do you believe?” He had many college professors with plenty of good reasons why that coin should not be coming
up heads 65 percent of the time, but at some point you have to say, “I
don’t know why this coin is coming up 65 percent heads, but I’m willing to bet after a million ﬂips that the 65 percent rate will hold true
even when on the face of it, it shouldn’t.” Abraham added, “Just because I don’t understand it doesn’t mean I’m not going to bet on it.”
Ultimately, Abraham was saying the same thing that Tom Willis had
said years before, which was to just trade the “numbers.” The empiricist in Abraham was driving at the concept of the unexpected big event;
the nexus of his trading proﬁts derived from trading “price.” Is the world
due for another large unexpected event that will give him a chance to
proﬁt? He did not blink: “Yes, but it will be one that we’ve never seen
before. It’s always a different one.”

Second-Generation Turtles

185

Boil the Ocean
Abraham might not be in Wall Street’s top ten in terms of earnings yet.
He might not be managing a billion-dollar fund at this moment in his
life, but he has done exceedingly well. Sitting in his ofﬁce, ﬁlled with
evidence of his eclectic interests ranging from oil and gas leasing projects to the restoration of antique books and papers, he has made a life
for himself that includes family, friends, and a company of like-minded
people drawn from his local community.
His hiring practices come very close to mimicking Dennis’s original
Turtle hiring process. No one at Abraham’s ﬁrm has an Ivy League
degree. Most employees have backgrounds working at the area’s feedlots or natural gas–drilling companies. For example, Abraham hired
Geoff Dockray as a clerk from one of those very feedlots. Dockray appreciated the opportunity to work in Abraham’s ofﬁce. He said, “This
beats shoveling manure at 6 a.m. in the morning. The ﬁnancial markets are complicated but they’re not as relentless as dealing with livestock all the time.” 5
Maybe it is that down-to-earth perspective gleaned from living in
handshake country that gives Abraham a clear perspective. Sitting in
the Cattle Exchange steakhouse located in the historic Moody Building, which he owns and where he has his ofﬁce, he had no doubts that
it is his entrepreneurial tenacity: “I think they [the winning Turtles]
have a self-conﬁdence or charisma to run a business. There’s a drive to
go out and do it. Then there is a drive to want to do it. Some people
[the losing Turtles] will just say, ‘Oh, hey, I made some money. That’s
all I need.’ ”
However, if you are going to boil the ocean (in other words, if you
are going to use all means and options available to get something done),
especially if it is a very competitive and lucrative endeavor, there will
be ups and downs. Salem Abraham’s experience has been no different.
Twice during his trading career, clients left after down or ﬂat performance periods. He regrouped and made new equity highs each time.
During trying times, he handled curve balls in his career by working on
other ideas to make money. He always focused on his trading, but he
also cast a wider net and caught other kinds of ﬁsh.
As with trading, not everything works out. One project was a water

186

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

deal that he almost cut with billionaire T. Boone Pickens (“Couldn’t
agree on the price”). Pickens and Abraham’s ranches are right next to
each other in the Texas panhandle (even though they are separated by
forty miles, their ranches touch) and they have become friends over the
years; Pickens was not shy about praising Abraham’s entrepreneurial
guts when I talked to him in his Dallas ofﬁce.
There were other deals that turned out to be big winners. Abraham
was humble about them: “I sold water rights to the city of Amarillo. I
invested $1.5 million and I got $9 million out. I said to myself, ‘That’s
a cool idea.’ Then I did the Chicago Mercantile Exchange deal [CME
Initial Public Offering]. I put $1.5 million in, and got about $13 million out. You recognize opportunities where you see them.”
This kind of thinking and risk-taking is how to make your ﬁrst million by age twenty-ﬁve—which Abraham did. Still, it’s not enough to
simply spot opportunities. The conﬁdence to act on them is mandatory. You need a killer instinct. When faced with real life and death,
even with chickens and pigs, it is never easy to pull the trigger or snap
a chicken’s neck, even for dinner. You have to be able to pull the trigger
when there is blood on Wall Street, especially if the blood is yours.6
Jerry Parker could not have known Salem Abraham would have the
prerequisite killer instinct when they ﬁrst met. Parker was probably
thinking, “Okay, this young guy has got a rough idea of what I do. I’ve
given him some pointers. If he’s serious, he’s going to ﬁgure it all out
and ‘just do it,’ but I will be surprised if he hangs around.”
Unlike the original Turtles who won the job lottery—who were
given the exact winning rules and allowed to practice on Richard
Dennis’s dime, all in the womblike atmosphere of C&D Commodities—Abraham was on his own from the get-go. He is tougher for it.
There is far more to learn from the attitude and actions of this secondgeneration Turtle than from any one original Turtle.

14
Model Greatness
“Are Turtles grown, or can be they taught? Do they have a magic
sixth sense or something? The jury is in, isn’t it? They’d be better
off having the knowledge implanted than relying on a sixth sense.
I think I could take a kid who wasn’t my son and say, ‘Do this, I’ll
pay you $50,000 a year, or you’re ﬁred if you don’t exactly follow
it.’ He’d beat me every day, every week, every month and every
year.” 1
Tom Willis

The Turtle story breaks down into two parts. Part one takes place
during the experiment, when the Turtles are on the relatively level
playing ﬁeld designed by Richard Dennis. His experiment proves nurture trumps nature. Part two takes place after the experiment, when the
Turtles have to face the real world as individuals and human nature
reenters the picture.
While the experiment itself is what made headlines, some people
familiar with the Turtle story recognized the greater signiﬁcance of part
two, the experiment’s aftermath as Turtles attempt to carry on solo.
Larry Hite called me late on a Friday afternoon after we’d had lunch
near his Park Avenue ofﬁce. Hite, who founded Mint Capital and was
instrumental in the early successes of the multibillion-dollar Man Financial hedge fund, had more feedback for me about my Turtle book
(i.e., the one you’re reading now).
“I have been thinking about this new book. . . .” He laid it out: “The
people who are very good and long-lasting are tough. If life goes against
them, they stick to their game. There is a certain amount of mental
toughness to have clarity. Toughness is just the ability to roll with the
punches. They don’t get disappointed by losses. Some people when
they lose, they don’t get back up. Think about the Turtles who failed at

188

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

trading. What did the failures have in common? Maybe the ones who
failed just gave up. They were not tough.”
Dennis demanded that the Turtles be mentally tough as long as
they worked for him, but once he pulled the plug they had to face
head on what Dennis was not providing them. Hite saw it. He brought
up the memo (see chapter 7) sent out by Dennis telling the Turtles to
cut back their leverage by 50 percent. He observed that Dennis had
made an error, ignored any knock against his ego, acknowledged the
mistake, and ﬁxed it. That was “an act of mental toughness” in Hite’s
book.
But Dennis did not select his students for strength of character and
drive to win, nor did he train them on the ﬁne art of mental toughness.
On that level playing ﬁeld where he covered the overhead, everyone appeared mentally tough. However, it turned out that only Turtles
like Jerry Parker, Paul Rabar, and a few others, and later, Salem Abraham, actually shared the same drive and entrepreneurial spirit that
Dennis had.
Think about the annual drafts of professional sports teams. They
demonstrate this same inability to screen candidates for mental toughness. For example, every year college stars get drafted with much fanfare. Every year at least one signiﬁcant stud, one “can’t miss” prospect,
fails. Look how many thousands of great college players never make it
to the NFL, NBA, or Major League Baseball. Something separates pretenders from contenders. Innate talent alone is never enough.
The same is true when it comes to making money. Take, for example, the top ten earners in the hedge fund industry for 2005:
1. James Simons, Renaissance Technologies Corp.: $1.5 billion
2. T. Boone Pickens, Jr., BP Capital Management: $1.4 billion
3. George Soros, Soros Fund Management: $840 million
4. Steven Cohen, SAC Capital Advisors: $550 million
