
are executed and confirmed within seconds. Robust systems would never request the
size of a trader’s potential order, or which side of the market he’s trading, before
giving a bid/offer quote. Inefficient dealers determine whether the investor is a buyer
or a seller, and shade the price to increase their own profit on the transaction.
The equity market typically operates under a “next best order” system, under
which you may not get executed at the price you wish, but rather at the next best
price available. For example, let’s say Microsoft is trading at $52.50. If you enter a
buy order at this price, by the time it reaches the specialist on the exchange floor the
price may have risen to $53.25. In this case, you will not get executed at $52.50; you
will get executed at $53.25, which is essentially a loss of three-quarters of a point.
The price transparency provided by some of the better market makers ensures that
traders always receive a fair price.
Perfect Market for Technical Analysis For technical analysts, currencies
rarely spend much time in tight trading ranges and have the tendency to develop
strong trends. Over 80 percent of volume is speculative in nature, and as a result the
market frequently overshoots and then corrects itself. Technical analysis works well
for the FX market and a technically trained trader can easily identify new trends and
breakouts, which provide multiple opportunities to enter and exit positions. Charts
and indicators are used by all professional FX traders, and candlestick charts are
available in most charting packages. In addition, the most commonly used
indicators—such as Fibonacci retracements, stochastics, moving average
convergence/divergence (MACD), moving averages, (RSI), and support/resistance
levels—have proven valid in many instances.

Figure 1.1 GBP/USD Chart
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)
In the GBP/USD chart in Figure 1.1, it is clear that Fibonacci retracements,
moving averages, and stochastics have at one point or another given successful
10

trading signals. For example, the 50 percent retracement level has served as support
for the GBP/USD throughout the month of January and for a part of February 2005.
The moving average crossovers of the 10-day and 20-day simple moving averages
also successfully forecasted the sell-off in the GBP/USD on March 21, 2005. Equity
traders who focus on technical analysis have the easiest transition since they can implement in the FX market the same technical strategies that they use in the equities
market.
Analyze Stocks Like Countries
Trading currencies is not difficult for fundamental traders, either. Countries can
be analyzed just like stocks. For example, if you analyze growth rates of stocks, you
can use gross domestic product (GDP) to analyze the growth rates of countries. If
you analyze inventory and production ratios, you can follow industrial production or
durable goods data. If you follow sales figures, you can analyze retail sales data. As
with a stock investment, it is better to invest in the currency of a country that is
growing faster and is in a better economic condition than other countries. Currency
prices reflect the balance of supply and demand for currencies. Two of the primary
factors affecting supply and demand of currencies are interest rates and the overall
strength of the economy. Economic indicators such as GDP, foreign investment, and
the trade balance reflect the general health of an economy and are therefore
responsible for the underlying shifts in supply and demand for that currency. There is
a tremendous amount of data released at regular intervals, some of which is more
important than others. Data related to interest rates and international trade is looked
at the most closely.
If the market has uncertainty regarding interest rates, then any bit of news
relating to interest rates can directly affect the currency market. Traditionally, if a
country raises its interest rate, the currency of that country will strengthen in relation
to other countries as investors shift assets to that country to gain a higher return.
Hikes in interest rates are generally bad news for stock markets, however. Some
investors will transfer money out of a country’s stock market when interest rates are
hiked, causing the country’s currency to weaken. Determining which effect
dominates can be tricky, but generally there is a consensus beforehand as to what the
interest rate move will do. Indicators that have the biggest impact on interest rates are
the producer price index (PPI), consumer price index (CPI), and GDP. Generally the
timing of interest rate moves is known in advance. They take place after regularly
scheduled meetings by the Bank of England (BOE), the U.S. Federal Reserve (Fed),
the European Central Bank (ECB), the Bank of Japan (BOJ), and other central banks.
The trade balance shows the net difference over a period of time between a
nation’s exports and imports. When a country imports more than it exports the trade
balance will show a deficit, which is generally considered unfavorable. For example,
if U.S. dollars are sold for other domestic national currencies (to pay for imports), the
flow of dollars outside the country will depreciate the value of the dollar. Similarly, if
trade figures show an increase in exports, dollars will flow into the United States and
appreciate the value of the dollar. From the standpoint of a national economy, a
deficit in and of itself is not necessarily a bad thing. If the deficit is greater than
market expectations, however, then it will trigger a negative price movement.
11

FX versus Futures
The FX market holds advantages over not only the equity market, but also the
futures market. Many futures traders have added currency spot trading to their
portfolios. After recapping the key spot foreign exchange attributes, we compare the
futures attributes.
FX Market Key Attributes
• It is the largest market in the world and has growing liquidity.
• There is 24-hour around-the-clock trading.
• Traders can profit in both bull and bear markets.
• Short selling is permitted without an uptick, and there are no trading curbs.
• Instant executable trading platform minimizes slippage and errors.
• Even though higher leverage increases risk, many traders see trading the FX
market as getting more bang for the buck.
Futures Attributes
• Market liquidity is limited, depending on the month of the contract traded.
• The presence of exchange fees results in more costs and commissions.
• dependent on the product traded; each product may have different opening and
closing hours, and there is limited after-hours trading.
• Futures leverage is higher than leverage for equities, but still only a fraction of
the leverage offered in FX.
• There tend to be prolonged bear markets.
• Pit trading structure increases error and slippage.
Like they can in the equities market, traders can implement in the FX market the
same strategies that they use in analyzing the futures markets. Most futures traders
are technical traders, and as mentioned in the equities section, the FX market is
perfect for technical analysis. In fact, it is the most commonly used analysis tool by
professional traders. Let’s take a closer look at how the futures market stacks up
against the FX market.
Comparing Market Hours and Liquidity The volume traded in the FX market
is estimated to be more than five times that of the futures market. The FX market is
open for trading 24 hours a day, but the futures market has confusing market hours
that vary based on the product traded. For example, trading gold futures is open only
between 7:20 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. on the New York Commodities Exchange
(COMEX), whereas if you trade crude oil futures on the New York Mercantile
Exchange, trading is open only between 8:30 a.m. and 2:10 p.m. These varying hours
not only create confusion, but also make it difficult to act on breakthrough announcements throughout the remainder of the day.
In addition, if you have a full-time job during the day and can trade only after
hours, futures would be a very inconvenient market product for you to trade. You
would basically be placing orders based on past prices and not current market prices.
This lack of transparency makes trading very cumbersome. With the FX market, if
you choose to trade after hours through the right market makers, you can be assured
that you would receive the same liquidity and spread as at any other time of day. In
12

addition, each time zone has its own unique news and developments that could move
specific currency pairs.
Low to Zero Transaction Costs In the futures market, traders must pay a
spread and/or a commission. With futures brokers, average commissions can run
close to $160 per trade on positions of $100,000 or greater. The over-the-counter
structure of the FX market eliminates exchange and clearing fees, which in turn
lowers transaction costs. Costs are further reduced by the efficiencies created by a
purely electronic marketplace that allows clients to deal directly with the market
maker, eliminating both ticket costs and middlemen. Because the currency market
offers around-the-clock liquidity, traders receive tight, competitive spreads both
intraday and at night. Futures traders are more vulnerable to liquidity risk and
typically receive wider dealing spreads, especially during after-hours trading.
Low to zero transaction costs make online FX trading the best market to trade
for short-term traders. If you are an active futures trader who typically places 20
trades a day, at $100 commission per trade, you would have to pay $2,000 in daily
transaction costs. A typical futures trade involves a broker, a Futures Commission
Merchant (FCM) order desk, a clerk on the exchange floor, a runner, and a pit trader.
All of these parties need to be paid, and their payment comes in the form of
commission and clearing fees, whereas the electronic nature of the FX market
minimizes these costs.
No Limit Up or Down Rules/Profit in Both Bull and Bear Markets There is
no limit down or limit up rule in the FX market, unlike the tight restriction on the
futures market. For example, on the S&P 500 index futures, if the contract value falls
more than 5 percent from the previous day’s close, limit down rules will come in
effect whereby on a 5 percent move the index is allowed to trade only at or above this
level for the next 10 minutes. For a 20 percent decline, trading would be completely
halted. Due to the decentralized nature of the FX market, there are no exchangeenforced restrictions on daily activity. In effect, this eliminates missed profits due to
archaic exchange regulations.
Execution Quality and Speed/Low Error Rates The futures market is also
known for inconsistent execution in terms of both pricing and execution time. Every
futures trader has at some point in time experienced a half hour or so wait for a
market order to be filled, only to then be executed at a price that may be far away
from where the market was trading when the initial order was placed. Even with
electronic trading and limited guarantees of execution speed, the prices for fills on
market orders are far from certain. The reason for this inefficiency is the number of
steps that are involved in placing a futures trade. A futures trade is typically a sevenstep process:
1.
The client calls his or her broker and places a trade (or places it online).
2.
The trading desk receives the order, processes it, and routes it to the FCM
order desk on the exchange floor.
3.
The FCM order desk passes the order to the order clerk.
4.
The order clerk hands the order to a runner or signals it to the pit.
5.
The trading clerk goes to the pit to execute the trade.
6.
The trade confirmation goes to the runner or is signaled to the order clerk
and processed by the FCM order desk.
13

7.

The broker receives the trade confirmation and passes it on to the client.

An FX trade, in comparison, is typically only a three-step process. A trader
would place an order on the platform, the FX dealing desk would automatically
execute it electronically, and the order confirmation would be posted or logged on the
trader’s trading station. The elimination of the additional parties involved in a futures
trade increases the speed of the FX trade execution and decreases errors.
In addition, the futures market typically operates under a “next best order”
system, under which traders frequently do not get executed at the initial market order
price, but rather at the next best price available. For example, let’s say a client is long
five March Dow Jones futures contracts at 8800 with a stop order at 8700; if the price
falls to this level, the order will most likely be executed at 8690. This 10-point
difference would be attributed to slippage, which is very common in the futures
market.
On most FX trading stations, traders execute directly off of real-time streaming
prices. Barring any unforeseen circumstances, there is generally no discrepancy
between the displayed price and the execution price. This holds true even during
volatile times and fast-moving markets. In the futures market, in contrast, execution
is uncertain because all orders must be done on the exchange, creating a situation
where liquidity is limited by the number of participants, which in turn limits
quantities that can be traded at a given price. Real-time streaming prices ensure that
FX market orders, stops, and limits are executed with minimal slippage and no partial
fills.

WHO ARE THE PLAYERS IN THE FX MARKET?
Since the foreign exchange market is an over-the-counter (OTC) market without
a centralized exchange, competition between market makers prohibits monopolistic
pricing strategies. If one market maker attempts to drastically skew the price, then
traders simply have the option to find another market maker. Moreover, spreads are
closely watched to ensure market makers are not whimsically altering the cost of the
trade. Many equity markets, in contrast, operate in a completely different fashion; the
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), for instance, is the sole place where companies
listed on the NYSE can have their stocks traded. Centralized markets are operated by
what are referred to as specialists, while market makers is the term used in reference
to decentralized marketplaces. (See Figures 1.2 and 1.3.) Since the NYSE is a
centralized market, a stock traded on the NYSE can have only 1 bid/ask quote at all
times. Decentralized markets, such as foreign exchange, can have multiple market
makers—all of whom have the right to quote different prices. Let’s look at how both
centralized and decentralized markets operate.
Centralized Markets
By their very nature, centralized markets tend to be monopolistic: with a single
specialist controlling the market, prices can easily be skewed to accommodate the
interests of the specialist, not those of the traders. If, for example, the market is filled
with sellers from whom the specialists must buy but no prospective buyers on the
14

other side, the specialists will be forced to buy from the sellers and be unable to sell a
commodity that is being sold off and hence falling in value. In such a situation, the
specialist may simply widen the spread, thereby increasing the cost of the trade and
preventing additional participants from entering the market. Or specialists can simply
drastically alter the quotes they are offering, thus manipulating the price to
accommodate their own needs.

Figure 1.2 Centralized Market Structure

Figure 1.3 Decentralized Market Structure
Hierarchy of Participants in Decentralized Market
While the foreign exchange market is decentralized and hence employs multiple
market makers rather than a single specialist, participants in the FX market are
organized into a hierarchy; those with superior credit access, volume transacted, and
sophistication receive priority in the market.
At the top of the food chain is the interbank market, which trades the highest
volume per day in relatively few (mostly G-7) currencies. In the interbank market,
the largest banks can deal with each other directly, via interbank brokers or through
electronic brokering systems like Electronic Brokering Services (EBS) or Reuters.
The interbank market is a credit-approved system where banks trade based solely on
the credit relationships they have established with one another. All the banks can see
the rates everyone is dealing at; however, each bank must have a specific credit relationship with another bank in order to trade at the rates being offered.

15

Other institutions such as online FX market makers, hedge funds, and corporations must trade FX through commercial banks.
Many banks (small community banks, banks in emerging markets),
corporations, and institutional investors do not have access to these rates because
they have no established credit lines with big banks. This forces small participants to
deal through just one bank for their foreign exchange needs, and often this means
much less competitive rates for the participants further down the participant
hierarchy. Those receiving the least competitive rates are customers of banks and exchange agencies.
Recently technology has broken down the barriers that used to stand between the
end users of foreign exchange services and the interbank market. The online trading
revolution opened its doors to retail clientele by connecting market makers and
market participants in an efficient, low-cost manner. In essence, the online trading
platform serves as a gateway to the liquid FX market. Average traders can now trade
alongside the biggest banks in the world, with similar pricing and execution. What
used to be a game dominated and controlled by the big boys is slowly becoming a
level playing field where individuals can profit and take advantage of the same
opportunities as big banks. FX is no longer an old boys club, which means
opportunity abounds for aspiring online currency traders.
Dealing Stations—Interbank Market The majority of FX volume is transacted
primarily through the interbank market. The leading banks of the world trade with
each other electronically over two platforms—the EBS and Reuters Dealing 3000Spot Matching. Both platforms offer trading in the major currency pairs; however,
certain currency pairs are more liquid and generally more frequently traded over
either EBS or Reuters D3000. These two companies are continually trying to capture
each other’s market shares, but as a guide, here is the breakdown of which currencies
are most liquid over the individual platforms:
EBS
Reuters
EUR/USD
GBP/USD
USD/JPY
EUR/GBP
EUR/JPY
USD/CAD
EUR/CHF
AUD/USD
USD/CHF
NZD/USD
Cross-currency pairs are generally not traded over either platform, but instead
are calculated based on the rates of the major currency pairs and then offset using the
“legs.” For example, if an interbank trader had a client who wanted to go long
AUD/JPY, the trader would most likely buy AUD/USD over the Reuters D3000
system and buy USD/JPY over EBS. The trader would then multiply these rates and
provide the client with the respective AUD/JPY rate. These currency pairs are also
known as synthetic currencies, and this helps to explain why spreads for cross currencies are generally wider than spreads for the major currency pairs.

16

Historical Events in the FX Market
Before diving into the inner workings of currency trading, it is important for
every trader to understand a few of the key milestones in the foreign exchange
marker, since even to this day they still represent events that are referenced
repeatedly by professional forex traders.

BRETTON WOODS: ANOINTING THE DOLLAR AS THE
WORLD CURRENCY (1944)
In July 1944, representatives of 44 nations met in Bretton Woods, New
Hampshire, to create a new institutional arrangement for governing the international
economy in the years after World War II. After the war, most agreed that
international economic instability was one of the principal causes of the war, and that
such instability needed to be prevented in the future. The agreement, which was
developed by renowned economists John Maynard Keynes and Harry Dexter White,
was initially proposed to Great Britain as a part of the Lend-Lease Act—an American
act designed to assist Great Britain in postwar redevelopment efforts. After various
negotiations, the final form of the Bretton Woods Agreement consisted of several key
points:
1. The formation of key international authorities designed to promote fair trade
and international economic harmony.
2. The fixing of exchange rates among currencies.
3. The convertibility between gold and the U.S. dollar, thus empowering the
U.S. dollar as the reserve currency of choice for the world.
Of the three aforementioned parameters, only the first point is still in existence
today. The organizations formed as a direct result of Bretton Woods include the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, and General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (GATT), which are still in existence today and play a crucial role in the
development and regulation of international economies. The IMF, for instance,
initially enforced the price of $35 per ounce of gold that was to be fixed under the
Bretton Woods system, as well as the fixing of exchange rates that occurred while
Bretton Woods was in operation (and the financing required to ensure that fixed
exchange rates would not create fundamental distortions in the international
economy).
Since the demise of Bretton Woods, the IMF has worked closely with another
progeny of Bretton Woods: the World Bank. Together, the two institutions now
regularly lend funds to developing nations, thus assisting them in the development of
a public infrastructure capable of supporting a sound mercantile economy that can
contribute in an international arena. And, in order to ensure that these nations can
actually enjoy equal and legitimate access to trade with their industrialized
counterparts, the World Bank and IMF must work closely with GATT. While GATT
was initially meant to be a temporary organization, it now operates to encourage the
dismantling of trade barriers—namely tariffs and quotas.
The Bretton Woods Agreement was in operation from 1944 to 1971 when it was
replaced with the Smithsonian Agreement, an international contract of sorts
17

pioneered by U.S. President Richard Nixon out of the necessity to accommodate for
Bretton Woods' shortcomings, unfortunately, the Smithsonian Agreement possessed
the same critical weakness: while it did not include gold/U.S. dollar convertibility, it
did maintain fixed exchange rates—a facet that did not accommodate the ongoing
U.S. trade deficit and the international need for a weaker U.S. dollar. As a result, the
Smithsonian Agreement was short-lived.
Ultimately, the exchange rates of the world evolved into a free market, whereby
supply and demand were the sole criteria that determined the value of a currency.
While this did and still does result in a number of currency crises and greater
volatility between currencies, it also allowed the market to become self-regulating,
and thus the market could dictate the appropriate value of a currency without any
hindrances.
As for Bretton Woods, perhaps its most memorable contribution to the
international economic arena was its role in changing the perception regarding the
U.S. dollar. While the British pound is still substantially stronger, and while the euro
is a revolutionary currency blazing new frontiers in both social behavior and
international trade, the U.S dollar remains the world’s reserve currency of choice, for
the time being. This is undeniably due lately in part to the Bretton Woods
Agreement: by establishing dollar/gold convertibility, the dollars role as the world's
most accessible and reliable currency was firmly cemented. And thus, while Bretton
Woods may be a doctrine of yesteryear, its impact on the U.S. dollar and
international economics still resonates today.
