
had his first negatively charged experience.
As he grows up and begins associating specific words and concepts with his memories, he will form
a belief about the nature of dogs. It would be reasonable to assume that he adopted a belief
something like, "All dogs are dangerous." With the use of the word "all," the boy's belief is
structured in a way that assures that he will avoid all dogs. He has no reason to question this belief,
because every experience has confirmed and reinforced its validity. However, he (and everyone else
on the planet) is susceptible to a creative experience. Under normal circumstances, the boy will do
everything possible to make sure he does not encounter a dog. But what if something unexpected
and unintended occurs? Suppose the boy is walking with his parents and, as a result, feels safe and
protected. Now, suppose he and his parents come to a blind corner and cannot see what is on the
other side. They encounter a scene in which several children of about the same age as the boy are
playing with some dogs and, furthermore, they are obviously having a great deal of fun. This is a
creative experience. The boy is confronted with indisputable information that what he believes about
the nature of dogs isn't true. What happens now? First, the experience was not at the boy's conscious
direction. He didn't make a decision to willingly expose himself to information that contradicted
what he believed to be true. We might call this an inadvertent creative experience, because the
external environment forced him to confront other possibilities that he didn't believe existed.
Second, the experience of seeing other children playing with dogs and not getting hurt will throw his
mind into a state of confusion.
After the confusion wears off, meaning as he begins to accept the possibility that not all dogs are
dangerous, several scenarios are possible. Seeing other children his own age (with whom he could
strongly identify) having such a great time playing with dogs could cause the boy to decide that he
wants to be like the other children and have fun with dogs, too. If that's the case, this inadvertent
creative encounter has caused him to become attracted to express himself in a way that he formerly
didn't believe was possible (interacting with dogs). In fact, the notion was so impossible that it
wouldn't have even occurred to him to consider it. Now, he not only considers it, he desires it. Will
he be able to express himself in a way that is consistent with his desire? The answer to this question
is a matter of energy dynamics.
There are two forces within the boy that are in direct conflict with each other, competing for
expression: his belief that "all dogs are dangerous" and his desire to have fun and be like the other
children. What he will do the next time he encounters a dog will be determined by which has more
energy: his belief or his desire. Given the intensity of the energy in his belief that "All dogs are
dangerous," we can reasonably assume that his belief will have far more energy than his desire. If
that's the case, then he will find his next encounter with a dog very frustrating. Even though he may
want to touch or pet the dog, he'll find that he can't interact with it in any way. The word "all" in his
belief will act as a paralyzing force, preventing him from fulfilling his desire.
He might be well aware of the fact that the dog he wants to pet is not dangerous and won't hurt him;

but he won't be able to pet it until the balance of energy tips in favor of his desire. If the boy
genuinely wants to interact with dogs, he will have to overcome his fear. This means that he will
have to de-activate his belief that all dogs are dangerous so he can properly install a belief about
dogs that is more consistent with his desire. We know that dogs can express themselves in a wide
range of ways, from loving and gentle to mean and nasty. However, very few dogs on a percentage
basis fall into the mean and nasty category. A good belief for the boy to adopt, then, would be
something like, "Most dogs are friendly, but some can be mean and nasty."
This belief would allow him to learn to recognize characteristics and behavior patterns that will tell
him which dogs he can play with and which ones to avoid. However, the larger issue is, how can the
boy de-activate the "all" in the belief that "All dogs are dangerous" so he can overcome his fear?
Remember that all beliefs naturally resist any force that would alter their present form, but, as I
indicated above, the appropriate approach is not to try to alter the belief, but rather to draw the
energy out of it and channel that energy into another belief that is better suited to our purposes. To
de-activate the concept the word "all" represents, the boy will have to create a positively charged
experience with a dog; at some point, he will have to step through his fear and touch one. Doing this
might require a great deal of effort on the boy's part over a considerable amount of time.
Early in the process, his new realization about dogs might be strong enough only to allow him to be
in the presence of a dog, at a distance, and not run away. However, each encounter with a dog, even
at a distance, that doesn't result in a negative outcome will draw more and more of the negative
energy out of his belief that "All dogs are dangerous." Eventually, each new positive experience will
allow him to close the gap between himself and a dog, little by little, to the point that he can actually
touch one. From an energy dynamics perspective, he will be able to touch a dog when his desire to
do so is at least one degree greater in intensity than his belief that all dogs are dangerous.
The moment he actually does touch a dog, it will have the effect of drawing most of the remaining
negative energy out of the "all" concept and transfer it to a belief that reflects his new experience.
Although it's probably not that common, there are people who, for various reasons, are motivated
enough to purposely put themselves through the above described process. However, they may not be
consciously aware of the dynamics involved. People who work through a childhood fear of this
magnitude usually do so somewhat haphazardly over a period of years, without knowing for sure
exactly how they did it (unless they seek and get competent professional help). Later on, as adults, if
they are asked or if they happen to encounter a situation that reminds them of their past (for
instance, observing a child who is terrified of dogs), they typically characterize the process they
went through as "I remember when I was afraid of dogs, but I grew out of it." The end result of the
first scenario was that the boy worked through his fear by de-activating his limiting belief about the
nature of dogs. This allowed him to express himself in a way that he finds pleasing and that
otherwise would have been impossible. The second scenario that could result from the child's
inadvertent creative experience with dogs is that he isn't attracted to the possibility of playing with a

dog. In other words, he could not care less about being like the other children or interacting with
dogs. In this case, his belief that all dogs are dangerous and his new realization that all dogs are not
dangerous will exist in his mental environment as contradictory concepts.
This is an example of what I call an active contradiction, when two active beliefs are in direct
conflict with each other, both demanding expression. In this example, the first belief exists at a core
level in the boy's mental environment, with a great deal of negatively charged energy. The second
belief is at a more superficial level, and has very little positively charged energy. The dynamics of
this situation are interesting, and extremely important. We have stated that beliefs control our
perception of information. Under normal circumstances, the boy would have been perceptually
blinded to the possibility of interacting with dogs, but the experience of seeing other children
playing with them created a positively charged concept in his mental environment that dogs are not
all dangerous; some can be friendly. However, he hasn't done anything to de-activate the "all" in his
belief that "All dogs are dangerous," and, as far as I know, beliefs have no capacity to de-activate
themselves.
As a result, beliefs exist in our mental environment from the moment they are born to the moment
we die, unless we consciously take steps to deactivate them. However, in this scenario, the boy has
no desire and consequently no motivation to step through his fear. Therefore, the boy is left with an
active contradiction where his minimally charged belief that not all dogs are dangerous gives him
the ability to perceive the possibility of playing with a dog, but his powerfully charged belief that all
dogs are dangerous still causes him to experience some level of fear every time he encounters a dog
(maybe not enough fear to cause him to run in terror, because some of that fear will be offset by the
other belief, but there will certainly be enough fear to cause a great deal of discomfort).
The ability to "see" and consequently know that a situation is not dangerous, but at the same time
find ourselves immobilized with fear, can be quite baffling if we don't understand that what we
discover as the result of thinking creatively or realize from an inadvertent creative experience
doesn't necessarily have enough energy to become a dominant force in our mental environment. In
other words, our new awareness or discovery could very well have enough energy to act as a
credible force on our perception of information, thereby causing us to perceive possibilities that
would otherwise be invisible; but it might not have enough energy to act as a credible force on our
behavior. In making this statement, I am operating out of the assumption that it takes more energy to
act or express ourselves than the amount of energy it takes to observe something.
On the other hand, new awareness and discoveries instantly and effortlessly become dominant
forces if there's nothing inside us that's in conflict with them. But if there are conflicting beliefs and
we aren't willing to de-activate the conflicting forces (expending some effort), especially if they're
negatively charged, then acting on what we've discovered will be a struggle at the very least, and
perhaps down right impossible. What I have just described is the psychological dilemma that
virtually every trader has to resolve. Let's say you have a firm grasp of the nature of probabilities

and, as a result, you "know" that the next trade is simply another trade in a series of trades that has a
probable outcome. Yet you find you're still afraid to put that next trade on, or you're still susceptible
to several of the fear-based trading errors we've discussed in previous chapters. Remember that the
underlying cause of fear is the potential to define and interpret market information as threatening.
What is the source of our potential to interpret market information as threatening? Our expectations!
When the market generates information that doesn't conform to what we expect, the up and down
tics seem to take on a threatening quality (become negatively charged). Consequently, we
experience fear, stress, and anxiety. What is the underlying source of our expectations? Our beliefs.
In light of what you now understand about the nature of beliefs, if you are still experiencing
negative states of mind when you trade, you can assume there's a conflict between what you "know"
about probable outcomes and any number of other beliefs in your mental environment that are
arguing (demanding expression) for something else. Keep in mind that all active beliefs demand
expression, even if we don't want them to. To think in probabilities, you have to believe that every
moment in the market is unique, or more specifically, that every edge has a unique outcome. When
you believe at a functional level that every edge has a unique outcome (meaning that it's a dominant
belief without any other beliefs arguing for something different), you will experience a state of mind
that is free of fear, stress, and anxiety when you trade. It really can't work any other way. A unique
outcome is not something we have already experienced, therefore it is not something we can already
know. If it were known, it could not be defined as unique.
When you believe that you don't know what is going to happen next, what exactly are you expecting
from the market? If you said "I don't know," you are absolutely right. If you believe that something
will happen and that you don't need to know exactly what that something is to make money, then
where s the potential to define and interpret market information as threatening and painful? If you
said "There is none," you are absolutely right again. Here is one more example of how beliefs
demand expression. Let's look at a situation where a child's first encounter with a dog was a very
positive experience. As a result, he has absolutely no problem interacting with dogs (any dog for
that matter), because he has not encountered one that's unfriendly. Therefore, he has no concept (an
energized belief) that it is possible for a dog to inflict any damage or cause him to experience pain.
As he learns to associate words with his memories, he will probably acquire a belief along the lines
of "all dogs are friendly and fun." Therefore, every time a dog comes into his field of awareness, this
belief will demand expression. From the perspective of someone who fi with a do?, it will seem as if
this child has an attitude of reckless abandon.
If you tried to convince the child that he'll get bitten someday if he doesn't exercise caution, his
belief will cause him to either discount or completely disregard your advice. His response would be
something like "No way!" or "It can't happen to me." Let's say at some point in his life he
approaches an unfamiliar dog that wants to be left alone. The dog growls. The warning will go
unheeded and the dog attacks the boy. From the perspective of the boy's belief system, he's just had

a creative experience. What effect will this experience have on his belief that "all dogs are friendly"?
Will he now be afraid of all dogs as the child in the first example was?
Unfortunately, the answers to these questions are not cut and dried, because there may be other
beliefs, also demanding expression, that don't have anything specifically to do with dogs that come
into play in a situation like this. For example, what if this child has a highly developed belief in
betrayal (he believes he's been betrayed by some very significant people in some very significant
situations that have caused him to experience intense emotional pain). If he associates the attack by
this one dog as a "betrayal" by dogs in general (in essence a betrayal of his belief in dogs), then he
could easily find himself afraid of all dogs.
All of the positive energy contained in his original belief could instantly be transformed into
negatively charged energy. The boy could justify this shift with a rationalization like "If one dog can
betray me, then any dog can." However, I do think this is an extreme and very unlikely occurrence.
What is more likely is the word "all" in his original belief will instantly be de-activated and that
energy will get transferred to a new belief that better reflects the true nature of dogs. This new
experience caused an energy shift that forced him to learn something about the nature of dogs that
he otherwise refused to consider possible.
His belief in the friendliness of dogs remains intact. He will still play with dogs, but he will now
exercise some discretion by consciously looking for signs of friendliness or unfriendliness. I think
that a fundamental truth about the nature of our existence is every moment in the market, as well as
in evervdav life, has elements of what we know (similarities) and elements that we don't or can't
know because we haven't experienced it yet. Until we actively train our minds to expect a unique
outcome, we will continue experiencing only what we know; everything else (other information and
possibilities that are not consistent with what we know and expect) will pass us by, unperceived,
discounted, distorted, outright denied, or attacked. When you truly believe that you don't need to
know, you will be thinking in probabilities (the market perspective) and will have no reason to
block, discount, distort, deny, or attack anything the market is offering about its potential to move in
any particular direction. If you are not experiencing the quality of mental freedom implied in that
statement, and it is your desire to do so, then you must take an active role in training your mind to
believe in the uniqueness of each moment, and you must de-activate any other belief that argues for
something different. This process isn't any different from the one the boy in the first scenario went
through, nor is it going to happen by itself. He wanted to interact with dogs without fear, but to do
so he had to create a new belief and de-activate the conflicting ones. This is the secret to achieving
consistent success as a trader.
3. Beliefs keep on working regardless of whether we are consciously aware of their existence in our
mental environment. In other words, we don't have to actively remember or have conscious access
to any particular belief for that belief to act as a force on our perception of information or on our

behavior. I know it s hard to "believe" that something we can't even remember can still have an
impact on our lives. But when you think about it, much of what we learn throughout our lives is
stored at an unconscious or subconscious level. If I asked you to remember each specific skill you
had to learn so that you could drive a car with confidence, chances are you wouldn't remember all
the things you needed to concentrate and focus on while you were in the process of learning. The
first time I had the opportunity to teach a teenager how to drive, I was absolutely amazed at how
much there was to learn, how much of the process I took for granted and no longer thought about at
a conscious level. Possibly the best example that illustrates this characteristic is people who drive
under the influence of alcohol. On any given day or night, there are probably thousands of people
who have had so much to drink that they have no idea that they have no conscious awareness of how
they drove from point A to point B. It is difficult to imagine how this is possible, unless you
consider that driving skills and one's belief in his ability to drive operate automatically on a much
deeper level than waking consciousness. Certainly, some percentage of these drunk drivers get into
accidents, but when you compare the accident rate with the estimated number of people driving
under the influence of alcohol, it's remarkable that there aren't a great many more accidents. In fact,
a drunk driver is probably most likely to cause an accident when he either falls asleep or something
requires a conscious decision and a fast reaction. In other words, the driving conditions are such that
operating out of one's subconscious skills is not enough.
SELF EVALUATION AND TRADING
How this characteristic applies to our trading is also quite profound. The trading environment offers us
an arena of unlimited opportunities to accumulate wealth. But just because the money is available and
we can perceive the possibility of getting it, that doesn't necessarily mean that we (as individuals) have
an unlimited sense of selfvaluation. In other words, there could be a huge gap between how much
money we desire for ourselves, how much we perceive is available, and how much we actually believe
we are worth or deserve. Everyone has a sense of self-valuation. The easiest way to describe this sense
is to list every active belief, both conscious and subconscious, that has the potential to argue either for
or against accumulating or achieving greater and greater levels of success and prosperity. Then match
the energy from the positively charged beliefs against the energy from the negatively charged beliefs. If
you have more positively charged energy arguing for success and prosperity than negatively charged
energy arguing against them, then you have a positive sense of self-valuation. Otherwise, you have a
negative sense of self-valuation. The dynamics of how these beliefs interact with one another is not
nearly so simple as I'm making it sound. In fact, it can be so complex that it could take years of
sophisticated mental work to organize and sort out. What you need to know is that it's almost
impossible to grow up in any social environment and not acquire some negatively charged beliefs that
would argue against success or accumulating vast sums of money.

Most of these self-sabotaging beliefs have long been forgotten and operate at a subconscious level, but
the fact that we may have forgotten them doesn't mean they've been de-activated. How do we acquire
self-sabotaging beliefs? Unfortunately, it's extremely easy. Probably the most common way is when a
child engages in some activity that a parent or teacher doesn't want him to do and the child accidently
injures himself. Many parents, to get their point across to the child, will respond to a situation like this
by saying, "This (whatever pain you are experiencing) wouldn't have happened to you if you didn't
deserve it," or "You disobeyed me and look what happened, God punished you." The problem with
making or hearing statements like this is that there's a potential for the child to associate every future
injury with these same statements and, subsequently, form a belief that he must be an unworthy person,
undeserving of success, happiness, or love. Anything we feel guilty about can have an adverse effect on
our sense of self-worth.
Usually guilt is associated with being a bad person, and most people believe that bad people should be
punished, certainly not rewarded. Some religions teach children that having a lot of money isn't godly
or spiritual. Some people believe that making money in certain ways is wrong, even though it may be
perfectly legal and moral from society's perspective. Again, you may not have a speoifir recollection of
learning something that would argue against the success you perceive as possible, but that doesn't mean
that what you learned is no longer having an effect. The way these subconscious self-sabotaging beliefs
manifest themselves in our trading is usually in the form of lapses in focus or concentration, resulting
in any number of trading errors, like putting in a buy for a sell or vice versa, or allowing yourself to
give in to distracting thoughts that compel you to leave the screen, only to find out when you return that
you missed the big trade of the day.
I've worked with many traders who achieved various levels of consistent success, but found they just
couldn't break through certain thresholds in acquiring equity. They discovered an invisible but very real
barrier similar to the proverbial glass ceiling that many women executives experience in the corporate
world. Every time these traders hit the barrier, they experienced a significant draw down, regardless of
the market conditions. However, when asked about what happened, they typically blamed their sudden
run of bad luck on just that—luck or the vagaries of the market. Interestingly, they typically created a
steadily rising equity curve, sometimes over a period of several months, and the significant draw down
always occurred at the same spot in their equity curve.
I describe this psychological phenomenon as being in a "negative zone." As magically as money can
flow into a trader's accounts when he is "in the zone," it can just as easily flow out, if he is in a negative
zone where unresolved self-valuation issues mysteriously act on his perception of information and
behavior. I am not implying here that you have to de-activate every belief that would argue against
your ever-expanding positive sense of selfvaluation, because you don't. But you must be aware of the
presence of such beliefs, and take specific steps in your trading regimen to compensate when they start
expressing themselves. CHAPTER
