
TREND-RANGE
Trend-range polarity underlies all swing trade preparation. Align execution properly with this
primary axis or profits will vanish. Trends rarely move in a straight line. As price surges forward, it
pauses frequently to test, retrace, and rest. This countertrend pull shakes out profit takers, losers,
and disbelievers. It lowers volatility and allows new participants to jump on board in hopes of a new
price surge. Fresh positions require excellent timing in these conditions. Early execution subjects

the swing trader to whipsaws while late entries miss the move and face increased risk. Ranges also
carry a high probability for trend relativity errors. Participants trap themselves into narrow price
movement while fixated on a broader trending market. Although the range limits losses, tied-up
capital misses other opportunities.
FIGURE 2.13
Bulls live above the 200-day MA while bears live below. When trading within this time frame, align general
strategies to conditions that favor the right side of the market. For example, stay long when price moves above the
average and sell short when it goes below. Shorter-term traders must understand how large-scale bull or bear
pressure can affect the performance of their individual trading vehicles. But they must align positions with
smaller-scale buying and selling pressure to book profits.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Focus trading strategies on the trend-range axis but build timing on the swing-momentum cycle that
underlies it. Positive feedback (directional movement) tends to surge in waves. These momentum
thrusts carry all the rewards that swing traders seek. Negative feedback (nondirectional movement)
sets the stage by providing the conditions needed to generate profitable entry points. Coordinate
these two impulses to execute with perfect timing. Enter positions when the range nears primary
S/R and then watch for momentum in the next lower time frame to carry the trade to a profit. As the
position starts to run, align an exit to momentum in the same time frame as the entry to maximize
the gain.

Identify trend-range through pattern recognition and indicator support. Trends print as sharpramping price bars. They force price rate of change (ROC) and directional movement indicators
(ADX) to rise sharply. Ranges appear as pullbacks, price constriction, or sideways action. Look for
volume and rate of change to drop off as ranges develop. They force moving averages to flatline
according to their period length. Oscillators such as Stochastics swing back and forth quickly
through small shifts in range direction. Watch the indicator jump to one extreme and stay there
when the trend takes over.
Use repeating chart patterns to uncover important swing points. Classic triangle, flag, and pennant
formations locate trade setups with clearly defined entry and risk levels. Constricting price bars,
lowering volatility, and range placement signal the end of one swing and beginning of a new
impulse. Align long or short positions in harmony with the expected movement but watch out for a
better trade in the opposite direction should pattern failure emerge.

EXPANSION-CONTRACTION
Price bars demonstrate orderly expansion-contraction polarity as the swing-momentum cycle
evolves. Bars tend to expand rapidly into a climax through rallies and selloffs. Then congestion sets
in and volatility drops as bar range contracts along with price rate of change. This negative
feedback characterizes progress until tight congestion signals an impending price movement that
again releases into expanding bars. Pattern readers have a trading advantage here because these
entry points capture the eye’s attention. Conversely, many math indicators hit neutral zones in this
environment and show nothing of interest.
Swing traders must pay special attention to these overlooked neutral conditions. Quiet balance
points trigger the most powerful and profitable opportunities throughout the markets. Empty zones
have little sponsorship or interest. They draw their initial power in a state of low volatility and
resolve it through directional movement and high volatility. They signal high-reward, low-risk entry
levels that allow swing traders to step in front of the crowd. Because narrow range bars char
acterize this opportunity, adverse movement after entry permits a fast stop loss exit with little
slippage.
Expansion-contraction ties closely into reward planning. Odds increase greatly that the next few
bars will contract when expansion bars thrust into known S/R. For this reason, the appearance of
wide range bars often signals the need for caution. Look at the chart landscape again, identify all
obstacles, and reexamine the intended holding period. The odds favor a pullback that will draw
down profit substantially before ejecting into another move.
For most trades, plan to exit when price expands into S/R. This strategy tracks the old wisdom that
advises us to ‘‘enter in mild times but exit in wild times.” Also consider closing the position when
the market prints a wide range bar that departs substantially from the routine price action but does
not occur at a breakout point. These often mark short covering moves, stop runs within smaller time
frames, and countertrend climaxes.
The swing trader seeks profit from single, direct price thrusts except when highly favorable
conditions demand greater flexibility. When momentum cycles align through several time frames,
and positions already show a profit, try to capture a series of expansion bars. But recall that markets
trend only fifteen to twenty percent of the time. Odds favor accepting the gift of a few bars and
moving on to the next trade. Only seasoned trading skill can consistently select the right path to take
with any particular setup. Learn to watch opportunity in three dimensions and take a giant step
toward this wisdom.

LEADING-LAGGING
Most technical indicators rely upon simple price/volume inputs. When these data points shift back
and forth, they also generate chart polarity in derivative math calculations. This interrelationship
explains why the swing trader should not seek the perfect indicator. The restless crowd drives price
change, but mathematics only interprets the residue of their participation. The eyes see emerging
trends long before the numbers signal their presence. For this reason, always use technical
indicators to support the pattern, not the other way around.
Apply popular price indicators to examine chart polarity that leads or lags shifting cycles.
Oscillators look forward to locate major swing reversals. Stochastics and Wilder’s Relative Strength
Indicator (RSI) both watch the changing axis of overbought-oversold conditions to identify turning
points. Trend-following indicators look backward to examine price development. Plot MA ribbons
or use the classic MACD Histogram to measure the trend-range axis and pinpoint the current phase
of the swing-momentum cycle.
FIGURE 2.14
All markets cycle endlessly between contraction and expansion. But congestive phases use up many more price bars
than trending moves. This suggests why making money in the markets can be so difficult. A trend may already be over
by the time most participants see a sharp rally or selloff. At the least, risk escalates dramatically as advancing price can
reverse or enter new congestion at any time. The swing trader tries to enter a low-risk position just before price bar
expansion, whenever possible, and let the breakout crowd to push it into a quick profit.

A finite pool of buyers and sellers participates in each market at any point in time. Rallies and
corrections feed on this supply until it dissipates. The stronger the rally or weaker the correction, the
more quickly a stock will reach the bottom of its fuel supply. Oscillators measure this important
gauge through overbought-oversold polarity. These forward-looking indicators tend to hover near
extremes and then swing sharply toward the opposite pole. Swing traders anticipate where this shift
will occur in both entry and exit strategies.
Markets can tap fresh crowds as prices move. New participants may quickly replace depleted
supplies. This self-feeding trend mechanism allows extreme buying and selling conditions to
continue long after measurements suggest that reversals should take place. Oscillators reflect this
when they move to one extreme and just stay there. For this reason, don’t rely on these indicators in
trending markets. They work best within constricted ranges where natural cycles allow regular
shifts in supply and demand.
Forward-looking indicators oscillate back and forth between 0 and 100 or swing through a central
axis. Popular interpretation suggests that price reaches overbought levels near the top value and
triggers selling pressure. This same reasoning dictates that oversold conditions exist near the lows
and invite longs to consider new positions. Over time, chartists have defined intermediate values
where plot crossovers signal the start of the related phase. For example, RSI commonly uses levels
of 30–70 to signal oversold-overbought states.
Trend-following indicators measure directional polarity. Moving averages fit right into the price
pane while many other plots draw separately. Some print common patterns that uncover new trends
and pinpoint trade timing. But trend-following indicators lag most chart action. In other words, they
will turn up or down after price movement and not before it. They identify directional cycles over
many different time elements. For example, half the averages may point up and the other half point
down at the same time in a typical MA ribbon.
Use these lagging measurements when oscillators stop working. Trend-following indicators offer a
better road map in directional markets and identify lower-risk entry triggers. They pinpoint a
stock’s location on the trend-range axis and reveal natural pullback levels. Apply them to
momentum strategies that capitalize on strong trending conditions. Also let them signal the start of a
new range. Then pull up some oscillators to reexamine the changing environment.

CONVERGENCE-DIVERGENCE
Successful trade execution relies upon correct interpretation of the convergence-divergence (C-D)
axis. This powerful concept defines relationships between price and all other aspects of the charting
landscape. Indicators that trend in a different direction than price signal divergence. They converge
when their movement corresponds with price direction. Divergent conditions mark negative
feedback, while convergence aligns with positive feedback. One market can also converge or
diverge with another. When S&P 500 goes up and Nasdaq 100 goes down, the two indices diverge.
Bonds and index futures converge when they both rise.
Swing traders must decide which forces will prevail as divergent conditions resolve. For example,
when falling price bars move against a rising MA, one will eventually rotate to track the other.
Common technical wisdom dictates that indi cators define an underlying trend more accurately than
price over short periods of time. But this logic often fails and wayward indicators obediently turn to
confirm the price action.
Apply a logical strategy to evaluate divergence and avoid very bad executions. Start with a
recognition that every market will exhibit numerous C-D relationships. Limit detailed analysis to

those elements that will support or interfere with the planned setup within the chosen holding
period. Locate the major C-D themes and filter out the smaller ones. Some divergences tend to
resolve more quickly than others. Accumulation can lag price for a long time before stopping a
rally. But a declining moving average could have a dramatic effect on price as a short-term rally
strikes it.
FIGURE 2.15
Oscillators pick up market turns faster than trend-following indicators. Notice how the Stochastics swings quickly in
response to each Cisco reversal while the slower MACD Histogram responds incrementally to each price bar. Use
oscillators in choppy markets but switch to trend-following measurements during sharp breakouts and breakdowns.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Apply cross-verification techniques to C-D trade analysis. Look for many discontinuous forms of
convergence that support the promising pattern. Compare these with the elements that diverge to
reach a logical conclusion about the next price direction. When convergence aligns repeatedly
through a single price point, odds increase dramatically that an important breakout or reversal will
occur right there. Couple this knowledge with well-marked S/R information and execute with
confidence. S/R exerts a greater influence on price development than C-D. When a market builds a
bullish pattern in the face of declining indicators, subsequent price action will more likely confirm
the pattern than the divergent mathematics.

Identify other conditions that support or conflict with current price development before making the
trade. Determine how seasonality or time-of-day bias affects the odds for the predicted move.
Consider the limitations of the indicator or landscape feature that exhibits the divergence.
Oscillators in trending markets and trend-following indicators in flat markets both trigger many
false signals. When in doubt, step to the sidelines and wait for a better opportunity. The most
profitable trades will exhibit major convergence between many chart elements.

READING MARKET SENTIMENT
Successful swing traders start each market day with a thoughtful analysis of current conditions.
Identify larger cycles, external influences, and important news that will likely drive price action.
Then look at the most promising setups and decide whether they properly align with those complex
forces. Evaluate any special risk associated with trading that day and decide how to alter execution
strategy to adjust to the new environment. Should position size be increased or decreased? Should
the first hour be avoided or aggressively traded? Are conditions ripe for a major rally, selloff, or
reversal?
Review current sentiment, important numbers, and technical indicators. Define what types of
unexpected factors will tighten or relax current trade management tactics. Write down those
parameters to avoid getting fooled, if required. Then execute according to the predetermined
boundaries. Watch how the first hour action alters or adjusts this initial analysis. Then shift the
active strategy to accommodate real reversals, breakouts, or breakdowns as they exert their
influence. But beware of costly trend relativity errors. Make certain that important market shifts
occur within the time frame of interest before adjusting the trading plan to accommodate them.

AVOIDING THE MOMENTUM TRAP
Success depends on overall market strength or weakness and how well positions capitalize on the
changing environment. Individual entries can act against sentiment and yield good profits, but over
time, the odds for success decrease when positions do not track movement in the larger indices and
market cycles. Swing trading produces better results when riding the wave and not drowning in it.
Markets tend to correct for many months at a time. But most participants focus on relatively brief
periods of strong upside momentum where they hope to pocket big gains. Unfortunately these
exciting times also awaken greed and weaken risk management. Participants violate personal rules,
chase dangerous positions, and develop an unhealthy sense of invulnerability. They also forget that
the momo environment will disappear quickly and without warning.
Strategies that work well in hot markets destroy trading accounts during cool ones. Most players
carry a long-side momentum bias into topping markets and corrections. This triggers inappropriate
positions, leads to missed opportunities, and empties the same pockets that filled so easily during
parabolic rallies. Avoid this common trap as experience grows. Learn to read the broader market
and adapt quickly to changing conditions. Build personal cycle measurements that bypass the
financial press and stock board chatter. Use common sense to anticipate and test new profit
strategies that the crowd may never see.
Combine market sentiment and Pattern Cycles to locate the best opportunities of the moment. Broad
forces align well with different setups on individual stocks. First gauge current conditions and then
decide what types of trades will work best in that environment. Make certain that strategies
correspond to the same time frame as the analysis. When major indices converge, trade the same
phase as their current Pattern Cycle whenever possible. When they don’t, choose positions that

support general sentiment and current risk. Use S/R barriers on both stocks and broader indices to
time profitable exits.
Swing traders must sell short as easily as they go long. This challenges the investor bias that most
neophytes carry into modern markets. Many participants still don’t understand many aspects of this
classic trading practice. The financial establishment discouraged retail customers from learning
about short sales for many years. The uptick rule made entry difficult, while Wall Street told
practitioners that they were hurting the American economy so that they could keep this profitable
strategy for themselves. Times have changed. Direct access execution systems now allow short sale
entry as quickly as long positions. Learn to use them without delay.
Pattern Cycles require a broad range of execution strategies in both directions. Be prepared to adapt
quickly to changes in market sentiment by learning simple ways to recognize new broad-scale
conditions. All sincere efforts will be greatly rewarded. The easiest trades always come early in a
trend before the crowd notices them. Profit from momentum markets, but don’t fall in love with
them. Increased risk always follows increased reward. Work to broaden execution skills and learn to
trade anything that offers a good opportunity. Market players who hit many singles will last longer
than those who knock a few home runs but strike out the rest of the time. Be consistent and make a
good living through both up and down trends.

THE BIG PICTURE
Swing traders must digest a vast amount of market information to reach simple conclusions about
opportunity and risk. Start with cross-market analysis and decide whether local or world influences
will more likely move the price action. Stay aware of news or fundamental conditions that will
impact the markets, but stay focused on the patterns and numbers. Except for shock events, markets
will follow the technicals because insiders already trade most hidden news in advance of the public.
The interplay among debt, currency, and commodities can dramatically affect the U.S. equity
markets. These broad forces trigger arbitrage between index futures and debt that move stock prices
and rob profits. Fortunately, most significant shifts between these world markets occur slowly.
Swing traders can adequately prepare for their substantial impact through a few well-chosen news
articles or weekly index chart analysis.
Stay informed. Today’s excitement won’t move tomorrow’s markets. Learn to recognize the big
picture and anticipate leadership through background study of economics, the media and world
politics. Once grounded in the basics, just follow the financial news and the most important
message of the day will become obvious. Modern markets have a self-fulfilling mechanism that
pushes the most emotional issues right to the top of the trading heap. Study these central themes
first and decide how serious or long lasting their impact may be.
Identify the leaders and laggards of the U.S. indices. Look at the Pattern Cycles for each index to
find the current trading phases. Are they rangebound or trending? Are oscillators rising or falling?
Do they converge or diverge? Each index has characteristics that affect and distort daily results.
Take the time to learn their construction and how individual stock movement can generate lopsided
information. For example, a Microsoft rally or selloff on certain days in 1999 accounted for most
price change in both the Dow 30 and Nasdaq 100.
Follow those indices and measurements that impact daily decision-making. Nasdaq Composite,
Nasdaq 100, S&P 500, and the Dow Industrials provide most of the data required to participate in
the American markets. Swing traders can isolate many subsector rallies and selloffs through these

major influences. Also follow the bond futures or bond yield and add smaller markets that generate
special interest. But discard information quickly if it doesn’t improve the bottom line.
Many equity traders now keep active futures data on their real-time screens. The decline of Chicago
Merchantile Exchange (CME) fees and birth of the S&P E-Mini index futures contract allow retail
participants to view derivative markets that were hidden to the public just a few years ago. Start to
examine futures by replacing S&P 500 Index quotes with the popular E-Mini. Then view the
interplay between that market and equities. This daily tug and pull explains much of the short-term
price oscillation that appears as noise to most observers. With a little practice, swing traders can
build strategies that carefully time execution to these fluctuations.
FIGURE 2.16
Index relative strength indicators measure current trading conditions and cycles. A spread between Nasdaq and
the SP-500 contrasts the activity of growth stocks against the safety of blue chips. Market bottoms tend to print
when Nasdaq takes over leadership from the other indices. A 14-week RSI reveals long-term Nasdaq buying and
selling pressures. Smooth the average by 5 to 7 periods and few whipsaws will occur once the plot starts to roll
over. Swing traders improve performance when they align long and short tactics to broad market sentiment.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

The S&P futures crowd has a higher percentage of professionals than equities. Swing traders can
see their participation on the intraday charts. Major fades follow almost every wide bar movement.
This gives an odd porcupine appearance to the flow of price action. Use this phenomenon as a noise

filter for execution of equity positions. Real breakouts and breakdowns will thrust past these fade
points while false moves terminate at them. Pay attention and learn to stand aside when others get
caught in small intraday price ripples that bleed trading accounts.
