
8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 34

• 34 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

in any one stock is ten percent,” Livermore said. “Now, will you
lend me the money?”
“One more question.” Hutton smiled. He liked this young
man. This young man was a force to be reckoned with, a mental
force. “Why do you think you can come back here next time and
beat the market?”
“Because I will have a new trading system by then. I consider
this part of my education.”
“How much did you come here with, Jesse?”
“Twenty-five hundred dollars.”
“And you leave with a borrowed thousand,” Hutton said,
reaching into his wallet, extracting the thousand in cash, and handing it to Livermore. “For thirty-five hundred dollars, you could
have gone to Harvard.”
“I’ll make a lot more money with my education here than I ever
would going to Harvard,” Livermore said, smiling as he took the
money.
“Somehow, I believe you, Jesse.”
“I’ll pay this back,” Livermore said, pocketing the money.
“I know you will. Just remember when you come back, do your
trading here. We like your business.”
“Yes sir, that I will,” Livermore said.
Ed Hutton watched him leave. There was no question in his
mind that he would see him again.
Livermore’s options for bucket-shop trading were limited. The
East Coast was closed off to him, so he looked to middle America.
He headed for Saint Louis, where he had heard of two huge
bucket-shop operations.
He took the train, arrived in Saint Louis, checked into a hotel,
showered, and headed for the first bucket shop. It was a large operation, with a trading gallery that held more than 200 people. He
started slow, using a false name and playing conservatively. He

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 35

THE BACK STORY

• 35 •

traded for three days until he was singled out. He had built his
$1,000 stake up to $3,800.
On the morning of the third day, he was called into the boss’s
office and greeted with, “Hello, Mr. Jesse Livermore. Sit down.”
They had recognized him. He was told that he was banned from
that bucket shop, to leave immediately.
He quickly went down to the next bucket shop, only a block
away. He went up to the window and made his play.
“Fifteen hundred shares of BRT.”
The clerk had just started to fill out the slip when the manager
came up and stood in front of Livermore. “Your money’s no good
in here. We ain’t the suckers here on this side of the cage, the suckers are on your side of the cage, Livermore.”
“You know my name?”
“And your game.” He handed the money back to Livermore.
“Listen . . .”
“No, you listen. You think I didn’t just get a call from down the
street about you? Now, I’m only gonna ask you one more time
nice. Get the hell outta here!”
“Get outta here doesn’t sound to me like you’re asking,” Livermore replied, taking back his money.
The next day he took the train back to New York. He visited
E. F. Hutton’s office. He handed back the $1,000 he had borrowed.
“You want interest?” Livermore asked with a smile.
“I’ll get my interest out of your commissions. That didn’t take
long. Did they make you?”
“Yeah, they nailed me within four days.”
“How’d you do?”
“Not great. I’m about right back where I was when I walked in
here six months ago.”
“So it’s Harvard or Wall Street again, huh?”
“No, it’s Wall Street or nothing.”

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 36

• 36 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

“How could you have a new system to beat Wall Street in four
days?” Hutton asked.
“I don’t have to beat Wall Street. I have to beat myself, my emotions.”
“That’s the smartest thing I’ve heard from you yet, Jesse. Good
luck.”
“Luck?”
“Yes, Jesse, we all need a little luck in this life. Now let’s reopen
your account.”
Livermore traded for several months. But when he summarized
his account, he found that he had only broken even. His confidence
remained high, but he still had not established a consistent winning
system for playing the market as he had with the bucket shops.
Then one day a fellow named Bill Sullivan walked into the E. F.
Hutton offices and told Livermore that the man who ran the Saint
Louis bucket shop had made a killing on a racetrack scheme and
moved to the East Coast. To avoid the New York City police he
had opened a new bucket-shop operation in Hoboken, New Jersey, just across the river. Sullivan told Livermore that it was a nolimit house. There was no limit to the amount of stock a trader
could buy or sell.
Livermore waited for Saturday to roll around before he visited
the Hoboken bucket shop. On Saturdays the market was open
only until 12. Inside the shop, the setup was very grand, with a full
quotation board, a customer’s gallery, and plenty of clerks for service. Livermore acted dumb and placed a few early orders. Then,
at a little past 11, he laid down $2,000 in cash and went short on
$20,000 worth of stock. The stocks plummeted, and just five minutes before the close he covered the shorts and cashed in. His profit
was $6,000. He went to collect, but the clerk did not have enough
cash to fully pay out. He was told to return on Monday for the rest
of his money.

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 37

THE BACK STORY

• 37 •

On Monday he showed up. Waiting for him was the same man
he had last seen in Saint Louis.
“Livermore, what do you want?”
“My money.”
“I told you never to trade in my establishment when you were
in Saint Louis. This is New Jersey, and I don’t want you trading in
here, either. There’s no money waitin’ for you here this Monday
morning.”
“Give me my money,” Livermore intoned.
The man looked at him for a few long seconds.
“Hey, at least I’m playing an honest game, not like your racetrack escapades,” Livermore continued, staring back. “If you want
to trade in this part of the country, you better pay me.”
A crowd had now gathered behind Livermore. He repeated, “I
want my money. I played fair and square.”
“You were banned.”
“Not here in Hoboken. Now, give me my money!”
The man finally nodded and the clerk peeled off some $1,000
bills until Livermore had his money, the full $6,000.
“Livermore, I have a boss, a very unforgiving boss. So do me a
favor and don’t come back in here.”
Livermore looked him in the eye, nodded and walked out. He
put his money in his pocket and thought about the situation on his
ride back to Manhattan.
The next day he called Bill Sullivan, the man who had told him
of the bucket shop. “Listen Bill, thanks for the tip on that place in
Hoboken. I need you to do me a little favor.”
“How little?” Sullivan asked.
“I’ll bankroll you, and I want you to go to Hoboken and make
some small plays. Then when the time is right, I’ll give you the
word.”
“What’s my cut?”

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 38

• 38 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

“Twenty percent plus expenses, and I’ll give you a thousand
dollars for a bankroll.”
“Deal, Livermore.”
Livermore waited until Sullivan was established and then made
his move. He went short and cleaned up a net of $4,100 after paying the 20 percent cut and expenses.
Livermore now had a stake of over $10,000, and he decided to
stick strictly to the stock market in the future—no more bucket
shops. He was banned for good now, and sooner or later, Arnold
Rothstein, the Brain, would step into the picture and pay him a
visit. If that happened, he would be lucky to keep his life, let alone
any money he had made. Besides, he had his stake back, bigger than
ever. Now it would be up to him to use it in the stock market.
Besides, he was tired of playing for small points in bucket shops.
He liked playing in a bigger game, a legitimate game, through
licensed brokers, where there was no limit on the money a trader
could make—or lose, as he would find out.
It would become the never-ending challenge of Livermore’s
life: beating the market. Beating the market was like alchemy—
changing lead into gold. The market changed paper into gold and
created fortunes beyond anyone’s wildest dreams. The market was
where $100 became $1,000, $1,000 became $1 million, and $1
million became $100 million. All the trader had to do was call the
moves before they occurred—and, as with any great puzzle, the
answer was always right there. All the trader had to do was figure
it out.
And Livermore remained confident that he could find the
answer to the puzzle.

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 39

*

chapter three

*

The San Francisco
Earthquake Rumbles
in New York
THE SPECULATOR

Modern usage has made the term speculator a synonym for
gambler and plunger. Actually the word comes from the Latin
speculari, which means to spy out and observe.
I have defined a speculator as a man who observes the future
and acts before it occurs. To be able to do this successfully—and
it is an ability of priceless value in all human affairs—three
things are necessary:
First, one must get the facts of a situation or problem.
Second, one must form a judgement as to what those facts
portend.
Third, one must act in time, before it is too late.
I have heard many men talk intelligently—even brilliantly—about something only to see them proven powerless
when it comes to acting on what they believe. If action is delayed until the need is apparent to everyone, it will be too late.
To be evident to all, a danger must be on top of us and out
of hand.
My Own Story, Bernard Baruch

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 40

• 40 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

LIVERMORE STUDIED HIS MISTAKES OBJECTIVELY. IN LATER

years, he often told his sons that “the only way you get a real education in the market is to invest cash, track your trade, and study
your mistakes!”
It is emotionally difficult to review your mistakes, since the
speculator must wade through his own bad trades and blunders.
And these are not simple blunders, these are blunders that cost
money. Anyone who has lost money by investing poorly knows
how difficult it is to reexamine what occurred.
The examination of a losing trade is torturous but necessary to
ensure that it will not happen again. Livermore was brutal in selfanalysis. He told his sons his conclusion: “Successful trading is
always an emotional battle for the speculator, not an intellectual
battle. It is only after a bet has been placed on a stock or a commodity, when the money has changed from cash in hand to stock
certificates, that the emotions spring to life.”
Livermore equated speculators who traded imaginary stock
positions with someone who was a crack shot on the pistol range.
How would such a crack shot do in a duel, facing an opponent’s
loaded pistol? That was when fear raised its ominous head, nerves
frayed and split, resolve was challenged, and reason fled.
To speculate, a trader had to be a player, not a theorist, or an
economist, or an analyst. A speculator had to be a player with
money down on the table. It was not the coach or the team’s
owner who won the game, it was the players on the field—just as
it was not the generals who won the battle, it was the grunts on the
ground.
For Livermore, the richest gold mine on the planet was sitting
high on the bedrock of Manhattan—the New York Stock
Exchange at the corner of Wall and Broad Streets. It looked easy—
no exploring necessary, no maps, no staking a claim. It was open

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 41

THE SAN FRANCISCO EARTHQUAKE RUMBLES IN NEW YORK

• 41 •

at certain hours, and it invited everyone into the mine to try their
luck. But very few miners walked out with a pot of gold.
The same facts were available to all the prospectors at the same
time. So failures to mine the mountain properly were personal failures, since everyone basically started out even. But the problems
were in many ways the same as those in hunting for gold, as well.
There were false clues, fool’s gold, dry holes, bad climatic conditions, corrupt partners, dance-hall girls, gunfighters, and professional
gamblers. And two of the biggest problems were claim jumpers and
scallywags who wanted to scam miners out of their gold by trying
to buy their claims cheaply or sell them fraudulent maps.
These scallywags, in Livermore’s mind, manifested on Wall
Street as tipsters. They stood at the entrance to the great gold mine
and sold their wares. These hucksters handed out tips to the uninitiated before the uninitiated even got a chance to dig for the gold
themselves. An easy road to success is what they promised—hit the
mother lode fast, with no work.
Livermore noticed that the novices never asked the simple questions:
• Why have you chosen me to receive this priceless advice?”
• If you have this information, then why aren’t you rich?
• What is driving you to give me this advice to buy a stock?
Are you secretly selling it to me at higher and higher prices?”
• If capital gains are so easy to make, then why are you only
interested in your commissions?
There were many pitfalls on the road to successful speculation,
and Livermore knew he was destined to fall into them all. But he
was not so much worried about falling into the pits as he was worried about falling into them over and over and over again.

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 42

• 42 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Livermore knew the basic laws of the market, as did everyone:
• When you are wrong there is one thing that cannot be
denied—you lose money.
• When you are right, you make money.
• Therefore, you are right only when you make money and
wrong only when you lose it. This law cannot be denied, and
it is the true law of speculation.
Over his career, Livermore observed that many people jawboned about the market, as if talking could reverse their fortunes,
or the pain of failing to adhere to the basic laws of speculation
would be less if they commiserated with other people. It was one
of the reasons Livermore was always silent about his trades. If he
won, well, then he had done the right thing. If he lost, he had
done the wrong thing. Why complain? Why explain?
His only quest in the analysis of his trades was to find out why
he had made money or why he had lost.
For Livermore, life in the market was as the poet Omar
Khayyám said in the Rubaiyat:
The moving finger writes
And having writ moves on
Nor all your piety nor your wit
Can cancel out a word of it
Nor your tears wash away a line
It was 1899, two years before the beginning of the twentieth century. Livermore was 22, he had $10,000 to trade with, and he had
seven years of experience to lean on. He knew by now that the
stock market was not the same as playing the bucket shops, but he

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 43

THE SAN FRANCISCO EARTHQUAKE RUMBLES IN NEW YORK

• 43 •

had beaten the bucket shops. There was no reason why he could
not beat the stock market as well.
He reopened his account at E. F. Hutton as he had promised he
would. He traded more cautiously this time, but still followed his
old principle of trading for the short term, following the tape on
an almost hourly or daily basis. He started to do better. He lived
well and made friends.
In October 1900, he married Nettie Jordan, an Indianapolis girl
whom he had met in his Midwestern bucket-shop days. He and
Nettie lived in the upscale Windsor Hotel on Fifth Avenue. In the
summers, Livermore rented them a cottage at Long Branch, New
Jersey, on the ocean. He made his first trip to Europe with Nettie
during this period, where he purchased more than $12,000 worth
of jewelry for her.
Then all hell broke lose in 1901, with a great boom in the market. A bull market developed. America was very prosperous, and
the market started to boil—the old record of 250,000 shares traded
in a day was broken by a 3-million-share day. Millionaires in steel,
finance, and railroads moved to New York to be near the action.
Big-shot gamblers ready to put their money where their mouth
was came, too. The turn of the century was an exciting time to be
alive.
The legends of Wall Street abounded, some of them great characters who would live forever in Wall Street history: John “Bet-aMillion” Gates, John A. Drake, Loyal Smith Page, and the
infamous Hetty Green, Wall Street’s first female powerhouse.
Hetty Green stood alone. As recorded in Kenneth L. Fisher’s
book, 100 Minds That Made the Market, she was as shrewd as they
came, turning her $6 million inheritance into more than $100 million. She was also as cheap as they came, wearing foul-smelling,
never-cleaned, black, out-of-fashion dresses with stock certificates

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 44

• 44 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

sewn into the hems. Every day she appeared, a black apparition,
drifting from the slum-level flats she owned to the Chemical
National Bank vault. She would plop down cross-legged on the
floor, then clip coupons and stuff them down into the hem of her
dress, all the while eating sandwiches and crackers that she had
crammed in her pockets.
Her investment strategy was simple: Make a great many good
solid investments that yielded around 6 percent and be as cheap as
a person could be. She said, “When I see a good thing going cheap
because nobody wants it, I buy a lot of it and tuck it away.” She
explained further, “If you invest $6 million for 51 years at 6 percent and don’t spend a dime of it you wind up with $117 million.
What’s wrong with that?”
She bought heavily in the financial panics—real estate mortgages, municipal bonds, and railroad bonds. Stocks provided her
extra profits. She knew the market well, but she also operated on
instinct and common sense. She escaped the Knickerbocker Trust
failure in the panic of 1907. How? She went into the bank and
came out saying, “Those men who run the bank are too damn
prosperous-looking, new suits, new shoes, new ties. I don’t like
it.” She got out only weeks before the collapse.
Hetty Green was the market’s only major female player at the
time. She said, “I wish women had more rights in business and
everywhere else than they do now! Men will take every kind of
advantage of women in business that they would not attempt with
a man. I have been fighting men in the courts all my life.”
Hetty was capable of anything and skilled at getting her way. If
nagging and persistence failed to get her what she wanted she
would turn on the tears. If the tears failed she initiated lawsuits.
Then she always refused to pay the legal fees, often hiring additional lawyers to defend her against her prior lawyers. Once she
paid $50 for a gun registration license to carry a revolver. When

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 45

THE SAN FRANCISCO EARTHQUAKE RUMBLES IN NEW YORK

• 45 •

asked why she said: “Mostly to protect myself against my goddamn
lawyers!” She was feared by all who knew her.
Hetty loved only money. She saw her son Ned as her successor.
She paid his college tuition on the promise that he would not get
married for 20 years. Ned agreed. Ned loved his mother. He had
only one leg. When he was 14 years old, Ned had injured his knee
in a snow-sledding accident. Hetty had refused to send him to a
doctor. She ministered to the cut leg with homemade poultices
and put him to bed. When his father got home and heard what
had happened he was furious, and took his son immediately to the
doctor. The doctor was forced to cut the boy’s leg off, because
gangrene had set in.
It was an era of great characters.
Livermore was aware of the Hetty Green approach to the market, a combination of thrift and compounding, and he knew it was
a sound strategy for some people. It just wasn’t for him. He did not
believe a return of 6 percent annually was all you could take out of
the stock market. And he certainly wasn’t interested in living frugally, like Hetty.
The 1901 market was in a frenzy. It was the first frenzied market that Livermore had witnessed as a Wall Street trader. It was to
set in his mind the great rule: Nothing ever changes in the market.
The only things that change are the players, the pockets, and the
memories. The new players have no memory of the previous
cycles, because they have not experienced them.
Livermore played the bull side of the 1901 market and made
one exceptional long trade on Northern Pacific with his $10,000
stake. He pocketed $50,000. But Livermore looked at this as only
a larger stake to play with. He was looking for a big break in the
market, a severe correction or a one-day reversal, and then a rally.
In early May, Livermore moved.
“Sell a thousand shares of Steel short at $100,” he barked to the

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 46

• 46 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

clerk just seconds before the market opened. “And sell a thousand
shares of Santa Fe at $80.”
The clerk disappeared, order slip in hand, to call the trader on
the floor. Livermore stood as the market opened and watched the
stocks he had shorted fall away, prices dropping like a stone. He felt
vindicated; his judgment had been correct. There was chaos as the
prices plummeted. But his smile quickly disappeared as he saw the
volume. He stood suddenly locked in fear. The volume was huge.
The opening activity on the floor was beyond the limits that the
traders could handle. It was a fast market. Fills on orders were
late—15 minutes, 30 minutes, an hour, two hours—and when
they were filled, they were filled at prices far from what the clients
had wanted.
Finally, Livermore got a fill on his opening orders. He looked at
the fill orders in disbelief. Even though his brokers were as good as
any on Wall Street, his fills were awful. The stock he had wanted
to sell short at $100 had been filled at $85. The stock he had
wanted to sell short at $80 had been filled at $65. These were the
prices he had wanted to buy them back at to cover his short positions when the rally came, which he believed would happen later
that day. He made an instant decision to buy the stocks back and
to cover his shorts immediately.
He yelled at the clerk, “Buy a thousand Steel and a thousand
Santa Fe at the market.”
The clerk ran off with the ticket to call it down to the floor of
the exchange. Livermore’s heart sank as he watched his stocks rally.
He watched the tape rise. He knew his shorts would be covered at
great losses now that the rally was in full swing. He had done the
worst thing a speculator could do: He had involuntarily sold at the
bottom and bought at the top.
The clerk returned with the tickets. Livermore opened them
slowly in the palm of his hand. He had established his short
