
63

c03.indd 63

1/13/09 9:59:06 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

EXHIBIT 3.4

Resistance Becomes Support

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

T he Trend Will Set You Free
Even more important to the practice of technical analysis than support and resistance is the concept of trend. Knowing the trend at
any given time is absolutely essential to analyzing charts effectively.
Though this may appear to be a simple thing, there are plenty of
nuances in identifying trends that make it an art unto itself.
One of the major complexities involved in determining whether
the trend is up or down has to do with timeframes, as presented
earlier in this chapter. On a long-term monthly bar chart of AUD/
USD, for example, where each bar is the equivalent of one month
of price action, the prevailing trend may be unmistakably up. At the

64

c03.indd 64

1/13/09 9:59:06 AM

T h e Tr e n d W i l l S e t Yo u F r e e

same time, the medium-term daily chart might show that the current trend is down. In turn, the short-term hourly chart may be
indicating an uptrend. And the ultra-short-term minute chart may
be hinting at a downtrend. Up-down-up-down—which timeframe
is indicating the correct trend direction for the currency pair?
The answer depends entirely upon which timeframe(s) a particular trader is accustomed to trading. It may well be true that the
longer timeframes offer more reliable trend indications, as shorter
timeframes tend to include a lot of market noise, or minor price
fluctuations that have very little to do with the overall trend. At
the same time, however, a short-term intraday trader might well
be advised to ignore price action on the weekly chart entirely. The
long-term trend is virtually irrelevant to the shortest-term intraday
trader. Likewise, a long-term position trader can certainly ignore the
intraday price movements on a 5-minute chart.
A potential method that can be used for dealing with trends and
timeframes is to concentrate on the trend indicated by a timeframe
4–6 times longer than the one traded. For example, if a trader is
accustomed to analyzing a 1-hour chart for trades, the 4-hour chart
(4 times the length of the 1-hour chart) would be used to indicate
the trend. And if a trader is accustomed to analyzing a 4-hour chart
for trades, the daily chart (6 times the length of the 4-hour chart)
would be used to indicate the trend. Finally, if a trader is accustomed
to analyzing a daily chart for trades, the weekly chart (5 times the
length of the daily chart) would be used to indicate the trend.
Once the overall, longer-term trend is identified, many foreign
exchange traders wisely follow the oft-repeated dictum that all trades
should always be in the direction of the prevailing trend. Although

65

c03.indd 65

1/13/09 9:59:06 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

there are certainly a substantial number of successful countertrend
technical traders in the foreign exchange markets, there are arguably
more successful traders that are of the trend-following persuasion.
Besides the issue of timeframe-compatibility in identifying
trends, the larger question remains as to how a trend is inherently
defined. If price movement consisted of a straight line either up or
down, identifying a trend would obviously be too simple. In reality,
currency prices move around incessantly, often denying the technical analyst an easy trend read.
There are primarily three modes of price movement that can be
readily identified.They are uptrend mode, downtrend mode, and nontrending (sideways) mode. Remember that in the foreign exchange
markets, an uptrend is simultaneously an uptrend for the base currency (first currency in the pair) and a downtrend for the quote
currency (second currency in the pair). Conversely, a downtrend for
a currency pair is simultaneously a downtrend for the base currency
and an uptrend for the quote currency. Because nontrending mode,
by definition, is not an integral part of a discussion on trends, it will
be disregarded here.
Ideally, an uptrend is characterized by progressively higher lows
and higher highs in price. An ideal downtrend, conversely, is characterized by progressively lower highs and lower lows. A low is considered a point of reversal between a downmove and an upmove.
A high is considered a point of reversal between an upmove and a
downmove.
Trends can be measured and evaluated with a number of tools,
including trendlines, trend channels, moving averages, Average
Directional Index (ADX), Directional Movement Index (DMI),

66

c03.indd 66

1/13/09 9:59:06 AM

H o w Tr e n d y — L i n e s a n d C h a n n e l s

Elliott Wave, and others. These will all be discussed later in this
chapter.
Although there are certainly idealistic conditions for the formation of uptrends and downtrends, in practice it can be difficult to
find sustained trends that conform perfectly to these requirements
(higher lows and highs for uptrends, and lower highs and lows for
downtrends). Much more frequently, traders and analysts find on
their charts uptrends that are only required to hit higher lows, and
downtrends that are only required to hit lower highs. Thus, we have
the terms, uptrend support and downtrend resistance. By definition, these two concepts comprise the technical analysis supertool
for evaluating trends—the trendline. In turn, the trendline comprises
half of another vitally important tool in trend analysis—the parallel
trend channel.

H ow Trendy — Lines and Channels
Besides the ubiquitous horizontal support and resistance lines
touched upon earlier in this chapter, trendlines and channels remain
among the most utilized weapons in the technical analysis arsenal.
There are almost as many ways to draw trendlines as there are traders using them in their analysis. Over time, there have also emerged
countless new methodologies for drawing and interpreting these
lines. But the traditional manner of constructing trendlines remains
clear and focused. One would connect progressively higher lows (at
least two, but preferably more) for an uptrend, as in Exhibit 3.5. In
a similar manner, one would connect progressively lower highs (at
least two, but preferably more) for a downtrend, as in Exhibit 3.6.

67

c03.indd 67

1/13/09 9:59:07 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

EXHIBIT 3.5

Uptrend Line

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

The practical applications of trendlines can be enormously useful
for the foreign exchange trader. In fact, there is a whole contingent
of traders that prefers to use trendline analysis almost exclusively in
dictating trading decisions. Trendlines can be used to pinpoint breakout entries, pullback entries, prudent stoplosses, and optimal profit
targets. Though there can often be excessive subjectivity in their
construction and interpretation, trendlines have withstood the test of
time as an integral component of many of the most profitable trading
strategies. These will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 5.
If a trendline supplies just the floor for an uptrend, the parallel
uptrend channel provides the ceiling as well. By the same token, if a

68

c03.indd 68

1/13/09 9:59:07 AM

H o w Tr e n d y — L i n e s a n d C h a n n e l s

EXHIBIT 3.6

Downtrend Line

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

trendline supplies just the ceiling for a downtrend, the parallel downtrend channel provides the floor as well. Price action that truly fits
comfortably into the borders of a parallel trend channel upholds the
highest ideals of a true trend. This is because, for example, an uptrend
that fits well into a parallel uptrend channel will contain both higher
lows and higher highs (see Exhibit 3.7). At the same time, a downtrend that fits well into a parallel downtrend channel will contain both
lower highs and lower lows (see Exhibit 3.8). This is in contrast to the
single trendline, which requires price only to fulfill half of the ideal.
One caveat regarding the parallel trend channel is that it often
encourages traders to trade against the trend. In an uptrend channel,

69

c03.indd 69

1/13/09 9:59:07 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

EXHIBIT 3.7

Parallel Uptrend Channel

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

for example, with support on the bottom line and resistance on the
top, many traders are tempted not only to enter long on the bottom,
but also to enter short on the top. A long entry on the bottom of an
uptrend channel is a trade in the direction of the trend, while a short
entry at the top of that same uptrend channel is a countertrend trade.
Though countertrend trading is by no means a taboo practice, and it
can often prove to be a profitable trading style for experienced traders, it is probably best for newer traders to stick to trading with the
trend. According to strict trendtraders, the top of an uptrend channel should be used exclusively for profit-taking on longs, rather than
entering short trades against the direction of the trend.

70

c03.indd 70

1/13/09 9:59:07 AM

H o w Tr e n d y — L i n e s a n d C h a n n e l s

EXHIBIT 3.8

Parallel Downtrend Channel

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

Another word of caution regarding channels relates to breakouts.
Many beginning traders will treat breakouts on both sides of a trend
channel as similar events. This could not be further from the truth.
In a parallel uptrend channel, for example, a breakdown below the
uptrend support line represents a potential change in trend that is
generally considered a highly significant and potentially actionable
event. A breakout above the top line of the uptrend channel, on the
other hand, is much less of an important or actionable event from
a trading perspective. This type of breakout merely represents an
acceleration of the trend, which frequently meets eventual failure as

71

c03.indd 71

1/13/09 9:59:08 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

momentum becomes exhausted. All of the above also holds true, but
in reverse, for the parallel downtrend channel.

T he Magic of Moving Averages
As noted previously, the prevailing trend can be indicated by several different technical tools. Trendlines and channels are the most
prevalent, but they can be very subjective. Moving averages also
show trend direction well, and they are much less subjective because
they are mathematically derived. Therefore, they do not require the
trader to use nearly as much human judgment in construction or
interpretation. By no means, however, does this make moving averages better than trendlines—they are just different.
Moving averages dynamically calculate the average price of a
currency pair over a defined number of past periods. For example,
on a daily chart (where each bar is worth one 24-hour period), a
20-period simple moving average (SMA) adds the daily close
prices for the last 20 days and divides by 20. This calculation simply results in the average, or mean, price for the last 20 days. But
when this average is continuously calculated every single day (hence
the term “moving” in moving average), it results in a dynamic line
that follows price, and can effectively describe the trend. Exhibit 3.9
shows a good example of a 20-period moving average expressing the
overall trend.
One major weakness of moving averages that is often cited by
traders and analysts is the fact that they invariably lag, or follow, price.
Moving averages, therefore, can never be predictive, as price always
arrives where it will arrive well before any moving average could.

72

c03.indd 72

1/13/09 9:59:08 AM

The Magic of Moving Averages

EXHIBIT 3.9

20-Period Moving Average

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

Consequently, although moving averages can certainly do a good
job of describing a current trend, they are extremely lacking when
it comes to signaling changes in trends. Many analysts and traders
throughout the decades have attempted to address this shortcoming
by creating new ways of calculating these important indicators.
As a result, there are three primary types of moving averages that
are in the most common use today, which are all distinct from each
other by their mathematical constructs. The three types are as follows: the simple moving average (SMA), the weighted moving average (WMA), and the exponential moving average (EMA). Without
delving into the source of their mathematical distinctions, suffice it

73

c03.indd 73

1/13/09 9:59:08 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

to say that SMAs assign equal weight to all of the data in the defined
period, while WMAs and EMAs assign greater weight to the most
recent price data in the defined period.
WMAs and EMAs came about partly as an attempt to combat
the lagging nature of SMA signals. In practical use, however, this
lagging effect has been mitigated only to a minor degree. Perhaps
it is safe to say that moving averages will always lag price, and there
is not much that anyone can do about it.
Lag notwithstanding, however, moving averages can certainly be
useful tools in helping to simplify price action for trading purposes.
EXHIBIT 3.10

Crossovers of Price and One Moving
Average

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

74

c03.indd 74

1/13/09 9:59:09 AM

The Magic of Moving Averages

This is accomplished primarily through the use of moving average
crossovers. In the world of moving averages, a crossover can be
defined in a number of different ways.
The most basic crossover, as shown in Exhibit 3.10, involves the
intersection of price and a single moving average. If price crosses
above the moving average, it would represent a possible opportunity
to buy the currency pair. If, on the other hand, price crosses below
the moving average, it would signify a possible sell, or short.
The second type of crossover, as shown in Exhibit 3.11, is probably the most commonly used moving average strategy. It involves
the use of two moving averages of different periods, say 5 and 20,

EXHIBIT 3.11

Crossovers of Two Moving Averages

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

75

c03.indd 75

1/13/09 9:59:10 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

for example. If the shorter-period moving average crosses above the
longer one, it would be considered a signal to buy. Conversely, if
the shorter moving average crosses below the longer one, it would
be considered a signal to sell.
The third primary type of moving average crossover involves the
use of three moving averages. This method of using multiple confirming lines attempts to help combat the unprofitable whipsaw
action that often results from nontrending, sideways markets. Systems
using three different moving averages usually produce signals when
the shortest period moving average crosses both longer moving averages, or when the shortest moving average crosses the middle one
and then the middle one subsequently crosses the longest.
Most moving average trading systems are generally always in the
market. This means that after each trade is opened on a crossover
and then closed on an opposite crossover, another trade is immediately opened in the opposite direction to take the place of the previous trade. Therefore, there is always at least one trade open, whether
long or short, depending on the prevailing crossover signal.
As just mentioned, beginning traders should be forewarned
that although crossover signals can often be exceptionally profitable, those traders that use them must be prepared for frequent losses
resulting from common whipsaw action. Whipsaws occur regardless of however many moving averages and confirmation crossovers
happen to be utilized in a given trading system. The most common
whipsaws occur when crossovers occur incessantly because of nontrending, sideways price action (as shown in Exhibit 3.12). This type
of price choppiness almost always results in multiple false crossover
signals with little to no follow-through, and consequently a string of

76

c03.indd 76

1/13/09 9:59:11 AM

The Magic of Moving Averages

EXHIBIT 3.12

Crossover Whipsaws

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

many small losses. Like its close cousin, the lag, the whipsaw is simply an unavoidable fact of trading with moving averages.
The idea behind moving average trading methods, therefore,
centers on the goal of gaining large profits during trending periods
when crossovers are few and far between—while at the same time
withstanding the inevitable small losses during sideways whipsaw
periods when crossovers are abundant. The greatest challenge with
this type of trading lies in the ability of the trader to let the winning
trades run while immediately closing losing trades. Only in this way
can a trader using moving averages profit enough during trends to
offset the many losses incurred during horizontal price activity, and

77

c03.indd 77

1/13/09 9:59:11 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

eventually come out ahead. This and other trend-trading strategies
will be discussed further in Chapter 5.

S eeing Patterns in the Candles
While moving averages and trendlines are meant to give an indication of trend direction for a long series of candles or bars, candlestick patterns reveal the battle between bulls and bears on only one
or a few candles. As mentioned earlier in this chapter, candlesticks
and their patterns were introduced by Steve Nison, who brought
this ancient charting method to America from its humble ricetrading roots in Japan.
One of the primary differences between bars and candlesticks
lies in the imaginative interpretation of candle patterns, which are
labeled with equally imaginative names. Most candlestick patterns
are considered either price reversal formations or patterns indicating indecision, while only a few are considered trend continuation
formations.
Before moving onto a presentation of the most common and
important candlestick patterns developed in Japan, it should be
noted that these patterns were never meant to comprise a complete
trading system. Rather, most high-level practitioners of candlestick
analysis, including Nison himself, state emphatically that candle patterns are intended either to confirm or be confirmed by other technical studies. In other words, candle patterns should not be relied
upon exclusively to provide the full technical picture. That being
said, candle patterns can contribute a great deal of insight to any
technician’s analytical process.

78

c03.indd 78

1/13/09 9:59:11 AM

Seeing Patterns in the Candles

Following are illustrations and explanations of some of the most
common candlestick patterns found in the foreign exchange markets. Several patterns, like the morning star and evening star, are
omitted because of their relative lack of compatibility with currency charts. In this case, a morning/evening star depends on a
gap between candle opens/closes, which, in the 24-hour foreign
exchange market, is relatively rare.
Exhibit 3.13 illustrates the most common single-candle patterns
used in forex trading.
A doji forms when a currency pair’s open and close are either
equal or close to equal. After the doji opens, price may go up and/or
down substantially, but should close at or near the open price. This
pattern represents indecision, or a tug-of-war, between the pair’s buyers and sellers. Only with additional technical confirmation could a
doji be considered the beginnings of a price reversal.

EXHIBIT 3.13

Single-Candle Patterns
Hammer
Doji

Spinning
Top

Hanging
Man

Inverted
Hammer

Shooting
Star

79

c03.indd 79

1/13/09 9:59:11 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

Another sign of indecision similar to the doji is the spinning top.
A spinning top has a very small real body with upper and lower
shadows that are longer than the length of the real body.
Hammers occur after downtrends, and signify a potential reversal.
A hammer is top-heavy with the real body, and has a long lower
shadow. The color of the real body is not important.
A hanging man looks identical to a hammer, but occurs after an
uptrend. Just like the hammer, a hanging man is top-heavy with the
real body, and has a long lower shadow. It also signifies a potential
reversal, and the color of the real body is unimportant.
An inverted hammer is naturally the opposite of a hammer. Like
the hammer, the inverted hammer also occurs after downtrends, signifies a potential reversal, and has a body color that is not vital to the
integrity of the pattern. However, an inverted hammer looks like an
upside-down hammer in that it is bottom-heavy with the real body,
and has a long upper shadow.
In a similar manner, a shooting star is the opposite of a hanging man. Like the hanging man, the shooting star also occurs after
uptrends, signifies a potential reversal, and has a body color that is
not vital to the integrity of the pattern. However, a shooting star
looks like an upside-down hanging man in that it is bottom-heavy
with the real body, and has a long upper shadow.
With the most common single-candle patterns in forex covered,
Exhibit 3.14 illustrates the most common multiple-candle patterns
used in forex trading.
The bullish engulfing pattern is a bullish reversal pattern that
usually occurs after a downtrend. Unlike the single-candle patterns
described above, the bullish engulfing pattern is a two-candle pattern.

80

c03.indd 80

1/13/09 9:59:12 AM

Seeing Patterns in the Candles

EXHIBIT 3.14

Multiple-Candle Patterns
Bullish Engulfing

Bearish Engulfing

Harami

It consists of a small bearish body on the first candle, followed by a
large bullish body on the next candle that completely encompasses
the small body’s vertical range. This is considered a significant downtrend reversal pattern.
Like the bullish engulfing pattern, the bearish engulfing pattern
is also a reversal pattern. However, a bearish engulfing pattern usually occurs after an uptrend. It consists of a small bullish body on the
first candle, followed by a large bearish body on the next candle that
completely encompasses the small body’s vertical range. This is considered a significant uptrend reversal pattern.
The opposite of an engulfing pattern is a harami, which consists of a large body followed by a smaller, encompassed body of the
opposite color. Therefore, a harami can either be a large bullish candle followed by a small bearish candle, or a large bearish candle followed by a small bullish candle. Like engulfing patterns, haramis are
also considered reversal indicators.

81

c03.indd 81

1/13/09 9:59:12 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

Of course, there are many other multiple-candle patterns. But
as mentioned previously, some depend upon gaps between candles,
which are relatively rare in the 24-hour foreign exchange market.
The basic candlestick patterns described in this chapter occur often
on currency charts, and are therefore the best starting place for
learning and practicing candlestick analysis.
