ffirs.indd vi

1/13/09 10:13:25 AM

ESSENTIALS
of Foreign
Exchange
Trading

ffirs.indd i

1/13/09 10:13:23 AM

ESSENTIALS SERIES
The Essentials Series was created for busy business advisory and corporate professionals. The
books in this series were designed so that these busy professionals can quickly acquire knowledge and skills in core business areas.
Each book provides need-to-have fundamentals for those professionals who must:
• Get up to speed quickly, because they have been promoted to a new position or
have broadened their responsibility scope
• Manage a new functional area
• Brush up on new developments in their area of responsibility
• Add more value to their company or clients
Other books in this series include:
Essentials of Accounts Payable, Mary S. Schaeffer
Essentials of Balanced Scorecard, Mohan Nair
Essentials of Capacity Management, Reginald Tomas Yu-Lee
Essentials of Capital Budgeting, James Sagner
Essentials of Cash Flow, H.A. Schaeffer Jr.
Essentials of Corporate Governance, Sanjay Anand
Essentials of Corporate Performance Measurement, George T. Friedlob, Lydia L.F. Schleifer, and
Franklin J. Plewa Jr.
Essentials of Cost Management, Joe and Catherine Stenzel
Essentials of Credit, Collections, and Accounts Receivable, Mary S. Schaeffer
Essentials of CRM: A Guide to Customer Relationship Management, Bryan Bergeron
Essentials of Financial Analysis, George T. Friedlob and Lydia L. F. Schleifer
Essentials of Financial Risk Management, Karen A. Horcher
Essentials of Intellectual Property, Paul J. Lerner and Alexander I. Poltorak
Essentials of Knowledge Management, Bryan Bergeron
Essentials of Patents, Andy Gibbs and Bob DeMatteis
Essentials of Payroll Management and Accounting, Steven M. Bragg
Essentials of Sarbanes-Oxley, Sanjay Anand
Essentials of Shared Services, Bryan Bergeron
Essentials of Supply Chain Management, Michael Hugos
Essentials of Trademarks and Unfair Competition, Dana Shilling
Essentials of Treasury, Karen A. Horcher
Essentials of Managing Corporate Cash, Michele Allman-Ward and James Sagner
Essentials of XBRL, Bryan Bergeron
For more information on any of the above titles, please visit www.wiley.com

ffirs.indd ii

1/13/09 10:13:24 AM

ESSENTIALS
of Foreign
Exchange
Trading
James Chen

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

ffirs.indd iii

1/13/09 10:13:24 AM

Copyright © 2009 by James Chen. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the
prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate
per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923,
978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher
for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111
River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 201-748-6011, fax 201-748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley
.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy
or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the
publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including
but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services, or technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at 800-762-2974, outside the United States at
317-572-3993 or fax 317-572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print
may not be available in electronic books.
For more information about Wiley products, visit our Web site at http://www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Chen, James.
Essentials of foreign exchange trading / James Chen.
p. cm. — (Essentials series)
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-470-39086-3 (pbk.)
1. Foreign exchange market. 2. Foreign exchange futures. 3. Investments. I. Title. II. Series.
HG3851.C437 2009
332.4'5—dc22
2008048193
Printed in the United States of America
10

ffirs.indd iv

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

1/13/09 10:13:24 AM

To my parents, my wife,
my children, and forex
traders everywhere.

ffirs.indd v

1/13/09 10:13:24 AM

ffirs.indd vi

1/13/09 10:13:25 AM

Contents
Preface

xi

Acknowledgments

xv

Chapter 1 Introduction to Foreign Exchange Trading

1

Trading Money to Make Money

2

Striking Gold

3

Buying and Selling at Retail

4

Big and Liquid, Like the Ocean

5

Open 24/5

7

Playing in the Majors

9

Leveraged to the Hilt

12

The Players

13

What Moves the Forex Markets?

15

What to Expect from This Book

17

Chapter Summary

19

Chapter 2 Basic Foreign Exchange Trading Mechanics

21

Anatomy of a Currency Pair

22

Going Long and Selling Short

24

Market Orders—On the Spot

27

Entry Orders—Waiting until the Price Is Right

27

Stopping Losses with Stop Losses and Trailing Stops

28

vii

ftoc.indd vii

1/13/09 10:16:39 AM

Contents

Profit Limits—When You’re in the Money

31

Exit with Caution

31

Trade Size—Lots and Lots of Lots

32

Leveraging Margin and Leverage

33

Margin Call—Insufficient Funds

34

Pips—The Currency of Currency Trading

37

Spreading the Wealth—Spreads or Commissions?

39

Interest—Giving and Receiving

41

Hedging—Two Sides of the Same Coin

44

Chapter Summary

45

Chapter 3 Technical Analysis—Tools for Trading Foreign Exchange 49
Introduction to Technical Analysis—
Interpreting Price Action

50

Basics of Bars and Candlesticks

52

Keeping Time with Chart Timeframes

57

Support for Resistance (and Support)

59

The Trend Will Set You Free

64

How Trendy—Lines and Channels

67

The Magic of Moving Averages

72

Seeing Patterns in the Candles

78

Currency Charts Take Shape

82

Indicators of Change

88

Pointing the Way with Pivot Points

95

Fibonacci’s Magic Numbers

96

Riding the Elliott Wave

98

Getting to the Point & Figure

99

Chapter Summary

100

viii

ftoc.indd viii

1/13/09 10:16:39 AM

Contents

Chapter 4 Fundamental Analysis—What Drives the
Foreign Exchange Markets

103

Introduction to Fundamental Analysis—Basic Economics 104
A Healthy Interest in Global Bank Rates

105

Carried Away with Trading

108

Indication of Things to Come—Economic Indicators

110

No News Is Bad News for News Traders

121

Chapter Summary

124

Chapter 5 Foreign Exchange Trading Methods and Strategies

127

Rules to Trade By

128

Position Trading—Settling in for the Long Term

130

Swing Trading—Riding the Waves

134

Day Trading—In and Out, Day In and Day Out

137

Trend Trading—Going with the Flow

140

Range Trading—Between a Rock and a Hard Place

147

Breakout Trading (and Fading)—Shooting for the Stars

150

Pattern Trading—Playing with Shapes

158

Fibonacci and Pivot Point Trading—Magic Numbers and
Self-Fulfilling Prophecies

161

Elliott Wave Trading—Two Steps Forward, One Step Back 166
Divergence Trading—Separate Paths

170

Multiple Timeframe Trading—Timing Is Everything

172

Point & Figure Trading—Pointing Out Breakouts

175

Carry Trading—In the Interest of Interest

179

News Trading—All the News That’s Fit to Profit From

183

Contrarian Trading—The Majority Doesn’t Rule

184

Backtesting—History Repeats Itself

187

ix

ftoc.indd ix

1/13/09 10:16:39 AM

Contents

Autotrading—Robots for Hire

190

Chapter Summary

192

Chapter 6 Important Elements of Successful Foreign
Exchange Trading

195

The Boring Side of Success

196

A Risky Business

196

Fatter Is Healthier (But Only for Trading Accounts)

197

Risk and Reward

198

Fix Your Fractions

200

Trailing Stops—Loyal Followers

201

Size Matters

202

Position Overload

205

Measuring Risk with a Trendline

208

Great Expectations

209

Psychologically Speaking

210

Plan the Trade and Trade the Plan

214

Chapter Summary

216

Index

219

x

ftoc.indd x

1/13/09 10:16:39 AM

Preface
oreign exchange trading has developed at such a blinding
speed within the last decade that is has garnered an unprecedented amount of interest from all corners of the globe. The
meteoric rise of forex can be attributed to the many advantages of
trading currencies over other financial markets. These advantages
will all be discussed within the pages of this book.
More important than recognizing how forex trading can work
to your benefit, however, is knowing exactly how to approach this
fascinating market with the proper prudence, attitude, and methodology to achieve consistent profitability. Only in this way can the
advantages of forex trading truly be realized. This book will assist
you in learning many of the most important aspects of playing the
currency game effectively.
I personally began my journey in forex trading when the retail
foreign exchange industry was still in its early infancy. Before I ever
even looked at a price chart of a currency pair or followed a forex
news feed, I placed a live trade on the EUR/USD with real money.
When a substantial sum was lost on that first trade, I placed another
trade. And then another. And yet another. Admittedly, I kept doing

F

xi

fpref.indd xi

1/13/09 10:15:41 AM

Preface

this until I lost almost every single penny in my trading account.
I had absolutely no rational reason or justification to place any of
those first several trades in that initial trading account. To me, at that
time, forex was purely a game of instinct and gut feel.
Needless to say, those early days taught me a good lesson. Most
humans are not instinctively good at trading. For the vast majority
of us, guts and instinct left unchecked invariably lead to catastrophic
losses at some point in time, usually sooner rather than later. On
attaining this realization, I began a tireless quest to become a profitable forex trader. My efforts consisted of a prolonged, single-minded
endeavor to absorb forex-specific analytical methodologies, highly
touted currency trading strategies, and sound money management
techniques. My search for the “holy grail” of foreign exchange trading had begun in earnest.
Over time, I realized that this holy grail of forex, in the traditional sense, was not only elusive but most likely nonexistent. I came
to the conclusion that although a bunch of chart indicators all flashing the same signal at the same exact time to enter into a currency
trade is a very nice thing to see, it probably would not by itself be
able to feed a typical family on a consistent basis. The true holy grail,
I eventually found, is a combination of good analytical and trading
technique, great risk/money management, and phenomenal discipline. Without these vital components, consistent profitability in
forex trading would be difficult to achieve.
This is where the book you are holding comes in. It is not
meant to be an exhaustive tome that covers every detailed aspect of
the foreign exchange world. Rather, this book is meant to serve as
a practical guide to help you develop some of the most important

xii

fpref.indd xii

1/13/09 10:15:41 AM

Preface

tools and attributes necessary for approaching forex trading in an
intelligent and well-prepared manner. Essentials of Foreign Exchange
Trading is the kind of book that I wish I had read during the earlier
years of my forex trading career.
But even now, after many years of trading this market and analyzing foreign exchange price movements for countless traders around the
globe on behalf of FX Solutions, I occasionally find myself neglecting
some of the essential concepts of good forex trading. Therefore, I have
included all of these key concepts within the pages of this book—
writing them down in this manner has helped me to refocus on what
is truly important in one’s quest for profitability in this market.
In short, this book is highly relevant for all who strive to increase
their probability of achieving success in forex trading.
Once you have read through and digested this book, I would
be happy to receive any comments and/or questions you may have.
Learning to trade foreign exchange is most certainly a pursuit
best accomplished by interacting with other forex traders. In that
spirit, you can reach me at anytime simply by e-mailing author@
fxtradingbook.com. I welcome your thoughts.
James Chen

xiii

fpref.indd xiii

1/13/09 10:15:42 AM

fpref.indd xiv

1/13/09 10:15:42 AM

Acknowledgments
irst and foremost, I would like to give special thanks to my
parents, Shou Lien and Hsiao-wen; my wife, Dongping;
and my sons, Tommy and Kevin.Your tireless love, support, and
encouragement both in life and throughout the entire frenzied writing process have truly been priceless.
I would also like to acknowledge my many colleagues at FX
Solutions who have consistently shown tremendous interest and support during the course of my writing this book.
In addition, I would like to thank the wonderful editors at John
Wiley & Sons for having demonstrated a great deal of confidence in
this book project and in me as its author.
And very importantly, I would like to give a special acknowledgment to all of the forex traders around the world who have made
foreign exchange trading what it is today. Without you, this book
would not be possible.

F

xv

flast.indd xv

1/13/09 10:14:30 AM

flast.indd xvi

1/13/09 10:14:30 AM

CHAPTER 1

Introduction to
Foreign Exchange
Trading
After reading this chapter, you will be
able to:
●

Understand the basic facts and history of the global
foreign exchange market.

●

Appreciate the characteristics that set forex apart from
other financial markets.

●

Assess who the real market players are, and how they
may affect currency prices.

●

Decide whether foreign exchange trading is right
for you.

●

Know what to expect from this book.

1

c01.indd 1

1/13/09 9:51:56 AM

I n t r o d u c t i o n t o F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

T rading Money to Make Money
Foreign exchange trading is essentially about trading money. There
are several reasons why people and institutions would want to trade
money. The two primary reasons are currency conversion and speculation. Currency conversion is simply the changing of money from
one currency to another for the primary purpose of purchasing
goods, services, or assets from a foreign country. For an American
company to buy British goods, for example, would necessitate the
conversion of U.S. dollars to British pounds.
This book will focus exclusively on foreign exchange trading for
speculative purposes, or trading money with the explicit goal of making money. This speculation process is very similar to trading in stocks
or futures. The goal, whether on a long-term or short-term basis, is
to earn profits from price changes. Just as a stock like Microsoft will
move up and down in price, currencies will also move up and down
in price. The real trick is to be on the right side of the move, and to
reap profits in return for assuming the risk of taking the trade.
Of course, there are many important ways in which trading foreign exchange is completely different from trading stocks or futures,
but the primary objective is the same. If a trader buys shares in
Microsoft, for instance, the hope is that the value of the shares will
go up and the trader will earn profits. In the same vein, if a trader
buys the Japanese yen, the hope is that the value of the yen increases
so that the trader will earn a profit on owning that currency.
Learning how to make money by trading money is not an easy
task. There are many factors that combine to make any given foreign
exchange trader a successful one. This combination usually includes

2

c01.indd 2

1/13/09 9:51:58 AM

Striking Gold

plenty of often painful trading experience, good risk management
skills, solid technical and fundamental analytical abilities, and a sound
psychological make-up. All of these will be discussed in detail further along in the book.
To begin with, though, an introduction to the world of foreign
exchange trading is in order. This will cover all of the basics, and will
begin with a very brief history lesson.

S triking Gold
Although money in one form or another has been around pretty
much since the beginning of time, modern speculative foreign
exchange trading (also known as “FX,” “forex,” or “currency trading”) is considered to have begun on a major scale relatively recently.
In modern times, the world’s currencies truly began to float freely
and be traded extensively in the early 1970s, after the collapse of the
Bretton Woods Agreements.
These agreements, established during the tail-end of World
War II in July 1944, came about as a result of meetings between
representatives of all the Allied nations in Bretton Woods, New
Hampshire, U.S.A.
Among other accomplishments resulting from Bretton Woods,
each of these nations agreed to adopt a monetary policy that would
effectively fix the exchange rate of its currency in relation to the
U.S. dollar, which in turn would be fixed to gold at a rate of USD
$35.00 per ounce of gold. These changes were akin to reinstating characteristics of the Gold Standard, but this time via the U.S.
dollar.

3

c01.indd 3

1/13/09 9:51:58 AM

I n t r o d u c t i o n t o F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

Clearly, with the Bretton Woods Agreements in place, foreign
exchange trading on any significant scale was virtually impossible
and nonproductive due to the nonfloating nature of currency values. While the valiant purposes of Bretton Woods were to control
conflict, maintain monetary stability, and discourage currency speculation, the agreements underwent increasing pressure as the U.S.
suspended the dollar’s convertibility into gold in 1971. The Bretton
Woods Agreements finally collapsed in the same year.
By 1973, with the complete collapse of Bretton Woods and
other similar agreements that strived to impose order on the global currency system, the world’s currencies truly began to float
much more freely. This meant that the market forces of supply and
demand would take precedence over international political consensus, and that mass speculation by banks and institutions would soon
become rampant. Although most individual traders could not take
part in the new market, this time period marked the birth of modern-day forex trading as we know it today.

B uying and Selling at Retail
Fast forward to around 1996, as computers and the Internet began
making online financial trading both practical and in demand.
With stock trading starting to go online, foreign exchange brokers/
market-makers began emerging to create and satisfy a new demand
for retail forex trading. Prior to this time, access to speculative forex
trading was reserved almost exclusively for banks and large institutions. With the advent of online platform trading, however, access
for the average individual trader/investor opened up in a major way.

4

c01.indd 4

1/13/09 9:51:58 AM

Big and Liquid, Like the Ocean

This new frontier of retail currency trading was in the arena of
“spot forex,” which was clearly differentiated from futures and forwards. Spot foreign exchange trading is distinguished by its almost
immediate delivery of the currency, rather than future delivery. Of
course, in speculative currency trading, the actual physical currency
never gets delivered—delivery is simply “rolled over” continuously to
the next delivery date ad infinitum (or until the trading position is
closed). The foreign exchange broker performs this important function in order to facilitate speculative trading, as opposed to having
customers actually convert money to/from a foreign currency. In spot
forex, the customary delivery settlement timeframe for most currency
trades is the date of trade execution plus two days (T+2).

B ig and Liquid, Like the Ocean
There are many characteristics that set the modern-day foreign
exchange market apart from other financial markets like equities
(stocks) and futures. Many of these characteristics help to make foreign exchange an appealing market for traders and investors coming
from other financial markets.
When most people first hear about the foreign exchange market,
they are usually introduced first to the sheer size of the global forex
system. Along with this size comes a magnitude of liquidity almost
unimaginable in any other financial market. Liquidity is defined simply as the degree to which an asset, like a currency, can be bought
or sold in the market without having a significant effect on the
asset’s price. The liquidity of currencies, especially the “major” ones
like the U.S. dollar and the euro, is unrivaled by any other financial
instrument, including stocks, bonds, and futures contracts.

5

c01.indd 5

1/13/09 9:51:59 AM

I n t r o d u c t i o n t o F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

Among other implications of this high level of liquidity, because of
the staggeringly high volume of transactions and the countless number
of traders (both institutional and retail) involved in this market, it is
extremely difficult for any individual market participant to manipulate
foreign exchange prices artificially in any significant manner.
This blanket statement, however, notably excludes the world’s
central banks (e.g., the U.S. Federal Reserve (the Fed), the European
Central Bank (ECB), the Bank of Japan (BOJ)), which can and do
attempt to manipulate the markets. This type of manipulation activity,
however, has become an accepted part of the forex trading game, and
generally does not offer an unfair advantage to any speculative market
participant. Furthermore, central bank attempts to manipulate currencies for the purposes of furthering national economic policy are
usually much easier to accept than, for example, the profit-minded
manipulation of individual stocks by often unscrupulous traders.
Apart from potential central bank manipulation, just how big is
the foreign exchange market that it can claim its place as the most
liquid market the world has known? According to the most recent
statistics issued by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS),
which serves as an international organization and “bank for central
banks,” the average daily turnover in the primary foreign exchange
markets is estimated to be around $3.2 trillion (as of April 2007). This
figure represents an unprecedented three-year growth rate of 69%,
and far eclipses the volume traded in any other financial market in
the world.
Of this $3.2 trillion, about $1 trillion is in “spot” foreign
exchange trades, which, as mentioned earlier, are forex trades that are
distinguished by immediate delivery of the currency. Spot foreign
