
 First, two candlestick indicators appeared, both providing a bullish signal. The upside gap filled is a three-session signal. A gap appears between the first two white sessions; and the third, black session fills that gap to complete the signal. 

 The second candlestick is a two-session signal, the bullish engulfing. This occurs below the support of consolidation, providing a strong clue that an uptrend will soon follow. 

 Confirming both candlesticks was the overall movement in the A/D line. It rose over an extended period including most of the consolidation period. This indicated that the next move would be to the upside.                  The importance of proximity All price patterns – reversal, continuation and consolidation – will provide signals, and these are going to take on varying degrees of significance depending on where they occur in the trading range. As a general rule, the closer to resistance or support, the more chartists pay attention, especially to reversal signals. A reversal against an uptrend taking place at resistance, or as part of a breakout above that level, has greater weight and likelihood of a reversal, than one occurring at mid-range. A bullish reversal found right at support or as part of a downside breakout, has a better chance of reversal than a signal occurring at mid-range. These are the valuable aspects of proximity. Resistance and support are the price levels at which reversal is not only most likely to occur, but also where reversal will probably be strongest. Mid-range reversal is likely to be relatively weak compared to reversal at resistance and support. This is true because these price borders of the trading range are strong, representing the price point where any breakout is unlikely to occur.

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends Explained: An Easy-to-Understand System for Successful Trading 

 Segment 4. Using indicators with candlestick chart reversal signals A key aspect to technical analysis is the development of specific signals flagging likely reversal. These Western technical signals often appear immediately before reversal. However, before entry or exit, these need confirmation. Candlestick reversal signals, when added to Western reversal indicators, are very strong reversal confirmation tools. This section demonstrates how three popular Western indicators signal the end of the trend; and how these work with candlestick reversal signals to provide strong confirmation. Indicator patterns Of the many Western technical signals, some are more powerful than others. Some of the most easily recognized and reliable reversal indicators include:   Double tops and bottoms. These signal repetitive attempts at moving price in a specific direction. Failure marks lost momentum and normally is followed by price trends in the opposite direction. Wedges. These reversal signals occur often and form declining breadth of trading. As the wedge narrows, reversal is likely to follow in the opposite direction (a falling wedge is bullish and a rising wedge is bearish). Exhaustion gaps. Among the many types of gaps, the exhaustion gap is easily recognized as the last part of a trend. When a gap occurs after a steady trend, it may indicate that momentum has been lost, and reversal is very likely. Recognizing trend endings with Western signs A study of chart patterns reveals many types of reversal indicators. While these by themselves are not reliable for entry or exit, the patterns are the first step in developing a strategy to (a) find reversal signals, and (b) seem confirmation before taking action. Double tops or bottoms are excellent markers of turning points. And among the most used reversals. The chart for Cisco Systems provided a clear double bottom in two consecutive sessions. Note how the downtrend immediately reversed and moved into a new uptrend. Wedges are another favorite, due to their high reliability as reversals. A rising wedge is bearish and a falling wedge is bullish. As the breadth of trading narrows, reversal is expected. The chart of Brightoil Petroleum provided a good example of a rising wedge. Note how the price breadth narrowed and concluded with three consecutive long days. Immediately after, a new downtrend slide began.   A third popular reversal signal is found in the exhaustion gap. Such gaps signal the conclusion of the current trend, and are signs of momentum being exhausted immediately before the reversal occurs. Intel Corp. showed three exhaustion gaps. The first was at the end of an uptrend, and the second and third signaled the conclusion of a downtrend. Confirming reversal with candlesticks The popular indicators are very strong and chartists rely on them for entry and exit timing. However, by themselves, no indicators can be relied upon without confirmation. The following charts are duplicates of the three shown for the popular technical signals; they are further expanded to reveal candlestick reversals. The confirming signals strengthen the indicated reversal in each case. Cisco Systems had a classic double bottom that ended the downtrend and began the uptrend. But by itself, was this enough to make a trade? The highlighted bullish harami – consisting of a black session followed by a white session opening and closing within the first day’s real body, is a very strong indicator confirming a likely uptrend. Such an uptrend followed.

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends Explained: An Easy-to-Understand System for Successful Trading 

 PART 7: MOMENTUM OSCILLATORS Segment 1. RSI, MACD, Stochastics and others This section explains how momentum oscillators work. There are many oscillators; the following discussion focuses on three of the best-known and most widely used: Relative Strength Index, MACD, and Stochastics. Relative Strength Index (RSI) RSI is a measurement of gains or losses during a trend. It is intended to identify and highlight overbought or oversold conditions. It is normally calculated over a 14-session period. The calculation of RSI is: 100 – 
 ( 
 100 ÷ ( 1 + RS ) 
 ) ( RS is: The average of upward closings in the past 14 days, divided by the average of downward closings over the past 14 days.) Although it is useful to understand the calculation and how RSI is derived, the index is added to charts automatically by selecting the RSI option. The index results are simply to follow. The RSI index ranges between zero and 100. If the index value moves above 70, the security is overbought. And if RSI moves below 30, it is oversold. As a confirming indicator, RSI is valuable when tracking candlestick or Western reversal signals. However, strong movement in a sustained trend can also distort the true meaning of RSI, so it should be used in conjunction with other signals. A significant move in RSI is divergence, when the RSI direction contradicts the price trend. This indicates that the price trend is weak. When divergence is found, RSI is acting as a leading indicator. When RSI conforms, it tends to act as a lagging indicator. When RSI occurs along with price movement, it tends to confirm reversal signals. Because RSI is measuring momentum in price movement, as trends weaken, RSI can be used to note the difference between a temporary retracement and an impending reversal. For example, Colfax Corp. went through two reversals in their trends. Both were marked with very clear and strong candlestick reversals, and both were confirmed by movement in the RSI.   The first reversal was marked by a bullish engulfing pattern at the bottom of a downtrend. This was preceded by a confirming dip slightly below the oversold line of RSI. The second reversal signal was found near the top of an extended and strong uptrend. The bearish harami was a red flag that the trend was coming to an end. It was confirmed as RSI moved into the overbought area at the same time. These two together were a sell signal. The application of RSI in this situation demonstrates how momentum confirms the subtle changes in price. It may be a leading or a lagging indicator, and in both cases it is effective as confirmation of what price signals forecast. Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD) MACD combines two moving averages and analyzes how they move in relation to one another, and in relation to price. It tracks momentum and provides significance when crossover occurs between the averages and price; and when the two MA lines converge or diverge. MACD employs a net exponential moving average (meaning one is subtracted from the other). As they move closer (converge) or farther apart (diverge), the MA average takes on significance. The shorter of the two is a 12-day MA and the longer is a slower-moving 26-day MA. The chart employs a crossover line known as the “zero line.” A positive MACD (above the zero line) tells you that the 12-day MA is higher than the 26-day; and a negative MACD shows that the 12-day MC is lower than the 26-day. Positive MACD reveals that upside momentum is on the increase. Negative MACD reveals that downside momentum is increasing. These two general “rules” make MACD easy to spot and easy to use. Some additional observations about MACD:   The zero line (or signal line) is a nine-day exponential moving average of the MACD. This is the dividing point between bullish (movement above) and bearish (movement below) trends. So there are actually three MAs in play: the 12-day move, the 26-day move, and the average of 9 days signal line. The faster the move and the farther from the signal line, the more significant it is in terms of the trend momentum. When the trend crosses over the signal line, it is bullish if the 12-day is higher than the 26-day; and bearish in the reverse moving below the signal line. Divergence (MACD moving away from price) is bullish if the price forms a new low but MACD forms a higher low. This reveals slowing of downside momentum. The opposite applies in divergence above a new high in price; it reveals slowing upside momentum. The details of the MA trends in MACD are complex, but the visual observation is easily observed. The point of MACD is to identify times when momentum is increasing or decreasing. 
 For example, Best Buy was quite volatile during the period shown on its chart. However, the volatility was more clearly understood with analysis of MACD in addition to price.   The crossovers occurred at key points in the trend. While price seemed to indicate uncertainty during the mid-July to mid-August period, MACD moved strongly below the signal line, displaying momentum to the downside. As the MA lines crosses and MACD moved above the signal line, momentum shifted again and became positive. This shows how MACD often anticipates likely momentum in either direction, and may diverge from what price appears to be revealing. This adds to the quality of the indicator, since MACD in both instances led the price trend before price levels turned. Stochastics Stochastics is a comparison between location of the current price and price levels over time. Resistance and support are important ingredients of the Stochastics trend as the oscillator is intended to identify likely reversal points. The formula for this indicator is the result of calculating exponential moving averages for highest and lowest price levels over a specified number of sessions. It reveals convergence and divergence from the current price to the typical price range over the identified time period. When price and Stochastic MA diverge, it provides a hint that the current price trend is weak or growing weaker. When the Stochastic MA moves faster than price (known as a “Stochastic pop”) is tells you to increase holdings (if moving in the same direction as price) or to liquidate the position if diverging against price). For example, The chart of Golden Eagle consisted on three specific trends, two down and one up. However, the value of Stochastics was in how that indicator anticipated the turn in advance of the price change.         In early July, the Stochastic anticipated the downtrend by moving down, accurately pegging the price trend that followed immediately. At the beginning of August, it appeared that the downtrend might continue. But Stochastics moved upward strongly, flagging the likely uptrend that began in response. By the middle of August, the uptrend appeared to be continuing strongly. But the Stochastics once again turned, anticipating coming weakness in the uptrend. *   *   * Conclusion Momentum, oscillators work in similar ways and all help to identify and even anticipate reversals based on strengthening or weakening in the price direction. The three reported here – RSI, MACD and Stochastics – are among the more popular and widely used momentum oscillators. However, there are many more, each designed to fine tune the tracking of momentum and its relationship to price.

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends Explained: An Easy-to-Understand System for Successful Trading 

 Segment 2. Interpreting momentum changes Oscillators provide a wealth of information and insight concerning price. While price charts focus on direction of movement, oscillators measure the speed of movement and peg likely reversal points. These points are based on distinctions between mid-range prices and the extremes (overbought or oversold). The meaning of momentum Oscillators may be centered or banded. Both provide information concerning price change and the degree of strength within a current trend. Momentum tends to grow as trends continue. Thus, the longer a trend continues, the greater its momentum. However, the trend eventually exhausts itself. At this point, momentum is expected to begin slowing. As momentum slows, it becomes increasingly likely that one of two three changes will occur:   Prices will level out and move into a sideways pattern. After this the trend may resume in the same direction. Prices will level out for a period of consolidation, and conclude with a new trend moving in the opposite direction. The trend will reverse quite suddenly and move in the opposite direction. This more sudden reversal is likely to be found at or close to resistance or support. The reversal occurs after failed tests of these price levels; or after a momentary breakout (often including gaps) that are immediately reversed and filled. Centered oscillators A centered oscillator begins with an assigned signal line or “zero value” line, and subsequent calculations move above or below that line. These types are effective at judging strength or weakness of a trend, and spotting changes in momentum. The best-known centered oscillator is MACD. Two moving averages (26-day and 12-day)  interact with one another and also in relation to a signal line. The signal line is an exponential summary of the past nine days. The farther the divergence between the two MA lines, the more significant the meaning; and the crossover points of both MA lines in relation to the signal line further marks a change in price momentum. Banded oscillators While centered oscillators analyze momentum from an assumed zero point, banded oscillators employ two moving average bands representing price extremes. The lower band equates with oversold, and the upper band equates with overbought. Typical and well-known examples are RSI and Stochastics. Both rely on signals crossing a predetermined line for the two extremes. RSI usually is set at 70 for overbought and 30 for oversold, in an index range of zero to 100. As long as the calculated RSI is between 30 and 70, the extremes have not been met. However, movement approaching either line may be used as early confirming signals. Stochastics uses a similar methodology. However, the ranges are 80 for overbought and 20 for oversold. Both RSI and Stochastics are bound between 0 and 100. Oscillator signals - overbought and oversold The primary use of oscillators is to monitor price movement not only by Western or Eastern reversal signals or volume, but also by indicated overbought and oversold conditions. Some signals are designed to lead signals, others lag. One of the most useful aspects to oscillators is the signal that a current trend is weak, even if it is not about to reverse. Weakness signals the chartist to look for reversals signals in price patterns. Confirmation is the essential key, whether oscillators lead or lag. A second aspect to oscillators is the value of divergence signals. When the oscillator contradics price, it signals weakness in the trend. Divergence may signal a bullish change (oscillator moving in a bullish direction versus price in a bearish trend).The combination of MA with other indicators – such as candlestick reversal signals, analysis of gapping price patterns, and conformity to the trading range, all make MA a useful technical confirmation indicator. Divergence may signal a bullish change (oscillator moving in a bullish direction versus price in a bearish trend). Divergence may also signal bearish change (oscillator moving bearish while price moves bullish). These divergences are symptoms most likely to be found as the oscillator index approaches or moves into overbought or oversold regions. In strong uptrends or downtrends, monitoring oscillators to find overbought or oversold conditions may serve as a first warning that the trend is about to reverse. However, overbought and oversold conditions may be false, so confirmation via other signals should be located before acting. The extremes may be a first sign of coming change, or could be false when not independently confirmed. For example, Aetna experienced a sharp downtrend. Tracking RSI led to an oversold signal, which appeared confirmed by the upturn in price. However, instead of an uptrend, price moved into a consolidation pattern with a three-point breadth for more than a month.   It is also possible in very strong trends for oscillators to move into overbought or oversold condition and remain there for an extended period of time. The extremes do not always signal that reversal is going to occur right away. For example, Sherwin Williams displayed an uptrend but at the same time, RSI moved into the overbought region and remained there throughout the remainder of the trend. After a pause, the uptrend resumed in spite of the RSI warning of a possible reversal. Crossover The tendency of oscillator MA lines or index values to cross thresholds (either signal lines or extremes) marks the beginning of change in a trend. Crossover validates divergence if and when the oscillator direction is contrary to price. In this case, divergence by itself might not be especially significant. However, if the MA crosses the signal line or two MAs cross one another in a centered oscillator, then the importance of the divergence may be greater. The same applies to banded oscillators. Divergence within the mid-range is not as meaningful as divergence accompanied by movement into overbought or oversold areas of the index. Both of these changes from one side of a signal line to the other, or from id-range to overbought or oversold, reveal a specific change in momentum. At such times, tracking price patterns and looking for reversal confirmation may strengthen the timing of entry or exit. Momentum oscillators anticipate these reversal patterns but do not reveal the timing of their actual occurrence. For the timing, rely on the price patterns showing reversal. Oscillators may also act to not confirm indicated price reversal. For example, locating a strong price pattern reversal seeks confirmation. If an oscillator does not provide the crossover to confirm the reversal, it could mean the price pattern signal was false. Positive and negative of oscillators Be aware of the different purpose and effectiveness in momentum oscillators. Differences between centered and banded oscillators affect their value to spot reversals. Banded oscillators are the best signals to find overbought and oversold conditions. For example, RSI is a simple 0-100 index with clearly understood thresholds of 70 and 30. Movement above or below signal a change in momentu and-once confirmed-signal the time for entry or exit in response. In this example, momentum may lead price patterns in identifying the change in the trend. However, these conditions in which the index moves out of the mid-range are not strong enough to act upon by themselves. They have to be confirmed by other reversal signals becasue they do not reveal the timing of change in the trend, only the change in its momentum. Centered oscillators are less effective in identifying overbought or oversold conditions. These are more effective in anticipating momentum shifts from bullish to bearish or vice versa. However, because they are based on MA analysis rather than calculated index values, the degree of changes tends to remain relatively small. So centered oscillators identify sentiment change and the strength or weakness of the trend. A danger of relying on centered oscillators is that they may react in a manner similar to reversal when the actual condition is a short-term retracement against the prevailing trend. This is why confirmation is essential before acting on discovered changes in centered oscillators. *   *   * Conclusion   Momentum oscillators may lead or lag, providing initial indicators or confirmation. They should not be used by themselves to signal entry or exit.   Because moving averages and index calculations determine the oscillator trend, they cannot always accurately predict price reversal. However, when combined with price trends and price-specific reversal signals, oscillators are excellent technical tools for timing of trades.

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends Explained: An Easy-to-Understand System for Successful Trading 

 Segment 3. Leading or lagging indicators? Chart reading is a process of making judgments. The strength of a reversal indicator relies not only on how well it is confirmed by other signals, but also on whether it is a leading or a lagging indicator. A leading indicator is presumed to appear in advance of a price reversal and also in advance of confirming signals. A lagging indicator confirms after a different signal has appeared and may also show up too late to make a trade decision. Leading indicators Among the best-known leading indicators are Relative Strength Index (RSI) and Stochastics. Both rely on formulated summaries of momentum to anticipate short-term changes in price. Most analysis of leading indicators focuses on reversal signals during strong uptrends or downtrends. However, the leading indicator appearing during a period of sideways movement is more valuable because, lacking specific direction, this provides an initial signal of the next trend expected to occur. Leading and lagging indicators are both used for spotting slowed momentum during a current trend, and both provide excellent forms of confirmation along with other reversal signals, notably in the form of candlestick indicators and tests of resistance and support. For example, sideways movement made it difficult to predict what would happen next in the chart of Intel Corp. A three-month sideways trend appeared to be ending as prices rose toward the end of April. However, the RSI contradicted this sign and then found confirmation. The overbought RSI signal occurred toward the end of March, forecasting a downtrend. Price moved upward the following month. However, note the strong bearish engulfing pattern at the last portion of the chart, confirming the earlier RSI signal.   This bearish sign and confirmation ended the sideways trend and forecast a downward movement. As the next chart shows, when expanding the Intel chart through June, a downtrend did occur as predicted by the bearish engulfing pattern. The downtrend ended when RSI dipped into the oversold area in the third week of March and again in the first week of June. At the same time, a bullish engulfing pattern predicted an uptrend and confirmed the RSI early signal.   Leading indicators rely on past price movement and dominance among buying or selling activity. However, although the indicator relies on past movement, past price levels are considered secondary to the indicated change in momentum a leading oscillator provides. Momentum measures the speed and strength of price movement, not price movement itself. As a result, even a seemingly strong trend may lose momentum and leading indicators are likely to anticipate the end of the trend before it appears in price levels. For example, RSI summarizes in a simple index the average price advances with average price declines for the past 14 sessions. The current RSI level reflects whether the overall momentum during this time frame is trending in an upward or downward direction. This application of a formula to create a range of momentum (in the case of RSI between 30 and 70 index value) summarizes the average of price movement and its likely meaning. Once the index exceeds 70 (overbought) or falls below 30 (oversold), the RSI acts as a leading indicator that a reversal is likely to follow. The early signals provided by leading indicators are a primary benefit, notably during periods of sideways price movement. These also anticipate price weakness when divergence appears between the indicator and price. These are strong signals for timing of entry and exit. A major disadvantage to leading indicators is that false signals do occur. A whipsaw – short-term price movement and reversal – can affect the oscillator and provide a false signal. With this in mind, leading indicators should be viewed as the first step in a trend change. After a leading indicator appears, seek additional signals providing confirmation or contradiction, before proceeding. This cautionary approach ensures the most effective use of leading indicators. Lagging indicators 
 The lagging indicator appears after price movement. As a momentum oscillator serving as a lagging indicator, this confirms a signal first seen in price patterns, such as candlestick reversal or tests of resistance and support. Well-known lagging indicators tend to rely on moving average analysis and convergence or divergence and crossover study. The best-known lagging indicator is MACD. Although it is a lagging signal, it is no less powerful than a leading indicator; it only shows up in a different location relative to price action. Lagging indicators are most valuable as confirmation signals during current trends. As confirming signals, lagging indicators may provide confidence to traders that a price-specific reversal signal is valid and likely to lead directly into a reversal. For example, Embry Holdings ended an uptrend in February and then prices moved sideways through mid-April. How do you recognize when a new trend will begin? The MACD line crossed into bearish territory in the third week of March. This was a signal that a new price trend would soon follow.   The MACD bearish crossover was the first sign that the sideways movement was likely to end. When the chart is extended through another month, a downtrend did appear. It seemed to have a short life; however, at the same time, MACD confirmed the bearish trend by again moving below the signal line and remaining there. After a short period of upward-trending days, a strong downtrend began just as MACD had predicted. In fact, the MACD line continued falling in negative territory through to the end of the chart, indicating that the downtrend was holding momentum. The major disadvantage to lagging indicators is that they might show up after a reversal has already occurred. However, reversals do not always occur quickly or immediately. So a slower-developing reversal may be spotted in a price pattern and then confirmed. In this sense, lagging indicators are quite effective in adding confidence to the likelihood of reversal. Indicators in perspective 
 Momentum oscillators that lead or lag may not always be as sensitive to price patterns as traders desire. They are not consistent. This is why they provide only a piece of the reversal puzzle. Confirmation is essential; but momentum indicators are among the best confirmation signals. If the period of study used to create oscillator values is decreased, it may create more false signals. If the period employed is increased, the level of signals might be too unresponsive to momentum shifts that the oscillators are ineffective. Longer average periods equate to reduced signal generation.
