
In other words, only by having what “scuttlebutt” can give you
before you approach management, can you know what you should
attempt to learn when you visit a company. Without it you may be
unable to determine that most basic of points—the competency of top
management itself. In even a medium-sized company, there may be a
key management team of as many as five men. You are not apt to meet
all of them on your first or second visit. If you do, you will probably
meet some for such a short time you will have no basis for determining
their relative ability. Frequently one or two men of the five will be far
more able or far less able than the others. Without “scuttlebutt” to guide
you, depending on whom you meet you may form far too high or far
too low an estimate of the entire management. With “scuttlebutt” you
may have formed a fairly accurate idea of who is particularly strong or
particularly weak, and are in a better position to ask to meet the specif-
ic officers you may want to know better, thereby satisfying yourself as
to whether this “scuttlebutt” impression is correct.


How I Go about Finding a Growth Stock 169

It is my opinion that in almost any field nothing is worth doing
unless it is worth doing right. When it comes to selecting growth stocks,
the rewards for proper action are so huge and the penalty for poor judg-
ment is so great that it is hard to see why anyone would want to select
a growth stock on the basis of supérficial knowledge. If an investor or
financial man wants to go about finding a growth stock properly, I
believe one rule he should always follow is this: he should never visit the
management of any company he is considering for investment until he
has first gathered together at least 50 per cent of all the knowledge he
would need to make the investment. If he contacts the management
without having done this first, he is in the highly dangerous position of
knowing so little of what he should seek that his chance of coming up
with the right answer is largely a matter of luck.

There is another reason I believe it so important to get at least half
the required knowledge about a company before visiting it. Prominent
management and managements in companies in colorful industries get
a tremendous number of requests for their time from people in the
investment business. Because the price at which their stock sells can
have so much significance to them in so many ways, they will usually
devote the time of valuable people to such visitors. However, from com-
pany after company I have heard the same type of comment.To no one
will they be rude, but the amount of time furnished by key men, rather
than by those who receive financial visitors but make few executive
decisions, depends far more on the company’s estimate of the compe-
tence of the visitor than it does on the sizc of the financial interest he
represents. More important, the degree of willingness to furnish infor-
mation—that is, how far the company will go in answering specific
questions and discussing vital matters—depends overwhelmingly on this
estimate of each visitor. Those who just drop in on a company without
real advance preparation, often have two strikes against them almost
before the visit starts.

This matter of whom you see (that it be the men who make the real
decisions, rather than a sort of financial public relations officer) is so
important that it is wise to go to considerable trouble to be introduced
to a management by the right people. An important customer or a
major stockholding interest known to management can be an excellent
source of introduction to pave the way for a first visit. So can the com-
pany’s investment banking connections. In any event, those really want-
ing to get optimum results from their first visit should make sure that


170 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

those introducing them have a high regard for the visitor and pass the
reasons for this good opinion on to the management.

Just a few weeks prior to my writing these words an incident
occurred which may illustrate how much preparation I feel should be
made prior to a first call on management. I was lunching with two rep-
resentatives of a major investment firm, one which is the investment
banker for two of the handful of companies in which the funds I man-
age are invested. Knowing the small number of situations I go into and
the long time I normally hold them, one of these gentlemen asked me
the ratio between the new (to me) companies I visited and the ones of
these into which I actually bought. I asked him to guess. He estimated
I bought into one for every two hundred and fifty visited. The other
gentleman ventured that it might be one for every twenty-five. Actual-
ly it runs somewhere between one to every two and one to every two
and one-half! This is not because one out of every two and one-half
companies I look at measures up to what I believe are my rather rigor-
ous standards for purchase. If he had substituted “companies looked at”
for “companies visited” perhaps one in forty or fifty might be about
right. If he had substituted “companies considered as possibilities for
investigation” (whether I actually investigated them or not) then the
original estimate of one stock bought for every two hundred and fifty
considered would be rather close to the mark. What he had overlooked
was that I believe it so impossible to get much benefit from a plant visit
until a great deal of pertinent “scuttlebutt” work has been done first, and
that I have found that “scuttlebutt” so many times furnishes an accurate
forecast of how well a company will measure up to my fifteen points,
that usually by the time I am ready to visit the management there will
be at least a fair chance that I will want to buy into the company. A great
many of the less attractive situations will have been weeded out along
the way.

This about sums up how I go about finding growth stocks. Possi-
bly one-fifth of my first investigations start from ideas gleaned from
friends in industry and four-fifths from culling what I believe are the
more attractive selections of a small number of able investment men.
These decisions are frankly a fast snap judgment on which companies
I should spend my time investigating and which I should ignore. Then
after a brief scrutiny of a few key points in an SEC prospectus, I will
seek “scuttlebutt” aggressively, constantly working toward how close to
our fifteen-point standard the company comes. I will discard one


How I Go about Finding a Growth Stock 171

prospective investment after another along the way. Some because the
evidence piles up that they are just run of the mill. Others because I
cannot get enough evidence to be reasonably sure one way or the other.
Only in the occasional case when I have a great amount of favorable
data do I then go to the final step of contacting the management. Then
if after meeting with management I find my prior hopes pretty well
confirmed and some of my previous {ears cased by answers that to me
make sense, at last I am ready to feel I may be rewarded for all my
efforts.

Because I have heard them so many times, I know the objections a
few of you will make to this approach. How can anyone be expected to
spend this amount of time finding just one investment? ‘Why are not the
answers already neatly worked out for me by the first person in the
investment business to whom I ask what I should buy? I would ask
those with this reaction to look at the world around them. In what
other line of activity could you put $10,000 in one year and ten years
later (with only occasional checking in the meantime to be sure man-
agement continues of high caliber) be able to have an asset worth from
$40,000 to $150,000? This is the kind of reward gained from selecting
growth stocks successfully, Is it either logical or reasonable that anyone
could do this with an effort no harder than reading a few simply worded
brokers’ free circulars in the comfort of an armchair one evening a
week? Does it make sense that anyone should be able to pick up this
type of profit by paying the first investment man he sees a commission
of $135, which is the New York Stock Exchange charge for buying
500 shares of stock at $20 per share? So far as I know, no other fields of
endeavor offer these huge rewards this easily. Similarly, they cannot be
made in the stock market unless you or your investment advisor utilize
the same traits that will bring large rewards in any other field of activity.
These are great effort combined with ability and enriched by both
judgment and vision. If these attributes are employed and something
fairly close to the rules laid down in this chapter are used to find com-
panics measuring well on our fifteen-point standard but not yet enjoy-
ing as much status in the financial community as such an appraisal
would warrant, the record is crystal clear that fortune-producing growth
stocks can be found. However, they cannot be found without hard work
and they cannot be found every day.


I

‘

Summary and Conclusion

e are starting the second decade of a half century that may well

see the standard of living of the human race advance more than

it has in the preceding five thousand years. Great have been the
investment risks of the recent past. Even greater have been the financial
rewards for the successful. However, in this field of investment, the risks
and rewards of the past hundred years may be small beside those of the
next fifty.

In these circumstances it may be well to take stock of our situation.
We almost certainly have not conquered the business cycle. We may not
even have tamed it. Nevertheless, we have added certain new factors that
significantly affect the art of investment in common stocks. One of these
is the emergence of modern corporate management, with all that this
has done to strengthen the investment characteristics of common shares.
Another is the economic harnessing of scientific research and develop-
mental engineering.

The emergence of these factors has not changed the basic principles
of successful common stock investment. It has made them more impor-
tant than ever. This book has attempted to show what these basic prin-
ciples are, what type of stock to buy, when to buy it, and most particu-
larly, never to sell it—as long as the company behind the common stock
maintains the characteristics of an unusually successful enterprise.

It is hoped that those sections dealing with the most common mis-
takes of many otherwise able investors will prove of some interest. It
should be remembered, however, that knowing the rules and under-
standing these common mistakes will do nothing to help those who do


Summary and Conclusion 173

not have some degree of patience and self-discipline. One of the ablest
investment men | have ever known told me many years ago that in the
stock market a good nervous system is even more important than a
good head. Perhaps Shakespeare unintentionally summarized the
process of successful common stock investment: “There is a tide in the
affairs of men which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune.”




Part Two

CONSERVATIVE
INVESTORS SLEEP
WELL


All of my business life, I have believed that the success of my own busi-
ness—or any business—depends on following the principles of two I's
and an H. These principles are integrity, ingenuity, and hard work. I
would like to dedicate this book to my three sons in the belief that
Arthur and Ken are following the principles of the two I’s and an H in
businesses very similar to mine, as is Don in onc that is quite different.


Introduction

overwhelming that only once before in this century has the
morale of the American investor been at anything like the low
ebb that exists as these words are being written. The well-known and
much publicized Dow Jones Industrial Average is an excellent indicator
of the day-to-day change in stock-market levels. However, when a
longer period is under consideration, this average may mask rather than
reveal the full extent of the injuries suffered by many who have held
common stocks in the recent past. One index that purports to show
what has happened to all publicly traded common stocks but that does
not weigh each stock issuc by the number of shares outstanding shows
the average stock in mid-1974 down 70 percent from its 1968 peak.
Faced with this kind of loss, large groups of investors have acted in
completely predictable ways. One group has pulled out of stocks com-
pletely. Yet many corporations are doing surprisingly well. In an envi-
ronment where more and more inflation appears inevitable, properly
selected stocks may be far less risky than some other placements that
appear safer. There is an even larger group that is of particular interest:
people who have decided that “from now on we will act more conserv-
atively.’ The usual rationale here is to confine purchases only to the
largest companies, the names of which at least are known to almost
everyone. There are probably few investors in the United States and
almost none in the Northeast who do not know the names Penn Central
and Consolidated Edison or the nature of these companies’ services. By
conventional standards, Penn Central some years ago and Consolidated

W-: these things are hard to measure precisely, indications are


178 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

Edison more recently were considered conservative investments. Unfor-
tunately, often there is so much confusion between acting conservative-
ly and acting conventionally that for those truly determined to conserve
their assets, this whole subject needs considerable untangling—which
should start with not one definition but two:

1. A conservative investment is one most likely to conserve (i.c.,
maintain) purchasing power at a minimum of risk.

2. Conservative investing is understanding of what a conservative
investment consists and then, in regard to specific investments,
following a procedural course of action needed properly to
determine whether specific investment vehicles are, in fact, con-
servative investments.

Consequently, to be a conservative investor, not one but two things
are required either of the investor or of those whose recommendations
he is following. The qualities desired in a conservative investment must
be understood. Then a course of inquiry must be made to see if a par-
ticular investment so qualifies. Without both conditions being present the
buyer of common stocks may be fortunate or unfortunate, conventional
in his approach or unconventional, but he is not being conservative.

It seems to me of overriding importance that confusion on matters
such as these be swept aside for all time to come. Not only stockhold-
ers themselves but also the American economy as a whole cannot afford
ever again to have those who make a sincere effort to understand the rules
suffer the type of bloodbath recently experienced by this generation of
investors—a bloodletting exceeded only by that which another genera-
tion experienced in the Great Depression some forty years earlier.
America today has unparalleled opportunities for improving the way of
life for all its people. It certainly has the technical knowledge and the
know-how to do so. However, to do these things in the traditional
American way will require some genuine re-education as to the basic
fundamentals for a great many investors as well as for many of those in
the investment industry itself. Only if many more investors come to feel
financially secure because they truly are secure will there be a reopen-
ing of the markets for new stock issues that will enable companies legit-
imately requiring additional equity funds to be in a position to secure
them on a basis conducive to going ahead with new projects. If this does
not happen, all that is left is to try to go ahead with what needs to be


Introduction 179

done in the way that, both here and abroad, has always proven so costly,
wasteful, and inefficient—by government financing, with management
under the dead hand of bureaucratic officialdom.

For these reasons I believe that the investors’ problems of taday
should be met head on and forthrightly. In an attempt to deal with these
problems in this book, I have leaned heavily on the counsel of my son,
Ken, who contributed the title as well as many other matters, including
part of the basic conception of what lies herein. I cannot adequately
acknowledge his assistance in this presentation.

This book is divided into four distinct sections. The first deals with
the anatomy—if the word may be used—of a conservative stock invest-
ment as delineated in definition number onc. The second analyzes the
part played by the financial community—the mistakes, if you will—that
helped produce the current bear market. This critique was not intend-
ed merely to throw rocks but to point out that similar errors can be
avoided in the future and that certain basic investment principles
become clear when the mistakes of the recent past are studied. The third
section deals with the course of action that must be taken to qualify as
conservative investing as delineated in definition number two. The final
section deals with some of the influences rampant in today’s world that
have caused grave doubts in the minds of many as to whether any
common stock is a suitable means for preserving assets—in other words,
whether for anything other than as gambling vehicles common stocks
should be considered at all. This book will, I hope, throw light on
whether the problems that helped produce the recent bear market have
created a condition where stock ownership is just a trap for the unwary
or whether, as in every prior major bear market in U.S. history, they
have created a magnificent opportunity for those with the ability and
the self-discipline to think for themselves and to act independently of
the popular emotions of the moment.

Pini A. FISHER
San Mateo, California


The First Dimension
of a Conservative
Investment

Superiority in Production, Marketing,
Research, and Financial Skills

ment is necessarily a complex organization. To understand what

must be present in such an investment we might start by portray-
ing one dimension of the characteristics we must be sure exist. This
dimension breaks down into four major subdivisions:

fees of the size and type to provide a conservative invest-

LOW-COST PRODUCTION

To be a truly conservative investment a company—for a majority if not
for all of its product lines—must be the lowest-cost producer or about
as low a cost producer as any competitor. It must also give promise of
continuing to be so in the future. Only in this way will it give its own-
ers a broad enough margin between costs and selling price to create two


The First Dimension of a Conservative Investment 181

vital conditions. One is sufficient leeway below the break-even point of
most competition. When a bad year hits the industry, prices are unlike-
ly to stay for long under this break-even point. As long as they do, loss-
es for much of the higher-cost competition will be so great that some
of these competitors will be forced to cease production. This almost
automatically increases the profits of the surviving low-cost companies
because they bencfit from the increased production that comes to them
as they take over demand formerly supplied by the closed plants. The
low-cost company will benefit even more when the decreased supply
from competitors enables it not only to do more business but also to
increase prices as excess supplies stop pressing on the market.

The second condition is that the greater than average profit margin
should enable a company to earn enough to generate internally a sig-
nificant part or perhaps all of the funds required for financing growth.
This avoids much or even all of the need for raising additional long-
term capital that can (a) result in new shares being issued and diluting
the value of already outstanding shares and/or (b) create an additional
burden of debt, with fixed interest payments and fixed maturities (which
must largely be met from future earnings) which greatly increase the
risks of the common-stock owners.

However, it should be realized that, just as the degree to which a
company is a low-cost producer increases the safety and conservatism of
the investment, so in a boom period in a bullish market does it decrease
its speculative appeal. The percentage that profits rise in such times will
always be far greater for the high-cost, risky, marginal company. Simple
arithmetic will explain why. Let us take an imaginary example of two
companies of the same size that, when times were normal, were selling
widgets at ten cents apiece. Company A has a profit of four cents per
widget and Company B of one cent. Now let us suppose that costs
remain the same but a temporary extra demand for widgets pushes up
the price to twelve cents, with both companies remaining the same size.
The strong company has increased profits from four cents per widget to
six cents, a gain of 50 percent, but the high-cost company has made a
300 percent profit gain, or tripled its profits. This is why, short-range, the
high-cost company sometimes goes up more in a boom and also why, a
few years later, when hard times come and widgets fall back to eight
cents, the strong company is still making a reduced but comfortable
profit. If the high-cost company doesn’t go bankrupt, it is likely to pro-
duce another crop of badly hurt investors (or perhaps speculators who


182 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

thought they were investors) who are sure something is wrong with the
system rather than with themselves.

All of the above has been written with manufacturing companies in
mind; hence the term production has been used. Many companies, of
course, are not manufacturers but are in service lines, such as wholesal-
ing, retailing or one of the many subdivisions of the financial world such
as banking or insurance. The same principles apply, but the word opera-
tions is substituted for production and a low- or high-cost operator for a
low- or high-cost producer.

STRONG MARKETING ORGANIZATION

A strong marketer must be constantly alert to the changing desires of its
customers so that the company is supplying what is desired today, not
what used to be desired. At the turn of the century, for example, there
was something wrong with the marketing efforts of a leading manufac-
turer of horse-drawn buggies if it persisted in trying to compete by
making finer and finer buggies rather than turning to automobiles or
going out of business altogether. To bring our example up to date, per-
haps well before the Arab oil embargo made every home in America
aware that large automobiles were big gas guzzlers, there was something
wrong with the segment of the automobile industry that failed to rec-
ognize the ever-increasing popularity of small imported compacts as a
sign that public demand was swinging toward a product that cost less,
was cheaper to operate, and was easier to park than the larger, flashier
models that for so many years had been favorites.
