
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

18. SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

55

market, having removed time markings, you will not be able to tell whether it is
monthly, weekly, daily, or a 5-minute chart. Later in this book (Chapter 39), we’ll
return to this theme, and you’ll see why it is so important to analyze markets in
more than one timeframe. We’ll have to make sure that buy or sell messages in both
timeframes confirm each other, because if they don’t it means that the market is too
chaotic and we should stand aside.
Nature’s Law is the rallying cry of a clutch of mystics who claim there is a perfect
order in the markets (which they’ll reveal to you for a price). They say that markets
move like clockwork in response to immutable natural laws. R. N. Elliott even titled
his last book Nature’s Law.
The “perfect order” crowd gravitates to astrology, numerology, conspiracy theory,
and other superstitions. Next time someone talks to you about natural order in the
markets, ask him about astrology. He’ll probably jump at the chance to come out of
the closet and talk about the stars.
The believers in perfect order in the markets claim that tops and bottoms can be
predicted far into the future. Amateurs love forecasts, and mysticism is a great marketing gimmick. It helps sell courses, trading systems, and newsletters.
Mystics, Random Walk academics, and Efficient Market theorists have one trait in
common. They are equally divorced from the reality of the markets.

■■18. Support and Resistance
A ball hits the floor and bounces. Toss it up, and it’ll drop after hitting the ceiling.
Support and resistance are like a floor and a ceiling, with prices sandwiched between
them. Understanding support and resistance is essential for understanding price
trends. Rating their strength helps you decide whether the trend is likely to punch
through or to reverse.
Support is a price level where buying is strong enough to interrupt or reverse
a downtrend. When a downtrend hits support, it bounces like a diver who hits the
bottom and pushes away from it. Support is represented on a chart by a horizontal
line connecting two or more bottoms (Figure 18.1).
Resistance is a price level where selling is strong enough to interrupt or reverse
an uptrend. When an uptrend hits resistance, it acts like a man who hits his head on
a branch while climbing a tree—he stops and may even tumble down. Resistance is
represented on a chart by a horizontal line connecting two or more tops.
It is better to draw support and resistance lines across the edges of congestion
areas where the bulk of the bars stopped rather than across extreme prices. Those
congestion zones show where masses of traders have changed their minds, while the
extreme points reflect only panic among the weakest traders.
Minor support or resistance causes trends to pause, while major support or resistance causes them to reverse. Traders buy at support and sell at resistance, making
their effectiveness a self-fulfilling prophecy.

56

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

FIGURE 18.1â•… NFLX weekly. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Support and Resistance
Draw horizontal lines across the upper and lower edges of congestion areas. The bottom
line marks the level of support at which buyers overcome sellers. The upper line identifies
resistance, where sellers overpower buyers. Support and resistance areas often switch
roles. Note how after a decisive upside breakout in area 1 prices hit resistance, but when
they broke above that level it turned into a zone of support (marked 2). The strength of
these barriers increases each time prices touch them and bounce away.
Beware of false breakouts from support and resistance. They are marked by letter “F”
on this chart. Amateurs tend to follow breakouts, while professionals tend to fade (trade
against) them. At the right edge of the chart NFLX is rallying from support at the level where
its previous rally ran into resistance.

How do we identify trends? Not by trendlines. My favorite tools are exponential moving averages that we’ll review in the next section. Trendlines are wildly
subjective—they are among the most self-deceptive tools. Trend identification is an
area in which computerized analysis is miles ahead of classical charting.

Memories, Pain, and Regret
Our memories of previous market turns prompt us to buy and sell at certain levels.
Buying and selling by crowds create support and resistance. Support and resistance exist
because people have memories.
If traders remember that prices have recently stopped falling and turned up from
a certain level, they are likely to buy when prices approach that level again. If traders
remember that an uptrend has recently reversed after rising to a certain peak, they
tend to sell and go short when prices approach that level again.
For example, all major rallies in the stock market from 1966 until 1982 ended
whenever the Dow Jones Industrial Average rallied into the area between 950 and
1050. That resistance zone was so strong that traders named it “a graveyard in the
sky.” Once the bulls rammed the market through that level, it became a major support area. In recent years, we saw a similar occurrence in gold, whose chart is shown
here (Figure 18.2). It hit the level of $1,000/oz four times, dropping after each
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

18. SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

57

FIGURE 18.2â•… Gold weekly. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Resistance Turns into Support
Notice how gold hit its overhead resistance at the $1,000/oz. level five times. Usually,
reversals occur on the first, second or third hit. When a market hits the same level for the
fourth time, it shows that it really wants to go that way. Gold broke above $1,000/oz. on
its fifth attempt.
Afterwards, gold made two attempts to pull down to its old resistance level, in areas
marked 6 and 7. Its inability to decline to that level showed that bears were weak, marking
the start of a major bull market in gold.

attempt. After the price of gold broke above that level on its fifth attempt, the level
of $1,000/oz turned into a massive support level.
Support and resistance exist because masses of traders feel pain and regret. Traders who hold losing positions feel intense pain. Losers are determined to get out as
soon as the market gives them another chance. Traders who missed an opportunity
to buy or sell short feel regret and also wait for the market to give them a second
chance. Feelings of pain and regret are mild in trading ranges when swings are relatively small and losers do not get hurt too badly. Breakouts from those ranges create
much more intense pain and regret.
When the market stays flat for a while, traders get used to buying near the lower
edge of its range and selling or even shorting near the upper edge. When an uptrend
begins, bears who sold short feel a great deal of pain. At the same time bulls feel an
intense regret that they didn’t buy more. Both are determined to buy if the market
declines to the breakout point and gives them a second chance to cover shorts or
to get long. The pain of bears and regret of bulls makes them eager to buy, creating
support during reactions in an uptrend.
When prices break down from a trading range, bulls who bought are in pain:
they feel trapped and wait for a rally to get out even. Bears, on the other hand, regret that they haven’t shorted more: they wait for a rally as a second chance to sell
short. Bulls’ pain and bears’ regret create resistance—a ceiling above the market
in downtrends. The strength of support and resistance depends on the strength of
feelings among masses of traders.

58

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

Strength of Support and Resistance
The longer prices stay in a congestion zone, the stronger the emotional commitment
of bulls and bears to that area. A congestion area hit by several trends is like a battlefield with craters from explosions: its defenders have plenty of cover and are likely to
slow down any attacking force.When prices approach that zone from above, it serves
as support. When prices rally into it from below, it acts as resistance. A congestion
area can reverse those roles, serving as either support or resistance.
The strength of those zones depends on three factors: their length, height, and
the volume of trading that has taken place in them. You can visualize these factors
as the length, the width, and the depth of a congestion zone.
The longer a support or resistance area—its length of time or the number of hits it took—
the stronger it is. Support and resistance, like good wine, become better with age. A
2-week trading range provides only minimal support or resistance, a 2-month range
gives people time to become used to it and creates intermediate support or resistance, while a 2-year range becomes accepted as a standard of value and offers major
support or resistance.
As support and resistance levels grow very old, they gradually become weaker.
Losers keep washing out of the markets, replaced by newcomers who don’t have the
same emotional commitment to very old price levels. People who lost money only
recently remember full well what happened to them. They are probably still in the
market, feeling pain and regret, trying to get even. People who made bad decisions
several years ago may well be out of that market, and their memories matter less.
The strength of support and resistance increases each time that area is hit. When
traders see that prices have reversed at a certain level, they tend to bet on a reversal
the next time prices reach that level.
The taller the support and resistance zone, the stronger it is. A tall congestion zone is
like a tall fence around a property. If a congestion zone’s height equals one percent
of current market value, it provides only minor support or resistance. If it’s three
percent tall, it provides intermediate support or resistance, and a congestion zone
that’s seven percent tall or higher can grind down a major trend.
The greater the volume of trading in a support and resistance zone, the stronger it is.
High volume shows active involvement by traders—a sign of strong emotional commitment. Low volume shows that traders have little interest in transacting at that
level—a sign of weak support or resistance.
You can measure the strength of support and resistance in dollars if you multiply
the number of days a stock spent in its congestion zone by its average daily volume
and price. Of course, when making such comparisons, we should measure support
and resistance zones for the same stock. You can’t compare apples with oranges or
AAPL with some $10 stock that trades a million shares on a good day.

Trading Rules
1. Whenever the trend you’re riding approaches support or resistance, tighten
your protective stop.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

18. SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

59

A protective stop is an order to sell below the market when you are long or
to cover shorts above the market when you are short. A stop protects you from
getting badly hurt by a reversal.
A trend reveals its health by how it acts when it hits support or resistance. If
it’s strong enough to penetrate that zone, your tight stop will not be triggered.
If a trend bounces away from support or resistance, it reveals its weakness. In that
case, your tight stop will salvage a good chunk of profits.
2. Support and resistance are more important on long-term charts than on shortterm charts.
A good trader monitors his market using several timeframes, but assigns more
weight to the longer ones. Weekly charts are more important than dailies. If the
weekly trend is strong, it is less alarming that the daily trend is hitting resistance.
When a weekly trend approaches major support or resistance, you should be
more inclined to exit.
3. Support and resistance levels point to trading opportunities.
The bottom of a congestion area identifies the bottom line of support. As prices
decline towards it, be alert to buying opportunities. One of the best patterns
in technical analysis is a false breakout. If prices dip below support and then
rally back into the support zone, they show that bears have lost their chance. A
price bar closing within a congestion zone after a false downside breakout marks
a buying opportunity; set a protective stop in the vicinity of the bottom of the
recent false downside breakout.
Similarly, a true upside breakout should not be followed by a pullback into
the range, just as a rocket is not supposed to sink back to its launching pad. A
false upside breakout gives a signal to sell short as a price bar returns into the
congestion zone. When shorting, place a protective stop near the top of the false
breakout (Figure 18.3).
On Placing Stopsâ•… Experienced traders tend to avoid placing them at round num-

bers. If I buy a stock near $52 and want to protect my position in the area of 51,
I’ll put a stop a few cents below $51. If I go long at 33.70 in a day-trade and want
to protect my position in the area of $33.50, I’ll put that stop a few cents below
$33.50. Because of a natural human tendency to use round numbers, clusters of
stops accumulate there. I prefer to place my stops at the far ends of such clusters.

True and False Breakouts
Markets spend more time in trading ranges than in trends. Most breakouts from trading ranges are false breakouts. They suck in trend-followers just before prices return
into their ranges. False breakouts hurt amateurs, but professional traders love them.
Professionals expect prices to fluctuate most of the time, without going anywhere
far.They wait until an upside breakout stops reaching new highs or a downside breakout stops making new lows. Then they pounce—fade the breakout (trade against it)

60

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

FIGURE 18.3â•… EGO and the Euro daily. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

False Breakouts
On the left, a chart of Eldorado Gold Corp. (EGO) shows a false downside breakout during gold bears’ final attempt to push gold stocks lower in December 2013. Prices opened
sharply below support, having gapped down from the previous day’s close. From there,
a rally began. Notice a pullback to the support line a week later, marked by a green arrowhead. Such pullbacks don’t always occur, but when they do, they offer an excellent
opportunity to hop aboard a new trend.
On the right, a chart of the Euro (represented here by $XEU) shows how an uptrend
culminated in a false upside breakout. Prices gapped above the line of resistance, triggering stops and shaking out weak shorts, and that’s when the downtrend began. There was
no second chance pullback in this market.

and place a protective stop near the latest extreme point. It’s a tight stop, and their
monetary risk is low, with a big profit potential from prices returning towards the
middle of the congestion zone. The risk/reward ratio is so good that professionals
can afford to be wrong half the time and still come out ahead of the game.
The best time to buy an upside breakout on a daily chart is when your analysis
of the weekly chart suggests that a new uptrend is developing. True breakouts are
confirmed by heavy volume, while false breakouts tend to have light volume. True
breakouts are confirmed when technical indicators reach new extremes in the
direction of the new trend, while false breakouts are often marked by divergences
between prices and indicators, which we’ll discuss later in the book.

■■19. Trends and Trading Ranges
A trend exists when prices keep rising or falling over a period of time. In a perfect
uptrend, each rally reaches a higher high than the preceding rally, while each decline stops at a higher level than the preceding decline. In a perfect downtrend,
each decline falls to a lower low than the preceding decline and each rally tops out
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

19. TRENDS AND TRADING RANGES

61

at a lower level than the preceding rally. In a trading range, most rallies stop at
about the same high level, and declines peter out at about the same low level. Perfect
patterns, of course, aren’t that common in financial markets, and multiple deviations
make life harder for analysts and traders (Figure 19.1).
Even a quick look at most charts reveals that markets spend most of the time in
trading ranges. Trends and trading ranges call for different tactics. When you go long
in an uptrend or sell short in a downtrend, you have to give that trend the benefit of
the doubt and use a wider stop, so as not to be shaken out easily. In a trading range,
on the other hand, you have to use tight stops, be nimble and close out positions at
the slightest sign of a reversal.
Another difference in trading tactics between trends and ranges is the handling of
strength and weakness.You have to follow strength during trends—buy in uptrends
and short in downtrends. When prices are in a trading range, you aim to do the opposite—buy weakness and sell strength.

FIGURE 19.1â•… FB daily, 22-day EMA. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Trend and the Trading Range
A pattern of higher tops and higher bottoms defines uptrends, while a pattern of lower
bottoms and lower tops defines downtrends. In the middle of this chart of Facebook, Inc.
(FB), you see a downtrend defined by three lower lows, marked 1, 3, and 5, and two lower
highs, marked 2 and 4. Notice the downtrend of a slow 22-day exponential moving average
(which we’ll review in Chapter 22) confirming the price downtrend. Its upturn signaled an
upside reversal, confirmed by new price peaks 6 and 8.
We’ve looked at false breakouts in the previous chapter, and you can see them again
in action here. False breakouts occur when prices cross their support or resistance lines,
spend one or two days beyond that line, and then return, marking a failed move in the direction of the breakout; afterwards prices tend to turn in the opposite direction. Here, a false
downside breakout, followed by the upturn of a moving average gave a strong buy signal.
We see a mirror image of this pattern after the top 8. There are two false upside breakouts, and after the second one, the moving average turns down, giving a sell signal. At the
right edge of the chart, prices are pulling back up to their declining moving average. Such
patterns tend to create good opportunities for selling short.

62

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

Mass Psychology
When the trend is up, bulls are more eager than bears, and their buying forces prices
higher. If bears manage to push prices down, bulls return to bargain hunt. They stop
the decline, and force prices to rise again. A downtrend occurs when bears are more
aggressive and their selling pushes markets down. Whenever a flurry of buying lifts
prices, bears sell short into that rally, stop it, and send prices to new lows.
When bulls and bears are about equal in strength, prices stay in a trading range.
When bulls manage to push prices up, bears sell short into that rally and prices fall.
As they decline, bargain hunters step in and buy. Then, as bears cover shorts, their
buying helps fuel a rally. This cycle can go on for a long time.
A trading range is like a fight between two equally strong street gangs. They
push one another back and forth, but neither can control the city block. A trend
is like a fight in which a stronger gang chases the weaker gang down the street.
Every once in a while the weaker gang stops and puts up a fight but then turns and
runs again.
Crowds spend most of their time aimlessly milling around, which is why markets
spend more time in trading ranges than in trends. A crowd has to become agitated
and surge to create a trend. Crowds do not stay excited for long—they go back to
aimlessness. Professionals tend to give the benefit of the doubt to trading ranges.

The Hard Right Edge
Trends and ranges are easy to see in the middle of a chart, but as you get close to its
right edge, the picture becomes increasingly foggy.The past is fixed and clear, but the
future is fluid and uncertain. Trends are easy to recognize on old charts, but, unfortunately, our brokers don’t allow us to trade in the past—we have to make trading
decisions at the hard right edge.
By the time a trend becomes perfectly clear, a good chunk of it is already gone.
Nobody will ring a bell when a trend dissolves into a trading range.
Many chart patterns and indicator signals contradict one another at the right edge
of the chart. You have to base your decisions on probabilities in an atmosphere of
uncertainty.
Most people feel very uncomfortable dealing with uncertainty. When their trade
doesn’t go the way their analysis suggested, they hang onto losing positions, waiting
for the market to turn and make them whole. Trying to be right is an unaffordable
luxury in the markets. Professional traders get out of losing trades fast. When the
market deviates from your analysis, you have to cut losses without fuss.

Methods and Techniques
Keep in mind that there is no single magic method to clearly and reliably identify all
trends and trading ranges. It pays to combine several analytic tools. None of them is
perfect, but when they confirm each another, a correct message is much more likely.
When they contradict one another, it’s better to pass up a trade.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

19. TRENDS AND TRADING RANGES

63

FIGURE 19.2â•… UNP daily, 22-day EMA, Directional system, MACD-Histogram. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Trend Identification
The single most important identifier of any trend is the pattern of its highs and lows. Look,
for example, at this daily chart of Union Pacific Corp (UNP). Once it broke out of its trading
range, its highs, marked by horizontal green lines, kept reaching higher and higher. Similarly, its reaction lows, marked by red horizontal lines, kept bottoming out at higher and
higher levels. Trying to draw a trendline would be a very subjective exercise because the
bottoms of UNP did not line up in a straight line.
The 22-day exponential moving average (EMA), represented by a red line superimposed
on prices, confirms the uptrend by its steady rise. Notice excellent buying opportunities, signaled by quick price dips to their moving average (we’ll return to this pattern in Chapter 22).
The Directional system (described in Chapter 24) signaled the start of a new trend when
the Average Directional Index (ADX) fell below 20 and then rallied above that level and
penetrated above the lower Directional Line (marked by a vertical green arrow). MACDHistogram (described in Chapter 23) identified a very powerful trend when it rallied to its
highest peak in several months (marked by a diagonal green arrow). Near the right edge of
the chart the trend is up, while prices are slightly below their recent high. A pullback to the
EMA is likely to create a fresh buying opportunity.
