
It is when the
unimaginable occurs
that the systematic trader
remains calm, presciently
knowing when to buy,
sell, or adjust their
exposure.
Mark Abraham
Quantitative Capital Management, L.P.

12

The trend is your friend
except at the end when it
bends.
Ed Seykota18

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Mechanical trading systems, generally used by trend followers,
are based on an objective and automated set of rules. Traders rigidly
follow these trading rules (often putting them into computer
programs) to get themselves in (buy) and out (sell) of a market. A
mechanical trading system can make life easier by eliminating
emotion from trading decisions. It forces discipline. If you break
your mechanical trading system rules, you will go broke.
Henry puts into perspective the downsides of discretionary
trading:

I feel sorry for the traders
who watch CNBC all day,
every day. They hope to
eek out some competitive
advantage from the
comments of some guy
who has never traded an
S&P contract in his life.
Even if the media
happened to have
something relevant to
say, the news is already
reflected in the open,
high, low, close, open
interest and daily
volume.
Christian Baha
CEO Superfund

“Unlike discretionary traders, whose decisions may be
subject to behavioral biases, JWH practices a disciplined
investment process. By quantifying the circumstances
under which key investment decisions are made, the JWH
methodology offers investors a consistent approach to
markets, unswayed by judgmental bias.”16
It seems a bit rigid to say you can’t even use just a little
discretion when faced with a trading decision, doesn’t it? After all,
where’s the fun if all you ever do is follow a mechanical model? But
then trend following isn’t supposed to be about fun. It’s supposed to
be about winning profits. A researcher at Campbell and Company,
one of the oldest and most successful trend following firms, is
adamant about avoiding discretion:
“One of our strengths is to follow our models and not use
discretion. This rule is written in stone at Campbell.”17
You can see throughout this book that trend followers choose
their words carefully and deliberately. It was encouraging to me to
find that there are few, if any, instances when their words are not
reflected in their philosophies and ultimately their performance data.

In Plain Sight
Trend following is not something new. It goes back decades. The
strategy is simply discovered by new generations of traders at
different times:
“Salem Abraham, a trend following trader, began researching the markets by asking a simple question: Who is making
money? The answer was trend followers and his journey
began.”19

13

Chapter 1 • Trend Following

But few people have made the journey with Abraham. During
the dot-com era of the late 1990s, during the 2008 real estate and
credit bubbles, so many investors and traders with so little strategy
were making so much money that trend followers disappeared from
the radar screen, even though they kept right on making money.
Since trend following has nothing to do with short-term trading,
cutting edge technologies, or Wall Street Holy Grails, its appeal is
always negligible during market bubbles. It’s not sexy. If investors
can jump on the bandwagon of practically any “long only” mutual
or hedge fund manager or turn a profit trading themselves by simply
buying Internet, energy, or real estate stocks and holding on to
them, what need would there ever be to adopt a strategy such as
trend following?
However, if we look at how much money trend followers have
made since assorted stock market bubbles have popped, trend
following becomes far more relevant to the bottom line. The
following chart (Chart 1.1) shows a hypothetical index of three
longtime trend following firms compared against the S&P stock
index. The chart combines Dunn Capital Management, Campbell
and Co., and John W. Henry and Co. into an equally weighted index:
Comparison of CTA Index to the S&P 500 Cash Index
January 1985–November 2003
$1,000 Starting Value—Compounded

$100,000.00

$10,000.00
Index
S&P 500

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

$1,000.00
Index Final Value:

$47,891

S&P 500 Final Value:

$6,326

CHART 1.1: Trend Following Index Compared to S&P and NASDAQ

Defining a trend is like
defining love. We know it
when we see it, but we
are rarely sure exactly
what it is. Fung and
Hsieh’s paper goes a long
way to doing for trends
what poets have been
trying to do for love since
time immemorial. They
give us a working model
that quantitatively
defines their value for us.
Traders will not be
surprised to learn that
trend following advisors
performed best during
extreme market moves,
especially during bad
months for equities.20

14

Change is not merely
necessary to life—it
is life.
Alvin Toffler

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Yet, even when trend following success is brought to their
attention, investors are often skeptical. They say the markets have
changed and that trend following no longer works. Their concerns
usually stem from a random press story of a trend follower who
supposedly “blew up” and lost all of his clients’ money. But the
truth is that trend following hasn’t changed, even though a single
trend follower may make a mistake.
Let’s put change in perspective. Markets behave the same as
they did 300 years ago. In other words, markets are the same today
because they always change. This is the philosophical underpinning
of trend following trading. A few years ago, for example, German
mark trading had significant trading volume. Now the Euro has
replaced the German mark. This was a huge, yet typical, change. If
you are flexible, market changes, like changes in life, don’t have to
impact you negatively. Trend traders traded the mark; now they
trade the Euro.
Accepting the inevitability of change is the first step to
understanding trend following philosophy. One trend follower
describes the benefits of understanding change:
“But what won’t change? Change. When a period of difficult
performance continues, however, most investors’ natural
conclusion is that something must be done to fix the
problem. Having been through these draw downs before, we
know that they are unpleasant, but they do not signal that
something is necessarily wrong with the future. During
these periods, almost everyone asks the same question in
these exact words: ‘Have the markets changed?’ I always
tell them the truth: ‘Yes.’ Not only have they changed, but
they will continue to change as they have throughout
history and certainly throughout our 19 years. Trend
following presupposes change. It is based on change.”21
Markets go up, down, and sideways. They trend. They flow.
They surprise. No one can forecast a trend’s beginning or end until
it becomes a matter of record, just like the weather. However, if
your trading strategy is designed to adapt to change, you can take
advantage of the changes to make money as John W. Henry noted:
“If you have a valid basic philosophy, the fact that things
change turns out to be a benefit. At least you can survive.
At the very least, you will survive over the long term. But if

15

Chapter 1 • Trend Following

you don’t have a valid basic philosophy, you won’t be
successful because change will eventually kill you. I knew I
could not predict anything, and that is why we decided to
follow trends, and that is why we’ve been so successful. We
simply follow trends. No matter how ridiculous those trends
appear to be at the beginning, and no matter how extended
or how irrational they seem at the end, we follow trends.”22
What does Henry mean by “a valid basic philosophy?” He is
talking about a trading strategy that can be defined, quantified,
written down, and measured in terms of numbers—as a way to
track trends. Do you have one of those? Does your broker have
one? Does your mutual fund manager have one? Does your highflying hedge fund have one? Trend followers do not guess if they
must buy or sell. They know what to do because they have their
“valid basic philosophy” codified in a specific plan. What is behind
the source of those trends, those profits? The Man Group, one of
the largest trend following traders, sees “trends as a persistent price
phenomenon that stem[s] from changes in risk premiums—the
amount of return investors demand to compensate the risks they
are taking. Risk premiums vary massively over time in response to
new market information, changes in economic environment, or
even intangible factors such as shifts in investor sentiment. When
risk premiums decrease or increase, underlying assets have to be
priced again. Because investors typically have different expectations, large shifts in markets result over several months or even
years as expectations are gradually adjusted. As long as there is
uncertainty about the future, there will be trends for [trend
followers] to capture.”

Change
There are plenty of people who ignore trend following’s
tremendous track record and argue that it is outdated, inferior, or it
plain doesn’t work.
“Has Trend Following Changed?” was the topic of a panel at a
Managed Fund Association’s conference. Patrick Welton saw that
there is no evidence that trend following has changed. To prove this
fact, he constructed 120 trend following models. Some were
reversal-based, and others were not. Some were breakout style
trading systems based on price action with others relying on

The people who excel in
any field are people who
realize that the moment is
there to be seized—that
there are opportunities at
every turn. They are more
alive to the moment.
Charles Faulkner23

The four most expensive
words in the English
language are “this time
it’s different.”
Sir John Templeton

16

While conceding tacitly or
explicitly that over the
long run daily price
movements are serially
independent (move
randomly) technical
analysts focus on
recurring short term
patterns and trends. They
are like surfboard riders,
who study the
movements of the waves,
not in order to
understand why they
behave as they do, but
simply in order to be on
hand whenever they
surge, to catch them at
their crest, or as soon
thereafter as possible to
ride them as far as they
possible can, and to
dissemble before they
change direction.
Morton S. Baratz25

By honest I don’t mean
that you only tell what’s
true. But you make clear
the entire situation. You
make clear all the
information that is
required for somebody
else who is intelligent to
make up their mind.
Richard Feynman

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

volatility and band-style breakouts. The average holding periods
ranged from two weeks to one year. The results gave almost
identical performance characteristics in periods covering the late
1980s, early 1990s, and late 1990s.
Welton also addressed the misconception that the sources of
return for trend following had changed. He pointed out that starting
from first principles, it was a fact that the source of return for trend
following resulted from sustained market price movements. Human
reaction to such events, and the stream of information describing
them, takes time and runs its course unpredictably. The resulting
magnitude and rate of price change could not be reliably forecast.
This is the precise reason why trend following works.24
Burt Kozloff, a consultant in the fund industry, also confronted
trend-trading skeptics head on two decades before trend followers’
fantastic October 2008 returns:
“In February, 1985, on a tour of Germany sponsored by the
Deutsche Terminborse, several advisors and pool operators
were making a presentation to a group of German
institutional investors. Among them were two trend-based
traders, Campbell & Co. and John W. Henry & Co. During
the question-and-answer period, one man stood and
proclaimed: ‘But isn’t it true that Trend Following is dead?’
At this point, the moderator asked that slides displaying the
performance histories for Campbell and Henry be displayed
again. The moderator marched through the declines,
saying: ‘Here’s the first obituary for trend-based trading.
Here’s the next one…and the next but these traders today
are at new highs, and they consistently decline to honor the
tombstones that skeptics keep erecting every time there’s a
losing period.’ Campbell and JWH have made their
investors hundreds of millions of dollars since that time. It
might, therefore, be a mistake to write yet another series of
obituaries.”26
A new trend following obituary, often oblivious to real facts, and
often rooted in ignorance, will be written every few years by mutual
fund defenders, player haters, and cranks despite the incredible
amounts of money made by trend following practitioners. Perplexed
at Wall Street’s lack of acceptance, one trend follower responded:

Chapter 1 • Trend Following

“How can someone buy high and short low and be
successful for two decades unless the underlying nature of
markets is to trend? On the other hand, I’ve seen yearafter-year, brilliant men buying low and selling high for a
while successfully and then going broke because they
thought they understood why a certain investment
instrument had to perform in accordance with their
personal logic.”27
I have found though that trend followers generally seem to be
oblivious to those who question their strategies. Why spend massive
energy constantly defending yourself when you are producing
monster returns year after year? That said, I do enjoy spending
time to make the defense for them. The subject is too important
and too valuable for the average investor to let it go under the radar.

Modus Operandi: Price
In an increasingly uncertain and, these days, downright
unfriendly world, it is extremely efficient and effective if our
decision making is based on this single, simple, reliable truth. The
constant barrage of fundamental data, such as price-earnings ratios,
crop reports, and economic studies, plays into traders’ tendencies
to make trading more complicated than it needs to be. Yet, factoring
in every possible fundamental still does not tell a trader how much
and when to buy, or how much and when to sell. The truth of
“price” always seems to win out over all of these other analytical
methods.
But even if you digest price as the key trading variable, it is not
unusual for many traders to become familiar with and focus on only
one market (usually stocks in their home countries) to the
exclusion of all other global opportunities. Seeking to maintain a
maximum degree of comfort, they follow this one familiar market’s
movements faithfully. If they specialize in stocks, they wouldn’t
dream of branching out into currencies or futures. How can a stock
trader know anything about currencies? That’s the fear. The idea
that you could know enough about Cisco and soybeans to trade
them both seems unfathomable to many. But think about what
cotton, crude oil, Cisco, GE, the U.S. dollar, the Australian dollar,
wheat, Apple, Google, and Berkshire Hathaway all have in common.
The answer? Price.

17

[Trend following] is
motivated by a very broad
interpretation of the
universe. The underlying
belief is that economic
systems adjust to changes
in fundamentals gradually
and over long periods of
time, and that the
consequent trends are
evident everywhere in
human history and
commerce. Political,
economic, and social
regime changes trigger
price adjustments in
markets that don’t happen
instantaneously. For
example, the growth and
decline of the Roman
Empire took place, not in
a day, but over hundreds
of years. A major problem,
of course, is that markets
don’t move from one state
to another in a straight
line: There are periods of
countertrend shock and
volatility. We spend most
of our time trying to find
ways to deal with those
unsettling but inevitable
events. That being said, it
is really not difficult to put
together a simple trend
following system that can
generate positive returns
over a realistic holding
period and there are
many, many commercial
systems that have been
generating strong, albeit
volatile, returns for a long
time. So there are
definitely firm grounds for
believing in Santa Claus.
Paul Mulvaney
CIO of
Mulvaney Capital Management Ltd.

18

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Market prices are the objective data. Accepting that truth
allows you to compare and study prices and measure their
movements, even if you know nothing about those markets
themselves. You can look at individual price histories and charts
without knowing which market is which and trade them
successfully. Think about that. That is not what they teach at
Wharton, but it is the foundation of making millions.

Follow the Trend
Don’t try to guess how far a trend will go. You can’t. Peter
Borish, former second-in-command with Paul Tudor Jones, lays
bare the only concern a trader must have:
“Price makes news, not the other way around. A market is
going to go where a market is going to go.”28
The concept of price as the trading cue is just too darn simple
for people to accept. This is seen in the mainstream press that
always emphasizes the wrong numbers. Bill Griffith, an anchor at
CNBC, once pondered:
“At some point, investing is an act of faith. If you can’t
believe the numbers, annual reports, etc., what numbers
can you believe?”
Griffith misses the point when he asks what numbers you can
believe if you can’t believe a company’s annual report. It doesn’t
matter whether you can or cannot believe the earnings statement.
All of these numbers can be doctored, fixed, or cooked. The traded
market price can’t be fixed. It’s the only number to believe. You can
see it every day in the paper or online. However, this simple fact
does not diminish the confusion. Alan Sloan, by all accounts a fine
finance reporter, searches for numbers to trust without ever
understanding how futile his search will be:
“If some of the smartest people on Wall Street can’t trust
the numbers, you wonder who can trust the numbers.”
What numbers is Sloan talking about? Balance sheets? Priceearnings ratios? You can’t ever trust those numbers. Someone can
always alter them. Beyond that, even if you knew accurate balance
sheet numbers, how can they can help you determine when or how
much to buy or sell? A critical lesson from John W. Henry:

Chapter 1 • Trend Following

“…Political uncertainty is one reason why investment
decisions are not driven by discretionary judgments. How,
for example, do you measure the impact of statements from
Messrs. Greenspan, Rubin, Summers, Miyazawa, or
Sakakibara? Even if [we] knew all the linkages between
fundamentals and prices, unclear policy comments would
limit our ability to generate returns…trying to interpret the
tea leaves in Humphreys-Hawkins testimony or the minds
of Japanese policy authorities does not lend itself to
disciplined systematic investing. Instead of trying to play a
loser’s game of handicapping policy statements, our models
let market prices do the talking. Prices may be volatile, but
they do not cloud the truth in market reactions. Our job is
to systematically sift price data to find trends and act on
them and not let the latest news flashes sway our market
opinions.”29
You can’t read tea leaves. Nobody can. William Eckhardt, a
longtime trend follower and former partner of trend follower
Richard Dennis (the father of the ‘Turtles’), builds off Henry’s
wisdom by describing how price is what traders live and die by:
“An important feature of our approach is that we work
almost exclusively with price, past and current…Price is
definitely the variable traders live and die by, so it is the
obvious candidate for investigation…Pure price systems are
close enough to the North Pole that any departure tends to
bring you farther south.”30
How does a trend follower implement Dennis’ philosophy?
Trend trader Ed Seykota told me a story about trading sugar. He had
been buying sugar—thousands of sugar contracts [futures]. Every
day, the market was closing limit up. Every day, the market was
going higher and higher. He just kept buying more and more sugar
each day limit up. A broker was watching all this. One day, the
broker called Seykota after the market was closed, because he had
extra contracts of sugar that were not balanced out, and he said to
Seykota, “I bet you want to buy these other 5,000 contracts of
sugar.” Seykota replied, “Sold.”
Think about that: After the market has closed limit up for days
in a row, Seykota says, “Sure, I’ll buy more sugar contracts at the
absolute top of the market.” Why is this an important lesson?

19

Ed Seykota is a genius
and a great trader who
has been phenomenally
successful. When I first
met Ed he had recently
graduated from MIT and
had developed some of
the first computer
programs for testing and
trading technical
systems…Ed provided an
excellent role model. For
example, one time, he
was short silver and the
market just kept eking
down, a half penny a day.
Everyone else seemed to
be bullish, talking about
why silver had to go up
because it was so cheap,
but Ed just stayed short.
Ed said, “The trend is
down, and I’m going to
stay short until the trend
changes.” I learned
patience from him in the
way he followed the
trend.
Michael Marcus31

Be less curious about
people and more curious
about ideas.
Marie Curie

20

The wisest trend follower
I know has said that
every 5 years some
famous trader blows up
and everyone declares
trend following to be
dead. Then, 5 years later,
some famous trader
blows up and everyone
declares trend following
to be dead. Then, 5 years
later…well, was the
problem trend following
or the trader?

[Trend following] is
similar to being long
options because the stop
loss creates a limited
downside, and the
continuation of the trend
creates the large upside.
This is why the phrase
for this approach to
trading is to “cut losses”
and to “let profits run.”
Of course, if trends
continually fail to
materialize, these limited
losses can accumulate to
large losses. This is also
true for any option
purchase strategy. For
trend followers, the
“option premium” is
“paid” for after an
unsuccessful trade is
closed when a stop loss
has been reached. The
premium can also be
“paid” after markets
have moved a great deal,
profits have been made,
and a reversal causes a
trailing stop to be hit,
and some of the profits
reversed.
Michael S. Rulle, President, Graham
Capital Management34

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Everybody instinctively wants to buy sugar on the dip. Let it come
down low. Get a bargain. Trend following works by doing the
opposite: by buying higher prices.
