
TIME-REVERSED SLOW %K MODEL
The first step in developing a neural forecasting model is to prepare a trainingfact
set, which is the sample of data consisting of examples from which the net learns;
i.e., it is the data used to train the network and to estimate certain statistics. In this
case, the fact set is generated using the in-sample data from all commodities in the

portfolio. The number of facts in the fact set is, therefore, large-88,092 data
points. A fact set is only generated for training, not for testing, for reasons that will
be explained later.
To generate the facts that make up the fact set for this model, the initial step
of computing the time-reversed Slow %K, which is to serve as the target, must be
taken. Each fact is then created and written to a file by stepping through the insample bars for each commodity in the portfolio. For each current bar (the one currently being stepped through), the process of creating a fact begins with computing
each input variable in the fact. This is done by calculating a difference between a
pair of prices, and then dividing that difference by the square-root of the number
of bars that separate the two prices. The square-root correction is used because, in
a random market, the standard deviation of a price difference between a pair of
bars is roughly proportional to the square-root of the number of bars separating the
two prices. The correction will force each price difference to contribute about
equally to the fact. In this experiment, each fact contains 18 price changes that are
computed using the square-root correction. These 18 prices change scores will
serve as the 18 inputs to the neural network after some additional processing.
The pairs of prices (used when computing the changes) are sampled with
increasing distance between them: i.e., the further back in time, the greater the distance between the pairs. For the first few bars prior to the current bar, the spacing
between the prices differenced is only 1 bar; i.e., the price of the bar prior to the
current bar is be subtracted from the price of the current bar; the price 2 bars
before the current bar is subtracted from the price 1 bar ago, etc. After several such
price change scores, the sampling is increased to every 2 bars, then every 4, then
every 8, etc. The exact spacings are in a table inside the code. The rationale behind
this procedure is to obtain more detailed information on very recent price behavior. The further back the prices are in time, the more likely only longer-term movements will be significant. Therefore, less resolution should be required. Sampling
the bars in this way ought to provide sufftcient resolution to detect cycles and other
phenomena that range from a period of 1 or 2 bars through 50 bars or more. This
approach is in accord with a suggestion made by Mark Jurik (jurikres.com).
After assembling the 18 input variables consisting of the square-root-corrected price differences for a fact, a normalization procedure is applied. The intention is to preserve wave shape while discarding amplitude information, By treating
the 18 input variables as a vector, the normalization consists of scaling the vector
to unit length. The calculations involve squaring each vector element or price difference, summing the squares, taking the square-root, and then dividing each element by the resultant number. These are the input variables for the neural network.
In actual fact, the neural network software will further scale these inputs to an
appropriate range for the input neurons.
The target (dependent variable in regression terms) for each fact is simply the
time-reversed Slow %K for the current bar. The input variables and target for each

fact are written in simple ASCII format to a file that can be analyzed with a good
neural network development package.
The resultant fact set is used to train a net to predict the time-reversed Slow
%K, i.e., to predict the relative position of today’s close, and, it is hoped, tomorrow’s open, with respect to the range of prices over the next 10 bars (a IO-bar timereversed Slow %K).
The next step in developing the neural forecaster is to actually train some
neural networks using the just-computed fact set. A series of neural networks,
varying in size, are trained. The method used to select the most appropriately sized
and trained network is not the usual one of examining behavior on a test set consisting of out-of-sample data. Instead, the correlation coefficients, which reflect
the predictive capabilities of each of the networks, are corrected for shrinkage
based on the sample size and the number of parameters or connection weights
being estimated in the corresponding network. The equation employed to correct
for shrinkage is the same one used to correct the multiple correlations derived
from a multivariate regression (see the chapters on optimization and statistics).
Shrinkage is greater for larger networks, and reflects curve-fitting of the undesirable kind. For a larger network to be selected over a smaller network, i.e., to overcome its greater shrinkage, the correlation it produces must be sufficiently greater
than that produced by the smaller network. This technique enables networks to be
selected without the usual reference to out-of-sample data. All networks are fully
trained: i.e., no attempt is being made to compensate for loss of degrees of freedom by undertraining.
The best networks, selected on the basis of the shrinkage-corrected correlations, are then tested using the actual entry model, together with the standard exit,
on both in- and out-of-sample data and across all markets. Because shrinkage results
from curve-fitting, excessively curve-fit networks should have very poor shrinkagecorrected correlations. The large number of facts in the fact set (88,092) should help
reduce the extent of undesirable curve-fitting for moderately sized networks.
Code for the Reverse Slow %K Model

234

] ,, process next

bar

The code is comprised of two functions: the usual function that implements the
trading model (Model), and a procedure to prepare the neural network inputs
(PrepareNeuralInputs). The procedure that prepares the inputs requires the index
of the current bar (cb) and a series of closing prices (cls) on which to operate.
The PrepareNeurallnputs function, given the index to the currant bar and a
series of closing prices, calculates all inputs for a given fact that are required for the
neural network. In the list, pbars, the numbers after the tirst zero (which is ignored),
are the lookbacks, relative to the current bar, which are used to calculate the price
differences discussed earlier. The first block of code, after the declarations, initializes a price adjustment factor table. The table IS tmualized on the first pass through
the function and contains the square-roots of the number of bars between each pair
of prices from which a difference is computed. The next block of code calculates the
adjusted price differences, as well as the sum of the squares of these differences, i.e.,

238

the squared amplitude or length of the resultant vector. The final block of code in
this function normalizes the vector of price differences to unit length.
The general code that implements the model follows our standard practice.
After a block of declarations, a number of parameters are copied to local variables for
convenient reference. The 50-bar average true range, which is used for the standard
exit, and the time-reversed lo-bar Slow %K, used as a target, are then computed.
One of the parameters (mode) sets the mode in which the code will run. A
mode of 1 runs the code to prepare a fact file: The file is opened, the header (consisting of the number of inputs, 18, and the number of targets, 1) is written, and the
fact count is initialized to zero. This process only occurs for the first market in the
portfolio. The tile remains open during all further processing until it is closed after
the last tradable in the portfolio has been processed. After the header, facts are written to the tile. All data before the in-sample date and after the out-of-sample date
are ignored. Only the in-sample data are used. Each fact written to the file consists
of a fact number, the 18 input variables (obtained using PrepareNeuralInpufs), and
the target (which is the time-reversed Slow %K). Progress inforntation is displayed
for the user as the fact file is prepared.
If mode is set to 2, a neural network that has been trained using the fact tile
discussed above is used to generate entries into trades, The first block of code
opens and loads the desired neural network before beginning to process the first
commodity. Then the standard loop begins. It steps through bars to simulate actual trading. After executing the usual code to update the simulator, calculate the
number of contracts to trade, avoid limit-locked days, etc., the block of code is
reached that generates the entry signals, stop prices, and limit prices. The
PrepareNeuralInpufs function is called to generate the inputs corresponding to the
current bar, these inputs are fed to the net, the network is told to run itself, the output from the net is retrieved, and the entry signal is generated.
The rules used to generate the entry signal are as follows. If the output from the
network is greater than a threshold (thresh), a sell signal is issued; the net is predicting
a high value for the time-reversed Slow %K, meaning that the current closing price
might be near the high of its near-future range. If the output from the network (the prediction of the time-reversed Slow %K) is below 100 minus thresh, a buy signal is
issued. As an example, if thresh were set to 80, any predicted,time-reversed Slow %K
greater than 80 would result in the posting of a sell signal, and any predicted timereversed Slow %K less than 20 would result in the issuing of a buy signal.
Finally, there are the two blocks of code used to issue the actual entry orders
and to implement the standardized exits. These blocks of code are identical to
those that have appeared and been discussed in previous chapters.
Test Methodology for the Reverse Slow %K Model
The model is executed with the mode parameter set to 1 to generate a fact set. The
fact set is loaded into N-TRAIN, a neural network development kit (Scientific

Consultant Services, 516-696-3333). appropriately scaled for neural processing,
and shuffled, as required when developing a neural network. A series of networks
are then trained, beginning with a small network and working up to a fairly large
network. Most of the networks are simple, 3-layer nets. Two 4.layer networks are
also trained. All nets are trained to maximum convergence and then “polished” to
remove any small biases or offsets. The process of polishing is achieved by reducing the learning rate to a very small number and then continuing to train the net for
about 50 runs.
Table 1 l-l contains information regarding all networks that were trained for
this model, along with the associated correlations and other statistics. In the table,
Nei Name = the file name to which the net was saved; Net Size = the number of
layers and the number of neurons in each layer; Connecrions = the number of connections in the net optimized by the training process (similar to the number of
regression coeff%zients in a multiple regression in terms of their impact on curvefitting and shrinkage); and Correlarion = the multiple correlation of the network
output with the target (this is not a squared multiple correlation but an actual correlation). Corrected for Shrinkage covers two columns: The left one represents the
correlation corrected for shrinkage under the assumption of an effective sample
size of 40,000 data points or facts in the training set. The right column represents
the correlation corrected for shrinkage under the assumption of 13,000 data points
or facts in the training set. The last line of the table contains the number of facts
or data points (Actual N) and the number of data points assumed for each of the
shrinkage corrections (Assumed).
The number of data points specified to the shrinkage adjustment equation is
smaller than the actual number of facts or data points in the training set. The reason

Training Statistics for Neural Nets to Predict Time-Reversed Slow %K

.-.....-NN2.NEl

NN3.NET
NN4.NET
NNS.NET
NNCNET
NN7.NEl
NNB.NET

IWO-I

18-8-l
18-10-1
18-12-l
IRiRl

IO-LVI
Ibl44l

152
190
228
304
312

p14r

240

is the presence of redundancy between facts. Specifically, a fact derived from one
bar is likely to be fairly similar to a fact derived from an immediately adjacent bar.
Because of the similarity, the “effective” number of data points, in terms of contributing statistically independent information, will be smaller than the actual number of data points. The two corrected correlation columns represent adjustments
assuming two differently reduced numbers of facts. The process of correcting correlations is analogous to that of correcting probabilities for multiple tests in optimization: As a parameter is stepped through a number of values, results are likely to be
similar for nearby parameter values, meaning the effective number of tests is sotnewhat less tbau the actual number of tests.
Training Results for Time-Reversed Slow %K Model

As evident from Table 1 l-l, the raw correlations rose monotonically with the size
of the network in terms of numbers of connections. When adjusted for shrinkage,
by assuming an effective sample size of 13,000, the picture changed dramatically:
The nets that stood out were the small Mayer net with 6 middle layer neurons, and
the smaller of the two 4-layer networks. With the more moderate shrinkage correction, the two large 4-layer networks had the highest estimated predictive ability, as indicated by the multiple correlation of their outputs with the target.
On the basis of the more conservative statistics (those assuming a smaller
effective sample size and, hence, more shrinkage due to curve-fitting) in Table 1 l1, two neural nets were selected for use in the entry model: the 18-6-l network
(nn2.nei) and the 18-14-4-l network (nn&rer). These were considered the best
bets for nets that might hold up out-of-sample. For the test of the entry model
using these nets, the model implementation was run with mode set to 2. As usual,
all order types (at open, on limit, on stop) were tested.

TURNING-POINT

MODELS

For these models, two additional fact sets are needed. Except for their targets,
these fact sets are identical to the one constructed for the time-reversed Slow %K.
The target for the first fact set is a 1, indicating a bottom turning point, if tomorrow’s open is lower than the 3 preceding bars and 10 succeeding bars. If not, this
target is set to 0. The target for the second fact set is a 1, indicating a top, if tomorrow’s open has a price higher than the preceding 3 and succeeding 10 opens.
Otherwise this target is set to 0. Assuming there are consistent patterns in the matket, the networks should be able to learn them and, therefore, predict whether
tomorrow’s open is going to be a top, a bottom, or neither.
Unlike the fact set for the time-reversed Slow %K model, the facts in the sets
for these models are generated only if tomorrow’s open could possibly be a turn
ing point. If, for example, tomorrow’s open is higher than today’s open, then

tomorrow’s open cannot be considered a turning point, as defined earlier, no matter what happens thereafter. Why ask the network to make a prediction when there
is no uncertainty or need? Only in cases where there is an uncertainty about
whether tomorrow’s open is going to be a turning point is it worth asking the network to make a forecast. Therefore, facts are only generated for such cases.
The processing of the inputs, the use of statistics, and all other aspects of the
test methodology for the turning-point models are identical to that for the timereversed Slow %K model. Essentially, both models are identical, and so is the
methodology; only the subjects of the predictions, and, consequently, the targets
on which the nets are trained, differ. Lastly, since the predictions are different, the
rules for generating entries based on the predictions are different between models.
The outputs of the trained networks represent the probabilities, ranging from
0 to 1, of whether a bottom, a top, or neither is present. The two sets of rules for
the two models for generating entries are as follows: For the tirst model, if the bottom predictor output is greater than a threshold, buy. For the second model, if the
top predictor output is greater than a threshold, sell. For both models, the threshold represents a level of confidence that the nets must have that there will be a bottom or a top before an entry order is placed.
// write actual in-sample facts to the fact file
forccb = 1; Cb <= nix cb++l (
// ioo!&ack
if (fit L&l < ISDATE~ continue;
if cdt Lcb+lOl > OOS~DATE~ break;
// ignore 00s data
if(opnIch+l] >= Lowest(opn, 3 , Cb) I
// skip these fame
continue;
fprintf Cfil, “$6d”, ++factco”nt) i
// fact number
PrepareNe”ralInputs(“ar, ClS, SD);
forck = 1; k c= 1s; kt+j
fprintf(fil, “%7.3f”, varGd1;
/, Standard inputs
if~opn~cbill < Lowest Copn, 9. cb+lO) 1
netout I 1.0; else netout = 0.0; ,, calculate target
fprintfcfil,‘%6.lf\Il”. netout i ,, target
ifC(Cb % 500) == 1)
printf CvZ* = %d\n’ , cb) ;
// progress info
l
// generate entry signals. stop prices and limit prices
signa1=0;
if~opn~cb+ll c LOWest~opn, 3 , Cbl) ( // r u n only these
PrepareNe”ralmputs(var. cls, &I; I/ preprocess data
rmset-inputvbmet, &“arIll) ;
,, feed net inputs
ntlfire Cnnet) ;
,, run the net
neta”~ = ntlget~output~nnet, 0);
/, get mtput
netout *= 100.0;
// scale to percent

Since the code for the bottom predictor model is almost identical to that of the timereversed Slow %K model, only the two blocks that contain changed code are presented above. In the first block of code, the time-reversed Slow %K is not used.
Instead, a series of ones or zeros is calculated that indicates the presence (1) or
absence (0) of bottoms (bottom target). When writing the facts, instead of writing the
time-reversed Slow %K, the bottom target is written. In the second block of code, the
roles for comparing the neural output with an appropriate threshold, and generating
the actual entry buy signals, are implemented. In both blocks, code is included to prevent the writing of facts, or use of predictions, when tomorrow’s open could not possibly be a bottom. Similar code fragments for the top predictor model appear below.

,, lo&back
/I ignore 00s data
I/ skip these facts
,, fact number

,, calculate target
,, write target

Test Methodology for the Turning-Point Model
The test methodology for this model is identical to that used for the time-reversed
Slow %K model. The fact set is generated, loaded into N-TRAIN, scaled, and shuffled. A series of nets (from 3. to 4-layer ones) are trained to maximum convergence
and then polished. Statistics such as shrinkage-corrected correlations are calculated.
Training Results for the Turning-Point Model
Bo&vn Forecaster. The structure of Table 1 l-2 is identical to that of Table 11-l. As
with the net trained to predict the time-reversed Slow %K, there was a monotonic
relationship between the number of connections in the network and the multiple correlation of the network’s output with the target; i.e., larger nets evinced higher correlations. The net was trained on a total of 23,900 facts, which is a smaller fact set than
that for the time-reversed Slow %K. The difference in number of facts resulted
because the only facts used were those that contained some uncertainty about whether
tomorrow’s open could be a turning point. Since the facts for the bottom forecaster
came from more widely spaced points in the time series, it was assumed that there
would be less redundancy among them. When corrected for shrinkage, effective sample sizes of 23,919 (equal to the actual number of facts) and 8,000 (a reduced effective fact count) were assumed. In terms of the more severely adjusted correlations, the
best net in this model appeared to be the largest 4-layer network; the smaller 4-layer
network was also very good. Other than these two nets, only the 3.layer network with
10 middle-layer neurons was a possible choice. For tests of trading performance, the
large 4-layer network (nn9.nef) and the much smaller 3-layer network (n&.net) were
selected.
T A B L E

11-Z

-,.

Training Statistics for Neural Nets to Predict Bottom Turning Points

Net Name INet Size
!

]Connections
I

lCorfelation
I

NNI .NET
NN2.NET
NNB
. .-.. NET
.- ,.
NN4.NE.‘ T
NNS.NET
NN8.NET
NN7.NE-r
NNB.NE

76
114

0.109
0.121

1.-52
I100
a__

O~lA8
_.. ._
Ill-. ,Ra
._”

.---

228
304
!mo
ii2

0.167
0.185
II225
0.219

18-200-l

488

I$

1841
18&i
1.--.
&&I
._IlIL~h4
._ .
1 &I 2-1
1818-l
18-14-4-1
a-20-.1

23900

lCorrected
I

forShrinkage
!

0.084
0.100

0.050
0.025

0~122
-..--

_._ O~tlAQ._

”
_. 1411
.-.

-.--

0.137
0.148
0~188
0.188

-..--

rind
-.---0.019
-0.080
0~057
o.oQ8

0.294

0.200

0.188

Assumed

23900

8000

I

_.__.

244

TABLE

1

l-3

Training Statistics for Neural Nets to Predict Top Turning Points
Net Name

Net Size

Connections Correlation Corrected forShrinkqje

NNI .NET

18-4-l

70

Actual N

125919

NN2 NET

Ii1

I

0.103

0.068 1

0117

IAs-----’

0 na71

0.035

-0 t-07

I

Top Forecuster.

Table 1 l-3 contains the statistics for the nets in this model; they
were trained on 25,919 facts. Again, the correlations were directly related in size to
the number of connections in the net, with a larger number of connections leading
to a better model fit. When mildly corrected for shrinkage, only the smaller 4-layer
network deviated from this relationship by having a higher correlation than would
be expected. When adjusted under the assumption of large amounts of curve-fitting
and shrinkage, only the two 4-layer networks stood out, with the largest one
(nn9.net) performing best. The only other high correlation obtained was for the 1%
10-l net (nn4.nef). To maximize the difference between the nets used in the trading
tests, the largest 4.layer net, which was the best shrinkage-corrected performer, and
the fairly small (18-10-l) net were chosen.
TRADING RESULTS FOR ALL MODELS
Table 11-4 provides data regarding whole portfolio performance with the best insample parameters for each test in the optimization and verification samples. The
information is presented for each combination of order type, network, and model.
In the table, SAM’ = whether the test was on the training or verification sample
(Nor OUT); ROA% = the annualized return-on-account; ARRR = the annualized
risk-to-reward ratio; PROB = the associated probability or statistical significance;
TRDS = the number of trades taken across all commodities in the portfolio;
WIN% = the percentage of winning trades; $TRD = the average profit/loss per
trade; BARS = the average number of days a trade was held; NETL = the total net
profit on long trades, in thousands of dollars; NETS = the total net profit on short
trades, in thousands of dollars. Columns PI, P2, and P3 represent parameter val-
