
Most charting systems will allow you to save charts including multiple technical studies,
such as MACD, RSI, stochastics, and ADX/DMI. I suggest layering the studies so only one is
visible at a time, leaving the maximum amount of space to display the price chart, which is
always the primary focus. You can then toggle between different studies at your convenience.

Looking at momentum in multiple time frames
Just as you were presented with starkly differing images by looking at the same price chart in
different time frames, so will you be confronted with vastly different momentum readings across
time frames. At any given moment, daily momentum readings may be negative and moving lower;
four-hour momentum may be nearing overbought territory; and hourly momentum may have topped

and turned lower.
Which one should you listen to? Simply put, all of them. The trick, however, is to keep each
reading in perspective according to its time frame. Daily momentum readings develop over many
days and weeks. Shorter-term readings play out in correspondingly shorter time frames.
The key is to view each period’s momentum indication in line with the time frame of the study. An
hourly reading that has bottomed out and turned higher suggests that prices may stop declining for a
few hours and possibly begin to move higher — but it’s no sure thing. Look next to the longer time
frames to put the shorter-term readings into perspective. For example, if the hourly has bottomed
out and started to move higher, and the four-hour reading is bottoming out in oversold territory,
you may just have the makings of a larger turnaround to the upside. But if the four-hour reading is
still in neutral territory and pointed lower, the hourly reading may suggest just a short-term bounce
in a continuing move lower.

I like to focus on four-hour momentum readings as the principal gauge of the durability of a
directional price move. Shorter-term studies, such as hourly or 90-minute, are good as earlywarning indicators and guides to short-term timing, but they can be quickly overwhelmed by
strong directional price moves. Daily studies tend to be too slow to give off timely signals
for short- and medium-term trading, generally confirming larger directional shifts well after
the fact. The four-hour period is a solid compromise that’s long enough to capture intraday
and multiday mini-trends without generating too many false signals, while being just short
enough to give timely indications of a pending reversal.

Trading on divergences between price and momentum
In Chapter 11, I introduce the idea of bullish/bearish divergences between price and momentum. In
a nutshell, a bullish divergence occurs when prices make new lows, but momentum is not making
similar new lows; a bearish divergence occurs when prices make new highs, but momentum is not
making similar new highs.
Figure 12-8 shows an example of a bullish divergence between price and MACD. Because
momentum is an underlying gauge of the speed of a directional move and, therefore, an indication
of the level of market interest behind the move, a divergence between price and momentum
typically signals that the latest price movement is false or unlikely to be sustained and will
eventually reverse course in the direction of the momentum. So a bullish divergence tends to signal
a price rebound after fresh selling makes new lows, and a bearish divergence typically signals a
price decline after last-ditch buying makes a new high.

The key to trading off divergences is to be patient and wait for confirmation. The latest rally
in prices, for example, may be the start of a new wave higher, and the momentum study may

eventually turn around or catch up and confirm the latest gains, negating the apparent
divergence. Also, prices can diverge from momentum for many hours or days. By all means,
always take note of divergences when you spot them, but keep them in context:
Has new information (data, comments, and so on) come into the market? If it’s new
news, it may generate a fresh wave of directional buying or selling and overwhelm the
divergence. If it’s old news, like reiterated comments or as-expected data that’s already
been discounted, it could make for an ideal divergence setup.
Are prices making significant new highs or lows? If prices have broken below a key
daily low or trend-line support, for example, fresh selling interest may be coming into the
market that creates a new wave lower. But if prices are pushing only below recent hourly
lows, and longer-term support is still some distance off, the divergence will tend to
correctly reflect that the price move down is invalid.
Figure 12-8:
A bullish
divergence is
created when
new price
lows are not
matched by
new lows in
momentum,
suggesting
that the latest
price decline
may not be
sustained.

Source: www.eSignal.com

The safest way to trade off divergences is to wait for confirmation that prices are indeed
reversing course in the direction of the momentum divergence. In most cases, there will be a
key trend line that is guiding prices higher or lower while prices are diverging with
momentum. When that trend line is broken by a price reversal, such as in Figure 12-8, you
can consider it confirmation that the divergence is beginning to play out.

Using momentum for timing entry and exit
You can also use momentum studies to refine the timing of your trade entry and exit. If your
analysis has led you to conclude that a long position is the way to go, for instance, and you’ve
identified key trend-line support on which to buy, you can look at various time frames of
momentum to determine the likelihood of prices actually reaching that support. If hourly momentum
has turned up from oversold levels, and four-hour momentum is showing signs of bottoming out,
but prices are still 50 pips away from your trend-line entry level, you may consider stepping in
ahead of the trend-line support and buying sooner.
Alternatively, if daily and four-hour studies are both solidly negative, and hourly momentum has
just gone through a short-term bounce higher but is now turning negative again, you can likely
afford to wait for prices to reach your desired price level. (You may even rethink the overall
strategy in light of such bearish momentum readings.) You can use momentum studies in the same
way to gauge the likelihood of reaching your take-profit targets.

Momentum is only a gauge of the relative speed of price movements and not always a
leading indicator of changes in direction. Although you should always listen to what
momentum studies are saying, so you can anticipate and prepare for alternative outcomes, you
should always wait for confirmation from prices themselves. Even then, markets and events
have a way of throwing curve balls at you, but at least you minimized the risks by waiting for
price confirmation.

Trading on Candlestick Patterns
Candlestick formations are among my favorite trade identification tools; I highlight some of the
most common reversal patterns to look for in Chapter 11. There are lots more patterns where those
came from, with others signaling trend continuation or consolidation. Obviously, I like to home in
on the reversal patterns because I think they give me the most price bang for my analysis buck.
Most trading books say that you can analyze candles in any time frame, but I like to focus
exclusively on daily and weekly candles. My thinking is that a full day’s or week’s price action
carries more weight than a few hours or other intraday periods. Besides, a candlestick pattern that
presents itself on a daily or weekly chart typically portends a larger price movement (hundreds of
pips) over the next few days or weeks rather than smaller price moves signaled by intraday candle
analysis.

The other neat feature of candlesticks is that most formations offer a clearly defined price
level that negates the scenario suggested by the pattern. Clarity is a rare commodity in the

forex market, so when you have a tool that offers generally clearly defined scenarios, it’s
well worth making it a standard part of your analysis routine.

The catch with candlesticks is that the formations offer only a general directional signal,
such as a recent price move higher that looks set to reverse. Even the term reverse doesn’t
necessarily mean prices will move lower — only that they’re likely to stop going up. But this
is the forex market, where prices are always moving, so when they stop going in one
direction, they usually start going in the other direction. The other trick with candlestick
formations is that they typically don’t suggest tactical price levels to enter or exit. As a result,
trading based on a candle formation can be a leap of faith, as in “The pattern suggests prices
should move lower in coming days but doesn’t indicate how high prices may go first.”

One way to trade candlestick reversal patterns is to leave orders to sell at higher levels in
the case of a bearish reversal pattern, or to buy at lower levels in the case of a bullish
reversal formation. The selling level would be on the approach to the highs for the preceding
move up, with a stop placed a margin of error above those highs, which should not be
surpassed if the pattern is valid. A similar approach could be used to buy on a bullish
reversal pattern. The idea is that the market may still try again in the direction of the prior
move, providing you better levels at which to enter your position based on the candlestick
formation.
Alternatively, or in tandem with the above strategy on an either/or basis, you can identify a key
support/resistance level in the direction suggested by the candlestick pattern and place a stop loss
order to enter on the other side, in case the market moves directly as the pattern suggests. I outline
a similar strategy in more detail in the following section.

Building a Trade Strategy from Start to Finish
If you’ve read any other trading books, you’ve undoubtedly seen numerous chart illustrations
where the authors can point to a chart pattern and say, “See, the pattern indicates a price top,” and
sure as shootin’, the rest of the chart shows that prices move lower. Don’t you just hate that? Well,
hindsight is 20/20. Don’t get me wrong; I’m guilty of the same thing in this book. It’s largely
unavoidable to get the point across.
In the real market, you’re never going to have the benefit of hindsight in advance. On every chart
you look at, the future is going to be blank. And that’s the eternal struggle — basing decisions in
the here and now on events that have yet to happen, all the while putting your money at risk.
To make amends, I do something a bit strange here and depict a trade opportunity in real time, or
as real as I can make it in a book. Who knows? The trade may blow up in my face, and I’ll have a

bad trade recommendation preserved in book form for posterity. The point of this exercise,
however, is not to show you how good or bad I am at spotting trades. It’s to give you an insight
into how you may analyze the market and construct a trade strategy on a regular basis, using many
of the approaches I outline in this chapter.
Follow along with Figures 12-9 and 12-10, which show some of the key daily and hourly price
points I use to define my trade strategy for EUR/USD from March 21, 2011. In Chapter 11, I
indicate my preference to use fundamental elements to determine the overall direction a currency
pair should move, and then apply technical analysis to refine entry and exit levels.
So, how do the fundamentals for EUR/USD stack up? At the moment, pretty good in my view.
European leaders have reached agreement on a long-term debt relief mechanism, and the market
seems to find it credible, reducing fears of financial instability. The ECB has strongly indicated it
plans to raise rates at its next meeting in a few weeks’ time, while the Fed has signaled rates will
stay low for the foreseeable future, giving EUR an advantage over the USD on the monetary policy
outlook. Also, one week ago the G7 intervened for the first time in more than a decade to support
Japanese efforts to restrain JPY strength in the aftermath of the earthquake/tsunami/nuclear disaster
earlier in March. That action saw the ECB buy EUR/JPY, giving EUR/USD, and risk assets in
general, a boost in the process. And the USD is generally quite weak.
As such, my expectation is to see EUR/USD strengthen further (currently 1.4230) to the 1.4450 to
1.4500 area initially, with potential to around 1.4680 based on the measured move objective of the
broken bull flag last month. A look at daily Ichimoku charts shows price well above the cloud and
above the Tenkan and Kijun, signs of a solid trend higher.
But I’m also wary that EUR/USD has already gained ground on the fundamental factors I cite
earlier, so I’m reluctant to buy at current levels. I also note the highs from November 2010 at
about 1.4250/1.4280 as a potentially significant resistance point. I definitely don’t want to get long
50 points below a major daily high.
Instead, I’ll look to get long at better levels. Looking at the daily chart in Figure 12-9, the break
above the 1.4000/50 level stands out as the most recent acceleration in the trend higher. Maybe I’ll
get a chance to buy a retest of the break?
The hourly chart in Figure 12-10 shows prices potentially set to drift out of the primary channel,
another cautionary sign. The hourly MACD is showing a bearish divergence on the newest highs,
but it could also be basing out above the zero line, potentially signaling another move higher.
Cross-checking with the ADX, it based out above the 25 trending level, and is currently above, but
only barely. All in all, I think I have a reasonable basis to expect a pullback lower while the
1.4280 highs hold. If they don’t, I’ll have a strategy for that scenario.
My strategy then is to buy a pullback at 1.4070 for a single lot of 100,000 EUR/USD, placing my
if-done/then-OCO limit buying order just above the key 1.4000/50 break level in case it’s not
reached. I’ll place my stop below that zone, allowing for a 20-pip margin of error, at 1.3980, for a

total risk of about 90 pips, or $900. My take profit order will be to sell at 1.4420, just below what
I think will be key round number resistance in the 1.4450/4500 area, possibly on some optionrelated selling interest, too, for a potential gain of around 350 pips or $3,500. I’ll raise the stop
loss to 1.4200 if the 1.4280/85 highs are tested, to lock in some profit in case of a failure.
In case prices move directly higher, I’m prepared to step up and buy on a stop loss basis at
1.4310, which would represent a clear break of both the 1.4280 highs and the 1.4300 level. But if
it’s triggered, I won’t hang on for too long in case the break ultimately fails. I’ll leave my stop at
1.4240 for a risk of around 70 pips, or $700. The take profit will be the same at 1.4420 for a
potential gain of around 110 pips. Depending on the strength of any follow-through buying above
1.4280, I may opt for a trailing stop loss of 70 pips and see how the 1.4450/4500 area reacts.

Figure 12-9:
Daily
EUR/USD
analysis
suggests
potential price
targets based
on the broken
bull flag, but
key daily
highs loom
just above
current prices.

Source: www.eSignal.com

Figure 1210: Hourly
EUR/USD
shows some
signs of a
potential stall
in recent gains
as seen in a
bearish
divergence in
MACD.

Source: www.eSignal.com

So how’d the trade turn out? Surprise, surprise, it went well, but I changed what was a mediumterm strategy into a short-term trade based on market developments. First, EUR/USD tried higher
one more time on Tuesday, but stopped short of 1.4250 with a high at 1.4249, before turning
lower. A combination of weaker Eurozone data, better U.S. data and escalating concerns over
Portuguese debt (the government collapsed on Wednesday night) saw EUR/USD drop to as low as
1.4054 (which is where the Ichimoku Tenkan line was on that day), triggering my limit entry order
at 1.4070 on Thursday morning in European trading. A disappointing U.S. durable goods report
later in the New York morning saw EUR/USD rebound quickly above 1.4120, eventually
triggering stop loss orders at 1.4150/70 and jumping as high as 1.4220.
With the quick bounce from the key 1.4000/50 support area identified earlier, I felt quite confident
in the overall strategy. But I was also mindful of the key resistance up at 1.4250/80, which now
appeared to be drawing sellers in below it. I decided to protect my profits, so I narrowed my
order to a stop loss at 1.4145 (locking in 75 pips profit), just below the break-up level at 1.4150
earlier in the morning and lowering my take profit to 1.4230. The rest of Thursday traded between
those levels, and I finished out the day still long one lot from 1.4070. Looking ahead, I considered
headlines coming from the EU debt summit could send EUR/USD lower in a flash, and also that
the German IFO survey due out on Friday morning was forecast to decline, also potentially
sending EUR/USD back down. Shortly after the New York close, I decided to exit the trade and
sold at 1.4175, for a gain of 105 pips, or $1,050.
What did I do right and what did I do wrong in the trade? First, I took time to analyze key price
levels and identify an opportunistic entry level, placing my order just above key support, in case it

wasn’t reached. Second, I aggressively protected my profits, adjusting my stop loss order based
on unfolding price movements. Third, I stayed flexible regarding exiting the trade, taking into
account technical levels and developing fundamental events. Last and most important, I took profit.
EUR/USD could’ve gone to the moon on Friday (it didn’t, but that’s another story) and I might’ve
missed out as my ultimate view of a higher EUR was realized. But the bottom line is that I
developed a trade strategy, stuck to it, and have something to show for it. You can’t go broke
taking profit.
What did I do wrong? In hindsight, I could have been more aggressive and sold short above
1.4200, keeping a tight stop over 1.4250 or 1.4280, for a well-defined and relatively minimal risk.
But that would have been contrary to my fundamental expectations, and I would have regretted it if
it failed. I also may have then become gun-shy and reluctant to get long at even higher levels. So
maybe it wasn’t such a bad thing after all.
I hope this example gives you a practical idea of how to put it all together, drawing on
fundamentals, chart formations, and technical analysis to identify a trade setup and construct the
trading plan to exploit it. In Chapters 13, 14, and 15, I look at considerations and strategies for
entering positions, managing positions, and exiting trades in much greater detail.

Chapter 13

Risk-Management Considerations
In This Chapter
Understanding the different types of risk
Managing leverage and inflated expectations
Setting up trade plans in terms of risk
Planning for the unexpected
Trading is all about risk, yet it’s frequently the last thing many individual traders think about. Too
often, they’re fixated on the expectation of positive trading results, as in “How much can I make?”
To a large extent, that’s basic human nature. Why would anyone speculate in anything unless he
believed he could win?
I think traders should approach the forex market with eyes wide-open when it comes to the risks
they’re taking. And I’m not talking about some simple risk formula that comes out to dollars and
cents. I’m looking at it from the perspective of an overall risk-taking enterprise philosophy. The
more aware you are of the risks you face in the forex market, the more likely you’ll be able to
avoid them — and the more likely your success.

Managing Risk Is More Than Avoiding Losses
On the most basic level, risk in currency trading is the same as trading in any other financial
market — the risk is that you’ll lose money. But risk comes in many different forms and from many
different sources. Sometimes the biggest risks are the ones that you never knew existed.
I believe forewarned is forearmed. In this section, I look at some of the main sources of risk that
may not be readily apparent or that are easily overlooked.

Leverage amplifies gains and losses — and
expectations
Leverage refers to the multiple applied to your available margin collateral, which translates into
the maximum size of your market position. Leverage is typically expressed as a multiplier rate
(like 10 times or 20 times) or a ratio (like 10:1 or 20:1) If the leverage rate is 10-times/ratio is

10:1, for example, and you have $1,000 of available margin, you’re able to hold a maximum
position equal to $10,000.
Online currency trading firms typically offer higher leverage ratios than you may be familiar with
from trading stocks on margin. Leverage ratios among currency brokers are typically on the order
of 100:1 for standard-size accounts (100,000 trade-lot size) and 200:1 for mini-accounts (10,000
trade-lot size). Recent regulatory changes around the world have limited maximum leverage ratios
to lower levels, such as 20:1 in Hong Kong or 50:1 in the United States, which I think is more than
sufficient for individual traders.

Be wary of forex brokerage firms that offer super-sized leverage. I’ve seen some offering
up to 400-times leverage, or 400:1. I strongly discourage you from employing that much
leverage. As well, regulatory limits on leverage have seen some traders go jurisdiction
shopping, looking for the highest leverage available, but ending up in dodgy locales that may
carry additional risks.
Leverage is a great trading tool, allowing traders with less capital to participate in markets that
they couldn’t trade otherwise. But leverage is still just a tool. As with any other tool (think of a
chainsaw here), if you learn how to use it properly, you’ll be able to get the job done faster and
easier. But if you don’t learn how it works, and respect it, you’re asking for trouble.

Most people see only the upside benefits of leverage — the larger the position on a
profitable trade, the larger the profit, right? Yes, leverage will magnify your gains, but it’ll
also magnify your losses — the larger the position on a losing trade, the larger the loss you’ll
experience. You need to have a healthy respect for the downside risk in trading, or you won’t
last very long.
Take an example of a $100,000/lot-size account with $10,000 in initial margin deposited at a 50:1
leverage ratio. That margin balance translates into a maximum position size of $500,000, or five
lots. If you were to take a position in USD/JPY at 90.00 using the maximum position size
available, every pip change in USD/JPY is worth about $55.55 ([$500,000 × 0.01 pips] ÷ 90.00 =
$55.55). But USD/JPY is regularly subject to 50- to 100-pip price swings in a single day (or
more). If you’re positioned the wrong way, you could lose around $2,778 to $5,555 in the course
of a normal, run-of-the-mill trading day. That’s about 28 percent to 55 percent of your trading
capital in just one trade!
