
The plan outlined above would have to be revised in the light
of changed circumstances. Both the benchmark price and the size
of the levy would have to be substantially lower than the figures
used above, reflecting the erosion in OPEC's monopoly profits
that has occurred since the scheme was formulated.
I am reluctant to invest any effort in revising the Pfan because I
recognize that it is totally unrealistic, given the prevailing bias.
Any kind of buffer scheme would be instantly laughed out of
court, and the dismissal would be justified by the past history of
buffer stock schemes. But the argument can be turned around. Is
the experience with the market mechanism any better? Look at
the history of oil. The only periods of stability were those when
there were excess supplies and a cartel-type arrangement was in
operation. There were three such episodes: first, the monopoly
established by Standard Oil; second, the production quota system
operated by the Texas Railroad Commission; and third, OPEC.
Each episode was preceded and followed by turmoil. If some sort
of stabilization scheme is necessary, should the task be left to the
producers? Ought not the consuming countries, whose vital interests are affected, take a hand in the arrangements? When the force
of this argument is recognized, it will be time to take the plan out
of the drawer.

338
I

h

Prescription

An International Currency
Once the idea of a buffer stock scheme for oil is accepted, it is a
relatively short step to the creation of a stable international currency. The unit of account would be based on oil. The price of oil
would be kept stable by the buffer stock scheme although its
value, in terms of other goods and services, may gradually appreciate if and when demand outstrips supply. In other words, national currencies would gradually depreciate in terms of the
international currency.
The newly created international lending agency would use oil
as its unit of account. Since its loans would be protected against
inflation, they could carry a low rate of interest, say, 3%. The
difference between interest earned (3%) and interest paid on
blocked accounts
could be used to unblock the accounts. As
the blocked accounts diminish, the lending agency builds up its
own capital.
The lending agency could be endowed with the powers that
usually appertain to a central bank. It could regulate the worldwide money supply by issuing its own short-term and long-term
obligations, and it could play a powerful role in regulating the
volume of national currencies in terms of its own unit of account.
It could exercise the various supervisory functions that are performed by central banks. Its unit of account would constitute an
international currency.
Commercial loans could also be designated in the international
currency. Eventually, the oil-based currency could replace the
dollar and other national currencies in all types of international
financial transactions. The transition would have to be carefully
orchestrated and the institutional framework developed. This is
not the place, and I am not the man, to design a comprehensive
scheme. It is clear that an oil-based currency could eliminate
speculative influences from international capital transfers.
Whether the establishment of such a currency would be acceptable to all parties concerned is the crucial question. The United
States, in particular, has much to lose if the dollar ceased to be
the main international currency. For one thing, the home country
of the reserve currency is in an advantageous position to render
financial services to the rest of the world. More important, the
United States is at present the only country that can borrow un-

Toward an International Central Bank

339

limited amounts in its own currency. If the dollar were replaced
by an international currency, the United States could continue
borrowing, but it would be obliged to repay its debt in full. At
present, it is within the power of the U.S. government to influence
the value of its own ipdebtedness and it is almost a foregone
conclusion that the indebtedness will be worth less when it is
repaid than it was at the time when it was incurred.
There are limits to the willingness of the rest of the world to
finance the U.S. budget deficit and we may be currently approaching these limits. But the Japanese, for one, seem content to finance
the United States even i n the knowledge that they will never be
repaid ir, full, because that is the way in which Japan can become
"number one" in the world. Japan has already taken over the role
of the United States as the major supplier of capital to the rest of
the world and it is only a question of time before the yen takes
over as the major reserve currency. The transition is likely to be
accompanied by a lot of turmoil and dislocations, as was the
transition from the pound sterling to the dollar in the interwar
period.
The introduction of an international currency would avoid the
turmoil. Moreover, it would help, arrest the decay of the U.S.
economy currently under way. We could no longer run up external debt on concessionary terms; therefore we would be forced to
put our house in order. The question is whether our government
has the foresight, and our people the will, to accept the discipline
that an international currency would impose. Renouncing credit
on easy terms makes sense only if we are determined to borrow
less. That means that we must reduce both our budget and our
trade deficits. It is at this point that the quastions of systemic
reform and economic policy become intertwined.
As far as trade is concerned, there are two alternative ways to
go. One is to exclude imports through protectionsist measures,
and the other is to increase our exports. Protectionism is a recipe
for disaster. It would precipitate the wholesale default of heavily
indebted countries and lead to the unraveling of the international
financial system. Even in the absence of financial calamity, the
elimination of comparative advantages would cause a substantial
lowering of living standards throughout the world. On the other
hand, it is difficult to see how exports can be significantly increased without systemic reform. Debt reform would increase the
purchasing power of debtor countries and monetary reform

340
t

I

Prescription

would provide the element of stability that is necessary for a
successful adjustment process in the U.S.
It can be argued that excessive financial instability is doing
great damage to the fabric of the American economy. Real assets
cannot adjust to macroeconomic changes as fast as financial assets; hence there is a great inducement to transfer real assets into
a financial form. This transfer is itself a major factor in weakening
the "real" economy. When we examine how financial assets are
employed we gain a true measure of the devastation that has occurred. The bulk of the assets is tied up in the Federal budget
deficit, loans to heavily indebted countries, and leveraged buyouts. "Real" capital forni~eianis act.cla1l-y declinicg. That w ~ u l d
not be so disastrous if we could count on a steady flow of income
from abroad. But our trade deficit is financed partly by debt service from less developed countries, which is precarious to say the
least, and partly by capital inflows, which we shall have to service
in turn. It is not an exaggeration to say that the "real" economy is
being sacrificed to keep the "financial" economy afloat.
To reduce our dependence on capital inflows, the budget deficit
needs to be tackled. The most alluring prospect, in my eyes, is a
disarmament treaty with the Soviet Union on advantageous
terms. The period of heavy defense spending under President
Reagan could then be justified as a gigantic gamble that has paid
off: the Imperial Circle would be replaced by a more stable configuration in which both our budget and our trade are closer to
balance.
The Japanese can, of course, continue to produce more than
they consume. There is nothing to stop them from becoming the
premier economic power in the world as long as they are willing
to save and to export capital. But the rise of Japan need not be
accompanied by the fall of the United States; with the help of an
international currency, two leading economic powers could coexist.

THE PARADOX OF SYSTEMIC REFORM

I have provided the outlines not only of a viable international
financial system but also of a viable economic policy for the
United States. It is no more than a sketch or a vision but it could
be elaborated to cover other aspects that I have not touched upon
here.
Two fundamental problems present themselves; one is abstract,
and the other personal. The abstract problem concerns all attempts at systemic reform. Given our inherently imperfect understanding, isn't there a paradox in systemic reform? How can we
hope to design an internally consistent system? The personal
problem concerns my aversion to bureaucracy; awhternational
central bank would make bureaucracy inescapable.
I believe the paradox of systemic reform is spurious but it needs
to be dealt with. Only if one could demand permanent and perfect
solutions would it have any validity. But it follows from our imperfect understanding that permanent and perfect solutions are
beyond our reach. Life is temporary; only death is permanent. It
makes a great deal of difference how we live our lives; temporary
solutions are much better than none at all.
There is a great temptation to insist on a permanent solution.
To understand its source, we must consider the meaning of life
and death. The fear of death is one of the most deeply felt human
emotions. We find the idea of death totally unacceptable and we
grasp at any straw to escape it. The striving for permanence and
perfection is just one of the ways in which we seek to escape
death. It happens to be a deception. Far from escaping theidea of
death, we embrace it: permanence and perfection are death.

342
1

I

Prescription

I have thought about the meaning of life and death long and
hard and I have come up with a formulation that I have found
personally satisfying. I shall sum it up here, although I realize
that it may not be as meaningful to others as it is to me, The key
is to distinguish between the fact of death and the idea of death.
The fact of death is linked with the fact of life, whereas the idea
of death stands in juxtaposition with the idea of consciousness.
Consciousness and death are irreconcilable; but life and death are
not. In other words, the fact of death need not be as terrifying as
the idea.
The idea of death is overpowering: in terms of death, life and
everything connected with it lose a 1 significance. BQP the idea of
death is only an idea and the correspondence between facts and
ideas is less than perfect. It would be a mistake to equate the idea
and the fact. As far as facts are concerned, the clear and present
fact is that we are alive. Death as a fact looms in the distance, but,
when we reach it, it will not be the same as the idea we have of it
now. In other words, our fear of death is unlikely to be validated
by the event.
In thinking about life and death, we have a choice: we can take
life or death as our starting point. The two are not mutually exclusive: both need to be dealt with-as a fact and as a thought. But
the point of view we adopt tends to favor one or the other. The
bias we develop permeates all aspects of our thinking and existence. There are civilizations, like that of the Egyptians, that seem
to be devoted to the cult of death; there are others, like that of the
Greeks, where even the immortals seem to lead normal lives. In
most instances the two points of view are at odds and the interplay between them makes history. The conflict between the spiritual and the temporal in Christianity is a case in point. The
drama is now being reenacted in the Soviet Union where the
demands of Communist ideology are difficult to reconcile with
the demands of military strength and economic efficiency.
The clash of biases can manifest itself in many more subtle
ways. Thus, we can take different attitudes with regard to economic regulation. One position is that regulation is useless because it introduces distortions that, left to themselves, eventually
lead to a breakdown of the system. This point of view is powerfully reinforced by the argument that the market mechanism, left
to itself, tends toward equilibrium. The opposite point of view is
that perfection is not attainable either by the market or by regula-

The Paradox of Systemic Reform

343

