are usually paid on a quarterly basis).

Market and Data Types

87

FIGURE 5.3 Event icons are automatically displayed on equity charts.

The stock split icon, shown in Figure 5.5, is placed on the date when
a stock split took place. This includes historical splits as well as forthcoming, announced splits. Mousing over this icon shows the split amount and
date. A 2-for-1 split, for example, means that shareholders prior to that
date would, after that date, be holding twice as many shares as before
(which are probably each worth about half what they were before, exogenous events notwithstanding).

88

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 5.4 The dividend icon shows the date and amount of each dividend.

The conference call event icon has a rather special feature, in that it
can in many cases provide you direct access to the audio of the call itself.
If running your mouse over the icon tells you the date and time of the call
and says “Double-Click for More Info,” such as with Figure 5.6, you can
double-click the icon to activate an audio playback of the conference call
itself.
Finally, the earnings report icon, shown with a dollar sign, indicates
the dates of prior and forthcoming earnings announcements. Understandably, these event icons often correlate with major price moves, particularly
with highly volatile growth stocks. A positive surprise (or negative disappointment) during an earnings report can create large gaps in a stock’s
price movement. Figure 5.7 shows a stock with a large number of earnings
icons (spaced a quarter apart), any of which yields the date of the earnings
release.

Market and Data Types

89

FIGURE 5.5 Here we see a 2-for-1 stock split for Yahoo! issued at the end of
the Internet bubble. Yahoo! has, understandably, not had any stock splits since that
time.

90

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 5.6 The conference call event icon often provides access to the audio of
the call.

MUTUAL FUNDS
Symbols for mutual funds are five alphabetical characters long (and those
ending with XX are, more specifically, money market funds). Examples include the well-known Fidelity Magellan Fund (FMAGX) and ultra index
funds, such as the Ultra-Bear ProFunds Small-Cap (UCPIX).
Unlike stocks, which have open, high, low, close, and volume data
points, mutual funds have only one data point per day, the Net Asset Value
(NAV). Because of this, when you chart a mutual fund, you will see a graph
with only one small dash per day, such as Figure 5.8, which can be difficult
to read.
Because of this, we advise using a line graph instead. Just go to the
Chart Settings menu, choose Graph Type, and then choose the line type

Market and Data Types

91

FIGURE 5.7 Earnings announcements can often be accompanied by large price
moves.

of graph. This setting makes any mutual fund graph much easier to interpret, as illustrated in Figure 5.9. You should also note that fund NAVs typically are not available until two hours after the regular close of the stock
market.
Another aspect of mutual funds is that they often experience distributions, which are cash payments to participants in the fund. The data platform supporting ProphetCharts is rather special in that it adjusts for these
dividends. Most charting platforms show a large gap in instances of distributions, which renders the chart much less useful. Failing to adjust for a
distribution is just as bad as failing to adjust for a stock split. ProphetCharts
applies a coefficient to all data preceding a distribution so that the chart is

92

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 5.8 Mutual funds only have one data point per day, and no volume.

FIGURE 5.9 A line graph is the best choice for charting mutual funds.

Market and Data Types

93

smoothed and adjusted, more accurately reflecting the true performance
and movement of a given fund.

FOREX
The foreign exchange (FOREX) market, as is mentioned in probably every
advertisement that’s ever appeared for the industry, is the largest dollarvolume market on the planet. Trillions of dollars of currencies are traded
worldwide every day.
Even if you never intend to trade in the FOREX markets, you will find
that a basic understanding of these markets will be helpful in your trading
in other realms. Intermarket analysis has value, and having an awareness of
what the euro–U.S. dollar ratio is doing is important in the world of modern
trading.
A huge number of currency pairs are available in ProphetCharts, and
all of them are listed in the Currency Pairs module, shown in Figure
5.10. As with all the other modules, you can activate this module by going to the Chart Settings menu and choosing it from the list of modules
shown.

FIGURE 5.10 The Currency Pairs module provides easy access to dozens of
FOREX ratios.

94

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 5.11 The EUR-USD is the most widely watched FOREX market.

You can either double-click, drag-and-drop, or manually type in any of
these currency pairs to see the chart. The data are available on both a daily
and an intraday basis, and unlike equity markets, FOREX trades virtually
around the clock (except weekends).
The most widely followed currency pair is the EUR-USD, shown in
Figure 5.11. The EUR-USD is a good way to get a glimpse of the relative
strength of the dollar to the euro (the higher the price, the weaker the dollar is, because the dollar is the denominator in this instance). Other good
pairs to follow include NZD-USD, USD-CAD, and EUR-JPY.
As with e-mini futures, our next topic, streaming intraday FOREX
data give you a good sense in nonmarket hours what the next day might
hold. Events that take place after hours, particularly important economic
reports, have immediate reverberations in these markets, and you can
get an accurate and timely assessment about how the equity markets will
probably react to such news announcements long before regular trading
commences.

E-MINI FUTURES
One of the most successful products—perhaps the most successful—ever
introduced by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange is the e-mini future. These

Market and Data Types

95

are electronically traded almost around the clock, and they cover all kinds
of different markets, but far and away the most popular of these is the S&P
500 e-mini, colloquially referred to as the ES.
There are a number of advantages to this instrument. As stated, it is
electronic, and it trades almost 24 hours a day. It is a highly leveraged
product, so profit potential (and loss potential!) is substantial. It provides
an excellent way for those proficient at anticipating index moves to make
money doing so.
The Futures module houses both the regular futures data and the emini data. You do not need to have this module open to access the charts,
but it makes it easier to see which contracts are available and to doubleclick on the item of interest instead of having to enter an arcane symbol
such as @ESZ9. Figure 5.12 shows an example of an e-mini contract that
has been chosen from the module and whose chart is being shown in the
price pane.
Looking closely at the various e-mini instruments available in the Futures module (Figure 5.13), you can see that it covers the gamut from Asian
indexes to sector indexes to currency futures.
In addition to the standard price data (open, high, low, close, and volume), e-mini futures also contain open interest, plotted as a red line graph
on top of the volume histogram. As with most futures, these markets are
extremely thinly traded until they become the so-called front month, as
shown in Figure 5.14. The S&P e-mini, for instance, has expiration months
of March, June, September, and December. So the September contract for

FIGURE 5.12 The e-mini futures symbols are housed in the Futures module.

96

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 5.13 To chart a particular e-mini, choose the month and then the market
within that month from the dropdown menu.

FIGURE 5.14 As shown in the volume pane, there is very little trading in a futures
contract until it becomes the front month, at which time volume and open interest
both surge.

Market and Data Types

97

FIGURE 5.15 E-mini futures trade around the clock, although most of the volume
is during regular market hours.

a given year would tend to be active from about the second week of June
until the first week of September, a three-month span.
As mentioned earlier, the e-mini markets trade extended hours. In the
case of the ES (and the important but not as popular NASDAQ equivalent,
the NQ), the trading is virtually constant, except for weekends. As you
can see in Figure 5.15, the volume during the evening and nighttime is extremely thin, but it nonetheless provides valuable insights and indications
as to what the next trading day will be like.

FUTURES AND COMMODITIES
Almost all ProphetCharts have access to the basic financial instruments,
such as U.S. stocks and indexes, mutual funds, and e-mini futures. Some
classes of data are available only to those who have signed up for certain exchange agreements. Your entitlements (based on the platform on
which you are using ProphetCharts) dictate whether the data you see is
delayed or real-time, or whether you can see a particular class of data
at all.

98

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 5.16 The Futures module organizes hundreds of markets into industryoriented categories.

Therefore, do not be concerned or confused if, by chance, you are not
able to view futures or options data. It may simply be that your particular
platform doesn’t permit you to see it. For the sake of completeness, we will
briefly discuss these data types as well.
Futures and commodities data (which will be referred to simply as “futures” here) cover markets from around the world in hundreds of different
forms. Everything, from pork bellies to orange juice to crude oil, is traded
on futures markets, and although there are many more stock traders than
futures traders, the opportunities for profit from the highly leveraged world
of futures have captured the imagination of many traders.
The futures module, shown in Figure 5.16, puts the hundreds of different individual markets into a sector-based hierarchy. If you wanted to see
what wheat contracts were available, for instance, you could click on the
plus sign next to the word Grains. Crude oil, on the other hand, would be
under Energy, while Silver would be under Metals.
The construction of a futures symbol tends to be in the format
<root><year><month>. For example, the June 2010 S&P 500 contract
would be represented as SP1006, since SP is the root symbol, 10 is the relevant portion of the year 2010, and 06 is the numeric representation of the
month June.
Futures contracts are ephemeral creatures, however. Most of them
last just two or three months. Therefore, ProphetCharts provides access
to synthetic futures contracts as well, more popularly known as continuous contracts. These are individual futures contracts that are chained together so that you can get a longer-term view of a market’s direction. If
you were interested, for example, in the wheat market, and you looked at

Market and Data Types

99

FIGURE 5.17 The unadjusted contract shows many years of data chained
together.

only one specific contract, your understanding of wheat would be extraordinarily limited. Looking at the continuous contract, however, you could
see wheat’s price action over a period of half a century.
There are a couple of styles of continuous contract: unadjusted and
adjusted. The unadjusted contract, as the name implies, chains the raw
contracts together. So if there were four contracts per year for a particular
market, then March would connect to June would connect to September
would connect to December, and so forth. The period of time in which each
of these was the front month would also be the portion of time when the
price data for that market would be presented in the continuous contract.
Figure 5.17, for instance, shows the continuous unadjusted contract
for crude oil. The symbol for such a contract is the root symbol followed
by the number 1600. Therefore, CL1600 is the continuous unadjusted contract for crude, W1600 is for wheat, NG1600 is for natural gas, and so
forth.
There are some markets, however, in which the price difference from
one contract to the next might be substantial. Some agricultural markets in
particular might have months that represent different crops whose prices

100

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 5.18 Unadjusted continuous contracts can have large price gaps.

are far apart, and chaining these contracts together would create many
misleading price gaps in the graph. Therefore, ProphetCharts provides for
adjusted contracts, which do a better job of merging such disparate data
together into a more useful graph.
Take natural gas, for example, shown in Figure 5.18. As you can see,
there are some very big price gaps, which usually come about when another month takes over as the front month.
The same market adjusted for these irregularities, shown in
Figure 5.19, is much smoother. Adjusted graphs are far more useful when
combined with standard technical studies and drawn objects because they
provide a more realistic representation as to what the market is really doing. The symbol for these is slightly different: 1700 instead of 1600 (examples: JO1700, HU1700, PB1700).

OPTIONS
Stock and index options have some very unusual symbology, but luckily
ProphetCharts has a helpful Wizard feature to make charting options a
snap.

Market and Data Types

101

FIGURE 5.19 In some markets, the adjusted version of the contract provides a
cleaner and more useful representation of the price action.

The first thing you need to do is choose the Find Option item from the
Symbols menu, which will reveal the Options Wizard dialog box, like the
one in Figure 5.20. The way to use this Wizard is:
1. Enter the underlying symbol. In the example shown here, the symbol

being used is IWM, which is the exchange-traded fund for the Russell
2000 index.

FIGURE 5.20 The Options Wizard greatly simpliﬁes the task of ﬁnding an option
chart.

102

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

2. Click the Set button. After you do, ProphetCharts will take a few mo-

ments to query the price database and determine all the available expirations and strike prices. You will see these dropdown menus become
available once the query is completed.
3. Next, choose what kind of option interests you—a Put (which is the
right to sell a given security at a given price) or a Call (which is the
right to buy a given security at a given price).
4. Then choose the month and year expiration from the Expiration dropdown menu, as well as the strike price from the Strike Price dropdown
menu. You will often find a large number of strike prices available.
5. Finally, click on the Get Chart button, which will show you the daily
or intraday price chart (depending on what you’ve selected in the Frequency and Duration dropdowns).

FIGURE 5.21 Options tend to be thinly traded except for the last couple of
months prior to their expiration.

Market and Data Types

103

After you have clicked Get Chart, you can use the Wizard to find other
options, or you can click Cancel to close the Wizard. An example options
chart, the IWM $60 put for November 2009, is shown in Figure 5.21. As
is so often the case with options, trading is very light and spotty early in
the history of the contract, but as the expiration date nears, the price bars
become more regular and easier to read.
As with futures contracts, options have open interest, which is plotted
in the volume pane. You can press Ctrl-Spacebar to toggle volume and open
interest on and off, as illustrated in Figure 5.22.
For the purpose of trading, an options chart isn’t particularly useful.
Not only is its history quite short but also only the final couple of months

FIGURE 5.22 Open interest is plotted for options, as well as volume data.

104

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

of an option have enough trading activity to create a decent graph. It is almost always more valuable to examine the underlying security (that is, the
principal instrument on which the option is based) to make an assessment
as to the probable future direction of a security.

OPTION CONTROLS
There is another module you can access—Option Controls—that gives you
one-click access to four useful tools when looking at options charts. These
four checkboxes, shown in Figure 5.23, are:

r Avg. Imp. Volatility (that is, averaged implied volatility).
r Bid-Ask Overlay.

FIGURE 5.23 Use the Option Controls module for one-click access to more
options-oriented functions.

Market and Data Types

105

r Compare with Stock.
r Implied Volatility.
An unusual and interesting feature is the Bid-Ask Overlay. In the world
of options trading, a huge majority of the tens of thousands of options on
the market don’t trade every day. Those that do trade might trade just a
few contracts.
Because of this, most options have little or no trading data. In a given
week, maybe only one trade will take place. So the other four days of that
week have no data at all. ProphetCharts has a novel solution to this problem. In the price data, the bid price and ask price are retained for every
single day and every single option. That way, you can get a good sense as
to the market for an option, irrespective of its activity.
Look at Figure 5.24, for instance. This is an option with very little activity, which is why the price chart has just a series of little tick bars and flat
lines. Once the Bid-Ask Overlay checkbox is on, however, the price chart is
much more meaningful, because a green line chart (representing the ask)
and a blue line chart (representing the bid) are plotted, as illustrated in
Figure 5.25.
Of course, options are based on something else, since they are derivative instruments. You can make use of the Left Axis function automatically
with Option Controls, combining a given option with its underlying

FIGURE 5.24 Most options charts look a lot like this—very little data, and very
hard to interpret.

106

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 5.25 Once the Bid-Ask Overlay is checked, the graph is much easier to
read.

instrument, which ProphetCharts will deduce for you. Look at Figure 5.26,
for instance. The option (plotted in black) is a put on IWM. By checking
Compare with Stock, you can cause ProphetCharts to plot in the same
graph the security on which the option is based (in this instance, IWM,
plotted in brown).
There are two other checkboxes in Option Controls: Avg. Implied
Volatility (used for stocks and indexes) and Implied Volatility (used for
options). The prior figure, Figure 5.23, illustrates how implied volatility is
charted in its own pane. If you are looking at a stock, it will show the averaged implied volatility, and if you are looking directly at an options instrument, it will plot the implied volatility.
There is a third item on the Symbols menu that hasn’t been explored
yet, and that is Show Options, featured in Figure 5.27. When you choose
this menu item, all of the puts and calls for the security you are viewing
will be denoted on the chart. It will not show expired options, but it will
show all the future options.
The options are denoted by two different icons: a large C for call options and a large P for put options. Looking at Figure 5.28, you can see that
the chart of IWM has yielded dozens of C and P icons on the chart, showing
the various call and put options that are available. These icons are located
precisely on the x-axis (to denote their expiration time) and y-axis (to denote their strike price). So the farther to the right an icon is on the chart,
the farther out in time it expires, and the higher the icon is on the graph,
the higher its strike price.

Market and Data Types

107

FIGURE 5.26 Overlay with Stock plots the underlying instrument along with its
option.

FIGURE 5.27 Choosing the Show Options item reveals all available options for
the security shown.

108

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 5.28 Forthcoming options on the graph with icons suggesting strike
prices and expiration dates.

These icons are not passive, however. You can actually make use of
them for things besides simply seeing what options are available for a given
stock or index. There are, to the right of the chart, three tabs—Singles,
Dual-legs, and Multi-legs—suggesting the kinds of options orders you can
construct simply by clicking on any of the C or P icons. This order construction is specific to the think or swim brokerage platform.
As you can see in Figure 5.29, running the mouse over any of the icons
reveals the symbol, strike price, type, and expiration. If you click on any of
the icons, richly detailed information about each instrument and its current
price will appear in the order construction area, as shown in Figure 5.30.
For a technical trader, data means opportunity. Understanding the different classes of data in ProphetCharts will, at a minimum, help you appreciate intermarket relationships regardless of what you trade, and it might

Market and Data Types

109

FIGURE 5.29 Running the mouse over any of the options icons will yield basic
information about them.

FIGURE 5.30 Clicking on any of the icons will make deeper data appear in the
option order construction pane.

110

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

even open you up to trading other markets you had not considered in
the past.
The menu functions, wizards, and modules built into ProphetCharts
make accessing any of these data types quick and easy. Now that you have
a solid grounding as to basic chart formation and how to access different
classes of tradable instruments, we can turn our attention to a deeper level
of chart analysis, the technical indicators.

CHAPTER 6

Indicators in
Action

n the world of charting, the most basic way to look at a stock (or any
other financial entity) is with the price data. The prices make up the
trends and patterns of value as it moves through time, and there is a
great deal that can be learned and predicted based on price movement.
However, there is another deeper way to look at this price movement,
and that is with the use of technical indicators. An indicator is essentially
an embellishment on the graph derived from price and/or volume data.
This embellishment might take the form of up-arrows, down-arrows, a line
graph overlaid on top of a price graph, a histogram, or any of many other
forms.
There are literally hundreds of indicators that have been created.
ProphetCharts provides access to nearly 200 of these. And many of these
indicators can themselves provide different parameters and tweaks to their
settings. So the number of possible indicators at your disposal theoretically
is in the hundreds of thousands.
The purpose of this chapter is not to delve into each and every possible indicator. There are far too many, and there are many excellent books
already written about the specifics of these indicators. Instead, this chapter provides you a basis for understanding the philosophy behind indicators, highlighting a small sample to help you understand the reasoning. It
also has the purpose of showing you how, within ProphetCharts, to access
these indicators.
