
competition for investor assets. Eaton Vance is a good example of an asset


LIFE INSURANCE

management boutique. The firm specializes in tax-managed products—
both stocks and bonds—and has had success in attracting and keeping tax-
conscious investors.

> Market leadership: High barriers to entry and economies of scale in the cus-
tody industry make size a formidable competitive advantage. With the
biggest custodians overseeing trillions in assets, smaller competitors face
overwhelming challenges. Established asset managers also enjoy the advan-
tages of long-term performance records and name recognition. Privately
held Fidelity Investments is the largest asset manager in the world. It is also
one of the most widely known and trusted names in the industry, a virtue

which helps it gather assets and manage them profitably.

Life Insurance

The economic characteristics of the life insurance industry don’t get our blood
racing. From time to time, the very best life insurance companies might pro-
vide good investment value, but in general, the investment opportunities in
the sector are rarely compelling. To explain why, we look into how the indus-
try works.

The challenging economics of the life insurance business are reflected in
the industry's stock performance. Over the 10 years ending August 31, 2003,
the S&P Life and Health insurance index has returned 3.6 percent on an an-
nual basis, versus 10.1 percent annually for the S&P 500 index.

Life insurance companies offer products that allow people to protect
themselves or their loved ones from catastrophic events such as death or dis-
ability or to provide greater financial protection and flexibility for situations
such as retirement. A life insurer pools the individual risks of many policy-
holders. The life insurer then strives to earn a profit by taking in and/or earn-

ing more money than it is required to eventually pay out to its policyholders.

Life Insurance Accounting 101

The life insurance business is chronically blighted by the complexity of its
products and financial statements. A bizarre fact of the industry is that
when an insurer sells a policy, it doesn’t really know how to effectively price

that policy because it doesn’t really know how much it will eventually cost.

253


254

ASSET MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE

Despite the best efforts of a life insurer’s actuaries to estimate variables such
as future investment returns, policy persistency rates (the length of time that
customers keep their policies), and life expectancy, it can take years before the
insurance company knows whether it made money on the policy.

Financial statements for life insurers are very different from the state-
ments of other businesses. Although the topic of how to read a life insurer's
financial statements could fill its own book, for the sake of brevity (and the
reader’s sanity) let’s stick to a conceptual overview.

On the asset side of the balance sheet are two major items: investments
(the accumulated premiums and fees that an insurer builds up before having
to pay out benefits to its policyholders) and deferred acquisition costs, which
is the capitalized value of selling insurance or annuities policies. For firms
that sell variable annuities, separate account assets, which represent the funds
that variable annuity owners have invested, constitute a third important
asset type. Because variable annuity owners manage their own investments,
these assets are segregated and the separate account assets are offset by an
equivalent amount of separate account liabilities on the opposite side of the
balance sheet.

A life insurer's other liabilities basically consist of the actuarially estimated
future benefits that need to be paid to the insurer’s policyholders. The two
main sources of revenue are (1) recurring premiums and fees and (2) any
earned investment income. The two main expenses are (1) benefits and divi-
dends paid to policyholders and (2) amortization of the deferred acquisition
costs. Given how few revenue and expense lines there are, it is vital to keep

track of their growth trends.

Key Drivers of Life Insurance Companies
Life insurance is a mature, slow-growth business that offers commodity prod-
ucts, which are easily substituted. Beyond certain regulatory and capital re-
quirements, the barriers to entry are modest. But once a firm has entered the
life insurance business, it can be difficult to exit. The firm owes life insurance
benefits to its customers, who may still have many years to live.

Only a few of the very largest life insurers, such as MetLife, Prudential,
and John Hancock, have economic moats because of their well-recognized

brands, extensive distribution systems, diverse product offerings, and


LIFE INSURANCE

established relationships with numerous corporate consumers, but these are
still tenuous competitive advantages. Otherwise, this is a classic no-moat
business.

Given the commodity-like products of the life insurance industry, it is
next to impossible for one insurer to successfully grow—without acquisi-
tions—above the industry’s long-term annual revenue growth rate (which is
little more than the nominal growth in GDP). The concept of reversion to
the mean is incredibly important to such a slow-growing business. For ex-
ample, the net income of a life insurer might be above or below the trend in
one period, thanks to some short-term event, such as outstanding invest-
ment returns. But over time, the investment returns—hence, net income—
will likely return to the mean.

Examining the mix of insurance products a company offers is critical for
getting a handle on what revenue and profit growth, as well as the risk level,
is likely to be. It is especially important to be aware of how much and what
types of annuity businesses a life insurer has. Annuities produce greater expo-
sure to the equity markets, which means that life insurers with big annuity
business are riskier investments.

Life insurers operate on a thin margin between their cost of equity and
their return on equity. Look for firms that consistently generate ROEs
above their costs of capital. We estimate that most life insurers have costs of
equity of about 10 percent to 11 percent, whereas the average ROE has his-
torically been around 12 percent. The strongest performing company in the
industry—specialty firm AFLAC—has generated a long-term ROE of
about 15 percent.

Tangible book value is the other key metric in U.S. life insurer valuation,
though you'll need to adjust it by excluding marked-to-market gains or losses
on available-for-sale securities from shareholders’ equity. This adjustment is
pretty straightforward. In the 10-k, a life insurer should have a footnote that
details the amount of unrealized gain or loss on its available-for-sale securities
portfolio, which is included in other comprehensive income. All you need to
do is subtract the gain or add the loss to shareholders’ equity to arrive at a
measure of tangible book value.

Tangible book value is the safest and most practical way to think about

valuation for life insurers for two fundamental reasons. First, there is very

255


256

ASSET MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE

little detail available on life insurers’ fundamental actuarial assumptions, and
its impossible to predict the insurers’ future investment returns. Second,
many major life insurers have only recently become publicly traded firms,

which means there is minimal historical financial data on these companies.

Hallmarks of Success for Life Insurance Companies
Life insurers can occasionally make good investments, but it’s important to

avoid buying into trouble. Here’s what we recommend looking for:

> Prudent premium growth rates: Generally, the best life insurers exhibit pre-
mium growth that isn’t significantly above the industry average. Accord-
ing to the American Council of Life Insurers, between 1991 and 2001, the
average annual increase in life insurers’ premium receipts was 6.2 percent.
Underpricing risk to win sales in insurance is a dangerous game.

> ROE consistently above the cost of equity: Given the high degree of finan-
cial leverage used in life insurance, a reliably positive spread between
ROE and cost of capital is the crucial determinant of firm success in the
long run. ROE for life insurers has historically been around 10 percent
to II percent.

> High credit rating: Most first-rate insurers sport AA ratings. Understand-
ably, consumers want to buy policies from firms that they expect to be
around when it comes time to collect. High-quality life insurers also have
risk-based capital levels that are generally around twice the minimum level
set by the insurer's state regulator.

> A diverse investment portfolio and a proven risk management culture: About
90 percent of U.S. life insurance industry assets are invested in fixed in-
come securities such as corporate bonds, private placements, and mort-
gage securities. The composition and quality of the fixed income portfolio
is crucial in determining the financial strength and future earnings
prospects of a life insurer. The best insurers control their exposure to
riskier asset classes, such as below investment grade (i-e., junk) bonds.
Compare an insurer's exposure to junk bonds to that of its competitors by
looking at a ratio such as junk bonds to tangible equity or junk bonds to

total assets.


PROPERTY/CASUALTY INSURANCE

Property/Casualty Insurance

Property/casualty insurance provides enormous benefits to the U.S. economy
by transferring financial risks that could otherwise impede profitable transac-
tions and raise living costs.

Unfortunately, for investors, the value that property/casualty (PC) insur-
ance products provide the U.S. economy rarely corresponds to large invest-
ment returns. Indeed, returns are often exceedingly poor. Net margins are
often razor-thin, often less than 5 percent. Returns on capital are equally
poor. The average PC insurance company earns a return on equity (ROE) of
less than 9 percent, and over time, most insurers achieve ROEs that are half
that earned by S&P 500 companies.

These poor results often make for poor long-term performance. Over the
10 years ending in 2003, PC insurers trailed the market, often significantly.
However, there are a few diamonds in the rough—consistent performers that
produce attractive returns over long periods. Studious investors, armed with
the keys to identifying better performing insurers, can earn solid returns in
this sector.

How Property/Casualty Insurers Make Money

When an insurer sells a policy, it accepts financial risk in exchange for a pre-
mium payment. By transferring many individual risks to a common pool, an
insurer is able to create a diversified risk portfolio, Because most risks aren't
realized (you don’t crash your car every year), insurers expect to earn a small
profit margin.

Insurers also enjoy a peculiar business advantage—premiums are received
well in advance of the firm’s requirement to pay claims. This money is often
referred to as float, and an insurer enjoys the use of this money between the
time it receives a premium and the time it has to paya claim. PC insurers ex-
ploit this by investing these premiums and keeping the money they make
from the investments.

How much money they can make this way depends on market perfor-
mance, the insurer’s asset allocation, and how long the insurer holds premi-
ums before making claim payments. Insurers writing /ong-taz/ insurance hold

premiums longer and, hence, can invest more in equities. (The length of an

257


258

ASSET MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE

insurance policy's ta// refers to the time it takes for damages to become ap-
parent. Short-tail policies are those where damages incurred during the in-
sured period become known quickly, such as a car accident, whereas long-tail
policies cover damages that may not become apparent for many years, such as

an asbestos injury.)

Property/Casualty Insurance Accounting 101

Let’s investigate how the PC insurance business works on an income state-
ment and balance sheet. Premium revenue (also known as earned premium) is
used to fund claim payments (loss expense), sales commissions for insurance
agents (commission expense), and operating expenses (OPEX). Insurers typi-
cally express each of these expenses as ratios to earned premiums. Claim ex-
penses, for example, typically consume 7s percent of an insurer's net revenues.

Adding together these three ratios produces the combined ratio—an insur-
ance company’s key underwriting profit measure. A combined ratio under 100
indicates an underwriting profit. For example, a combined ratio of 95 means
that the insurer paid out 95 percent of its premium revenue for losses. The
5 percent remaining is the underwriting profit. A combined ratio exceeding
100 indicates an underwriting loss. For example, an insurer with a combined
ratio of 105 paid out 105 percent of its premium revenue to cover losses, mean-
ing that it had an underwriting loss equal to 5 percent of revenues.

Companies with combined ratios exceeding 105 for more than a short
time have a difficult time recouping their losses via investment earnings, and
this type of poor underwriting track record suggests that an insurer's compet-
itive position is unusually weak. Insurers unable to earn even the occasional
underwriting profit will produce the industry's poorest returns and may be
tempted to accept large investment risks to boost profitability.

Insurers also make money from investment income, which they often re-
port as a ratio of premiums. Adding the investment ratio to the combined
ratio yields the operating profit ratio. In many instances, investment income
is a key profit determinant because it offsets underwriting losses.

On the balance sheet, the key asset for most insurers is investments. In
addition to float, most insurers invest a large portion of their own retained
earnings as well. The investments account reveals the size of an insurer's in-

vestments relative to its asset base and details the asset allocation employed.


PROPERTY/CASUALTY INSURANCE

Asa starting point, look for insurers with no more than 30 percent invested
in equities (unless the company is run by Warren Buffett).

Finally, unearned premiums represent premiums received but not yet
considered revenue. This oddity reflects an accounting convention. When an
insurer receives a premium, it is deemed to earn it gradually across the year.
After all, ifa customer cancels a policy, the insurer must refund that portion
of the coverage not consumed. After six months, an annual auto policy
would be 50 percent earned, and half the premium would be considered rev-
enue. Before this occurs, the premiums are held in the unearned premium ac-
count, and the insurer is free to invest them.

Nirvana for an insurer is being able to consistently earn underwriting
profits ona large, growing customer base. In effect, this insurer would be get-
ting paid to profit from investing other people's money and could retain this
float indefinitely (as long as it grows). Unfortunately, for investors, these sit-

uations rarely occur,

Key Drivers for Property/Casualty Companies

Property/casualty insurers confront difficult economics. In most instances,
pricing power is low or nonexistent, for two important reasons. Entry barri-
ers are low, enabling competitors to quickly swoop in on profitable markets.
And insurance products are often difficult to distinguish, except by price. Al-
though insurers attempt to distinguish their products using tactics such as
better customer service, bundling, and policy terms, these features are easily

replicated by competitors.

Unpredictable Costs: The absence of pricing power exacerbates a more signif-
icant problem: An insurer’s most important costs are mostly uncontrollable
and unpredictable. Claims expense generally consumes more than 70 percent
of an insurer’s premiums. This encompasses cost items such as judicial
awards, medical expenses, and repair parts over which an insurer has little or
no control. These costs not only are difficult to control, but also are unpre-
dictable and often grow faster than insurers are able to raise premium rates.
For example, social inflation is a particular challenge. This is the ten-
dency of juries and judges to increase benefits and expand contract coverage,

often well beyond the terms of the original insurance policy. This can make

259


260

ASSET MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE

claims much larger than an insurance company could have anticipated. One
study estimated that the average jury award increased 19 percent annually
over the 1990s." Insurers also face considerable expenses from growing insur-
ance fraud rates. The estimated annual cost of insurance fraud is $80 billion.*

Unpredictable cost inflation is especially troublesome for insurers because
they must estimate their costs well before the costs are incurred. Insurers lack
the pricing power to incorporate a margin of safety into their pricing, so vari-
ations in loss expenses can quickly wipe out profits and cause large reserving
charges. Because there are few positive cost surprises, insurers are often at the
whim of the forces outlined previously.

Insurers also face contamination. If one insurer prices too low—mistak-
enly or otherwise—profits for all insurers can be wiped out as other industry
players offer low prices in response to the perceived competitive threat. This is
an especially acute problem for insurers who compete with mutual firms. (A
mutual insurer is an insurance company owned solely by the people it insures,
rather than by shareholders.) Mutual insurers, such as State Farm, are excep-
tionally dangerous competitors because they lack the profit motive of most
other insurers, and they can compete on price and incur losses for long periods
to build market share. For example, State Farm’s enormous balance sheet—
which can throw off plenty of investment income—could enable it to price

below cost for many years, which would eliminate profits for listed insurers.

Cyclicality in the Insurance Business: Insurance is a mature business. We gen-
erally expect mature businesses to grow with GDP over the long term, but
the insurance industry also exhibits considerable cyclicality.

This cyclicality results from pricing decisions and investment returns.
When market returns are high, such as in the late 1990s, insurers face less
pressure to underwrite profitably because underwriting losses are easily offset
by investment income. Consequently, premium rates decline over a period of

time. This is referred to as a soft market.

™The Legend of the Price-Gouging Insurer,” Insurance Information Institute (November
2002) and Morningstar Analysis.

*Coalition Against Insurance Fraud, “Insurance Fraud: The Crime you Pay For,” http://www
.insurancefraud.org/downloads/Backgrounder.pdf.


PROPERTY/CASUALTY INSURANCE

However, after many years of price decreases, insurers are often unpre-
pared for a decrease in market returns or for severe losses from a large event
like the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. Because these losses cannot be
offset by investment returns, premium rates must rise to restore profitability.
At this point, prices have been too low for too long, so insurers must raise
rates and reduce contract terms considerably to restore profitability. This is re-
ferred to as a hard market, and 100 percent price increases aren’t uncommon.

Hard markets aren't sustained as long as soft markets, though. Once prof-
itability is restored and investment market returns normalize, the stronger in-
surers will start to lower prices again to attract customers and deter rivals,

knowing they can once again start to offset losses with investment returns.

Regulation: Finally, insurers face considerable regulation. Insurance rates
must often be approved on a state-by-state basis, meaning that insurers are at
the mercy of the regulators in each state. In many instances, insurers are re-
quired to insure less profitable customers without being able to charge them
higher prices to compensate. Furthermore, in many states, insurers are re-
quired to fund the losses of competitors who become insolvent.

Insurers are also highly susceptible to consumer lobbying, which can in-
fluence regulators to keep prices low or mandate price changes. A key exam-
ple is California's Proposition 103, which mandated an immediate 20 percent
cut in insurance premium prices and caused the transfer of more than $1.2
billion from insurers to customers.’ This was good for customers but bad for

insurance investors.

Hallmarks of Success for Property/Casualty Insurance Companies

Economic moats are scarce in property/casualty insurance. The industry's
dismal economics condemns most insurers to perpetually poor returns and
ongoing price competition. However, the news isn’t all bad. Intelligent strate-
gies and management teams can create a narrow economic moat, thereby al-
lowing for the opportunity of decent investment returns. Five qualities we

recommend seeking in a PC insurer are:

3 The Foundation for Taxpayer and Consumer Rights, “Background on Insurance Reform—A.
Detailed Analysis of California Proposition 103.” Excerpted from “Auto Insurance Crisis &¢
Reform,” by Harvey Rosenfield, published Fall 1998 in University of Memphis Law Review.

261


262 ASSET MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE

Low-cost operator: In a commodity business where firms compete on price,
the lowest cost provider usually enjoys the highest profits. Insurers who
can minimize their costs are most likely to earn high returns, and insurers
who refuse to sell unprofitable insurance enjoy a special advantage in cost
containment. Two of our favorite insurers, Progressive and Berkshire
Hathaway subsidiary GEICO, employ this approach by marketing di-
rectly to consumers, avoiding sales commission expense, and underwrit-
ing strictly for profit. It’s no surprise that their returns consistently lead
the industry.

Strategic acquirer: Profitable insurers who can continually acquire un-
derperforming insurers and return their operations to profitability can
often earn attractive returns with an above-average growth rate. Although
acquisition-driven growth can be a risky strategy, experienced manage-
ment teams can often play the insurance cycle to acquire companies at
bargain prices. White Mountains is a good example of a company that
has done this successfully.
