
c02.indd 31

11/2/07 12:14:54 PM

32

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Fundamental Seduction
Whether we are in the United States, Europe, or Asia speaking at
trade shows or expositions, someone always steps up during one of
these events to ask, “What about the fundamentals? Don’t you guys
even look at the company reports?” Our answer is always the same.
Yes, we look at the fundamentals to see if our stock candidate has
earnings and we check to see how much debt they are carrying on the
books. Many times, the company reports tell us which stocks to trade,
but the fundamentals never give us the signals that tell us when to
get into a position. More importantly, the fundamentals don’t tell us
when to get out when the position is turning against us. By the time
the accountants update the reports that go to the analysts, the price
move will have already taken place. Are you really going to wait until
the end of the quarter to make the decision to get out when a stock is
moving against you? Of course not, and this is why we focus so much
of our attention on the price action.
The other reason we put less weight into the fundamentals is that
there is too much information out there. You will see that once you
have an opinion about a stock, your mind will search for information
in order to support your opinion. For example, you think the stock
is going to go higher and you’ve read the opinions of the Wall Street
analysts who also think this stock is going higher. So, you buy it. Next
week, you look at the stock only to see that it is now trading at a lower
price than where you bought it. At this point you are not too worried
because you have faith in the report you’ve read and you see that
the company had very strong sales numbers last quarter. The next
week, the stock price continues to fall. In desperation, you reach for
the company report. Once again you take another look at the priceto-earnings ratio (P/E) and see that its earnings continue to be
strong. In fact, it has a lower P/E than the rest of the stocks in that
sector. So you make the decision to hold on.
Do you see what has just happened? Your opinion caused you to
search for more data to justify your reasons to hold on. This information overload, combined with your getting involved with the product
or service of this company, has caused you to fall in love with this
stock. Don’t marry your stock positions because they usually won’t
remain faithful. The longer you hold on to them when they are
going down, the harder it will be for you to separate yourself from
the losers when you are wrong.

c02.indd 32

11/2/07 12:14:54 PM

Are You Out of Your Mind?

33

Chatter Box—AJ
Learning how to take small losses along the way is a great way to
avoid getting attached to your portfolio. True traders look at the
numbers with the realization that they are going to be wrong every
once in a while. In fact, there may be times when they are wrong
multiple times in a row. However, accepting this ahead of time makes
it easier for the trader to take the loss, knowing that the goal is to
keep the losses small along the way. We will be talking more about
this in Chapter 12 when we cover the 1% Rule for risk management.
Learning to take small losses along the way is something many
people are challenged with because they have associated realized
loss with pain. Remember what we said about how the mind moves
away from pain and toward things of pleasure? To fix this you must
learn how to find pleasure in taking a small loss. Refusing to take a
loss is like a fighter getting into the ring with his opponent, thinking he
is never going to get punched in the face. A good fighter learns how
to absorb a blow by moving with the punch, and this allows him to
continue on with the fight. A trader learns how to take small losses,
which allows him to hold on to his trading capital so he can get back
into the market without getting knocked out. Reward yourself after
you have taken a small loss, and don’t look back at the trade to see
what might have happened had you held on.

There will be times when you sell a stock at a loss, and immediately after you sell it, the stock rallies. However, looking back at your
stocks to see if you made the right decision will only condition you
to hold on to the losers. There may be occasions when the stock will
drop in price and 12 months later it will be higher than where you
sold it. But would you have really held on to it for a year to get back
into the positive side of the trade? This is not what a professional
trader would do, so you shouldn’t do this either.

Using Best Practices
One of the things that we’ve found most helpful for our students is
having them put a trading plan together. As we covered in the first
chapter, you should have a trading plan in place before you execute
your first trade. Your trading plan should be written down, clearly

c02.indd 33

11/2/07 12:14:55 PM

34

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

articulated, with no gray areas. When you have identified your exit
points, make sure you post them in a place that is clearly visible,
preferably somewhere near your trading computer, and be sure to
stick with the plan.
Another good idea that will help you hold steady in your mindset as a trader is to ask for the help of a close friend or spouse. You
may be surprised to know that husband-and-wife teams work very
well. Right about now, all of the husbands are thinking, “There is
no way I’m going to have my wife on this account with me—she’d
kill me if she knew how much money I lost last month.” This may
come as a surprise to a lot of the male traders out there, but women
often make better traders than men because most women will not
ride a loss as far as a man would. Men have a greater tendency to
fight the market when things turn against us. The next time you
feel the urge to ride a loss in an effort to fight your way back to the
breakeven point, try to remember that the market is too big for you
to fight. If you still find that you are challenged in this area, then
have a friend, partner, or trading buddy hold you accountable for
your actions.
In other words, if you say you are going to get out of a position at
a certain price level, then stick to it and have your partner hold you to
it. Professional floor traders and market makers report to head traders who hold them accountable, so why shouldn’t you have someone
you can check in with? The fact is that many trading firms around
the world will not allow their traders to take large positions home
with them overnight because it adds too much risk to the firm.

The Business of Trading
If you plan on taking your trading strategy seriously, then you must
think of this as if you were starting a new business. If you are fortunate enough to know someone who is a professional trader, ask him
if you can visit his office. Take a look with your own eyes at how the
trading floors operate. If you get the opportunity to meet the head
traders, make sure you ask them how they monitor risk. These people pay for their salaries over and over again each month when they
do what’s expected of them. That job, once again, is to limit losses.
Every entrepreneur knows that there are start-up costs involved
in any new venture, and it is highly unlikely that a new business will
make a profit right away. In fact, most new businesses only begin

c02.indd 34

11/2/07 12:14:56 PM

Are You Out of Your Mind?

35

to see profits a year or two after their doors are opened. As you
are starting out in your new trading business, you should have the
same mind-set as other entrepreneurs. The price of a new computer
system, the books and tapes you add to your library, the seminars you
attend—these are all part of the start-up costs. Just be careful you are
not spending too much money on the seminar circuit. On that note,
make sure you are getting your information only from experts who
are walking the walk and not just talking the talk. The Market Guys
spend many months on the road each and every year attending
trade shows and money expos. It’s shocking to see just how many
snake oil salesmen are out there. In fact, we were once in a show
in Frankfurt, Germany, where one of the trade show booths had
a vodka bar set up right in the middle of the floor with tables all
around it. We walked around the bar to peek our heads in to see just
how many cases of booze there were in their inventory. While this
was a business model we would never endorse, the fact is there are
many companies out there who are in the seminar business just to
get your money.
We make it a point to tell everyone in our audience to make
sure they vet their source before buying any material that shows you
how to make a profit. Before you take trading advice from someone, please do yourself a favor and make sure you are dealing with
individuals who are putting their money on the line when they are
trading the market. Also, make sure they are willing to share the bad
trades as well as the good trades with you. How many times have you
seen an ad in a magazine or a commercial on television proclaiming
that you can make 200 to 300 percent profits by using their system?
Or the infomercials given by someone who was once homeless and
living on a park bench but now makes millions of dollars trading
spreads in the options markets overnight? Can you make millions
trading options? Yes, you can. But let’s get real—relying on television
commercials that play on your emotions is not the way to go.
We’ll assume that if you are reading this book right now you
have checked out the credibility of The Market Guys and our Keep
It Super Simple (KISS) method of trading. We are very proud to say
that our approach to risk management has resulted in many success
stories around the world. Our favorite stories are not the ones that
talk about fabulous profits but the stories that talk about the end of
losses. When a trader comes to us and tells us that they are no longer
losing money, we know they’re now on the path to profits.

c02.indd 35

11/2/07 12:14:56 PM

36

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Overcoming Fear and Greed
We have already addressed how pain and pleasure motivate us to
make certain decisions, so now let’s talk about two cousins: fear
and greed. We fear the pain that we want to avoid, and we become
greedy for the pleasure that attends to a winning trade. Let’s
explore how these emotions work in our trading and how we can
overcome them.
The more powerful of the two is fear. Fear is one reason why
most people will avoid buying a stock on its high. The large majority
of amateur traders would feel more comfortable buying a stock on a
52-week low rather than a 52-week high. The reason for this behavior
is that the trader has a mind-set that says, “If I buy this stock on its
high, it could fall. So, I’ll wait for it to drop some before I buy it.”
This is the fear emotion working against you. If you think about what
you are doing when you wait for a stock to drop before you buy it, you
will see that you’re really waiting for the sellers to control the stock.
In order for a stock price to drop, the sellers have to take control of
the price. Conversely, if the buyers were in control, the stock price
would rise. Therefore, you are buying a stock that is weakening.
When you compare this way of thinking to that of a professional
trader, you will see that a seasoned trader would feel very comfortable buying a stock on its high because their mind-set is to Buy High
and Sell Higher. In other words, buy the stock when it is being controlled by the buyers, and you will be getting into a stock that is
strengthening. Stocks that are in growth mode will continue to set
new highs. If a stock is going to move from a low point to a higher
point, it will set new highs all along the way! If a professional trader
sees a stock that has been going up in a nice steady trend, they are
confident in their own decisions because there is a good chance that
the stock will continue up. If they make a bad choice and the stock
drops in price after they buy it, then they simply get out with a small
loss and move on to the next stock. Successful traders have a simple
strategy: Buy strength and sell weakness. You can’t make it any simpler than that.
Another characteristic we often observe in new traders is how
fear leads to overanalysis. When you are unsure of your knowledge,
strategy, or ability to pick a good stock, you will continue to question yourself. This type of fear will cause you to go back and check
out the company a little bit more. You might find yourself digging

c02.indd 36

11/2/07 12:14:56 PM

Are You Out of Your Mind?

37

into the company report to verify earnings once again, or you
might hammer away at a few more analyst reports to see if there is
anything that would negate your reasons for buying this company.
Before you know it, you have spent so much time analyzing and
probing that the stock has already made its move up. Then you
wind up saying to yourself, “It’s too high now. Let me wait and see
what happens.”
Have you ever heard the old saying, “Overanalysis equals paralysis?” It’s true, and the underlying cause of this paralysis is fear. You
may have lost money in the past after you bought a stock on a high
and you are fearful that it will happen again, so you refrain from
looking at any stock that’s on a 52-week high. You respond quite like
a child who once got burned on a stove. Any child who burns himself
on a stove will most likely not want to get close to that stove again.
This is a natural response part of a self-defense system. It teaches us
lessons when we experience pain. Every time we feel pain, the mind
remembers the event that caused the pain and then transforms that
memory into a fear that shapes our behavior patterns. This is nothing more than a conditioned response.
Greed also conditions our behavior in harmful ways. If you have
ever tasted the sweetness of a profit after buying a stock and shortly
after you sell, it rallies to even higher levels, you will know what we’re
taking about here. Once you’ve tasted it, you want it over and over
again. Unfortunately, those home-run trades only come once in a
while. But as a result of your tasting this sweetness, you will find that
a pattern forms where you wind up holding on to those losing stocks
longer than you should.
Another reason people hold on to losing trades is that greed
has caused them to believe that this losing stock is going to come
back soon and launch just like that winning stock did. If you’re not
careful, this risky behavior pattern will wind up costing you money
like a one-armed bandit in a Las Vegas casino. We often travel to Las
Vegas to speak at financial and trading shows, and it never ceases to
amaze us how those slot machines captivate people. We assume that
most people know that the odds are stacked heavily on the side of
the casino, yet thousands of people sit there for hours as they put in
their coins, waiting for big payoffs.
If you took a psychology course in college, you may remember
the name Ivan Pavlov. In 1904, Ivan Pavlov won the Nobel Prize in
physiology/medicine for his research on digestion. The work he did

c02.indd 37

11/2/07 12:14:57 PM

38

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

with his dogs made him a household name as he documented how
our nervous systems trigger certain reflexes. The similarity between
Pavlov’s dogs and the Las Vegas gambler is uncanny, and it’s a
short trip from trader to gambler. Before you reject the connection
between the behavior patterns of the Vegas gambler and the market
trader, remember that pleasure and greed are akin to one another.
Both emotions drive us toward behavior that may ultimately harm us
more than help us. It’s important that you know this; if you ignore
this fact, you may wind up unexpectedly gambling your financial
future away.
Pavlov’s work involved a metronome and dog food. He would
sound the metronome at the same time he gave food to the experimental dogs. After a short while, the dogs, which previously salivated
only when they saw and ate their food, would begin to salivate when
the metronome sounded. He also found that the dogs would salivate
after he rang the bell even if there were no food present. He published these results in 1903, calling it a conditioned reflex. This is
different than an innate reflex, which is what a child would do if he
touched a hot stove. This pain again teaches the child and a valuable
lesson is learned. Pavlov called this learning process conditioning,
and he also found that the conditioned reflex will be repressed if
the positive stimulus, in the metronome sounding, proved wrong too
often. In other words, if the metronome sounded repeatedly without
any food appearing, the dogs would eventually stop salivating at the
sound.
Can you see the similarity between Pavlov’s dogs and the Las
Vegas gambler sitting at the slot machine? The casino is playing with
the gambler like Pavlov experimented with his dogs. The behavior
exhibited by the gambler of putting dollars into the slot is rewarded
with a treat that amounts to a small payoff of coins from the machine.
As coins fall into the coin tray, the bells ring and the behavior continues. After a while, another small payoff arrives and more bells sound,
but this time the gambler has less money.
As time goes on, these small payoffs result in our sample gambler believing that she will continue to be rewarded and she starts
to salivate with greed. Like Pavlov’s dogs, she salivates even if there
was no reward. This is the same reason why a trader will hold on to
a losing trade even if there is no reward. Greed drives us to hold on
to our losses, and if we continue to let greed take over, we will get to
a point where one of two things will happen. Either the pain will get

c02.indd 38

11/2/07 12:14:57 PM

Are You Out of Your Mind?

39

too great to hold on any longer or you will run out of money and
blow up your trading account.
So how does one break out of this vicious circle? The first step
is to admit when you are wrong and pull away from the stocks that
are costing you money time after time. This will be very difficult at
first because most people don’t like to admit when they are wrong.
In fact, many traders feel that they have to go back and defeat the
stock that cost them their profit, and it becomes some sort of duel
they play with the market. Their new goal is not to make a profit but
rather to get back what they lost. Then, if they are lucky enough to
get back to the breakeven point, they walk away feeling like a winner.
Once you come to the realization that you are on the wrong side of a
losing position, you can start fresh with a new list of stocks.

Filtering Your Emotion
If you are looking for ways to help remove the emotions associated
with trading, you must first make sure to filter your thoughts. Make
sure you are analyzing your stocks for their trend value. Rate your
stocks from 1 to 5, giving your stock a score of 1 if the trend is nice
and steady with a long history of consistency. If the trend is too
extreme, meaning you are a buyer and the price chart is going up
vertically, then give it a 3. If you are a buyer and the stock is going
down, you may throw that one off your list or give it a 5.
Then you would measure the emotional value of that same stock
on a scale from 1 to 5, with 5 representing a very high emotional
charge. If you are picking up a stock because you heard Slim Trainer
mention it on that stock show Crazy Money, we would rate that at the
top of the emotional scorecard by giving it a 5. On the other hand, if
you got a hot stock tip from your brother-in-law Pete, we would rate
that with a 3 because, although your brother-in-law knows a lot about
the market, chances are he has already bought into the story of the
company without even checking a price chart to see if the trend of
the stock was up.
Once you have these two numbers, total them up for each stock.
The stocks with the lowest numbers are your best choices. The best
score you can get for a stock is a 2. This represents a stock with
a great trend (score of 1) and no emotional charge (score of 1).
Using filters like this will gradually help you develop the mind-set
you need to become a highly successful trader.

c02.indd 39

11/2/07 12:14:57 PM

40

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Case Studies
Dan

Over the years we have helped many people reach their ultimate
financial goals. Nothing makes us happier than when we meet people like Dan.
Dan was a house painter in the Washington, D.C., area who had
a goal to make a million dollars in the stock market. Like a lot of
people who are new to the market, Dan was hoping to get advice
from the broker he had his account with. He assumed that his broker would be able to tell him how to trade and invest in the markets,
and he was excited about the opportunities. One day, Dan made
an appointment to visit a representative who worked for a so-called
full-service brokerage firm. This company claimed to be one of the
world’s leading financial management and advisory companies, so
Dan thought he had found the right place. However, when he told
this particular representative what his plan was, the representative
laughed when he saw Dan’s check for $2,000. “Sir,” he said, “if this is
what you plan on opening your account with, then we would suggest
you take your $2,000 and go to Las Vegas with it. You’ll have a better
chance reaching your goal there.” Outraged, Dan stormed out of the
office and down the road to a broker who would take his money.
Fortunately, Dan did not give up so easily. He spent time learning
how to trade options and the importance of having a good risk management plan in place. He had early success in the first six months
of trading, and this allowed him to put a plan together to build his
dream house. His plan was to make money each month in the option
markets, and each month he would take some of his profits and
put it toward the construction of his new home. He didn’t want a
mortgage in the end, so he decided to buy the land first. The next
month, he made enough in the markets to build a foundation, and
each month after that, he would add something to the house. One
day, he called to tell us the roof was on. This was a big deal for him
because the rain was no longer beating down on the frame of his new
home. He referred to his new status simply as “dry.” Later in the same
year, he called to give us an update and said that he was ready to put
on the front door. He said, “I want a big double wooden door—one
that is warm and beautiful, a door that makes people feel welcomed
when they knock on it.”
