
Reflexivity in the Currency Market

77

set into motion a self-reinforcing process in the opposite direction. In other words, currencies tend to move in large waves, with
each move lasting several years.
These three tendencies are mutually self-validating. It is the
growth in speculative ;capital flows moving in a trend-following
fashion that makes the trend so persistent; it is the persistence of
the trend that makes trend-following bias so rewarding; and it
is the rewards reaped by speculation that attract increasing
amounts of capital.
The longer a benign circle lasts, the more attractive it is to hold
financial assets in the appreciating currency and the more important the exchange rate'becomes in calculating total return. Those
who are inclined to fight the trend are progressively eliminated
and in the end only trend followers survive as active participants.
As speculation gains in importance, other factors lose their influence. There is nothing to guide speculators but the market itself,
and the market is dominated by trend followers. These considerations explain how thk dollar could continue to appreciate in the
face of an ever-rising trade deficit. Eventually, a crossover point
would have been reached, even without the intervention of the
authorities, when the inflow of speculative funds could not keep
pace with the trade deficit and with rising interest obligations,
and the trend would have been reversed. Since the predominating
bias is trend following, speculative capital would then have
started moving in the opposite direction. If and %en that happened, the reversal could easily have accelerated into a free fall.
For one thing, speculation and "fundamental" flows would then
have worked in the same direction. Even more important, when a
change in trend is recognized, the volume of speculative transaetions is likely to undergo a dramatic, not to say catastrophic,
increase. While a trend persists, speculative flows are incremental; but a reversal involves not only the current flow but also the
accumulated stock of speculative capital. The longer the trend
has persisted, the larger the accumulation. There are, of course,
mitigating circumstances. One is that market participants are
likely to recognize a change in trend only gradually. The other is
that the authorities are bound to be aware of the danger and do
something to prevent a crash. How the drama actually unfolded
will be the subject of a later chapter. Here we are trying to establish a general proposition.
Taking the three generalizations together, it can be asserted that

a

78
I

I

Theory

speculation is progressively destabilizing. The destabilizing effect
arises not because the speculative capital flows must be eventually reversed but exactly because they need not be reversed
until much later. If they had to be reversed in short order, capital
transactions would provide a welcome cushion for making the
adjustment process less painful. If they need not be reversed, the
participants get to depend on them so that eventually when the
turn comes the adjustment becomes that much more painful.
It is quite likely that the generalization about the progressive
accumulation of hot money holds true not only within a cycle but
also from one cycle to another, although the history of fluctuating
exchange rates is too short to provide reliable evidence. It has
certainly been true so far-the size of speculative capital movements was far greater in Reagan's benign circle than it was during
Carter's vicious circle. Empirical studies of the 1930s also showed
a cumulative growth in "hot money" movements,' although circumstances were somewhat different because currencies were not
freely floating.
We can see why hot money should continue to accumulate as
long as real interest rates are high and the return on physical
investments low: keeping capital in liquid fonn in an appreciat;
ing currency is more rewarding than investing it in physical assets. What is needed to give the generalization universal validity
is an argument that would show that fluctuating exchange rates
are associated with high returns on financial assets and low returns on physical investments. Let me try. We have seen that hot
money can earn exceptional returns if it gets the trend right; since
it sets the trend, that is likely to be the case. Physical assets represent the opposite side of the coin: they cannot move to take
advantage of the trend. The tradable goods sector is bound to
suffer when a currency appreciates. Of course, a depreciating currency brings windfall profits to exporters, but having been hurt
before, exporters are loath to invest on the basis of a temporary
advantage: they prefer to hold their profits in financial assets,
contributing to the growth of hot money. The process can be most
clearly observed in the United Kingdom, where exporters refused
to expand when sterling fell below $1.10 in 1985, despite record
profits. How right they were! Sterling rose above $1.50 by April
1986. Thus, both an appreciating currency and a depreciating
currency discourage physical investment and foster the accumulation of "hot money."

Reflexivity in the Currency Market

79

We can attempt yet banother tentative generalization. When a
long-term trend loses its momentum, short-term volatility tends
to rise. It is easy to see why that should be so: the trend-following
crowd is disoriented. The generalization is tentative because it is
based on inadequate evidence. It certainly was true when the
dollar reversed its trend in 1985.2
If these generalizations are indeed valid, the eventual demise of
a system of freely fluctuating exchange rates is inevitable. Fluctuations become so wild that either the system has to be modified
by some kind of government intervention or it is bound to break
down. Currency markets thus provide the best support for my
contention that financial markets are inherently unstable. There
is no built-in tendency toward equilibrium: to the extent that we
need stability we must introduce it by deliberate policy measures.
These conclusions may not strike the reader as particularly revolutionary at the present time, but they certainly contradicted the
prevailing wisdom at ,the time they were written in Aprilt'ay
1985. There was widespread malaise about the instability of exchange rates, but belief in the magic of the market was still running strong, and the famous Plaza agreement in September 1985
came as something of a shock to market participants. Even today,
there is no theoretical underpinning for the contention that a
freely floating exchange rate system is cumulatively destabilizing.
That is what I hope to have provided here.
&
I have been speculating in currencies ever since they started
floating, but I have failed to make money on a consistent basis.
On balance, I traded profitably tluough 1980 and then chalked up
losses between 1981 and 1985. My approach has been tentative,
based more on intuition than on conviction. By temperament, I
have always been more interested in picking the turning point
than in following a trend. I managed to catch both the rise and
fall of European currencies against the dollar until 1981, but I
traded myself out of my positions too soon. Having lost the trend,
I found it too demeaning to start following the trend-followers; I
tried to pick the reversal point instead-needless to say, without
success. I had so-me temporary profits in the early part of 1984,
but I gave them all back. 1 was again engaged in a speculation
against the dollar at the time I wrote this chapter [AprilJMay
1985).Writing it has undoubtedly helped to clarify my thoughts.
The real-time experiment recorded in Part 111 may be regarded

80

,

Theory

as a practical test of the theory propounded here. Admittedly the
theory is far too abstract to be of much use in making concrete
predictions. Specifically, the turning point cannot be determined
until it has actually occurred. But, as we shall see, the theory can
be very useful in interpreting events as they unfold.

THE CREDlT AhW REGULATORY CYCLE *

There seems to be a special affinity between reflexivity and credit.
That is hardly surprising: credit depends on expectations; expectations involve bias; hdnce credit is one of the main avenues that
permit bias to play a causal role in the course of events. But there
is more to it. Credit seems to be associated with a particular kind
of reflexive pattern that is known as boom and bust. The pattern
is asymmetrical: the boom is drawn out and accelerates gradually;
the bust is sudden and often catastrophic. By contrast, when
credit is not an essential ingredient in a reflexitlreprocess, the
pattern tends to be more symmetrical. For instance, in the currency market it does not seem to make much difference whether
the dollar is rising or falling: the exchange rate seems to follow a
wavelike pattern.
I believe the asymmetry arises out of a reflexive connection
between loan and collateral. In this context I give collateral a very
broad definition: it will denote whatever determines the creditworthiness of a debtor, whether it is actually pledged or not. It
may mean a piece of property or an expected future stream of
income; in either case, it is something on which the lender is
willing to place a value. Valuation is supposed to be a passive
relationship in which the value reflects the underlying asset; but
in this case it involves a positive act: a loan is made. The act of
lending may affect the collateral value: that is the connection that
gives rise to a reflexive process.
* Written in August 1985.
81

82

Theory

It will be recalled that we have analyzed reflexivity as two connections working in opposite directions: the "normal" connection where a value is placed on future events, as in the stock
market or banking-we have called it the cognitive function; and
a "perverse" connection in which expectations affect that which
is expected-we have called it the participating function. The
participating function is perverse because its effect is not always
felt, and when it does operate its influence is so difficult to disentangle that it tends to go unrecognized. The prevailing view of
how financial markets operate tends to leave the participating
function out of account. For instance, in the international lending
boom, bankers did not recognize that the debt ratios olr borrowing
countries were favorably influenced by their own lending activity. In the conglomerate boom, investors did not realize that pershare earnings growth can be affected by the valuation they place
on it. At present, most people do not realize that the erosion of
collateral values can depress the economy.
The act of lending usually stimulates economic activity. It enables the borrower to consume more than he would otherwise, or
to invest in productive assets. There are exceptions, to be sure: if
the assets in question are not physical but financial ones, the
effect is not necessarily stimulative. By the same token, debt service has a depressing impact. Resources that would otherwise be
devoted to consumption or the creation of a future stream of income are withdrawn. As the total amount of debt outstanding
accumulates, the portion that has to be utilized for debt service
increases. It is only net new lending that stimulates, and total
new lending has to keep rising in order to keep net new lending
stable.
The connection between lending and economic activity is far
from straightforward (that is, in fact, the best justification for the
monetarists' preoccupation with money supply, to the neglect of
credit). The major difficulty is that credit need not be involved in
the physical production or consumption of goods and services; it
may be used for purely financial purposes. In this case, its influence on economic activity becomes problematic. For purposes of
this discussion it may be helpful to distinguish between a "real"
economy and a "financial" economy. Economic activity takes
place in the "real" economy, while the extension and repayment
of credit occur in the "financial" economy. The reflexive interaction between the act of lending and the value of the collateral may

The Credit and Regulatory Cycle

83

then connect the "real" and the "financial" economy or it may be
confined to the "financitil" economy. Here we shall focus on the
first case.
A strong economy tends to enhance the asset values and income
streams that serve to determine creditworthiness. In the early
stages of a reflexive prdcess of credit expansion the amount of
credit involved is relatively small so that its impact on collateral
values is negligible. Thdt is why the expansionary phase is slow
to start with and credit remains soundly based at first. But as the
amount of debt accumulates, total lending increases in importance and begins to have an appreciable effect on collateral values. The process continves until a point is reached where total
credit cannot increase fast enough to continue stimulating the
economy. By that time, collateral values have become greatly dependent on the stimulative effect of new lending and, as new
lending fails to accelerate, collateral values begin to decline. The
erosion of collateral values has a depressing effect on economic
activity, which in turn reinforces the erosion of collateral values.
Since the collateral has'been pretty fully utilized at that point, a
decline may precipitate the liquidation of loans, which in turn
may make the decline more precipitous. That is the anatomy of a
typical boom and bust.
Booms and busts are not symmetrical because, at the inception
of a boom, both the volume of credit and the value of the collateral
are at a minimum; at the time of the bust, both are a p maximum.
But there is another factor at play. The liquidation of loans takes
time; the faster it has to be accomplished, the greater the effect on
the value of the collateral. In a bust, the reflexive interaction between loans and collateral becomes compr~ssedwithin a very
short time frame and the consequences can be catastrophic. It is
the sudden liquidation of accumulated positions that gives a bust
such a different shape from the preceding boom.
It can be seen that the boomhust sequence is a particular variant of reflexivity. Booms can arise whenever there is a two-way
connection between values and the act of valuation. The act of
valuation takes many forms. In the stock market, it is equity that
is valued; in banking, it is collateral. It is possible, although unlikely, that a boom could be generated without any credit expansion. The two examples we studied in the stock market, the REIT
and conglomerate booms, could, in theory, have unfolded without the stocks being used as collateral, although in practice there

'

84

t

t

Theory

was a lot of credit involved. In the absence of credit the reversal
would be a more gradual process. The contraction would not be a
mirror image of the expansion for the reason mentioned earlierthe reflexive element in valuations is greater at the time of reversal than at the inception of a trend-but the compression that is
characteristic of busts would be absent.
Both the b o o d u s t pattern and its explanation are almost too
obvious to be interesting. The amazing thing is that the reflexive
connection between lending and collateral has not been generally
recognized. There is an enormous literature on the trade cycle,
but I have not seen much awareness of the reflexive relationship
described here. Moreover, the trade cycles that-are gemrally discussed in textbooks differ in duration from the credit cycle I am
discussing here: they are short-tenn fluctuations within a larger
pattern. There is an awareness of a larger cycle, usually referred
to as the Kondratieff wave,-but it has never been "scientifically"
explained. At present, there is much concern that we may be
approaching another recession but the general assumption is that
we are dealing with a recession just like any other; the fact that
we are in the declining phase of the larger cycle is usually left out
of account. I contend that all previous recessions since the end of
World War 11occurred while credit was expanding, while the one
we may or may not be facing now would occur when borrowing
capacity in the real economy is contracting. This creates a situation that has no precedent in recent history.
Exactly where we are in the larger cycle is difficult to determine. I must confess I have been confused on the issue since 1982.
The reason for my confusion is that while the boom has clearly
' sun out of steam, the bust has not taken place.
Busts can be very disruptive, especially if the liquidation of
collateral causes a sudden compression of credit. The consequences are so unpleasant that strenuous efforts are made to avoid
them. The institution of central banking has evolved in a continuing attempt to prevent sudden, catastrophic contractions in
credit. Since a panic is hard to arrest once it has started, prevention is best practiced in the expansionary phase. That is why the
role of central banks has gradually expanded to include the regulation of the money supply. That is also why organized financial
markets regulate the ratio of collateral to credit.
Until now, the authorities have been able to prevent a bust. We
find ourselves in a twilight zone where the "normal" process of

The Credit and Regulatory Cycle

85

credit expansion culminated long ago but the "normal" process
of credit contraction has been prevented by the authorities. We
are in uncharted territory because the actions of the authorities
have no precedent.
The fact that banks and organized financial markets are regulated complicates the Course of events tremendously. Financial
history is best interpreted as a reflexive process in which there
are two sets of participants instead of one: competitors and regulators.
Such a system is much more complex than the case we studied
in the stock market. There, the regulatory environment was more
or less fixed: it was the backdrop against which the drama was
acted out. Here, the regulatory environment is an integral part of
the process.
~t is important to realize that-the regulators are also participants. There is a natural tendency to regard them as superhuman
beings who somehow stand outside and above the economic process and intervene only when the participants have made a mess
of it. That is not the case. They also are human, all too human.
They operate with imperfect understanding and their activities
have unintended consequences. Indeed, they seem to adjust to
changing circumstances less well than those who are motivated
by profit and loss, so that regulations are generally designed to
prevent the last mishap, not the next one. The deficiencies of
s rapidly
regulation tend to be more noticeable when c o n d i t i ~ are
changing, and conditions tend to change more rapidly when the
economy is less regulated.
We begin to discern a reflexive relationship between the regulators and the economy they regulate. It gives rise Po a process
that takes place concurrently with the process of credit expansion
and contraction and interacts with it. It is no wonder that the
result is so complex and perplexing!
The regulatory cycle does not have the asymmetric character of
the credit ~ycle.It seems to fit the wave pattern we developed for
the currency market better than the boom and bust pattern of the
credit cycle. Just as freely floating currencies tend to fluctuate
between over- and undervaluation, so market economies tend to
fluctuate between over- and underregulation. The length of the
cycle seems to be correlated with the credit cycle and one can
sense intuitively why that should be so. Credit expansion and
contraction have much to do which changes in the economy,

86

,

4

Theory

which in turn have a bearing on the adequacy of regulations.
Conversely, the regulatory environment influences not only how
fast credit can expand but also how far. Clearly, there is a twoway connection between credit and regulation, but it is far from
clear to me at this stage of the investigation what pattern, if any,
the interaction follows. That is the main source of my confusion.
We have identified a credit cycle that follows a boom/bust pattern: a regulatory cycle that is more wavelike, and an interplay
between the two whose pattern is unclear. There are, of course,
many secular developments involved as well, some of which relate to credit, some to regulation, and some to both. We have
mentioned that central banks tend to get stronger after each crisis;
that is a secular development that renders each cycle unique. In
the Great Depression both the banking system and the international trading system collapsed, making the contraction of credit
and economic activity much more severe than it would have been
otherwise. We can be certain that every effort will be made to
avoid a similar collapse in this cycle. We did not dwell on the
information revolution or on the improvements in transportation
that have helped the development of an integrated world economy. The outcome of all these influences is a unique course of
events that is easier to explain than to predict.
Looked at from this perspective, the entire postwar period is
part of a large expansionary boom that is now well advanced and
ripe for a bust. The bust has been avoided, however, by the intervention of the authorities at crucial moments. The interplay between government actions and the market mechanism has given
rise to a unique constellation that I have called Reagan's Imperial
Circle. We are now at the crucial moment where the Imperial
Circle is beginning to unwind and the au+thorities must invent
another solution to forestall a bust.
The same postwar period has also seen an almost complete
swing from government regulation to unrestrained competition.
We are now at a curious moment where the bias in favor of deregulation is still on the rise yet the need for government intervention in specific areas is beginning to reassert itself. The banking
industry, for one, is already on the way to becoming more regulated.
One could try and write a history of the postwar era in these
terms. The present credit cycle started after the end of World War
11; the origins of the regulatory cycle go back even farther to the

The Credit and Regulatory Cycle

87

New Deal, although the creation of the Bretton Woods system can
be taken as the starting point as far as the world economy is
concerned. The expansion that followed was intimately related to
the removal of restrictions on international trade and investment.
But international capital movements created problems for the
Bretton Woods system that were never anticipated and remain
unresolved.
I shall not attempt to present the complete story here. 1 shall
start at the point where I became actively involved and I shall
follow the path of my own involvement. This will give the investigation a more experimental character.
My experiences began after the breakdown of the system of
fixed exchange rates in 1973. Relationships that had been fixed
became subject to reflexive influences and my interest veered
from specific companies and industries to macroeconomic processes. My study of "growth banks" in 1972 constituted a transition point, although I did not know it at the time.
With the passage of time I found the instability of macroeconomic trends increasingly disturbing in both a subjective and an
objective sense and I decided to distance myself from active investing in 1981.After the crisis of 1982 I made a theoretical study
of the international debt problem. I was under the mistaken
impression that the crisis of 1982 constituted the climax in the
process of credit expansion. I thought that the authorities were
not doing enough to prevent a bust; I failed to regize that they
were doing too much. They actually kept credit expanding, albeit
on a more unsound basis than ever. The United States replaced
less developed countries as the "borrower of last resort" and commercial banks tried to grow their way out of the loans made ta
less developed countries by aggressively expanding in other directions. This led to another series of crises in 1984 that constituted the real turning point for the banking and thrift industries.
We are now suffering from the aftereffects of that climax. The
United States government continues to borrow on an everincreasing scale, but here, too, a turning point is at hand. The
dollar has begun to decline and foreigners are going to be repaid
in a depreciating currency. Perhaps the last great engine of credit
creation that is still going full blast is in the stock market where
mergermania is at its peak; but it does not have a stimulating
effect on the real economy.
The theoretical framework of an interrelated credit and regula-
