
When firms do well, so do their shares, and when business suffers, the
stock will as well.

Wal-Mart, for example, hit a speed bump in the mid-1990s when its
growth rate slowed down a bit—and its share price was essentially flat during
the same period. On the other hand, Colgate-Palmolive posted great results
during the late 1990s as it cut fat from its supply chain and launched an in-

novative toothpaste that stole market share—and the company’s stock saw


INTRODUCTION XVII

dramatic gains at the same time. The message is clear: Company fundamen-
tals have a direct effect on share prices.

This principle applies only over a long time period—in the short term,
stock prices can (and do) move around for a whole host of reasons that have
nothing whatsoever to do with the underlying value of the company. We
firmly advocate focusing on the long-term performance of businesses because
the short-term price movement of a stock is completely unpredictable.

Think back to the Internet mania of the late 1990s. Wonderful (but bor-
ing) businesses such as insurance companies, banks, and real estate stocks
traded at incredibly low valuations, even though the intrinsic worth of these
businesses hadn't really changed. At the same time, companies that had not a
prayer of turning a profit were being accorded billion-dollar valuations.

The Long-Term Approach

Given the proclivity of Mr. Market to plead temporary insanity at the drop of
a hat, we strongly believe that it’s not worth devoting any time to predicting
its actions. We're not alone in this. After talking to literally thousands of
money managers over the past 15 years or so, we've discovered that none of
the truly exceptional managers spend any time at all thinking about what the
market will do in the short term. Instead, they all focus on finding underval-
ued stocks that can be held for an extended time.

There are good reasons for this. Betting on short-term price movements
means doing a large amount of trading, which drives up taxes and trans-
action costs. The tax on short-term capital gains can be almost double the
rate of long-term capital gains, and constant trading means paying commis-
sions more frequently. As we'll discuss in Chapter 1, costs such as these
can be a huge drag on your portfolio, and minimizing them is the single
most important thing you can do to enhance your long-term investment
returns.

We've seen this borne out in long-term studies of mutual fund returns:
Funds with higher turnover—ones that trade more—generally post lower
results than their more deliberate peers, to the tune of about 1.5 percentage
points per year over 10 years. This may not sound like much, but the differ-

ence between alo percent annual return and an IL§ percent annual return


XVIII INTRODUCTION

on a $10,000 investment is almost $3,800 after 10 years. That's the price of

impatience.

Having the Courage of Your Convictions

Finally, successful stock-picking means having the courage to take a stance
that’s different from the crowd. There will always be conflicting opinions
about the merits of any company, and it’s often the companies with the most
conflict surrounding them that make the best investments. Thus, as an in-
vestor, you have to be able to develop your own opinion about the value of a
stock, and you should change that value only if the facts warrant doing so—
not because you read a negative news article or because some pundit mouths
off on TV. Investment success depends on personal discipline, not on whether

the crowd agrees or disagrees with you.

Let's Get Started
My goal in this book is to show you how to think for yourself, ignore the day-
to-day noise, and make profitable long-term investment decisions. Here’s our
road map.

First, you need to develop an investment philosophy, which I'll discuss in

Chapter 1. Successful investing is built on five core principles:

1. Doing your homework
2. Finding companies with strong competitive advantages (or economic
moats)

Having a margin of safety

Qe

Holding for the long term

5. Knowing when to sell

Building a solid stock portfolio should be centered on these five ideas; once
you know them, you'll be ready to start learning how to look at companies.
Second, I'll take a step back and review what not to do—because avoiding

mistakes is the most profitable strategy of all. In Chapter 2, I'll go over the

‘Alice Lowenstein, “The Low-Turnover Advantage,” Morningstar Mutual Funds, 30 (August 15,
1997): St-S2.


INTRODUCTION

most common mistakes that investors make. If you steer clear of these, you'll
start out ahead of the pack.

In Chapter 3, Pll show you how to separate great companies from
mediocre ones by analyzing competitive advantages, which we call economic
moats. I'll explain how economic moats are what help great companies keep
their top-tier status and why they're a big part of what separates long-run
winners from flashes in the pan. Understanding the sources of a firm’s eco-
nomic moat is critical to thoroughly analyzing a company.

Chapters 4 through 7 show you how to analyze companies by reading
their financial statements. First, I'll describe how financial statements
work—what the line items mean and how the different statements fit to-
gether. Once you know how to read balance sheets and income statements,
[ll show you a five-step process for putting all the numbers in context and
finding out just how solid a company really is. I’ll also show you how to eval-
uate management.

In Chapter 8, we'll look at how you can detect aggressive accounting, and
Pll tell you what red flags to watch out for so you can minimize the odds of a
big blowup in your portfolio.

In Chapters 9 and 10, I'll show you how to value stocks. You'll learn the
underlying theory of investment value, when ratios such as price-to-earnings
are (and aren't) useful, and how to figure out whether a stock is trading for
more or less than its intrinsic value. The cheapest stock isn’t always the best
investment, and what looks expensive may actually be cheap when viewed
from another angle.

Chapter 11 provides two case studies. I'll apply the tools presented in the
previous chapters to two real-world companies, so you can see for yourself
how the process of fundamental analysis works in practice.

In Chapter 12, I'll explain the 10-Minute Test, a quick-and-dirty checklist
that can help you separate firms that are unlikely to be worth your time from
the ones that deserve a thorough, in-depth examination.

In Chapters 13 through 26, P’ll lean on Morningstar’s team of equity an-
alysts to give you tips for analyzing different sectors of the stock market.
From semiconductors to drugs to banks, we'll tell you exactly what you
need to know to analyze companies from every corner of the market. You'll

learn what industry-specific characteristics separate the great firms from the

XIX


XX

INTRODUCTION

also-rans, what industry jargon means, and which industries are more (and
less) likely to offer fertile hunting ground for great investment ideas.

Finally, we'll wrap up with some recommended readings for those who
want to learn more.

The structure of the book is the same as the basic investment process that
we advocate: Develop a set of investing principles, understand the company’s
competitive environment, analyze the company, and value the stock. If you
can follow this process while avoiding most big mistakes, you'll do just fine as

an investor.


The Five Rules for Successful
Stock Investing

Ir ALWAYS AMAZES me how few investors—and sometimes, fund man-
agers—can articulate their investment philosophy. Without an investing
framework, a way of thinking about the world, you're going to have a very
tough time doing well in the market.

I realized this some years ago while attending the annual meeting of Berk-
shire Hathaway, the firm run by billionaire superinvestor Warren Buffett. I
overheard another attendee complain that he wouldn't be attending another
Berkshire meeting because “Buffett says the same thing every year.” To me,
that’s the whole point of having an investment philosophy and sticking to it.
If you do your homework, stay patient, and insulate yourself from popular
opinion, youre likely to do well. It's when you get frustrated, move outside
your circle of competence, and start deviating from your personal investment

philosophy that you'r likely to get into trouble.


THE FIVE RULES FOR SUCCESSFUL STOCK INVESTING

Here are the five rules that we recommend:

Do your homework.
Find economic moats.
Have a margin of safety.
Hold for the long haul.

Know when to sell.

yey pos

Do Your Homework

This sounds obvious, but perhaps the most common mistake that investors
make is failing to thoroughly investigate the stocks they purchase. Unless you
know the business inside and out, you shouldn't buy the stock.

This means that you need to develop an understanding of accounting so
that you can decide for yourself what kind of financial shape a company is in.
For one thing, you're putting your own money at risk, so you should know
what you're buying. More important, investing has many gray areas, so you
can't just take someone else’s word that a company is an attractive invest-
ment. You have to be able to decide for yourself because one person’s hot
growth stock is another's disaster waiting to happen. In Chapters 4 through
7, Pll show you what you need to know about accounting and how to boil
the analysis process down to a manageable level.

Once you have the tools, you need to take time to put them to use. That
means sitting down and reading the annual report cover to cover, checking out
industry competitors, and going through past financial statements. This can be
tough to do, especially if you're pressed for time, but taking the time to thor-
oughly investigate a company will help you avoid many poor investments.

Think of the time you spend on research as a cooling-off period. It’s al-
ways tempting when you hear about a great investment idea to think you
have to act now, before the stock starts moving—but discretion is almost al-
ways the better part of valor. After all, your research process might very well
uncover facts that make the investment seem less attractive. But if it is a win-
ner and if youre truly a long-term investor, missing out on the first couple of
points of upside won't make a big difference in the overall performance of
your portfolio, especially since the cooling-off period will probably lead you

to avoid some investments that would have turned out poorly.


HAVE A MARGIN OF SAFETY

Find Economic Moats
What separates a bad company from a good one? Or a good company from a
great one?

In large part, it’s the size of the economic moat a company builds around
itself. The term economic moat is used to describe a firm’s competitive advan-
tage—in the same way that a moat kept invaders of medieval castles at bay,
an economic moat keeps competitors from attacking a firm’s profits.

In any competitive economy, capital invariably seeks the areas of highest
expected return. As a result, the most profitable firms find themselves beset
by competitors, which is why profits for most companies have a strong
tendency over time to regress to the mean. This means that most highly
profitable companies tend to become less profitable as other firms compete
with them.

Economic moats allow a relatively small number of companies to retain
above-average levels of profitability for many years, and these companies are
often the most superior long-term investments. Longer periods of excess
profitability lead, on average, to better long-term stock performance.

Identifying economic moats is such a critical part of the investing process
that we'll devote an entire chapter—Chapter 3—to learning how to analyze
them. Here's a quick preview. The key to identifying wide economic moats
can be found in the answer to a deceptively simple question: How does a com-
pany manage to keep competitors at bay and earn consistently fat profits? If
you can answer this, you've found the source of the firm’s economic moat.

Have a Margin of Safety

Finding great companies is only half of the investment process—the other
half is assessing what the company is worth. You can’t just go out and pay
whatever the market is asking for the stock because the market might be de-
manding too high a price. And if the price you pay is too high, your invest-
ment returns will likely be disappointing.

The goal of any investor should be to buy stocks for less than they're
really worth. Unfortunately, it’s easy for estimates of a stock’s value to be too
optimistic—the future has a nasty way of turning out worse than expected.
We can compensate for this all-too-human tendency by buying stocks only
when they're trading for substantially less than our estimate of what they're


THE FIVE RULES FOR SUCCESSFUL STOCK INVESTING

worth. This difference between the market's price and our estimate of value is
the margin of safety.

Take Coke, for example. There’s no question that Coke had a solid com-
petitive position in the late 1990s, and you can make a strong argument that
it still does. But folks who paid 50 times earnings for Coke’s shares have had
a tough time seeing a decent return on their investment because they ignored
a critical part of the stock-picking process: having a margin of safety. Not
only was Coke’s stock expensive, but even if you thought Coke was worth 50
times earnings, it didn’t make sense to pay full price—after all, the assump-
tions that led you to think Coke was worth such a high price might have
been too optimistic. Better to have incorporated a margin of safety by paying,
for example, only 40 times earnings in case things went awry.

Always include a margin of safety into the price youre willing to pay for
a stock. If you later realize you overestimated the company’s prospects, you'll
have a built-in cushion that will mitigate your investment losses. The size of
your margin of safety should be larger for shakier firms with uncertain fu-
tures and smaller for solid firms with reasonably predictable earnings. For ex-
ample, a 20 percent margin of safety would be appropriate for a stable firm
such as Wal-Mart, but youd want a substantially larger one for a firm such as
Abercrombie & Fitch, which is driven by the whims of teen fashion.

Sticking to a valuation discipline is tough for many people because they're
worried that if they don’t buy today, they might miss the boat forever on the
stock, That’s certainly a possibility—but it’s also a possibility that the com-
pany will hit a financial speed bump and send the shares tumbling. The future
is an uncertain place, after all, and if you wait long enough, most stocks will
sell at a decent discount to their fair value at one time or another. As for the
few that just keep going straight up year after year—well, let’s just say that not
making money is a lot less painful than /osévg money you already have. For
every Wal-Mart, there’s a Woolworth’s.

One simple way to get a feel for a stock’s valuation is to look at its histori-
cal price/earnings ratio—a measure of how much you're paying for every dol-
lar of the firm’s earnings—over the past 10 years or more. (We have 10 years’
worth of valuation data available free on Morningstar.com, and other research

services have this information as well.) If a stock is currently selling at a


HOLD FOR THE LONG HAUL

price/earnings ratio of 30 and its range over the past 10 years has been between
15 and 33, you're obviously buying in at the high end of historical norms.

To justify paying today’s price, you have to be plenty confident that the
company’s outlook is better today than it was over the past 10 years. Occa-
sionally, this is the case, but most of the time when a company’s valuation is
significantly higher now than in the past, watch out. The market is probably
overestimating growth prospects, and you'll likely be left with a stock that
underperforms the market over the coming years.

We'll talk more about valuation in Chapters 9 and 10, so don’t worry if
yourre still wondering how to value a stock. The key thing to remember for
now is simply that if you don’t use discipline and conservatism in figuring
out the prices you're willing to pay for stocks, you'll regret it eventually. Valu-

ation isa crucial part of the investment process.

Hold for the Long Haul

Never forget that buying a stock is a major purchase and should be treated
like one. You wouldn't buy and sell your car, your refrigerator, or your DVD
player 50 times a year. Investing should be a long-term commitment because
short-term trading means that you're playing a loser’s game. The costs really
begin to add up—both the taxes and the brokerage costs—and create an al-
most insurmountable hurdle to good performance.

If you trade frequently, you'll rack up commissions and other expenses
that, over time, could have compounded. Every $1 you spend on commis-
sions today could have been turned into $5.60 if you had invested that dollar
at 9 percent for 20 years. Spend $500 today and you could be giving up more
than $2,800 20 years hence.

But that’s just the beginning of the story because frequent trading also
dramatically increases the taxes you pay. And whatever amount you pay in
taxes each year is money that can’t compound for you next year.

Let’s look at two hypothetical investors to see what commissions, trading,
and taxes can do to a portfolio. Long-Term Lucy is one of those old-fashioned
fuddy-duddies who like to buy just a few stocks and hang on to them for a
long time, and Trader Tim is a gunslinger who likes to get out of stocks as

soon as he’s made a few bucks (see Figure 1.1).


6 THE FIVE RULES FOR SUCCESSFUL STOCK INVESTING

Growth af $10,000 Investment (After Taxes, Cammissians Excluded)

@ Long-Term Lucy: Holds stocks for $114,275
30 years, pays long-term taxes

Trader Tim: Trades stocks every $54,362
six months, pays short-term taxes

Year 1 5 10 15 20 25 30

Figure 1.1. Tim turns over his partfolio every six manths, incurring a 35% short-term capital gains tax.
Lucy's gains are taxed at only 15% thanks to her buy-and-hald strategy, and more of her maney
compounds over a langer time. Source: Marningstar, Inc.

Lucy invests $10,000 in five stocks for 30 years at a 9 percent rate of re-
turn and then sells the investment and pays long-term capital gains of 15 per-
cent. Tim, meanwhile, invests the same amount of money at the same rate of
return but trades the entire portfolio twice per year, paying 35 percent short-
term capital gains taxes on his profits and reinvesting what's left. We'll give
them both a break and not charge them any commissions for now.

After 30 years, Lucy has about $114,000, while Tim has less than half that
amount—only about $54,000. As you can see, letting your money com-
pound without paying Uncle Sam every year makes a huge difference, even
ignoring brokerage fees.

And since holding a single stock for 30 years may not be realistic, let’s
consider what happens if Lucy sells her entire portfolio every five years, rein-
vesting the proceeds each time. In this case, she winds up with about
$96,000—which is not much less than $114,000 and is still much more than
Tim's $54,000 (see Figure 1.2).

These examples look at just the tax impact of frequent trading—things
look even worse for the traders once we factor in commissions. If we assume

that Tim and Lucy pay $15 per trade, Tim nets only about $31,000 after 30


KNOW WHEN TO SELL 7

Growth af $10,000 Investment (After Taxes, Cammissians Excluded)

@ Long-Term Lucy: Holds stocks for $95,994
five years, pays long-term taxes

Trader Tim: Trades stocks every $54,362
six months, pays short-term taxes

Year 1 5 10 15 20 25 30

Figure 1.2 Lucy decreases her halding period to 5 years fram 30 years, but the benefit of lower taxes
and a longer compounding periad still nets her significantly more than Tim. Source: Morningstar, Inc.

years and Lucy nets $93,000, again assuming she holds her stocks for five
years (see Figure 1.3).

The real-world costs of taxes and commissions can take a big bite out of
your portfolio. Extending your average holding period from six months to
five years yields about $62,000 in extra investment returns. Lucy gets a lavish
reward for her patience, don’t you think?

One final thought: To match Lucy’s $93,000 portfolio value, Tim would
need to generate returns of around 14 percent each year instead of 9 percent.
That’s the true cost of frequent trading in this example—about five percent-
age points per year. So, if you really think that churning your portfolio will
get you five extra percentage points of performance each year, then trade
away. If, like the rest of us, you were taught some humility by the bear mar-
ket, be patient—ir'll pay off.

Know When to Sell
Ideally, we'd all hold our investments forever, but the reality is that few com-
panies are worth holding for decades at a stretch—and few investors are savvy

enough to buy only those companies. Knowing when it’s appropriate to bail


8

THE FIVE RULES FOR SUCCESSFUL STOCK INVESTING

Growth of $10,000 Investment (After Taxes, Commissions Included)

@ Long-Term Lucy: Holds stocks for $92,531
five years, pays long-term taxes

Trader Tim: Trades stocks every
six months, pays short-term taxes.

Year 1 5 10 15 20 25 30

Figure 1.3. When commissions are taken into account, Tim's returns suffer far more than Lucy's.
Source: Morningstar, Inc.

out of a stock is at least as important as knowing when to buy one, yet we
often sell our winners too early and hang on to our losers for too long,

The key is to constantly monitor the companies you own, rather than the
stocks you own. It’s far better to spend some time keeping up on the news sur-
rounding your companies and the industries in which they function than it is
to look at the stock price 20 times a day.

Before I discuss when you should sell a stock, I ought to point out when
you shouldn’t sell.

The Stock Has Dropped
By themselves, share-price movements convey no useful information, espe-
cially because prices can move in all sorts of directions in the short term for
completely unfathomable reasons. The long-run performance of stocks is
largely based on the expected future cash flows of the companies attached to
them—it has very little to do with what the stock did over the past week or
month.
