
 Discipline 

 Success in trading comes with skill development and self-discipline. Trading principles are easy, and day trading strategies are very simple. I have a Ph.D. in chemical engineering and I have worked as a research scientist at a world class facility. I have published numerous scholarly publications in high impact and respected scientific journals on my nanotechnology and complicated molecular level research. Believe me, I had to study and understand extremely more difficult concepts, so I can assure you that day trading, in theory at least, is easy. 

 What makes day trading, or any type of trading for that matter, difficult is the discipline and self-control that you need. You have no chance to make money as a trader without discipline, no matter your style, the time you commit to trading, the country you live in, or the market you are trading in. 

 Beginner traders who fail to make money in the markets often get frustrated and go out and try to learn more about how the markets work, study new strategies, adopt additional technical indicators, follow new traders, and join other chatrooms. They don’t realize that the main cause of their failure is often their lack of self-discipline, their impulsive decisions and their sloppy risk and money management, not their technical knowledge. 

 Year after year, professional institutional traders perform so much better than private retail traders do. While most private traders are university-educated and thoughtful book-reading individuals who are often business owners or professionals, the average institutional traders are loud 20 something-year-old cowboys who used to play rugby in college and haven’t read a book for many years. Have you wondered why these guys outperform private traders year after year? It’s not because they are younger or sharper or faster. They also don’t win because of their training or platforms, since most of us retail traders have almost the same gear as they do. The answer is the strictly enforced discipline of trading firms. 

 Many successful institutional traders will quit their firm and go out on their own. They ask themselves, “Why should I share all of my profits with the firm, when I know how to trade and can keep all of the profit for myself?” Most of them lose money as private traders. They equip themselves with the same software and platforms, trade the same systems, and stay in touch with their contacts, but still fail. After a few months, most of them are back in a New York City recruiting office, looking for a trading job. How come those traders could make money for their firms but not for themselves? 

 The answer is self-discipline. 

 When institutional traders quit their firm, they leave behind their manager and all of the strictly enforced risk control rules. A trader who violates risk limits is fired immediately. Traders who leave institutions may know how to trade, but their discipline is often external, not internal. They quickly lose money without their managers because they have developed no self-discipline. 

 We private retail traders can break any rule and change our plan in the middle of a trade. We can average down to a losing position, we can constantly break the rules, and no one will notice. Managers in trading firms though are quick to get rid of impulsive people who break any trading rule for a second time. This creates a serious discipline for institutional traders. Strict external discipline saves institutional traders from heavy losses and deadly sins (such as the averaging down of a losing position), which quite often will destroy many private accounts. 

 Discipline means you execute your plan and honor your stop loss as you set it out, without altering it in the middle of a trade. Discipline is executing your detailed plan every single time. If your plan is to buy a stock at VWAP and your stop loss is if it fails to hold VWAP, then you must accept the loss immediately and get out of the trade if the stock fails to hold the VWAP. 

 Do not be stubborn about your decision if you are wrong. The market does not reward stubbornness. The market is not interested in how you wish stocks would trade. Traders must adapt to the market and do what the market demands. And that is the way day trading works and that is how it will always work. 

 There are going to be many days when you follow your plan, like in the above example, and then the stock will go back up and trade above VWAP after you were stopped out. In fact, there will be many times such as this in your trading career. But consider these two points: (1) Do not judge your trading strategy based upon one trade. Executing your plan, and being disciplined, will lead to long-term success. Many times your plan will be fine and solid but a hedge fund manager out of nowhere will decide to liquidate a position in a stock that you are trading, the price will drop suddenly and you will get stopped out. You did not do anything wrong, it is the nature of the market that is unpredictable. At times, the uncertainty of the market will leave you in the red. (2) A professional trader accepts the loss and gets out of the trade. You then re-evaluate and plan another if-then scenario. You can always get back into the stock. Commissions are cheap (for most of the brokers), and professionals often take several quick stabs at a trade before it will start running in their favor. 

 Trading teaches you a great deal about yourself, about your mental weaknesses and about your strengths. This alone ensures that trading is a valuable life experience. 

 Mentorship and a Community of Traders 

 Dr. Brett Steenbarger, the author of great books such as The Psychology of Trading and The Daily Trading Coach , once wrote: 

 “ There is no question in my mind that, if I were to start trading full-time, knowing what I know now, I would either join a proprietary trading firm or would form my own “virtual trading group” by connecting online (and in real time) with a handful of like-minded traders. ” 

 You need to be part of a mastermind group that will add value to your trading career. To whom can you turn to ask trading questions? I encourage you to join a community of traders. Trading alone is very difficult and can be emotionally overwhelming. It is very helpful to join a community of traders so that you can ask them questions, talk to them, learn new methods and strategies, get some hints and alerts about the stock market, and also make your own contributions. If you join me, you will see that I often lose money. It can be comforting to see that losing money is not limited to you, and everyone, including experienced traders, has to take a loss. As I’ve said, it’s all part of the process. 

 There are many chatrooms that you can join on the Internet. Some of them are free, but most of them charge a fee. In our chatroom, you can see my trading platform and stock screener in real time while I am trading and listen as I explain my strategy and thought process. You can watch and listen. Or you can take your own trades, but still be part of our community. 

 It is extremely important to remember however, that if you are in any community of traders, either our chatroom at www.BearBullTraders.com or the dozens of others out there, you should not follow the pack or the room moderator, but you should be an independent thinker. Generally, people change when they join crowds. They become more unquestioning and impulsive, nervously searching for a leader whose trades they can mirror. They react with the crowd instead of using their minds. Chatroom members may catch a few trends together, but they get killed when trends reverse. Never forget that successful traders are independent thinkers. Simply use your judgment to decide when to trade and when not to. 

 You need to find a trading mentor. A good mentor can positively impact your trading career in so many different ways. Today, because of algorithmic programs and market volatility, it’s much harder for new traders to survive the learning curve. A good mentor can make a huge difference. A mentor demonstrates the professionalism required to be successful. A mentor can lead you to discover the talent inside of you. Sometimes you just need to be told that you can do it. In online trading communities, experienced traders mentor new traders at times for a fee, but often for free. I personally mentor a few traders at a time, and of course, I myself did and still have a trading mentor. It is important to note though that mentorship does not work unless you are receptive, listen, and then put in the work necessary to adapt successfully. 

 You should find a mentor whose trading style fits with your personality. For example, if momentum trading is your favorite style, you’re wasting your time talking to me. Although I trade them from time to time, my style is really only for those who have an intraday swing day mentality. I mostly focus on VWAP and Support or Resistance trades. 

 Reflection and Review 

 By now, you may correctly think that trading psychology and self-discipline, a series of proven trading strategies, and excellent money and risk management are the essential elements of success in trading. But there is another element that ties all of your trading fundamentals together: record-keeping. 

 Keeping records of your trades will enable you to learn from your past success and failure experiences and make you a better trader. In fact, the most important and the most effective way to continuously improve as a trader is to keep a diary of your trades. There are many consistently profitable traders around the world, trading different markets with different methods, but they all have one thing in common: they keep excellent records of their trades. It is a very tedious and boring task; but it is also a very necessary task. Journal your trades daily. Make sure to include the following points in your trading journal: 

 Your physical well-being (lack of sleep, too much coffee, too much food the night before, etc.) 
 The time of the day you made the trade 
 The strategy you were anticipating 
 How you found the opportunity (from a scanner, a chatroom, etc.) 
 Quality of your entry (risk/reward) 
 Sizing/management of your trade (scaling in and out as planned) 
 Execution of exits (following profit targets or stop losses) 

 I personally take a screenshot from my screen (with a free software called Screenshot Captor ) and journal my trades in my blog with that software. Please visit my blog to get some ideas on how to journal your trades. You do not have to follow my style, but you should find what works best for you because to be successful, you must journal your trades daily. 

 Mike Bellafiore, co-founder of SMB Capital (a proprietary trading firm in New York City), writes in his book One Good Trade that the professional traders at his firm video record all of their trades during the day. In their afternoon session they sit around their conference room tables, enjoy a lunch catered by the firm, review their trades and groupthink about better ways to take your money. Trading is a full contact sport and anything less than your complete focus is disrespectful to the game and will certainly knock you out of the game. Profitable traders constantly evaluate their trading system. They make adjustments every month, every day, and even intraday. 

 New traders often ask me how to improve after a series of losses and a period of struggling. I recommend to them that they review their journal and look more specifically at what precisely they are doing poorly at in their trading. I am doing poorly doesn’t mean anything. You cannot improve if you don’t have a proper record of your daily trades. 

 Is it your stock selection? 
 Is it your entry points? 
 Is it your discipline or psychology? 
 Is it your platform or clearing firm (broker)? 
 What about other traders, is it a bad month for everyone or just for you? 

 If the new trader lives in Vancouver, Canada, I usually meet them in person and identify the areas that need to be improved. If I cannot meet them in person, we have a chat over Skype and evaluate their performance. One time a trader complained about her order execution speed. I remotely connected to her PC (using TeamViewer, a remote control/remote access software) and evaluated the CPU performance. I had to remove many unnecessary programs and apps from her PC, run a malware scanner and remove a variety of intrusive software, computer viruses, spyware, adware, scareware, and other malicious programs. I freed up a lot of the PC’s memory and CPU capacity and her trading execution speed increased significantly. Your PC, just like your body and mind, needs to be kept clean, lean and fast, all of which have a direct effect on your trading platform and eventually your trading results. 

 I personally live video record all of my trades during the morning session (as I rarely make any trades Mid-day or at the Close). I believe traders, like athletes, should watch their trading videos. The best athletes and teams watch films of themselves to see what they’re doing right and wrong, and how best to improve. I will review my tapes during Mid-day and make sure to note important observations on my entry, exit, price action, Level 2 signals and so on. I try to learn as much as possible from my trades. Sometimes I look for new algorithmic programs that I must be aware of. I search for areas that I could have added more size. This is one of my trading weaknesses. I also do a poor job of holding for a longer time the stocks that are going in my favor. I therefore consider trades that I could have held longer. I make sure to find spots where I was too aggressive and to find trades that did not offer a good risk/reward opportunity but that I still took the trade in. I review my position sizing and why and where I added more. That is How to Day Trade for a Living. There is no other way to get better. There are no excuses in trading. To get better and to help traders in my community, I have to do this. 

 Watching trading videos also shows me how easy trading is when there are no emotions attached to a trade. When I review my work, I am not invested in a trade in real time with real money. Trading live, the market seems fast and unpredictable. When you watch back your trading video, you see that the market is actually very slow. There are times when I see the pattern in a stock by watching my video and recognize how I traded the stock backward, and that is embarrassing for someone of my experience. 

 I later review my videos over the weekend to create educational series to use in teaching day trading. Over the weekend, after I celebrate the winning week on Friday night with my friends and family in Vancouver, I lock myself into my home office and cut tape after tape to develop and update my training programs. 

 Watching your videos is an exercise that can benefit all traders no matter their experience. New traders need to watch the markets trade. Watching your videos increases your trading experience and confidence and significantly shortens your learning curve. But I agree, it takes time and it is indeed boring.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 My Daily Blog and YouTube Video Recaps 

 As mentioned earlier, I also write a blog post about my trades and document my thoughts for each and every trade on my website. This blog helps me to maintain a good record of all of my trades, and also helps my fellow traders and others to learn more by reading about my experiences. Your journal does not have to be long and complicated, and it can include mostly images. As I noted, I use a free software called Screenshot Captor to take a screenshot from my platform in real time right after I end a trade. I can see my entries and exits on the chart and I just add my thought process to the journal along with anything else I think I should note from that trading day. Below you can read my daily blog for February 6, 2017: 

 --------- 

 “ +$986 Trading GALE TSN COG HAS February 6, 2017 by Andrew 

 Figure 9.4 - My closed P&L on February 6, 2017. 

 Wow, what a day! Let's see: 

 GALE 

 GALE was very active pre-market, that is why I wanted to watch it. It opened weak below VWAP, but closed above it after the first 1 min. I went long 2,000 shares with the hope of getting to the pre-market high at $2.62. 

 Figure 9.5 - 5-minute chart of GALE on February 6, 2017. 

 It could not push higher, and I got stopped out. Stock later sold off massively during the day, I am glad I got out of the way. -$180 loss. 

 Figure 9.6 - 1-minute chart of GALE on February 6, 2017. 

 TSN 

 TSN was a solid VWAP trade. I went short 400 shares below VWAP after the Opening Range Breakout. I covered in 4 steps toward the previous day close and daily level of $64.47. I have never seen a stock sell off like this at the Open. Chop Chop! 

 Stock bounced back to VWAP, rejected it, and sold off again. I went short 100 shares again below daily level of $64.47. I got stopped out early at VWAP. I should have waited to see if TSN broke the VWAP or not. 

 But price could not break the VWAP and sold off again. This time I went short small, and added 2 more times below VWAP with the profit target of daily level of $64.47. I covered everything at $64.47 daily level as planned. Chop Chop! 

 Damn I should have held some for next move down because we broke that level and stock is now moving lower. 

 Figure 9.7 - 5-minute chart of TSN on February 6, 2017. I made three trades on it. 

 Stock is really weak as I am journaling my trades in the morning but I am not going to trade as I hit my daily goal.  

 HAS 

 HAS was on my watchlist as well. I went short when stock bounced from high of the day above VWAP, anticipating the break below VWAP. Stock lost the VWAP and I covered my shorts at 9 EMA. Chop Chop! 

 Figure 9.8 - 5-minute chart of HAS on February 6, 2017. 

 COG 

 COG was also a short above VWAP. I went short above VWAP and added more as I saw signs of weakness. I covered everything at daily level of $23.45. Chop Chop! 

 Figure 9.9 - 5-minute chart of COG on February 6, 2017. 

 It was a good day, +$986!” (as you will see in Figure 9.4 above) 

 --------- 

 You can read my daily journals on my website. Often traders in my network will discuss my trades with me and I will learn something from them as well. Sometimes I edit videos of my daily trades and post them on my YouTube channel. I keep a library of all of my trading videos and cut and edit them for a trading course that I am currently preparing.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Final Words 

 You need to practice. You need experience deciphering market patterns and you need to be constantly tweaking your if-then statements for your trading setups. Every day is a new game and a new puzzle to solve. Many people believe that trading can be reduced to a few rules that they can follow every morning. Always do this or always do that. In reality, trading isn't about “always” at all; it is about each situation and each trade. You must learn how to think in day trading, and this is no easy task. 

 You must start recognizing patterns and developing trading strategies. And these strategies must be practiced in real time and under stress. Trading in simulators can help and is absolutely necessary, but there is no substitute for trading with your real hard–earned cash where your results actually matter. 

 When you begin as a trader, you most likely will be horrible. Many times at the beginning of my career I came to the conclusion that day trading was not for me. Even now that I am an experienced and profitable trader, there is at least one day almost every month that I wonder if I can trade in this market any longer. Of course, this feeling of disappointment goes away faster these days, usually after the next good trade. But for you, because you have not seen success yet, surviving the learning curve is very difficult. I know that. However, this does not mean you should lose a lot of money when you trade live at the beginning. Trading in the simulators will help to prepare you for real trading with real money. 

 If you are signing up for a training course or mentorship program, you should very carefully read about their plan. A good training program will only encourage you to trade the easiest setups when you start. For example, for the first month live, new traders should only trade Support or Resistance or VWAP trades. The next month, new traders can shift to reversal trades exclusively. 

 The next month, you should focus on Moving Average Trend trades. After that, you can focus on Bull Flag Momentum plays (momentum trades are the hardest to execute and manage risk in). But you should start with one trade play at a time. 

 Often new traders expect to make money immediately, and when they don’t, they let this affect their work. When they do not see the results that they expected, they start to focus on the wrong things. Some increase their share size, hoping that this will help them make more money. Many will not prepare as hard as they should because they become discouraged. They ask themselves, “What is the point of preparing hard if I cannot make money?” They start to take chances that a successful and experienced trader would never take. They become gamblers. This leads to even more significant losses and only adds to their problem. 

 While there is no one right way to make money trading, there is only one right way to begin your trading career. When you first begin, you must focus on the process of trading, not on how to make money for a living. You must allow at least eight to twelve months before you will become consistently profitable. If you are not willing or are unable to do this, then you should find another career. Some are not able to either financially or psychologically commit this much time to this pursuit. If this is the case, then again, you should find another profession. 
