
In following all these varied world markets, I know you read a tremendous amount of
economic literature. Do you also pay any attention to the various market advisory letters?
I get a "guru report" every day.
Who is on that list?
All the newsletter writers who have a large following. People like Prech-ter, Zweig, Davis, Eliades,
and so on.
Do you use your guru report as a measure of contrary opinion?
I try not to be too much of a wise guy because during major price moves, they will be right for a
portion of it. What I am really looking for is a consensus that the market is not confirming. I like to
know that there are a lot of people who are going to be wrong.
So if you see that most of the members on your guru list are bullish at a time when the market
is not moving up, and you have some fundamental reason to be bearish, you will feel stronger
about the trade?
Yes, much stronger.
Do you think people can trade profitably by just following the gurus?
Probably, but my impression is that to make money, you have to hold a position with conviction.
That is very difficult when you are following someone else. There are some good gurus, however.
For example, in the stock market, I like Marty Zweig. He uses excellent risk control. Unlike some
other gurus, he doesn't believe he is predicting the future; he is simply observing what is happening
and making rational bets.
You talk about both the importance of risk control and the necessity of having the conviction
to hold a position. How much risk do you typically take on a trade?
First of all, I try very hard not to risk more than 1 percent of my portfolio on any single trade.
Second, I study the correlation of my trades to reduce my exposure. We do a daily computer
analysis to see how correlated our positions are. Through bitter experience, I have learned that a
mistake in position correlation is the root of some of the most serious problems in trading. If you
have eight highly correlated positions, then you are really trading one position that is eight times as
large.
Does that mean if you are bullish in both the Deutsche mark and Swiss franc, then you decide
which one you like better and place your entire long position in that currency?
Yes, that is definitely true. But even more important is the idea of trading a long in one market
against a short in a related market. For example, right now, although I am net short the dollar, I am
long the yen and short the Deutsche mark. In all my trading, if I am long something, I like to be
short something else.
Do the cross rates like the Deutsche mark/Japanese yen move slower than the individual
currencies themselves?
Not necessarily. For example, recently the sterling/mark cross rate was in a yearlong congestion
between approximately 2.96 and 3.00. It finally broke out about a month ago. The day it broke out,
it challenged the top of the range about twenty times. The Bank of England kept on defending it.
Finally the Bank of England gave in. As soon as the cross rate pierced the 3.01 level, there were no
trades. In fact, there were no trades until it hit 3.0350. So it moved virtually a full 1 percent without
trading.
Is that unusual for the interbank market?
Very unusual. It meant everybody was watching the 3.00 level. Once everyone realized the Bank of
England was not stepping in, no one wanted to be a seller.
Is that type of breakout—a violent and quick one—much more reliable than a typical
breakout?
Yes, it is much more reliable.
Even though your fills are worse?
Terrible fills. The worse the fills are, the better your trade. In that case, after trading for a couple of
42

hours between 3.04 and 3.02, the rate went straight up to 3.11.
Do you believe that the cross rates provide better trading opportunities in currencies than net
short or long positions against the dollar?
Yes, because there are a lot fewer people paying attention to the cross rates. The general rule is:
The less observed, the better the trade.
Your trading style involves a synthesis of fundamental and technical analysis. But if I were to
say to you, Bruce, we are going to put you in a room and you can have either all the
fundamental information you want, or all the charts and technical input you want, but only
one, which would you choose?
That is like asking a doctor whether he would prefer treating a patient with diagnostics or with a
chart monitoring his condition. You need both. But, if anything, the fundamentals are more
important now. In the 1970s, it was a lot easier to make money using technical analysis alone.
There were far fewer false breakouts. Nowadays, everybody is a chartist, and there are a huge
number of technical trading systems. I think that change has made it much harder for the technical
trader.
Do you think that the trend-following system approach will eventually self-destruct under the
weight of its own size and the fact that most of these systems are using similar approaches?
I think that is true. The only thing that will save those technical systems is a period of high
inflation, when simple trend-following methodologies will work again. However, there is no
question in my mind that if we have stable, moderate rates of inflation, the technical trading
systems will kill each other off.
Let's shift our conversation to the stock market. Do you believe that the stock market behaves
differently from other markets, and if so, how?
The stock market has far more short-term countertrends. After the market has gone up, it always
wants to come down. The commodity markets аre driven by supply and demand for physical goods;
if there is a true shortage, prices will tend to keep trending higher.
So if the stock index market is much choppier, are there any technical approaches that can
work?
Perhaps, but they keep changing. I have found that very long-term decision-making systems will
catch the bigger stock market advances, but you need to use very wide stops.
So you have to be very long term to filter out the noise.
Much longer than most traders can handle because that strategy involves riding out large
retracements. As an alternative approach, one of the traders I know does very well in the stock
index markets by trying to figure out how the stock market can hurt the most traders. It seems to
work for him.
How can he quantify that?
He looks at market sentiment numbers, but basically it is a matter of gut feel.
Some critics have attributed the October 1987 crash to program trading. What are your own
feelings?
I think two different elements were involved. First, overly high prices left the stock market
vulnerable to a decline, which was triggered by rising interest rates and other fundamental causes.
Second, that decline was accentuated by heavy selling from pension funds who were involved in
so-called portfolio insurance.
Are we talking about portfolio insurance as opposed to arbitrage-type program trading!
[Portfolio insurance involves systematically selling stock index futures as stock prices decline
(and covering those shorts when prices rise) in order to reduce portfolio risk. Program trading
normally refers to buying and selling stock index futures against an opposite position in a basket of
stocks when the prices of the two are out of line.]
Right. The only way in which arbitrage could be said to have contributed to the problem, rather
than helped it, is that if it weren’t for program trading arbitrage, portfolio insurance may never have
43

been developed.
So the arbitrageurs are only to be blamed for the market decline insofar as they made
portfolio insurance possible?
Yes. If you read the Brady report, you will see that the portfolio insurers came into the market with
billions of dollars worth of sales in a few hours. The market was unable to absorb it. Portfolio
insurance was a terrible idea; it was insurance in name only. In fact, it was nothing more than a
massive stop-loss order. If it were not for portfolio insurance selling, the market would still have
gone down sharply, but nothing like the 500-point decline we witnessed.
Do you feel great traders have a special talent?
In a sense. By definition, there can only be a relatively small group of superior traders, since
trading is a zero-sum game.
What is the balance of trading success between talent and hard work?
If you don't work very hard, it is extremely unlikely that you will be a good trader.
Are there some traders who can just coast by on innate skills?
You can do that for a while. There are a lot of one-year wonders in trading. It is quite common to
find somebody who has a strong feeling that sugar is going to 40 cents, or that the copper spreads
are going to widen dramatically, and that one idea turns out right. For example, recently I heard
about a trader who made $27 million trading copper spreads this past year, and then lost virtually
all of it.
What advice would you give the novice trader?
First, I would say that risk management is the most important thing to be well understood.
Undertrade, undertrade, undertrade is my second piece of advice. Whatever you think your position
ought to be, cut it at least in half. My experience with novice traders is that they trade three to five
times too big. They are taking 5 to 10 percent risks on a trade when they should be taking 1 to 2
percent risks.
Besides overtrading, what other mistakes do novice traders typically make?
They personalize the market. A common mistake is to think of the market as a personal nemesis.
The market, of course, is totally impersonal; it doesn't care whether you make money or not.
Whenever a trader says, "I wish," or "I hope," he is engaging in a destructive way of thinking
because it takes attention away from the diagnostic process.
In my conversation with Kovner, I was struck by the immense complexity and scope of his
analysis. I still can't figure out how he can find the time to follow and analyze intricately the
economies of so many different countries, let alone integrate these various analyses into a single
picture. Clearly, Kovner's unique synthesis of worldwide fundamental and technical analysis is
hardly translatable to the average trader. Nevertheless, there are key elements in Kovner's trading
approach that have direct relevance to the more mundane trader.
Kovner lists risk management as the key to successful trading; he always decides on an exit point
before he puts on a trade. He also stresses the need for evaluating risk on a portfolio basis rather
than viewing the risk of each trade independently. This is absolutely critical when one holds
positions that are highly correlated, since the overall portfolio risk is likely to be much greater than
the trader realizes.
One statement by Kovner, which made a particularly strong impression on me, concerned his
approach in placing stops: "I place my stop at a point that is too far away or too difficult to reach
easily." In this manner, Kovner maximizes the chances that he will not be stopped out of a trade
that proves correct, while at the same time maintaining rigid money management discipline. The
philosophy behind this approach is that it is better to allocate the predetermined maximum dollar
risk in a trade to a smaller number of contracts, while using a wider stop. This is the exact reverse
of the typical trader, who will try to limit the loss per contract, but trade as many contracts as
possible—an approach which usually results in many good trades being stopped out before the
market moves in the anticipated direction. The moral is: Place your stops at al point that, if reached,
will reasonably indicate that the trade is wrong,' not at a point determined primarily by the
44

maximum dollar amount you are willing to lose per contract. If the meaningful stop point implies
an uncomfortably large loss per contract, trade a smaller number of contracts.
Kovner's worst trading mistake—his "going bust trade," as he terms it—resulted from a spur of the
moment decision. My own personal experience underscores that there is probably no class of trades
with a higher failure rate than impulsive (not to be confused with intuitive) trades. Regardless of
the approach used, once a strategy is selected, the trader should stick to his or her game plan and
avoid impulsive trading decisions (for example, putting on an unplanned trade because a friend has
just recommended it; liquidating a position before the predetermined stop point is reached because
of an adverse price movement).
Finally, Kovner views a good trader as "strong, independent, and contrary in the extreme," and
points to discipline and a willingness to make (and accept) mistakes as significant traits of the
winning trader.

45

Richard Dennis-A Legend Retires
Richard Dennis became intrigued by commodity trading during the late 1960s, while earning the
minimum wage as a runner on the exchange floor. In the summer of 1970, he decided to take a
crack at trading on his own, and with $1,600 borrowed from his family, he purchased a seat on the
Mid America Exchange.
The Mid Am, as it is called, is a kind of minor league exchange because it trades pint-sized
versions of the contracts traded on the major exchanges. The Mid Am tends to attract the business
of small hedgers and speculators for whom a single regular-sized contract represents too large a
position. As a fledgling trader with little risk capital, the Mid Am was well suited to Dennis—it
was also the only exchange on which he could afford a seat.
The seat cost Dennis $1,200, leaving him a scant $400 for trading. Incredible as it may seem, he
eventually transformed that tiny stake into a fortune, which has been estimated by some to
approach $200 million. As his father is reported to have said, in what must be one of the grand
understatements of all time, "Let's just say Richie ran that four hundred bucks up pretty good."
Although Dennis has been exceptionally successful over the long haul, he has withstood a few
dramatic setbacks. He was in the midst of one such downturn at the time of our interview. Several
of the public funds managed by Dennis lost enough during the late 1987-early 1988 period to
trigger the 50 percent loss cutoff point for the cessation of trading. Dennis' personal account
witnessed a similar fate. As he expressed in a letter to investors, "These results parallel immense
losses in my own personal trading."
Perhaps one of Dennis' most impressive traits as a trader is his ability to weather such hard times
with little emotional impact. Apparently, he has learned to accept such sporadic large losses as part
of the game. His confidence during such periods remains unshaken, as he believes he will
eventually rebound if he stays true to his basic trading strategy. Had I not known, judging by the
mood and confidence of the man I interviewed, I would sooner have guessed that he had just made
a small fortune rather than lost one.
Whatever the stereotype image of a centimillionaire may be, Dennis does not fit it. His lowspending lifestyle is legendary. In fact, his only real extravagances are his sizable political and
charitable contributions. His political views also do not mesh with the popular image of the very
rich. Dennis is the founder of the Roosevelt Center for American Policy Studies, a liberal think
tank, and he supports the concept of higher tax rates for wealthy Americans. In recent years, he has
taken an increasingly active role in the political sphere, supporting a variety of liberal candidates.
Unlike trading, his win-loss ratio in politics has been disappointing. In the 1988 presidential race,
Dennis was the national cochairman for the Babbitt campaign.
In drawing up a list of candidates to be interviewed for this project, Dennis was an essential name.
He is one of the foremost trading legends of our time—a trader that a number of others interviewed
in this book cited with the phrase, "I'm not in his league."
In setting up the interview, I dealt with one of Dennis' assistants. After explaining the project to
him, he told me he would talk to Dennis and get back to me. About one week later, I received a call
informing me that Dennis could see me on a date about one month forward for exactly one hour. I
explained that I was coming to Chicago for the primary purpose of interviewing Dennis and that
one hour was hardly enough time to cover all the essential areas. The response essentially was: that
was all the time allotted; the implicit message: Take it or leave it. I agreed, hoping that I would get
some more time if the interview was going well.
I arrived about five minutes before the appointed time and was ushered into a large but decidedly
unpretentious office. Dennis arrived precisely on the hour, shook hands politely, and sat down at
his desk. He apologized in advance if, in the course of the interview, he occasionally glanced at the
quote screen, explaining that he could keep his mind on the interview at the same time, and would
signal me if he had to put in any orders. Having the experience of trading myself (albeit on an infmitesimally smaller scale), I explained that I understood.
As the interview began, there was an element of unease on both our parts. In my case, I had a sense
of a ticking clock with not enough time to accomplish the task at hand. In the case of Dennis, I
believe it was a matter of a genuinely shy personality, at least in terms of a first meeting. After five
46

to ten minutes, the tension was gone, the atmosphere became relaxed, and the conversation flowed
smoothly.
Forty-five minutes into the interview, I began to think that things were going so well that Dennis
would continue our conversation beyond the allotted hour. At exactly ten minutes before the end of
the hour, my illusion was shattered. "I've only got about ten more minutes," he said, "so if there's
still stuff that's important you may want to get to it." I shuffled through my index cards and quickly
tried to identify some of the key questions I had not yet covered. Precisely at the end of the hour,
Dennis said, "That's about all the time I have, thank you."
One segment of questions I did not get to dealt with the political side of Dennis' experiences. These
topics included the Senate hearings on alleged manipulation of the soybean market by Dennis, the
Roosevelt Institute, and the various political figures Dennis had known. Although these subjects
were certainly areas of interest and color, they were not pertinent to the primary focus of this book.
Consequently, I chose questions related to trading before attempting to turn to anything politically
oriented.
At the end of the interview, I played my final card by saying, "I didn't even get to any questions
related to the political side." "They're not interested in that anyway," Dennis replied as he politely
said goodbye and left the office.
About six weeks later, I requested and obtained a follow-up interview with Dennis. The portion of
the interview dealing with the budget deficit problem and Dennis' large losses in his public fund
trading at that time came from this second meeting.
A month after our last conversation, Dennis announced that he was retiring from trading to
concentrate on his political interests full-time. Will Dennis never trade again? Maybe, but don't bet
on it.
How did you first get involved in commodity trading?
After graduating high school, I got a summer job as a runner on the floor and I dabbled in trading a
little bit. With my minimum-wage salary, I was making $40 a week, and losing $40 an hour
trading. I didn't know what I was doing. The advantage was that at least I got to do it with small
amounts of money. I like to say the tuition was small for what I learned.
I heard the story that before you turned twenty-one, you had your father stand in the ring,
while you stood on the sidelines signaling trades to him.
That was in 1968 and 1969. My father had the membership but he didn't know much about trading.
He was just going along with it because I was underage and wanted to do it. When I turned twentyone, it was one of the happiest days in his life because he said, "I really hate this. I have no idea
what I'm doing. It's yours!"
Were you at a disadvantage trading one step removed, with your father filling the orders?
Sure. We consistently lost.
But you couldn't have lost very much because you were trading very small.
I probably lost a couple of thousand dollars during that period.
Do you consider that period worthwhile, nonetheless, because of the lessons learned?
Yes, in retrospect, I would say this to new traders—although it may not be a reassuring thought—
when you start, you ought to be as bad a trader as you are ever going to be.
Because it is less expensive at that time?
Right. You shouldn't be too surprised if you really screw up.
Do you know traders for whom early success proved to be their undoing?
I have noticed variations of that. There are a lot of people who get imprinted like ducks. You can
teach them that a warship is their mother if you get them young enough. For a lot of traders, it
doesn't matter so much whether their first big trade is successful or not, but whether their first big
profit is on the long or short side. Those people tend to be perennial bulls or bears, and that is very
bad. Both sides have to be equally OK. There can't be anything psychologically more satisfying
about one than the other. If there is, your trading is going to go askew.
I think that's what happened to a lot of people in the 1973 runaway bull market in soybeans. Even if
47

they didn't make money themselves, but were just present to witness the market mania and see a
few people make a lot of money, they were imprinted with it.
You're talking about a subsequent bias to the bullish side because of that experience?
Yes.
What gave you confidence when you first started trading on the Mid America Exchange with
such a small stake? After all, one mistake and you were out of the game.
Well, no, the advantage of the Mid America Exchange was that they traded minicontracts. I had a
few mistakes in me, and I made most, but not all of them. I don't know that I had any confidence. I
just had what a lot of people have when they get in this business: a need to try to succeed. I mean, if
you were betting on this sort of thing before the fact, you should have bet that it wouldn't work.
There is no doubt about that.
Most traders are not successful in the first year. What were you doing differently?
I was doing enough things right that I didn't capsize even with that small capitalization. I was lucky
enough to stagger into having the right positions on before the big corn blight in 1970.
Was that luck or foresight?
I think it was more foresight. I had very pale ideas, rales, and attitudes about the market then. But a
few that I learned were right, like go with the trend.
One Friday, the grain markets all closed at their highs for the year. I believed—and I still believe—
that you go with the trend, and the stronger the trend, the better. I remember getting in on the close
and just buying a couple of minicontracts in corn, wheat, and beans. The next Monday morning
they all opened up the limit because of the corn blight news.
Sure that didn't have to happen, and if it didn't, it would have set me back. It might have taken a lot
longer to get to about $2,000, which compared to $400 was a real grubstake. But, it wasn't like I
threw a dart and decided what to do. I did something that should work in the long ran—I went with
the trend.
Is this particular pattern—a very strong close on a Friday—a market characteristic that you find
useful as an indicator of the following week's price action?
Yes, at a minimum, it is important not to have a short position with a loss on Friday if the market
closes at a high, or a long position if it closes at alow.
I was curious about your going to graduate school despite your initial trading success.
I signed up for graduate school before the summer of 1970, which was when I traded in the pit for
the first time. I had just planned to trade over the summer, but the three months and $3,000 in
profits made a big impression on me. I went to Tulane in New Orleans and lasted for about one
week. I used my laundromat quarters phoning trades into Chicago. Once I used up all the quarters
and had nothing but dirty clothes, I had no choice but to come back to Chicago.
Since then you have been a full-time commodity trader?
Yes.
What comes to mind as your most dramatic or most emotional trading experience?
There was one in the first year. I had just quit graduate school to trade. One day, I made a
particularly bad trade and lost about $300. Since I only had about $3,000, that was a very big loss
and it was destabilizing. I then compounded the error by reversing my original position and losing
again. To top things off, I then reversed back to my original position and lost a third time. By the
end of the day, I had lost $1,000, or one-third of my entire capitalization.
Since then, I have learned that when you have a destabilizing loss, get out, go home, take a nap, do
something, but put a little time between that and your next decision. When you are getting beat to
death, get your head out of the mixer. Looking back, I realized that if I had had a trading rale about
losses, I wouldn't have had that traumatic experience.
In retrospect, would you say that was one of your best trades because you were so imprinted
with that experience that you didn't make a mistake of that magnitude, percentagewise,
again?
48
