
RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Hole-in-the-wall triggers intense conflict as sudden price action counters the prevailing crowd
sentiment. This shock event then spirals trend according to well-defined herd mechanics until
volatility eventually dissipates the movement. Through the early stages, hole strategy enters short
positions after bear rallies carry price into strong resistance. Tony Plummer documents how these
sudden conflicts induce predictable Fibonacci-based crowd movement in his complex book The
Psychology of Technical Analysis.
This price shock occurs in all time frames. Swing traders can apply its tactics to both intraday and
longer-term positions. In fact, the hole has better applications for intraday trading than any other
bell. Because most gaps occur as the new market session opens, signals appear immediately on
multiday 5-minute and 60-minute charts. The intraday trader can quickly apply hole tactics to take
advantage of the active first hour. These same formations may or may not print on the daily chart
because some gaps fill before the closing bell. But fast confirmation within the shorter time frame
allows many active strategies regardless of the closing price.

HOLE STRATEGIES
Intraday traders can lay a Fib grid across the last intermediate uptrend and locate the retracement
level of the morning hole. This will determine the prospects for a successful short sale on a pullback
test. Extend the grid over longer trends and see whether price action corresponds with those levels.

Very wide gaps can suggest trading strategies through three or more different trend
lengths. Identify converging retracements and match these to obvious pattern S/R on the intraday
charts.
A morning down gap can lead to lower prices immediately. These short sales may be difficult to
execute during the volatile market open. But intraday traders have an excellent time tool if price
rises into a hole pullback test. Market wisdom suggests that gaps will not fill during the session if
they remain open after the first hour. So if price takes too long to bounce and return into the
intraday hole, subsequent short sales should have very high odds for success.
The best hole setups in all time frames come after waiting for the first short-term bottom. Intense
volume on the down gap often dissipates selling pressure immediately. Short sales on the signal bar
face high risk unless tightly managed. A damaged stock can bounce quickly after this shock event
because it carries a strong supply of hopeful buyers from the previous uptrend. When this occurs,
the next short sale opportunity may come quickly, so stay prepared. Look for a penetration into the
gap on weak volume that hits natural Fibonacci retracements and other broken pattern support.
Holes that immediately carry lower suggest very weak demand. Execute a trend-following strategy
with a tight stop loss. Place the stop over the top of the high for the shock bar and drop it down
immediately when the position moves into a profit. Stay defensive and take what the market offers,
as a short covering rally can ignite at any time. Note the level where the decline finally ends. It
often marks a clear first failure event with major support on the other side of the trend mirror. If so,
look for a subsequent bounce to the 62% level where the gap sits. This sets up an excellent reversal
pattern. In the meantime, the retracement may offer a long-side scalp if Stochastics flips over from
an oversold level.
Gap echos can fill holes immediately. These gaps in the other direction occur infrequently but can
induce large losses. Measure demand through volume analysis to confirm that the initial break did
substantial damage. Then watch the pullback for declining interest into the rise. On daily setups, try
to enter the short sale early in the day to avoid overnight turnarounds. Major gaps rarely occur
midday, so this allows the position to move into a profit before the close. Keep in mind that gap
echos will trigger price change similar to the original event, so avoid getting caught in the trap.
Each holding period will demand different exit rules, but execution will be similar regardless of the
time frame strategy. The lowest-risk entry takes place during the rally back into the hole. The
simplest exit follows the subsequent downdraft. Defensive measures must be exercised with this
formation because the stock still carries high relative strength and finds many willing buyers. Use
cross-verification techniques to locate multiple confirmations for timing and measure reward:risk
carefully.
The best initial break violates both the 20-bar and 50-bar EMAs, but good holes still appear above
these levels. Markets that hold above their intermediate moving averages retain more relative
strength than those that violate them. Watch how price interacts with the 50-bar average after a hole
to measure the technical damage. Use more defensive exit strategies until this average violates.
Longer trends and their pullbacks take precedence over shorter ones. Look for a bounce at 38% of
the longest trend applicable to the gap. This may be below the first failure level of several smaller
uptrend legs. Try to locate this key level in advance by taking a step back and looking at the chart
from a distance. The skilled eye may see proportionality in this longer view that uncovers many
natural reversal levels.
FIGURE 11.3
Gap echos trap short sellers and rob profits. But they rarely occur after a hole breaks through solid support on high

volume. Consider where the price bar drops after a hole event. If it sits on a trendline or important average, stand aside
and allow the market to work out the conflicting conditions. Note how the Keynote hole drops price into a trendline
rather than breaking through it. After a bar or two the stock jumps back through the gap and continues the rally.

APPLICATIONS
Study each signal to see if it generates crowd conflict. First determine whether or not the hole
breaks obvious support. That violation marks a natural short sale level on a subsequent bounce.
When a gap drops into the top of support, it often triggers a sideways condition rather than an
immediate selloff. The bar that follows the signal provides input on the market’s strength or
weakness. For example, narrow price action near the bottom of the prior bar’s range should lead to
a rapid decline. And always look closely at volume on the breakdown. Some holes flag tired
markets, while others point to major trend changes.

1-2 DECLINE
Rally support often presents two well-marked lines of defense. A reversal into a new downtrend
requires that both levels break before downside momentum can accelerate. Pullbacks may pierce the
first level but print a solid bottom at the second. Or both can violate in a single shock event. This
hole setup breaks first support on the signal bar. Traders then short the subsequent test and decline
through second support.
Description

•
•
•
•

Hole-in-the-wall breaks support but a second major level remains intact.
Price tests and fails the broken first support.
The selloff carries price into a test of the second support.
Price breaks the second support.

This hole prints in a lower time frame than the second violation. The gap signals that the larger
breakdown may soon take place. Price action mimics a typical ABC pullback but violates natural
Fibonacci support. It offers yet another strategy for low-risk entry ahead of the crowd.
Setup Tactics (FIGURE 11.4)

Flextronics rally draws a rising 2-month parallel price channel (1).
Breakout pierces upper channel as price expands out of the top Bollinger Band into a death star
(2) reversal.
The selloff breaks through support at 72 in a hole-in-the-wall (3) that fills a prior gap at 71 (6).
Expanding bars fill a second gap at 68 (4) before finding support at the channel bottom (5).
A long shadow (7) violates the bottom Bollinger Band, completes a first failure pattern, and
reverses the market.
Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 11.5)
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•

•
•

Place a Fib grid over the prior rally.
The grid reveals a hidden continuation gap (1) at 71 that sits right at the 50% retracement.
Hole-in-the-wall (2) breaks through the same price in a gap echo that completes an island
reversal (12).
First failure (4) generates two trendlines (5) (6) that suggest a possible head and shoulders
reversal.
Small breakout gap (11) ends the short-term downtrend but long entry represents a high-risk
countertrend play within the larger price action.
Short entry at the same level anticipates a right shoulder to match the height of the left
shoulder (10) but the first gap (7) and 62% resistance generate whipsaws.
The test of the hole (3) marks a good short sale opportunity as a small doji prints at the top
Bollinger Band right at the 50% retracement and bottom of the gap. Place stop loss at the
top of the hole around 72.
Two gaps (7) (11) limit the reward target for the decline. Consider a defensive exit under 69
or a tight trailing stop loss.
The last gap (11) fills and price congests (8) on the bottom of the major parallel price
channel (6). The NR7 bar just before the drop invites a new short sale. Place stop loss in the
middle of the filled gap (11) at 67-½ or 68.
The neckline (5) limits the reward target. Consider a defensive exit near 63 or a tight trailing
stop loss to capitalize on the channel break.
The neckline breaks at (9) but the action shows few upticks. Stand aside and let the crowd
play the head and shoulders or place a very defensive short sale near the break and get out
on any whipsaw.
FIGURE 11.4

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

FIGURE 11.5

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Reward:Risk

The charting landscape pinpoints low-risk entry and natural danger zones throughout the setup. One
major whipsaw level increases risk, while several good short sales produce measured rewards
between support levels. Risk rarely exceeds 2 points on opportunities with 3-point reward potential.
This mediocre ratio contrasts with good cross-verification for the major channel break on the daily
chart.

SUPPORT HOLE
Note the similarities between this setup and the prior one. Both print rising channels before the
hole-in-the-wall. But this pattern breaks the channel on the signal rather than dropping price into
support. This invokes a more bearish scenario and faster decline.
Description
•
•

A market rallies strongly on increasing momentum.
The rally reverses sharply and a hole-in-the-wall breaks major support.

This setup occurs frequently with rising channels because support prints very high in the rally’s
development. Look for a break of a major moving average on the signal. The 20-day or 50-day MA

on a daily chart marks a violation level that cross-verifies a channel break or similar pattern
outcome.
Setup Tactics (FIGURE 11.6)
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Genome Therapeutics draws a 1-month rising parallel price channel (1).
Price expands out of the upper channel but reverses in a tall dark cloud cover (7) pattern.
The selloff bounces off the bottom channel and forms horizontal support (4).
The support and channel break (2) in a hole-in-the-wall.
Price pulls back to test the gap during intraday trading (5).
Price again gaps down on the bar after the hole (3).
Price pulls back to test the second gap during intraday trading (6).
FIGURE 11.6

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 11.7)
•
•

The first two pullbacks (4) (5) occur before or on the signal bar (1) so they don’t offer entry
unless the swing trader had the stock under observation in the first place.
The second gap (2) offers a midday short sale opportunity as it pulls back to test resistance
(6). Place stop loss 1–2 ticks within the real body of the prior candle.

•
•
•
•
•

Price drops 5 points and whipsaws in a short squeeze back to 45. Defensive management
would exit the position with a profit before it returns to the original entry level.
Another short sale appears as price takes out the 2-day low (9). A defensive position
requires entry near the violation with a stop loss just above the prior low.
The daily chart signals caution (3) when the price bar strikes the bottom Bollinger Band and
50-day EMA.
The next range slows the action until the bottom Bollinger Band turns down.
Price returns to test resistance (7), finally breaks to a lower level (8), and allows a last short
sale entry.

Reward:Risk

Simple pullback and breakdown strategies work well throughout this setup. Only one whipsaw
endangers profits, while risk remains very low with clearly defined stop loss. Reward could average
between 5 and 8 points with a 1–2-point risk. The setup also illustrates the advantage of early
warning systems that flag the hole event before the signal bar closes. At the least, regular Genome
traders could see the developing pattern before the rest of the crowd.
FIGURE 11.7

ISLAND REVERSAL

Every island reversal off an intermediate high prints a hole-in-the-wall variation on the down gap.
Trading considerations for this classic pattern must include the crowd’s inevitable participation.
This invites more uncertainty than other hole setups. But the double gaps still strongly resist
bounces and invite low-risk short sales.
Description
•
•
•

A vertical rally gaps up in a final exhaustion event.
Price prints a series of topping bars and gaps down in a hole-in-the-wall.
The hole occurs at the same level as the prior exhaustion gap.

The topping pattern can break at any time. Fully developed congestion may use 30 bars or more.
Single-bar events print the very bearish abandoned baby pattern. The longer that congestion takes to
roll over, the weaker that market becomes.
This offers both advantages and disadvantages. The hole relies on high relative strength to force a
sharp pullback into the gap. But weak markets drop faster with fewer whipsaws.
FIGURE 11.8

Setup Tactics (FIGURE 11.8)

Itxc Corp prints an exhaustion gap (2) that signals the end of its 90-point rally.
A nine-bar topping pattern (1) draws a 2B reversal.
FIGURE 11.9

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.
•
•
•

The stock gaps down in a hole-in-the-wall (3) that completes an island reversal pattern.
The selloff finds support at the 50% retracement (5).
Price action pulls back into resistance below the gap (4) and reverses in a doji top.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 11.9)

The weak bounce forms a bear flag (1).
The declining highs draw a potential descending trendline (2).
Bollinger Bands tighten as a narrow candle prints right at the intersection between the trendline
and bear flag bottom channel (3).
Short entry here carries increased risk with the false breakdown just one bar ago (8).

The next bar expands downward and confirms the trendline. Price also fails the center Bollinger
Band (4).
Risk remains high at this point. The best short sale strategy enters when (8) violates. Use a stop
loss several ticks above the (8) low.
Price pushes into an inverse 3rd watch (10). Although entry on the prior bar places the trade in a
3–5-point profit, odds still favor a breakdown through the lows.
An Adam and Eve top (9) completes and price breaks lower.
The selloff gathers momentum. The next support stands at the 62% retracement. Price action
breaks it and pulls back to test it from below (5).
The decline carries into a large first failure (6).
Dark cloud cover at the 62% retracement (7) offers a final short sale opportunity.
Reward:Risk

The setup manages risk with a tight stop loss over the potential short sales. Small classic patterns
and candlesticks provide early warning of impending price movement. Very small landscape
features offer good advice on entry and exit. Pullbacks proceed on schedule and with few surprises.
Longer-term position traders benefit from this profit pattern more than short-term players.

12 CHAPTER
POWER SPIKE

CHARACTERISTICS
Each market establishes average participation that fluctuates through shifts in outstanding float,
volatility, and external events. Price development speeds up sharply when intense volume suddenly
shocks this median flow of buying and selling behavior. This emotional interaction can trigger at
new price levels or as trend approaches past battle zones. Regardless of location, the final impact
may affect the charting landscape for months to come.

TRADE MECHANICS
Power spikes signal when volume jumps above natural levels for that market. These trend hot spots
identify emotional crowd events that may induce excellent short-term opportunities. A candidate
may signal an immediate trade or future opportunity or just emit frustrating noise. Study the price
action that prints with the volume event to filter out low-yield patterns. First determine whether the
chart shows a possible reversal, breakout, breakdown, or swing pivot. Eliminate all stocks that
don’t represent one of these outcomes. The power spike uses only these charting landscape features.
Also rule out mergers and acquisitions. These events will print dramatic price change and volume,
but their future may depend on fundamentals such as arbitrage or predetermined value.
Breakouts from bases into new uptrends or downtrends provide an immediate short-term
opportunity. Breakouts to new highs or lows require patience until a pullback offers safe entry.

Reversals can trigger either outcome. Swing pivots print psychotic trendlines and S/R in which
price cycles repeatedly across the spike boundary for many bars after the event. Trading strategies
with these odd setups can become quite complex.
FIGURE 12.1
A two-bar power spike signals the end of a long Jmar Technologies rally. Climax volume uses up available
buying power and short circuits further price gains. Power spikes induce a variety of price mechanics that support
or terminate ongoing trends. To predict the impact and persistence of this emotional event, look to its placement
within the pattern.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Heavy volume allows markets to move past established barriers. Swing traders examine this telltale
emission to find evidence of the crowd’s next intentions. False breakouts become more difficult to
engineer when high volume appears right at new highs or lows. But keep in mind that a price surge
may already be over by the time the spike signal arises. Exercise discipline and wait for a pullback
to enter many of these candidates.
Power spikes near old highs and lows signal long-term market direction. These past battlegrounds
mark the profit or loss in many portfolios. Urgent shareholders start to unload positions as the
market returns to these critical levels. New players see opportunity at the same time and take the
other side of the trade. Conflict builds until bar expansion confirms price direction. When this battle

prints on high volume, it captures great attention and ensures further momentum on subsequent
bars.
Short-term price action generates many questionable volume signals, so always stay defensive.
Routine buying and selling frequently mask the true nature of insider interest. The best path stands
aside and avoids signals from most natural volume fluctuations. But at certain times crowd
participation rings a very loud bell and demands an immediate response. Swing traders find these
opportunities by looking for volume events that print well outside the normal routine.
Use the power spike signal only on daily charts. Time bias within the intraday markets distorts
short-term volume output and triggers false signals. First- and last-hour volume can comprise 60%
or more of the total intraday action. This induces setups to trigger on the opening ticks rather than
natural crowd emotion. Intraday volume also displays a high noise-to-signal ratio for all but the
most liquid stocks. And block trades that scroll well after actual execution greatly distort 5-minute
and 60-minute chart data.
But volume histograms may still provide valuable intraday signals under certain circumstances.
Noise decreases as liquidity increases. The massive crowds that trade highly liquid stocks create
virtual index markets. These issues display such high participation within each tick that volume
analysis can yield fluid data measurement and accurate price forecasting. But limit their use to
trending histograms rather than single spikes. This avoids late block reports and other false signals.
FIGURE 12.2
Volume surges during the first and last hours of each market session. It also reaches a nadir shortly after lunch, as
this Microsoft chart illustrates. Important signals hide within the tall volume walls that mark high participation.
Look for relative spikes that stand out against other histograms in that time zone. These point to intermediate
price swings and important intraday reversals.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Study short-term participation at intermediate tops or bottoms on a liquid intraday chart. Volume
will rise into the event and peak as a reversal or breakout occurs. Combine this analysis with
candlesticks and look for hammers or dojis. They will often generate important signals to within a
single tick of price expansion. Also pay close attention to potential intraday 2B reversals. Stops
trigger sharp histogram spikes when a prior high or low breaks. Then watch for price to jump back
across the broken boundary and signal a fade entry.
Use peak relativity to determine short-term crowd interest. The first hour sets a natural participation
level. Compare the subsequent action against this burst of activity and other small spikes throughout
the day. This establishes volume levels to check for convergence or divergence during short-term
price breakouts. Also draw a trend line across the tops of the peaks to identify when volume may
lead price to new highs or lows.
SPIKE STRATEGIES
Power spikes print as volume escalates dramatically. But sometimes one price bar cannot resolve
the entire imbalance that the setup triggers. These spikes evolve over a number of intervals but have
the same impact as single session events. In either case, the phenomenon represents an influential
event that should leave a footprint on the underlying trend for months to come.
