
Tracking Fundamental Forces That Impact Markets

65

Central Bankers Move the Markets

The binary option trader needs to track impending central bank decisions
and statements. Their words are powerful triggers for market sentiment to
cascade through the social media. By closely following central bank statements and minutes, the trader will get, in advance, one of the best leading
indicators for whether conditions are suitable for different trading strategies.
When a central bank statement is due, consider an out-of-the-money strategy.
It is more appropriate than a deep-in-the-money strategy, because there is a
high potential for a surprise in the statement.
Checklist for Currency Pairs

Trading binary options in currency pairs provides a virtual round-the-clock
opportunity from the opening of the Asian session on Monday morning until
the close of the New York session. Depending on the firm, actual opening and
closing times for trading may vary.
There are several items that the trader should know about in evaluating
market conditions relating to the currency pairs. A key feature is that currency prices are not random and reflect major economic forces and sentiment
expectations. The following are some of the terms to study and know in order
to evaluate currency pairs.
• Interest rate expectations: Interest rate expectations are the key drivers of
currency-pair price action. When interest rates are expected to rise, the currency pair will become more attractive and therefore attract demand. The
general effect is the pair increases in value.
• Relative growth: If one country is growing faster than another, the currency
of the stronger growth country will tend to be stronger as it attracts capital.
• Data releases: Currency pairs are extremely sensitive to economic data
releases. Disappointing GDP results in a weakening of the currency. Surprise positive data generally increases the value of the currency.
• Resistance and support: These daily and weekly levels are important for currencies as $5 trillion a day is exchanged; intraday movements are subject to
noise trading and not that meaningful.
• Commodity-based currency pairs: The USD/CAD and the AUD/USD, are
the main commodity-based pairs and move in reaction to commodity
markets.

66

Trading Binary Options

• Cross pairs: These exclude the U.S. dollar. Binary options on GBP/JPY and
EUR/JPY are available. Cross pairs exhibit more predictable patterns because the U.S. dollar is excluded and this removes a lot of potential noise.
Bitcoin as a Binary

Bitcoin has emerged as a new underlying market for binary traders. It is now
being offered on the Nadex and IG market platforms. Also, many OTC
firms offer Bitcoin binaries. There are two important points that the binary
trader should have in mind when trading Bitcoin binaries. First, Bitcoin has
great volatility. Sudden movement happens without clues leading up to those
movements. The result is that out-of-the money buy or sell trades make the
most sense. Second, Bitcoin actual prices are not transparent. At Nadex, a
new index called TeraBitcoin Index is used to provide the quote stream at
Nadex. At IG, Bitcoin (XBT/USD) quotes are a composite of the price of
Bitcoin from several Bitcoin exchanges.
But at other binary firms, which offer Bitcoin high-low binaries, it is not
at all transparent which Bitcoin exchange is used. For those who trade Bitcoin
binaries, there is, however, a major advantage: Bitcoin prices are the least correlated with the other underlying markets and this in theory reduces the total
volatility of a return of the total portfolio of the trader.
Using an Economic Calendar as Trading Tool

The economic data calendar should be thought of as a key fundamental analysis and binary option trading tool. Many sites offer economic calendars and
they are easy to access. It is so important that no one should trade without the
calendar being reviewed first. Not knowing that an economic data release is
scheduled to appear leaves your binary option trade subject to great risk. The
economic calendar provides a critical and advanced alert function for the
binary option trader. It lists the time of economic data releases. These releases
provide key measures relating to economic performance in countries around
the world. The markets pay close attention to these releases and react to any
surprises in them. In weeks in which key economic data releases will occur,
there is certain to be greater volatility.
The binary option trader has two basic approaches relating to trading the
economic data releases. The first approach is to view economic data releases as
a factor in raising the overall volatility level of the markets during that week.

Tracking Fundamental Forces That Impact Markets

67

Greater volatility benefits strategies that choose deeper-out-of-the-money
strike prices because of the tendency of prices to move with greater momentum in reaction to surprise announcements. But a cautionary note is in order
regarding volatility. It is not simply the level of volatility that is important,
but its rate of change. When volatility is at extremes, it can be a reversal
signal. Traders view high volatility as a sell signal and low volatility as a buy
signal. How to track volatility will be reviewed in a later chapter.
Alternatively, the trader can view a particular economic data release as a
directly tradable event. In this context, the trader can anticipate a bullish or
bearish direction, and choose a corresponding strike price. However, what
happens if the trader wants to trade a big surprise, but doesn’t know which
way the market will react? He can, in fact, use binary option trading to play
a breakout in either direction. This is similar to a straddle strategy in regular
options. A third approach is to wait for the economic release to occur and
develop a trading strategy after the market reaction to the news.

look Online
These websites have proven to be useful in providing basic information and tools
that binary option traders can use to identify forces affecting the markets, track
their trades, and improve their results.
www.forexfactory.com
www.chinaview.cn
http://adv.org
www.chinamoney.com.cn
www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic/Documents/mfh.txt
www.bis.org/cbanks.htm
www.ino.com
www.rexpros.com

Trading Binary Options: Strategies and Tactics, Second Edition
By Abe Cofnas
Copyright © 2016 by Abe Cofnas

Chapter 5

Basic Technical Analysis

This chapter reviews basic technical analysis that will help shape binary
option trading. If you are a beginning trader, going through the key technical
analysis steps will help you develop core skills that can be applied in any
market. Binary option trading is an ideal place for a new trader and this
chapter provides a review of basic technical analysis concepts and techniques
that will help improve the skill level of the binary option trader. The more
experienced trader can use it as a quick review or skip these sections.
Confirming fundamental conditions through technical indicators is a key
phase for preparing to trade binary options. Beginning traders have a tendency
to anchor their trades on one indicator or type of information. But making a
trading decision is multi-dimensional. It is really about pattern recognition. Ask
yourself what pattern the underlying market is in. Is the underlying market trending up, down, or sideways? Is the price experiencing an increasing momentum?
Is it at extremes? Is volatility low or high? Is it testing support or resistance?
These and other questions come quickly to the mind of the trader who needs to
effectively prepare for trading binary options. They become, in effect, a checklist
of technical conditions that need to be reviewed. Let’s look at candlesticks, trend
lines, and support and resistance lines. These three categories create a solid foundation for trading, and apply very effectively to binary option trading decisions.
Key Candlestick Patterns

If you are new to trading, you need to become familiar with candlesticks.
Candlesticks are a common way to represent price activity. They originated
with the Japanese when they were trading rice hundreds of years ago. Today,
69

70

Trading Binary Options

Figure 5.1 Key Parts of Candlesticks
High

Low

High
Close

Open

Body

Body

Open

Close
Low

candlestick patterns are the most popular way to represent price activity. Let’s
start with understanding the basic structure of candles (Figure 5.1).
Each candle has four parts. Wicks represent the lowest and highest points
reached. There is the body, which has a top and bottom representing the open
and close prices. These four components are, in effect, the DNA of price
action. Any emotion in the market is ultimately represented in the candlestick pattern.
A candle can represent price activity for almost any desired time frame.
There can be one-minute, five-minute, one-hour, one-day, one-week, and
one-month candles. When a trader selects a time period, the candle represents that time frame. For example, 50 candles on a 5-minute time period
represents 50 × 5 minutes, or 250 minutes of price activity.
One of the most important and basic features of the candlestick is its color.
It is conventional to have a white candle representing a bullish activity and a
black candle representing a bearish activity. Many charts allow traders to use
their own colors to represent being bullish or bearish. Let’s look at what being
bullish or bearish really mean in the context of what the candlestick is doing.
A bullish candle is one in which the close price is above the opening
price. A bearish candle is one in which the close price is below the opening.
Basically, the direction is either north or south! There are times when the
open and close are the same or nearly the same. The candles are then neither
bullish nor bearish. This represents indecision or hesitation. Candles are all
about expressing the emotion in the market. They are, in fact, emotional

Basic Technical Analysis

71

landmarks. It is commonplace to look at the market as a battle between buyers and sellers. If this is so, then the candlesticks are snapshots in time of
who is winning that battle. All the patterns of the market that are possible
are really single candles grouped together representing the price activity as
it moves in time. There are many candle patterns; following are some of the
most important ones: Hammer (Figure 5.2), Doji (Figure 5.3), Spinning Tops
(Figure 5.4), Engulfing Candles (Figure 5.5), and Tweezers (Figure 5.6).
It’s a good idea to study these patterns and try to get familiar with them
in the context of market action. They will confirm the emotional status of the
market. Hammer patterns are called that because they look like a hammer.
It is characterized by having a long wick, sometimes twice the body size.
When a hammer appears, it is usually a reversal sign. Dojis are very important in showing hesitation and indecision. There is virtually no body since
the open and close price points turn out to be nearly the same. Spinning
tops are related to market indecision as well since they have small bodies. The
engulfing candle is considered a very good indicator of a change in the mood
of the market. It is a pattern of a small candle followed by a very big body
of an opposite color. That is why it is called engulfing. Tweezer candles demonstrate strong support or resistance. When a tweezer is at the bottom, the
bears have failed to push the price lower. When tweezer formations are at the
top of a candle, it signifies a failure to push the price higher. It is important
to keep in mind that the predictability of the emotion signified by a candlestick is related to the time frame. One-minute candles are not as predictive as
one-hour candles. In binary option trading, four-hour and one-day candles
provide a good source of reliable emotional information about the market.
Figure 5.2 Hammer—Bullish

72

Trading Binary Options

Figure 5.3 Dojis

Long-Legged
Doji

Figure 5.4

Dragonfly
Doji

Gravestone
Doji

Doji Followed by Reversal

Figure 5.5 Spinning Tops—Indecision

White
Spinning Tops

Black
Spinning Tops

Four-Price
Doji

Basic Technical Analysis

73

Figure 5.6 Engulfing Candles

Bullish Engulfing

Bearish Engulfing

Figure 5.7 Tweezers

Trend Lines

Trend lines are one of the basic tools for trading in all markets. But even
though trend lines are basic, they remain one of the most important and
effective tools a binary option trader can use. The trader who learns how to
use trend lines for shaping a diagnosis of the market patterns is likely to rely
a lot less on the many technical indicators that are commonly used. Let’s
explore trend lines further. First, let’s define our terms. There are two types of
trends: an uptrend and a downtrend.

74

Trading Binary Options

An uptrend is a situation in which the prices keep getting higher highs and
also higher lows. A downtrend occurs when there are lower highs and lower lows.
Trend lines help the binary option trader find the condition of the sentiment
in the market. In fact, we can restate what a trend is in terms of sentiment. It
can be viewed as a persistence of sentiment. When the trader determines that the
sentiment is strong, the binary option strategy that makes sense is to go with the
sentiment. If the trader determines that the sentiment is very strong, the choices
are more difficult. A very strong trend may be a prelude to a continuation of the
action; however, it may also be a contra-indicator that the price is ready to reverse.
We can see that the power of trend analysis is its ability to project into
the future. Trend lines are not indicators, and they are not lagging. They are,
in fact, sentiment maps that define the boundary between optimism and fear.
Many beginning traders don’t know how to draw a trend line and as a
result misjudge the price action. To ensure that you know how to draw a
trend line correctly, let’s review the key steps involved. First, we present the
steps in drawing a downtrend line (Figure 5.8). Second, we present the steps
in drawing an uptrend line (Figure 5.9).
Figure 5.8 Drawing a Downtrend Line
Find the highest high,
then connect to the
next lower high and extend.

Basic Technical Analysis

75

Figure 5.9 Drawing an Uptrend Line

Find the lowest low,
then the next higher low
and extend out.

The steps for drawing a downtrend line are:
1. Locate the recent high.
2. Draw a line next to the immediate lower high.
3. Extend the line to the right end of the chart beyond the latest date into
the future.
The steps for drawing an uptrend line are:
1. Find lowest low.
2. Find the next higher low following the lowest low.
3. Draw a line from the lowest low to the higher low and extend it into the
future.
The trend lines need to only connect the candlestick lows or highs and
not the candle bodies. Figure 5.10 shows an incorrect drawing of the lines.
Beyond understanding how to draw trend lines, the trader needs to be
able to detect whether there is an outer and an inner trend. The presence of
an inner trend line indicates a shift in sentiment and momentum and should

76

Trading Binary Options

Figure 5.10 Incorrectly Drawn Trend Line

Trend line needs to connect
the candlestick lows
or highs only

Incorrect
trend line

be an alert that conditions are changing fast. The trader can also use the outer
trend line as a boundary where the price will have difficulty in breaking. So
finding an outer and inner trend line helps locate the right binary option
strike price (Figure 5.11).
A useful exercise is to profile the trend conditions. Try to answer the
questions: Is the price above or below the day trend line in the intended direction of the trade? Is the 50-day moving average in agreement with the trend
direction? Is the 21-day moving average above or below the 50-day moving
average? (See Figure 5.12.)
Support and Resistance

A foundation for all of trading is being able to describe what the price activity is doing on a chart. Reading the chart is a process of identifying and
describing where the price is and what it is doing. A basic tool is resistance

Basic Technical Analysis

77

Figure 5.11 Outer and Inner Trend Lines

Inner Trend Lines

Outer Trend Line

and support lines (Figure 5.13). They provide evidence where the emotions
of the market are clustered. Let’s define some key terms and illustrate it in
a chart.
Support is where the price stops falling and comes to a temporary rest.
This area is called support. It is as if the price stopped falling and is resting on
a floor. Resistance is the point at which the price stops rising and comes to a
pause. It is as if a ceiling has formed.
The first step in drawing a resistance or support line is to locate the price
action on the chart (Figure 5.14). In reviewing the price movement, try to
answer the questions: Where is the most recent low? Where is the most recent
high? Then draw a horizontal line under the low and then above the high.
Support and resistance do not form instantly. Confirmation is usually needed
to be sure that there is a zone of support. This often means waiting to see
three failed attempts to break support or resistance.

78

Trading Binary Options

Figure 5.12 Trend Conditions Checklist
Is price above the daily trend line in the
intended direction?

Daily
Trend
Line

Is price above the 50-day moving average?
Is the 50-day moving average in agreement
with the trend line direction?
Is the 21-day moving average above or below
the 50-day moving average?

21-Day
Moving Average

50-Day
Moving Average

Figure 5.13 Basic Support and Resistance Lines
Resistance

Support

Basic Technical Analysis

79

Figure 5.14 How Support and Resistance Lines Form
Resistance

Support

Finding support and resistance is one of the first steps in developing a
trading strategy. If a trader wants to buy into the market, one of the best
locations to buy will be near a support area. If a trader wants to sell into the
market, one of the best locations to sell will be near a resistance area. This is
because if there is strong support, it is likely that a low in the price has been
established and if there is strong resistance, it is likely that a high in the price
has been established. Trading near support and resistance helps achieve the
goal of buying low and selling high. In short, once a support line or resistance
line is established, it has identified for you a top and a bottom. Locating a
support and resistance line is also important because it will help reduce the
risk of loss of a trade.
Another feature of support and resistance lines is what happens when
a price goes through a support line and falls below it. What happens when
a price goes through a resistance line and pushes above it? When these
events occur, and they occur all the time, the support line begins to act as
a new resistance line. The resistance line begins to act as a new support line
(Figure 5.15). We can see this shift and intimate relationship between support and resistance in Figure 5.16.
An important question that should be asked is this: How strong is the
support or resistance? The stronger the support or resistance lines, the greater
the confidence the trader has in using these lines to shape a trade. There are
many ways of identifying the degree of weakness or strength of support and
Figure 5.15

Resistance Becomes Support
Support
Becomes
Resistance

Resistance
Becomes
Support

80

Trading Binary Options

Figure 5.16 Support Transforms to Resistance

New resistance

Finally breaks through

Strong resistance

New support
above old resistance

Strong support

resistance lines. The first tool is the price itself. If a support or resistance
line has been touched many times, this indicates that the line is strong and
holding the price from going through it. Many traders use three touches to
confirm that the lines are good lines to locate possible entry positions. It’s
useful to keep in mind that higher time frames provide more evidence of the
strength of support or resistance. When a price action is probing a day support or resistance line, it is evidence that sentiment is changing much more
than a price action probing an hourly support or resistance line. This logic
further confirms that four-hour, day, and one-week price action charts should
be the basis for trading weekly binary option contracts.
As you can see, support and resistance is not one-dimensional. Making
a judgment about the strength of support and resistance requires a multiple
time analysis as well as looking at the price action in relationship to other
patterns such as Bollinger Bands and the presence or absence of doji candles
(Figure 5.17).

Basic Technical Analysis

81

Figure 5.17 Support and Resistance Checklist

Is price at a 15-minute support or resistance?
15-Minute Chart

Is price moving above or below a Bollinger Band
and is it returning to its previous direction?

Is price at a 4-hour support or resistance?

4-Hour Chart

Is price at a daily support or resistance?
Daily Chart

Is price probing the Bollinger Band and
seeming to slide?

Confirming Strength with Price Break Charts

Because detecting direction in the underlying market is so important, the
trader should look to confirm the decisions and conclusions made using the
basic trend line, candlestick, resistance, and support tools. A very powerful
chart tool and technique to use is price breaks. The book Sentiment Indicators
provides a very detailed view of price break charts for the very serious trader,
but this chapter provides a basic understanding necessary for applying it to
binary option trading.
Price break charts have their origins with Japanese traders. There was
little Western awareness of them until the publication of Steve Nison’s book,
Beyond Candlesticks: New Japanese Charting Techniques Revealed (Nison 1994).
In effect, this book reintroduced price break charts to the United States. Price
break charts provide a powerful ability to detect the strength of a trend and
where it will end. As a result, they can be a very effective tool for binary
option trading. Let’s first look at the basics of price break charts.

82

Trading Binary Options

TIP
Price break charts are available for free access by downloading the following
platform:
h t t p : / / d ow n l o a d s . s o l o t r a d e r. c o m / Wo r l d Tr a d i n g Te a m / Wo r l d
TradingTeamSoloTrader.exe.

Price break charts look like candlesticks without the wicks. They are
bricks or columns. A good way to view them is as steps up or steps down in
the direction that the sentiment is taking. They usually have a black color for
a down move and a white color for an upward move. The key condition that
determines the generation of a black brick is whether a new low has been
created. If a new low has been created, a new black column is added or
painted onto the chart. If a new high has been reached, then a new white
column appears (Figure 5.18). If no new low or high has been achieved, nothing is added. One of the most beneficial aspects of price break charts is the
clarity of their rules. Because they operate on close prices, there is no room
for dispute (Figure 5.19).
Figure 5.18 Three-Line Break Chart Showing Bullish Reversal
