
- 209 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Please stop that," he said with a smile.
It was actually the best day with Francesca. The fall was humbling her and
making her seem human. It was evoking, however unwilling, honest
emotions. It was allowing sincere physical contact, one person genuinely
trying to help another. It was shoving him into her life. Whatever happened
next, whether at the hospital or at her home, he would at least be there for a
moment. In the emergency, she was needing him, though she certainly didn't
want that.
As he held her feet and stared blankly out the window, Marco realized how
desperately he craved a relationship of any kind, with any person.
Any friend would do.
At the foot of the hill, she said to Mr. Coletta, "I would like to go to my
apartment."
He looked in the rearview mirror and said, "But I think you should see a
doctor."
"Maybe later. I'll rest for a bit and see how it feels." The decision was made;
arguing wouldVe been useless.
Marco had some advice too, but he held it. He wanted to see where she
lived.
"Very well," said Mr. Coletta.
"It's Via Minzoni, near the train station."
Marco smiled to himself, quite proud that he knew the street. He could
picture it on a map, at the northern edge of the old city, a nice section but not
the high-rent district. He had walked it at least once. In fact, he'd found an
early-hours coffee bar at a spot where the street ended at the Piazza dei
Martiri. As they zipped along the perimeter, in the mid-afternoon traffic,
Marco glanced at every street sign, took in every intersection, and knew
exactly where he was at all times.
Not another word was spoken. He held her feet, her stylish but well-used
black boots slightly soiling his wool slacks. At that moment, he couldn't
have cared less. When they turned onto Via Minzoni, she said, "Down about
two blocks, on the right." A moment later she said, "Just ahead. There's a
spot behind that green BMW."
They gently extracted her from the rear seat and got her to the sidewalk,
where she shook free for a second and tried to walk. The ankle gave way;
they caught her. 'I'm on the second floor," she said, gritting her teeth. There
were eight apartments. Marco watched carefully

- 210 -

John Grisham

The Broker

John GitiSHAiM
as she pushed the button next to the name of Giovanni Ferro. A female voice
answered.
"Francesca," she said, and the door clicked. They stepped into a foyer that
was dark and shabby. To the right was an elevator with its door open,
waiting. The three of them filled it tightly. "I'm really fine now," she said,
obviously trying to lose both Marco and Mr. Coletta.
"We need to get some ice on it," Marco said as they began a very slow ride
up.
The elevator made a noisy stop, its door finally opened, and they shuffled
out, both men still holding Francesca by the elbows. Her apartment was only
a few steps away, and when they arrived at the door Mr. Coletta had gone far
enough.
"I'm very sorry about this," he said. "If there are medical bills, would you
please call me?"
"No, you're very kind. Thank you so much."
"Thank you," Marco said, still attached to her. He pushed the doorbell and
waited as Mr. Coletta ducked back in the elevator and left them. She pulled
away and said, "This is fine, Marco. I can manage from here. My mother is
house-sitting today."
He was hoping for an invitation inside, but he was in no position to push on.
The episode had run its course as far as he was concerned, and he had
learned much more than he could have expected. He smiled, released her
arm, and was about to say goodbye when a lock clicked loudly from inside.
She turned toward the door, and in doing so put pressure on her wounded
ankle. It buckled again, causing her to gasp and reach for him.
The door opened just as Francesca fainted.
Her mother was Signora Altonelli, a seventyish lady who spoke no English
and for the first few hectic minutes thought Marco had somehow harmed her
daughter. His bumbling Italian proved inadequate, especially under the
pressure of the moment. He carried Francesca to the sofa, raised her feet,
and conveyed the concept of "Ghiaccio, ghiaccio." Ice, get some ice. She
reluctantly backed away, then disappeared into the kitchen.
Francesca was stirring by the time her mother returned with a wet washcloth
and a small plastic bag of ice.

- 211 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"You fainted," Marco said, hovering over her. She clutched his hand and
looked about wildly.
"Chi e?" her mother said suspiciously. Who's he?
"Un amico." A friend. He patted her face with the washcloth and she rallied
quickly. In some of the fastest Italian he had yet to experience, she explained
to her mother what had happened. The machine- gun bursts back and forth
made him dizzy as he tried to pick off an occasional word, then he simply
gave up. Suddenly, Signora Altoneili smiled and patted him on the shoulder
with great approval. Good boy.
When she disappeared, Francesca said, "She's gone to make coffee."
"Great." He had pulled a stool next to the sofa, and he sat close by, waiting.
"We need to get some ice on this thing," he said.
"Yes, we should."
They both looked at her boots. "Will you take them off?" she asked.
"Sure." He unzipped the right boot and removed it as though that foot had
been injured too. He went even slower with the left one. Every little
movement caused pain, and at one point he said, "Would you prefer to do
it?"
"No, please, go ahead." The zipper stopped almost exactly at the ankle. The
swelling made it difficult to ease the boot off. After a few long minutes of
delicate wiggling, while the patient suffered with clenched teeth, the boot
was off.
She was wearing black stockings. Marco studied them, then announced,
''These have to come off."
"Yes, they do." Her mother returned and fired off something in Italian. "Why
don't you wait in the kitchen?" Francesca said to Marco.
The kitchen was small but impeccably put together, very modern with
chrome and glass and not a square inch of wasted space. A high- tech
coffeepot gurgled on a counter. The walls above a small breakfast nook were
covered in bright abstract art. He waited and listened to both of them chatter
at once.
They got the stockings off without further injury. When Marco returned to
the living room, Signora Altoneili was arranging the ice around the left
ankle.
"She says it's not broken," Francesca said to him. "She worked in a hospital
for many years."

- 212 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Does she live in Bologna?"
"Imola, a few miles away."
He knew exactly where it was, on the map anyway. "I guess I should be
going now," he said, not really wanting to go but suddenly feeling like a
trespasser.
"I think you need some coffee," Francesca said. Her mother darted away,
back into the kitchen.
"I feel like I'm intruding," he said.
"No, please, after all you've done today, it's the least I can do."
Her mother was back, with a glass of water and two pills. Francesca gulped
it all down and propped her head up on some pillows. She exchanged short
sentences with her mother, then looked at him and said, "She has a chocolate
torta in the refrigerator. Would you like some?"
"Yes, thank you."
And her mother was off again, humming now and quite pleased that she had
someone to care for and someone to feed. Marco resumed his place on the
stool. "Does it hurt?"
"Yes, it does," she said, smiling. "I cannot lie. It hurts."
He could think of no appropriate response, so he ventured back to common
ground. "It all happened so fast," he said. They spent a few minutes
rehashing the fall. Then they were silent. She closed her eyes and appeared
to be napping. Marco crossed his arms over his chest and stared at a huge,
very odd painting that covered almost an entire wall.
The building was ancient, but from the inside Francesca and her husband
had fought back as determined modernists. The furniture was low, sleek
black leather with bright steel frames, very minimalist. The walls were
covered with baffling contemporary art.
"We can't tell Luigi about this," she whispered.
"Why not?"
She hesitated, then let it go. "He is paying me two hundred euros a week to
tutor you, Marco, and he his complaining about the price. We've argued. He
has threatened to find someone else. Frankly, I need the money. I'm getting
one or two jobs a week now; it's still the slow season. Things will pick up in
a month when the tourists come south, but right now I'm not earning much."
The stoic facade was long gone. He couldn't believe that she was

- 213 -

John Grisham

The Broker

allowing herself to be so vulnerable. The lady was frightened, and he would
break his neck to help her.
She continued: "I'm sure he will terminate my services if I skip a few days."
"Well, you're about to skip a few days." He glanced at the ice wrapped
around her ankle.
"Can we keep it quiet? I should be able to move around soon, don't you
think?"
"We can try to keep it quiet, but Luigi has a way of knowing things. He
follows me closely. I'll call in sick tomorrow, then we'll figure out something
the next day. Maybe we could study here."
"No. My husband is here."
Marco couldn't help but glance over his shoulder. "Here?"
"He's in the bedroom, very ill."
"What's-"
"Cancer. The last stages. My mother sits with him when I'm working. A
hospice nurse comes in each afternoon to medicate him."
"I'm sorry."
"So am I."
"Don't worry about Luigi. I'll tell him I'm thrilled with your teaching style,
and that I will refuse to work with anyone else."
"That would be a lie, wouldn't it?"
"Sort of."
Signora Altonelli was back with a tray of torta and espresso. She placed it on
a bright red coffee table in the middle of the room and began slicing.
Francesca took the coffee but didn't feel like eating. Marco ate as slowly as
humanly possible and sipped from his small cup as if it might be his last.
When Signora Altonelli insisted on another slice, and a refill, he grudgingly
accepted.
Marco stayed about an hour. Riding down in the elevator, he realized that
Giovanni Ferro had not made a sound.

- 214 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Red Chinas principal intelligence agency, the Ministry of State Security, or
MSS, used small, highly trained units to carry out assassinations around the
world, in much the same manner as the Russians, Israelis, British, and
Americans.
One notable difference, though, was that the Chinese had come to rely upon
one unit in particular. Instead of spreading the dirty work around like other
countries, the MSS turned first to a young man the CIA and Mossad had
been watching with great admiration for several years. His name was
Sammy Tin, the product of two Red Chinese diplomats who were rumored
to have been selected by the MSS to marry and reproduce. If ever an agent
were perfectly cloned, it was Sammy Tin. Born in New York City and raised
in the suburbs around D.C., he'd been educated by private tutors who
bombarded him with foreign languages from the time he left diapers. He
entered the University of Maryland at the age of sixteen, left it with two
degrees at the age of twenty-one, then studied engineering in Hamburg,
Germany. Somewhere along the way he picked up bomb-making as a hobby.
Explosives became his passion, with an emphasis on controlled explosions
from odd packages-envelopes, paper cups, Ball-point pens,

- 215 -

John Grisham

The Broker

cigarette packages. He was an expert marksman, but guns were simple and
bored him. The Tin Man loved his bombs.
He then studied chemistry under an assumed name in Tokyo, and there he
mastered the art and science of killing with poisons. By the time he was
twenty-four he had a dozen different names, about that many languages, and
crossed borders with a vast array of passports and disguises. He could
convince any customs agent anywhere that he was Japanese, Korean, or
Taiwanese.
To round out his education, he spent a grueling year in training with an elite
Chinese army unit. He learned to camp, cook over a fire, cross raging rivers,
survive in the ocean, and live in the wilderness for days. When he was
twenty-six, the MSS decided the boy had studied enough. It was time to start
killing.
As far as Langley could tell, he began notching his astounding body count
with the murders of three Red Chinese scientists who'd gotten too cozy with
the Russians. He got them over dinner at a restaurant in Moscow. While
their bodyguards waited outside, one got his throat slit in the men's room
while he finished up at the urinal. It took an hour to find his body, crammed
in a rather small garbage can. The second made the mistake of worrying
about the first. He went to the men's room, where the Tin Man was waiting,
dressed as a janitor. They found him with his head stuffed down the toilet,
which had been clogged and was backing up. The third died seconds later at
the table, where he was sitting alone and becoming very worried about his
two missing colleagues. A man in a waiter's jacket hurried by, and without
slowing thrust a poison dart into the back of his neck.
As killings go, it was all quite sloppy. Too much blood, too many witnesses.
Escape was dicey, but the Tin Man got a break and managed to dash through
the busy kitchen unnoticed. He was on the loose and sprinting through a
back alley by the time the bodyguards were summoned. He ducked into the
dark city, caught a cab, and twenty minutes later entered the Chinese
embassy. The next day he was in Beijing, quietly celebrating his first
success.
The audacity of the attack shocked the intelligence world. Rival agencies
scrambled to find out who did it. It ran so contrary to how the Chinese
normally eliminated their enemies. They were famous for their patience, the
discipline to wait and wait until the timing was perfect. They would chase
until their prey simply gave up. Or they would

- 216 -

John Grisham

The Broker

ditch one plan and go to the next, carefully waiting for their opportunity.
When it happened again a few months later in Berlin, the Tin Man's legend
was born. A French executive had handed over some bogus high-tech secrets
dealing with mobile radar. He got flung from the balcony of a fourteenthfloor hotel room, and when he landed beside the pool it upset quite a few
sunbathers. Again, the killing was much too visible.
In London, the Tin Man blew a mans head off with a cell phone. A defector
in New York's Chinatown lost most of his face when a cigarette exploded.
Sammy Tin was soon getting credit for most of the more dramatic
intelligence killings in that underworld. The legend grew rapidly. Though he
kept four or five trusted members in his unit, he often worked alone. He lost
a man in Singapore when their target suddenly emerged with some friends,
all with guns. It was a rare failure, and the lesson from it was to stay lean,
strike fast, and don't keep too many people on the payroll.
As he matured, the hits became less dramatic, less violent, and much easier
to conceal. He was now thirty-three, and without a doubt the most feared
agent in the world. The CIA spent a fortune trying to track his movements.
They knew he was in Beijing, hanging around his luxurious apartment.
When he left, they tracked him to Hong Kong. Interpol was alerted when he
boarded a nonstop flight to London, where he changed passports and at the
last moment boarded an Alitalia flight to Milan.
Interpol could only watch. Sammy Tin often traveled with diplomatic cover.
He was no criminal; he was an agent, a diplomat, a businessman, a
professor, anything he needed to be.
A car was waiting for him at Milan's Malpensa airport, and he vanished into
the city. As far as the CIA could tell, it had been four and a hah0 years since
the Tin Man had set foot in Italy.
Mr. Elya certainly looked the part of a wealthy Saudi businessman, though
his heavy wool suit was almost black, a little too dark for Bologna, and its
pinstripes were much too thick for anything designed in Italy. And his shirt
was pink, with a glistening white collar, not a bad combo, but, well, it was
still pink. Through the collar was a gold bar,

- 217 -

John Grisham

The Broker

also too thick, that pushed the knot of the tie up tightly for the choking look,
and at each end of the bar was a diamond. Mr. Elya was into diamonds-a
large one on each hand, dozens of smaller ones clustered in his Rolex, a
couple more in the gold cuffs of his shirt. The shoes appeared to Stefano to
be Italian, brand new, brown, but much too light to go with the suit.
As a whole, the package simply wasn't working. It was trying mightily,
though. Stefano had time to analyze his client while they rode in virtual
silence from the airport, where Mr. Elya and his assistant had arrived by
private jet, to the center of Bologna. They were in the rear of a black
Mercedes, one of Mr. Elya's conditions, with a driver who was silent in the
front seat along with the assistant, who evidently spoke only Arabic. Mr.
Elya's English was passable, quick bursts of it, usually followed with
something in Arabic to the assistant, who felt compelled to write down
everything his master said.
After ten minutes in the car with them, Stefano was already hoping they
would finish well before lunch.
The first apartment he showed them was near the university, where Mr.
Elya's son would soon arrive to study medicine. Four rooms on the second
floor, no elevator, solid old building, nicely furnished, certainly luxurious
for any student-1,800 euros a month, one year's lease, utilities extra. Mr.
Elya did nothing but frown, as if his spoiled son would require something
much nicer. The assistant frowned too. They frowned all the way down the
stairs, into the car, and said nothing as the driver hurried to the second stop.
It was on Via Remorsella, one block west of Via Fondazza. The flat was
slightly larger than the first, had a kitchen the size of a broom closet, was
badly furnished, had no view whatsoever, was twenty minutes away from
the university, cost 2,600 euros a month, and even had a strange odor to it.
The frowning stopped, they liked the place. "This will be fine," Mr. Elya
said, and Stefano breathed a sigh of relief. With a bit of luck, he wouldn't
have to entertain them over lunch. And he'd just earned a nice commission.
They hurried over to the office of Stefano's company, where paperwork was
produced at a record pace. Mr. Elya was a busy man with an urgent meeting
in Rome, and if the rental couldn't be completed right then, on the spot, then
forget everything!
The black Mercedes sped them back to the airport, where a rat

- 218 -

John Grisham

The Broker

tied and exhausted Stefano said thanks and farewell and hurried away as
quickly as possible. Mr. Elya and his assistant walked across the tarmac to
his jet and disappeared inside. The door closed.
The jet didn't move. Inside, Mr. Elya and his assistant had ditched their
business garb and were dressed casually. They huddled with three other
members of their team. After waiting for about an hour, they finally left the
jet, hauled their substantial baggage to the private terminal, then into waiting
vans.
Luigi had become suspicious of the navy blue Silvio bag. Marco never left it
in his apartment. It was never out of his sight. He carried it everywhere,
strapped over his shoulder and tucked tightly under his right arm as if it
contained gold.
What could he possibly possess now that required such protection? He rarely
carried his study materials anywhere. If he and Ermanno studied inside, they
did so in Marco's apartment. If they studied outside, it was all conversation
and no books were used.
Whitaker in Milano was suspicious too, especially since Marco had been
spotted in an Internet cafe near the university. He sent an agent named
Krater to Bologna to help Zellman and Luigi keep a closer eye on Marco and
his troublesome bag. With the noose tightening and fireworks expected,
Whitaker was asking Langley for even more muscle on the streets.
But Langley was in chaos. Teddy's departure, though certainly not
unexpected, had turned the place upside down. The shock waves from
Lucat's sacking were still being felt. The President was threatening a major
overhaul, and the deputy directors and high-level administrators were
spending more time protecting their butts than watching their operations.
It was Krater who got the radio message from Luigi that Marco was drifting
toward Piazza Maggiore, probably in search of his late- afternoon coffee.
Krater spotted him as he strode across the square, dark blue bag under his
right arm, looking very much like a local. After studying a rather thick file
on Joel Backman, it was nice to finally lay eyes on him. If the poor guy only
knew.
But Marco wasn't thirsty, not yet anyway. He passed the cafes and shops,
then suddenly, after a furtive glance, stepped into Albergo

- 219 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Nettuno, a fifty-room boutique hotel just off the piazza. Krater radioed
Zellman and Luigi, who was particularly puzzled because Marco had no
reason whatsoever to be entering a hotel. Krater waited five minutes, then
walked into the small lobby, absorbing everything he saw. To his right was a
lobby area with some chairs and a few travel magazines strewn over a wide
coffee table. To his left was a small empty phone room with its door open,
then another room that was not empty. Marco sat there, alone, hunched over
the small table under the wall-mounted phone, his blue bag open. He was too
busy to see Krater walk by.
"May I help you, sir?" the clerk said from the front desk.
"Yes, thanks, I wanted to inquire about a room," Krater said in Italian.
"For when?1'
"Tonight."
"I'm sorry, but we have no vacancies."
Krater picked up a brochure at the desk. "You're always full," he said with a
smile. "Its a popular place."
''Yes, it is. Perhaps another time."
"Do you by chance have Internet access?"
"Of course."
"Wireless?"
"Yes, the first hotel in the city."
He backed away and said, "Thanks. I'll try again another time."
'"Yes, please."
He passed the phone room on the way out. Marco had not looked up.
With both thumbs he was typing his text and hoping he would not be asked
to leave by the clerk at the front desk. The wireless access was something
the Nettuno advertised, but only for its guests. The coffee shops, libraries,
and one of the bookstores offered it free to anyone who ventured in, but not
the hotels.
His e-mail read:
Grinch: I once dealt with a banker in Zurich, name of Mike/ Van Thiessen,
at Rhineland Bank, on Bahnhofstrasse, downtown

- 220 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Zurich. See if you can determine if he's still there. If not, who took his
place? Do not leave a trail! Marco
He pushed Send, and once again prayed that he'd done things right. He
quickly turned off the Ankyo 850 and tucked it away in his bag. As he left,
he nodded at the clerk, who was on the phone.
Two minutes after Krater came out of the hotel, Marco made his exit. They
watched him from three different points, then followed him as he mixed
easily with the late-afternoon rush of people leaving work. Zellman circled
back, entered the Nettuno, went to the second phone room on the left, and
sat in the seat where Marco had been less than twenty minutes earlier. The
clerk, puzzled now, pretended to be busy behind his desk.
An hour later, they met in a bar and retraced his movements. The conclusion
was obvious, but still hard to swallow-since Marco had not used the phone,
he was freeloading on the hotel's wireless Internet access. There was no
other reason to randomly enter the hotel lobby, sit in a phone room for less
than ten minutes, then abruptly leave. But how could he do it? He had no
laptop, no cell phone other than the one Luigi had loaned him, an outdated
device that would only work in the city and could in no way be upgraded to
go online. Had he obtained some high-tech gadget? He had no money.
Theft was a possibility.
They kicked around various scenarios. Zellman left to e-mail the disturbing
news to Whitaker. Krater was dispatched to begin window shopping for an
identical blue Silvio bag.
Luigi was left to contemplate dinner.
His thoughts were interrupted by a call from Marco himself. He was in his
apartment, not feeling too well, his stomach had been jumpy all afternoon.
He'd canceled his lesson with Francesca, and now he was begging off
dinner.
