
CHAPTER 2

The Crooked Playing Field

47

screens until that point in time. Add natural laziness into the equation,
and you have a population of sleepy buyers for your targeted stocks.
Get your selling bids out there a few seconds before this crowd joins
the fray at 8 a.m. because the spark of premarket activity they generate
can last just a few minutes. You’ll be amazed how often you can dump
positions in this time window, at or near the prior day’s closing price,
because many of these folks have no clue what’s happening on the other
side of the world. Then settle back, monitor the action, and wait for the
five-minute interval leading into the opening bell. Many market players
hide their intentions until this brief period, when they play a game of
show and tell with the public through the market depth screen. Just
keep in mind that the bid-ask spread can change radically by the open.
Use any and all advantageous quotes to dump positions that approach
break-even or risk tolerance levels.
Quick thinking will be needed when the opening bell finally rings and
the bulk of your remaining positions gap lower with the broad market.
This is the right time to ask a simple question about each stock. Does
the gap drop price into or through obvious support levels? The relative
positioning will determine your next set of trade decisions. Don’t touch
stocks that hold support at the open because these could bounce
strongly after the initial flurry of selling pressure eases up. Heck, they
might even recover and jump back into the pattern you were hoping to
capitalize upon when you first bought them. Just play it safe by watching
support closely, in case those levels break during the early minutes of
the new session. If they do, get out immediately.
Stocks that gap through support at the open require your full attention
because they can trigger shock losses if you don’t make the right moves.
Rather than sell immediately, observe price action for a minute and note
if the stock is running lower or running in place. You have more time to act
when it’s just bouncing around at or near the opening price level. Alternatively, stocks running lower need to be dumped immediately. Don’t
get fancy and try to save pennies with a bid that anticipates a bounce.
Instead, place your sell order 5, 10, or 20 cents under the market to
make certain you get filled and get out.
Finally, deal with positions that hold support levels at the open. In a
nutshell, some of these stocks will recover, while others are destined
for lower prices. The simplest methodology with these remaining plays
is to track early swing lows and then get out immediately if those levels
get taken out. If you’re finding it hard to think straight after several hours

PART ONE

48

F I G U R E

Parsing the Modern Markets

2.4

There’s no perfect solution when Apple gaps down and breaks support. The best exit may
come in the premarket session or right at the opening bell, but waiting a few minutes is
often a better plan. Unfortunately, that hesitation didn’t work this time around because the
stock continues lower for 10 minutes and then consolidates for another 10 minutes. The best
strategy for traders still positioned in that consolidation pattern was to watch the tape and
get out when price broke the 15-minute low.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used
with permission.

of damage control, just place stops under those lows and let the market
have the final word.
Then get up, go outside, and get some fresh air. With the right attitude
and a little luck, you could make back those early losses by the closing
bell.

TWO
P A

R

T

CYCLES, SHOCKS,
AND SEASONALITY

This page intentionally left blank

3

C

H

A

P

TE

R

REVISITING THE
MARKET CLOCK

P

atterns grind through endless cycles of bases, breakouts, uptrends,
tops, breakdowns, and downtrends. These cycles occur in all time
frames, generating all sorts of interesting alignments and misalignments
between relative trends. Rather than undermining our strategies, these
conflicts, collisions, and convergences yield most of the inefficiencies we
refer to as trading opportunities. This crazy quilt of price development
tells us that effective time management is an absolute prerequisite for longterm survival. In other words, if we intend to make money in the financial
markets, we need to align our positions with all the cyclical impulses that
define the endless battle between bulls and bears.
Time impacts trade management in four ways:
• By generating conflicting trends on intraday, daily, weekly, and
monthly price patterns
• By defining how long it should take for price to reach a profit
objective or to fail to trigger a stop loss
• By identifying relative strength and weakness cycles
51

52

PART TWO

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

• By triggering a calendar or clock bias that can override the forces
of supply and demand
Calendar and clock bias, better known as seasonality, is a massively misunderstood concept that exerts a huge influence on the ticker
tape. Simply stated, certain times of the day, week, and month will trigger
predictable market behavior that overrules technical analysis and even
common sense. For example, the daily calendar reveals all kinds of time
quirks, such as turnaround Tuesday, tax loss selling, expiration magnetism, and the Santa rally. Even the intraday markets show a regular
seasonal bias, with first and last hour volatility, midday turnarounds, and
the 11 a.m. countertrend.
Each trading opportunity has an optimal holding period that will
maximize reward and reduce risk. It’s our job to uncover these magic
numbers and then align positions with their strict requirements. Unfortunately, this prerequisite triggers conflict and failure when the most advantageous time alignment doesn’t match the holding period anticipated in
the trading strategy. Not surprisingly, this is a key factor in mediocre performance. Simply stated, your strategy and positions must synchronize
properly with a multiplicity of time elements, or your trades will not work
out as expected. Sadly, the majority of market players choose to ignore this
requirement and just chase their tails instead of working in harmony with
beneficial times and cycles.
Master the time element by aggressively managing the information
interface. For starters, make sure your quote screens and databases focus
on time frames that reflect the intended holding period. Then filter your
charts through scans that favor certain time and cycle characteristics. Do
this by adjusting the focal length assigned to moving averages and other
technical indicators. With a little experience, it becomes second nature to
synchronize the trade setup into a single layer of market activity. However,
this is just the first step in the time management process because the interface
also needs to examine relative strength and weakness from many angles.
This time-sensitive component is grossly misunderstood because it’s been
compressed over the years into a small cache of technical indicators, like
Wilder’s RSI. In truth, Mr. Market gives us dozens of ways to evaluate
relative strength and its overriding impact on price development.
Localize trade execution by examining the charts just above and
below the time frame that yielded the opportunity. This follows the 3D
charting process outlined in The Master Swing Trader. For those unfamiliar
with that concept, independent trends on the intraday, daily, and weekly

CHAPTER 3

Revisiting the Market Clock

53

charts generate interweaving market dynamics that will affect the outcome
of the specific pattern you want to trade. Your strategy and plan need to
decipher these layers of activity and gauge their relative impact on the
risk, reward, and time elements of the trade. When properly executed, 3D
charting analysis optimizes profit and visualizes short-term danger with
amazing accuracy.
Finally, apply time-based stop losses to manage holding periods even
though price-based stop losses might not be endangered. This will address
the overriding impact of opportunity-cost. In other words, don’t hesitate
to get out of nonperforming trades when they approach the maximum
time you want to be in the market. In a nutshell, this filtering mechanism
recovers lost opportunity because tied up capital can then be put to work
in other places.

Trend Relativity
Ignorance of the time element can trigger all sorts of trend relativity errors.
This concept warns that great trade setups in one time frame can lead
to horrible outcomes in another time frame. Understanding this simple
statement is vitally important to your survival because it will save the
fortune you’re losing to bad position choices. In addition, trend relativity
yields two further observations that translate into extremely powerful
trading strategies. First, market movement in all venues is time-frame
specific. Second, all trends flow downhill, with longer-term impulses
taking priority over shorter-term impulses. For example, an uptrend on
the daily pattern predicts nothing about price movement on the weekly
pattern. Conversely, the weekly pattern greatly impacts price movement
on the daily pattern, especially when the two impulses come into conflict.
This usually happens when daily price hits a key level on the weekly chart,
like a swing high/low, support-resistance line, or an unfilled gap.
To avoid trend relativity errors, base your entry decision solely on
charting features that might come into play during the life of the trade.
You need to know your profit target in order to accomplish this task. This
is the price level where, in a perfect world, you intend to take your reward
and head back to the sidelines. It’s a realistic number based on the specific
pattern and the obstacles that need to be overcome within a certain time
frame. You’ll find these obstacles on the chart that’s yielding the opportunity as well as on the chart in the next longer time frame.

54

PART TWO

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

Once you’ve established the profit target for a specific trade, go
ahead and ignore all the trendlines, moving averages, and channels that
price won’t intersect while the position is active. Then focus your trade
management squarely on the obstacles you’ve identified and the quality
of price action when the position nears one of these zones of conflict. If
you haven’t figured it out yet, this is where your tape-reading skills will
come into play. In addition, you’ll also need to track progress on shorter
time-frame charts, noting small patterns that develop at or near these
nexus points.
How will technical indicators impact your trend relativity analysis?
For starters, these tools lose their effectiveness when improperly timetuned. Alternatively, resonant time readings can evoke great results with
relatively simple data input. As a general rule, avoid the default settings
and black boxes that come with your charting software, unless they adequately reflect your unique strategies. However, there are exceptions to
the rule. For example, I’ve never touched the standard 20-day 2-standarddeviation Bollinger Bands that come loaded in most charting programs
because they let me eavesdrop on common buy and sell signals the crowd
is watching. For me, this is extremely valuable information when deciding
on the most advantageous trade entry or exit.
Keep in mind that indicator time frames denote relative periods
rather than absolute lengths. For example, short term to a swing trader
denotes a different amount of time than short term to a mutual fund holder.
As a result, your market strategies must address short-, intermediate-, and
long-term considerations that are unique to your trading plan. And, yes,
you’re absolutely right if this effort sounds like a complex puzzle that
requires a great deal of thought and intuitive problem solving.

The Electronic Trading Day
The sixth chapter of The Master Swing Trader looked closely at the trading
day, dissecting the forces of supply and demand between 9:30 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. New York time. The modern electronic markets have deeply
impacted this order flow, generating an intraday environment that would
look like an alien landscape to legendary trader Jesse Livermore. For the
rest of us, this is the world we’re forced to play in each day, whether we
like it or not. Days of the week string together these individual sessions
into a broader oscillation that defines expected price action in a cycle that

CHAPTER 3

Revisiting the Market Clock

55

starts on Monday morning and ends at Friday’s closing bell. Moving
outward even further, weekly and monthly influences, like options expiration and the January Effect, encompass a closed system of cycles and
seasonality that impacts price patterns as deeply as program algorithms
or Fed meetings.
Index futures oscillations give the survivalist trader an effective
method to track the buying and selling impulses that make up the market
day. In addition to defining cycle length, i.e., how long buyers are in
control versus how long sellers are in control, index futures also emit
actionable data on the intensity of buying or selling pressure for that particular session. In general, these impulses alternate in rhythmic 60- to
90-minute cycles. Aligning these waves with specific times of day and
individual equity patterns builds a wealth of data that defines short-term
opportunity and risk.
The intraday shift between buyers and sellers has similarities to a
sports match in which players on one team, bulls or bears in this case, take
hold of the ball and try to score a few points. However, their time on offense
is always limited, just like four downs or three outs, with the opposite side
regaining control as soon as they’ve expended their firepower. The trick
for traders watching this ebb and flow is to accurately gauge the relative
strength of each side as they come up to bat or surrender the ball.
In other words, do the controlling team players succeed in pushing
price through minor support/resistance levels, or are their efforts confined
to weak oscillations that fail to “move the tape”? Key battles for the session often take place in the first hour, when there can be rapid turnover
between bull and bear impulses. Expectations for significant movement
drop to the lowest levels during the noisy middle of the day, when the
market is often setting boundaries that will come into play in the final
hour. Price action into the close may finally crown a winner and yield
a short-term trend that market players are hoping will follow through
at the start of the next trading day. Intraday risk taking, as well as management of open positions, needs to work in harmony with the strength
and direction of these intraday impulses in order to yield the best results.
Of course, there are many scenarios in which we want to use intraday
weakness to buy or strength to sell. But as a general rule for a long-biased
trader, cash should be raised when the selling impulse is stronger than the
buying impulse and put to work when buyers prove, through their shortterm power, that they’re taking control of the ticker tape.
Daily cycles now start well before the New York open for American
traders, as overnight impulses set the stage in the CME Globex index

56

PART TWO

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

futures. Early price action in the regular session is tightly focused on discounting overnight shocks, as well as establishing themes for the new
trading day. The middle part of the day tests the price boundaries promulgated by these themes, while the last hour yields a print that goes into
the books as the final word on short-term local supply and demand. In a
nutshell, the first hour of the day proposes, while the final hour of the day
disposes. About 80% of the time, the markets will move within relatively
narrow boundaries defined by short-term themes, while 20% of the time,
they will jolt forcefully from one price level to another in a trend event
characterized by wide-range price bars. Most traders book the majority
of their profits and incur the majority of their losses on these relatively
rare trend days. Notably, the advent of the electronic markets on the last
decade has failed to undermine the intraday oscillation between buyers
and sellers or the ratio between trend and range bars.
However, the trading bots have altered numerous aspects of the daily
buy-sell cycle. The most critical change is tied intimately to our risk, both
appetite and management. Intraday swings at all equity capitalization
levels have widened considerably, which, in turn, trigger our stops more
often and more violently than in the past. As I noted in the second chapter,
program algorithms move like magnets toward pockets of liquidity. In
the good old days, these levels corresponded with stops placed behind
large-scale support and resistance, like weekly highs, lows, and longerterm moving averages. These days, millisecond execution capacity has
exposed shorter and shorter time frames to stop running exercises, with
the infuriating practice now encoded into dozens of program algorithms.
Perhaps as an unintended consequence, stop triggering in short time
frames often sets off a domino effect, cascading through longer and longer
time frames until the most carefully placed stop loss has been identified
and annihilated.
Intraday price action now shows a strong tendency to print high or
low swings around the New York lunch hour. A typical scenario starts
with a minor gap down and mild pullback after a notable rally day. The
downside gathers steam for an hour or two and then fizzles out over the
lunch hour. An afternoon bounce tries to fill the gap and regain the session
or prior day’s high. A late cycle then kicks into gear, lifting the indices
above that high or triggering a program-induced selloff that tests or takes
out the midday low.
Another intraday cycle actually starts prior to the opening of the
regular session. Index futures often spike into a swing high or low right
at 8:00 a.m. New York time, or at 8:30 a.m. if there’s a scheduled economic

CHAPTER 3

Revisiting the Market Clock

F I G U R E

57

3.1

Eight days of S&P 500 futures action illustrate how opening trends tend to fade near the lunch hour and give
way to proportional counterswings. Program algorithms often pause and reevaluate the playing field right in the
middle of the session, prior to initiating afternoon strategies that continue their morning efforts or swing in the
opposite direction. This has generated a persistent bias for the midday market to print a notable high or low.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

release. The earlier time corresponds with the activation of premarket
quoting systems at the major discount brokers. In other words, the tape
gets painted into a high or low for public traders checking out the early
morning action. This cycle shifts forward 30 minutes on news days, often
pulling into a high that triggers a selloff after the economic release or a
low that yields a rally.
Ironically, the intraday markets have become more illiquid in recent
years because they’re dominated by phantom quotes that back away faster

58

PART TWO

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

than you can hit your buy or sell button. This disappearing act is most
prevalent right after the opening bell. In fact, no matter how hard you’ve
worked to establish a winning position in the prior session, chances are
your profit will be placed at risk by a vanishing bid-ask spread early in
the new day. This shell game eases up whenever the public is active,
but those periods constitute a minority of time in the last 10 years of market
history. Also consider the utter destruction of the opening bid system
since the demise of NYSE specialists and Nasdaq market makers. It’s
not unusual these days for a Dow Industrial component to start the session with a 75 cent to one dollar bid-ask spread because no one is
responsible for making an orderly market or gets an automatic advantage
by adding liquidity.

Calendar Perils
Traders look for directional guidance wherever they can find it. Most of the
time they just react to short-term influences, like the daily flow of economic
and earnings reports, but the broad market calendar also exercises considerable influence on the ticker tape. Seasonality has taken on increasingly
diabolical undertones in our modern electronic markets as large institutions deconstruct classic wisdom and attempt to outthink their competition. For example, the January Effect kicked in just after Election Day for
several years after the 2000 to 2002 bear market, with big rallies that left
behind more cautious investors who were waiting for New Year’s Day.
Not surprisingly, those buying frenzies ended as soon as the traditional
starting period in early January began, giving way to selloffs that targeted
small-fry investors who were waiting for the classic calendar influence to
move the market.
Window dressing seasonality has expanded radically from its traditional end-of-quarter influence in recent years. In prior decades, this
positive bias was closely aligned with quarterly markup, when fund
managers would buy the top-performing stocks of the prior three months,
getting them into their portfolios just in time to report holdings to their
investors. Window dressing now has a monthly impact, perhaps due to
the short-term mentality that has infused every aspect of our modern
markets. Performance-hungry funds now want to publish positive reports
on a monthly rather than quarterly basis, so the days leading into monthend also take on a mildly positive bias. The quarterly influence remains

CHAPTER 3

Revisiting the Market Clock

59

stronger than the monthly one, however, and has higher odds of kicking
into gear right on schedule.
The first session of the new month continues the positive bias, with
funds wiping the slate clean and picking up fresh plays for the new month
or quarter. Steady rallies with few or no pullbacks characterize many of
these sessions, which can be extremely profitable when traders recognize
the markup early in the day and then ride piggyback until the closing bell.
The period after Election Day, noted as a recent aberration of the January
Effect, also has clear window dressing undertones. Think about the old
adage to “sell in May and go away.” You’ll note that the advice isn’t
telling us to go away forever. Rather, the period between June and August
points to higher risk because of the thin summer tape, while September
and October are notorious for tax selling pressure and historic panics. At
some point, however, fund managers need to jump back into the water
and book their year-end gains. The beneficial period between November
and December options expiration gives institutions a perfect opportunity
to accomplish this self-serving task.
Here’s how it works. These folks do a little buying and set a
positive tone for the tape. This attracts the retail crowd, which salivates
like Pavlov’s dog and buys the usual momentum plays. Funds fuel the
fire, adding a healthy dose of options exposure coming out of November
expiration. The year-end rally embers continue to burn brightly into
December’s triple witching options expiration, which precedes the thinly
traded period between the Christmas holiday and New Year’s Day. Funds
and institutions then use the end of expiration to take profits and lock
in yearly gains, with compressive options plays that won’t expire until
the following year. This is why the tape often goes dead as a doornail
right after December triple witching. In theory, the protective strategies
will keep index prices within a narrow band that matches the final performance numbers. It’s also the time when predatory hedge funds emerge
and initiate the first wave of contrary strategies that target long-side retail
exposure taken in the prior four to six weeks.
The Federal Reserve, through its Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC), meets eight times per year to review and update interest rates.
It can also set unscheduled meetings during dangerous times, like the
credit crisis that began in 2007. Both types of meetings have become major
cyclical events for the worldwide trading community. This is especially
true in our Net-driven environment because the rate decision is transmitted to the public in real time, allowing everyone to place instantaneous
bets on the market’s reaction. Not all Federal Reserve meetings are market
