
287 䊏
Sakata’s Method and Candle Formations

Figure 5-3

Figure 5-4

䊏 288

Chapter Five

sell on the third gap. The first gap (ku) demonstrates the appearance
of new buying with great force. The second gap represents additional
buying and possibly some covering by the sophisticated bears. The
third gap is the result of short covering by the reluctant bears and any
delayed market orders for buying. Here, on the third gap, Sakata’s
Method recommends selling because of the conflict of orders and the
possibility of reaching overbought conditions too soon. This same
technique works in reverse for a downward gap in the market after a
top. The Japanese term for filling a gap is anaume. Gaps (ku) are also
called windows (mado) by the Japanese.

SAN-PEI ( THREE SOLDIERS)
San-pei means “three soldiers who are marching in the same direction.” This is typified by the bullish Three White Soldiers candle pattern, which indicates a steady rise in the market. This steady type of
price rise shows promise as a major move to the upside. Sakata’s
Method also shows how this pattern deteriorates and shows weakness in the market rise. These bearish variations to the bullish Three
White Soldiers pattern are discussed next. The first variation of the
Three White Soldiers pattern is the Advanced Block pattern, which is
quite similar, except that the second and third white days have long
upper shadows. The second variation of the Three White Soldiers
pattern is the Deliberation (stalled) pattern, which also has a long
upper shadow on the second day. However, the third day is a Spinning Top, and most likely a star. This suggests that a turnaround in
the market is near.
Other patterns that make the san-pei method are the Three Black
Crows and the Identical Three Crows pattern. Each of these candle
patterns is bearish and indicates a weak market (Chapter 3).

289 䊏
Sakata’s Method and Candle Formations

Figure 5-5

Figure 5-6

䊏 290

Chapter Five

SAN-PON (THREE METHODS)
San-poh means “a rest or cease-fire in market action.” A popular
saying “Buy, sell, and rest.” Most traditional books on market psychology and trading suggest taking a break from the markets. This is
necessary for many reasons, not the least of which is to get a perspective on the market while not having any money involved. San-poh
involves the continuation patterns called the Rising Three methods
and the Falling Three Methods (Chapter 4). Some sources also refer
to two other patterns, the Upside Gap Three Methods and Downside
Gap Three Methods, all discussed in Chapter 4.
The Rising and Falling Three Methods continuation patterns are
resting patterns. The trend of the market is not broken, only pausing
while preparing for another advance or decline.
Sakata’s Method is intended to present a clear and confident way
of looking at charts. Often Sakata’s Method is presented along with
the following simple philosophy.
1. In an up or down market, prices will continue to move in
the established direction. This fact was instrumental in the
development of candle pattern identification with a computer (Chapter 6).
2. It takes more force to cause a market to rise that to cause it
to fall. This is related directly to the traditional saying that
a market can fall due to its own weight.
3. A market that has risen will eventually fall, and a market
that has fallen will eventually rise. As an article in the September 1991 issue of Forbes observed, in a bear market, it’s
smart to remind yourself that the world isn’t coming to an
end, and in bull market, it’s smart to remind yourself that
trees don’t grow to the sky. A similar and more common
analogy is that all good things must come to an end.

291 䊏
Sakata’s Method and Candle Formations

Figure 5-7

Figure 5-8

䊏 292

Chapter Five

4. Market prices sometimes just stop moving completely. This
refers to lateral trading, a time for all but the most nimble
traders to stand aside.
Sakata’s Method, while focusing on the number 3, also involves the
use of broader formations in which numerous candle patterns may
exist.

CANDLE FORMATIONS
There are many Japanese candle formations that resemble price formations used in traditional technical analysis. Steve Nison coined
many of the names commonly used in the West today. These formations can consist of many days of data. These formations are used as
general market indicators and lack the precise timing that many
investors and traders require. When a formation does evolve, look
for additional evidence of price reversal, such as a reversal candle
pattern. Some interference may occur when a formation takes shape
over a long period of time. Remember that most candle patterns, and
certainly almost all reversal candle patterns, require that they have a
relationship with the current or previous trend. These trends are
greatly influenced by the following candle formations.

EIGHT NEW PRICE LINES (SHINNE HATTE )
This is a formation of continually rising prices in the market. After
eight new price highs are set, one should take profits, or at least protect positions with stops. Action based on 10 new price highs, 12 new
price highs, and 13 new price highs is also mentioned in some litera-

293 䊏
Sakata’s Method and Candle Formations

Figure 5-9

ture, but not recommended here. The previous market action should
be taken into consideration before using this technique.

TWEEZERS (KENUKI)
Tweezers is a relatively simple formation using the components of
two or more daily candle lines to determine tops and bottoms. If the
high of two days is equal, the formation is called a Tweezer Top
(kenukitenjo). Likewise, if the low of two days is equal, it is called a
Tweezer Bottom (kenukizoko). The high or low of these days may
also coincide with the open or close. This means that one day could
have a long upper shadow and the next day could be an Opening
Marubozu with the open (also the high) equal to the high of the previous day. The Tweezer Top or Tweezer Bottom is not limited to just

䊏 294

Chapter Five

two days. Days of erratic movement could occur between the two
days that make up the tweezer formation.
Tweezer Tops and Tweezer Bottoms are formations that will give
short-term support and resistance. The terms support and resistance
refer to prices that have previously turned the market. Support is a
price base that stops market declines, and resistance is a level of
prices that usually halts market rises. A good indication that Tweezer
Tops and Tweezer Bottoms have succeeded occurs when they are also
part of a reversal pattern. An example of this would be a Harami
Cross in which the two highs (or lows) are equal.
Similar in concept to the Tweezers is the Matching Low and Stick
Sandwich patterns discussed in Chapter 3. These two bullish reversal
patterns are derivatives of the tweezer concept, except that the close

Figure 5-10

295 䊏
Sakata’s Method and Candle Formations

price is used exclusively, whereas the Tweezer may use any data component, such as high or low.

HIGH WAVES (TUKANE NOCHIAL)
The High Waves formation can be seen in the upper shadows on a
series of candle lines. After an uptrend, a series of days such as a
Shooting Star, Spinning Tops, or Gravestone Doji can produce topping tendencies. This failure to close higher shows a loss of direction
and can indicate a reversal in market direction. An Advance Block
pattern could also be the beginning of a High Waves formation.

Figure 5-11

䊏 296

Chapter Five

TOWER TOP AND TOWER BOTTOM (OHTENJYOU )
Tower Tops and Tower Bottoms are made by long days that slowly
change color and indicate a possible reversal. Tower Bottoms occur
when the market is in a downtrend, along with many long black days,
but not necessarily setting significantly lower prices as in the Three
Black Crows pattern. These long black days eventually become white
days, and even though a turnaround isn’t obvious, new closing highs
are eventually made. There is nothing to say that an occasional short
day cannot be part of this reversal pattern. These short days usually
happen during the transition from black o white days. Of course, the
Tower Top is the exact opposite. The term Tower refers to the long
days that help define this pattern. Some Japanese literature refers to
this type of formation as a Turret Top when it occurs at peaks.

Figure 5-12

297 䊏
Sakata’s Method and Candle Formations

Figure 5-13

FRY PAN BOTTOM (NABEZOKO)
The Fry Pan Bottom is similar to the Tower Bottom, except that the
days are all small or short body days. The bottom formation is
rounded and the colors are not as important. After a number of days
of slowly rounding out the bottom, a gap is made with a white day.
This confirms the reversal and an uptrend should begin. The name is
derived from the scooping bottom of a frying pan with a long handle.
Dumpling Top is the counterpart of the Fry Pan Bottom formation. It is a rounded top similar to the rounded top in traditional
technical jargon. The downtrend is confirmed by a gap to a back
body. If the black day after the gap is a Belt Hold Line, the ability of
this formation to predict future price movement is even better.

䊏 298

Chapter Five

Figure 5-14

Figure 5-15

299 䊏
Sakata’s Method and Candle Formations

HIGH PRICE GAPPING PLAY AND LOW PRICE GAPPING
PLAY (BOHTOH AND BOHRAKU )
High and Low Price Gapping Plays are the Japanese equivalents of
breakouts. As prices begin to consolidate near a support or resistance
level, the indecision in the market becomes greater as time goes by.
Once this range is broken, market direction is quickly resumed. If the
breakout is caused by a gap in the same direction as the prices were
trending before the consolidation, a further move in that direction is
certain. Because of the subjective nature of these formations, the textbook cases will rarely be seen. Basically, they are the same as the Rising and Falling Three Methods and the Mat Hold, except that no
clear arrangement of candlesticks can be used to define them.

Figure 5-16

䊏 300

Chapter Five

Figure 5-17

CHAPTER SIX

The Philosophy
behind Candle
Pattern Identification
DATA REQUIREMENTS, GAPS, AND RULES
Only daily price data, which consists of open, high, low, and close
prices on a stock or commodity, is being used when explaining these
concepts. Many times, the open price is not available on stocks. In
such cases the previous day’s closing price has been substituted. The
exception to this is when the previous day’s close is higher than
today’s high, today’s high is used for the open. Similarly, when the
previous day’s close is lower than today’s low, today’s low is used as
the open price. This allows the visibility of gaps from one day’s close
to the next day’s range.
Gaps are an important part of candlestick analysis. To demonstrate that there is not much difference, the S&P 100 stocks with and
without open price were tested and analyzed. Comprehensive testing

䊏 301 䊏

䊏 302

Chapter Six

was also accomplished on vast amounts of data that contained the
open price to see if there was any statistical information about gaps
that could be used when the open price was not available. Whenever
a day’s high and low prices were greater than the high price of the
preceding day, a gap-up analysis was performed. Likewise, whenever
a day’s high and low price were less than the previous day’s low price,
a gap-down analysis was done. Once a “gap day” was identified, the
following formula was used to determine the location of the open
price relative to the day’s range.
[(Open − Low) / (High − Low)] * 100
The results showed consistency that the open price was 17% to
31% into the high-low range following a gap. If the gap was to the
upside, the open price would fall about 17 to 28 percent above the
low price. Similarly, if the gap was to the downside, the open price
would fall 17 to 31 percent below the high price. Remember, these
are just statistics calculated from a large amount of data, so the usual
precautions are suggested.
One must also be aware that certain candle patterns cannot exist if
there is no open price. That is, the previous day’s close cannot be substituted for the open. The following candle patterns cannot exist
when the open price is not available. This was first written in 1992
when opening price data was not readily available. Since then most
data services provide opening prices on all stocks. Coincidentally or
not, most of these services started providing open prices in the 1991
time frame.

303 䊏
The Philosophy behind Candle Pattern identification

Figure 6-1

Inverted Hammer
Dark Cloud Cover
Piercing Line
Meeting Lines
Upside Gap Two Crows
Two Crows
Unique Three River Bottom
Kicking

䊏 304

Chapter Six

Matching Low
Side-by-Side White Lines
Three Line Strike
In Neck Line
There are techniques that can be used in computerized candle pattern identification that will still allow these patterns to be used. For
example, one could set some parameters that relate the data components from “greater than” to “greater than or equal to.” As a result
a requirement that the open of one day should be less than the close
of the previous day could be modified so that the open could also be
equal. Although this may stretch the philosophy of candle pattern
recognition too far, it at least permits the use of data that does not
contain the open price.
Today’s electronic capabilities let traders watch intraday price
movements from single trade ticks, one minute bars, and almost any
other conceivable increment in between. It is not the purpose here to
decide which type is better, but sometimes the trees do get in the way
of the forest. One must also keep in mind that candle patterns reflect
the short-term psychology of trading, including the decision process
that occurs after a market is closed. This is why open and close prices
are so important.
Using intraday data without the benefit of a break is questionable
at the very least.

THE IDEA
Pattern recognition has been around for many years. A computer can
check and scan vast amounts of data and compile unlimited statistics

305 䊏
The Philosophy behind Candle Pattern identification

on patterns and their ability to forecast prices. This approach never
remains popular for very long because it is based solely on statistics
and overlooks an important explanation of why some patterns are
more successful than others—human psychology.

ENTER HUMAN PSYCHOLOGY
In the first few minutes of the trading day, a great deal of overnight
emotion is captured. Sometimes special events cause chaos. For example, on the New York Stock Exchange, it may take several minutes for
the specialist to open a stock for trading because of a large order
imbalance. However, once a stock or commodity does open, a point
of reference has been established. From this reference point, trading
decisions are made throughout the day.
As the trading day progresses, extremes are reached as speculator
emotion is tossed around. These extremes of emotions are recorded
as the high and low of the trading day. Finally, the trading day ends
and the last trade is recorded as the closing price. This is the price
that many will use to help make decisions about their positions and
the tactics they will use at the open of the next trading day.
Aside from intraday data, four prices are normally available for
the trader to analyze. One certainly knows the exact open and close
prices for any trading day, but at what times during the day the high
and low were reached, and in what order, are not known.
How does one determine the existence of a candlestick pattern?
Most candle patterns require the identification of not only the
data relationship making the pattern, but also the trend immediately
preceding the pattern. The trend is what sets up the psychology of
traders for the candle pattern to develop. Most of the current literature somehow evades this essential ingredient to candle pattern
recognition.

䊏 306

Chapter Six

It must also be stated here that Japanese candlestick analysis is
short-term (one to seven days) analysis. Any patterns that give
longer-term results are surely just coincidental.

TREND DETERMINATION
What is a trend? This question, if it could be answered in depth,
could reveal the secrets of the marketplace. For this discussion, only
a simple and highly reliable short-term answer is sought.
Trend analysis is a primary part of technical analysis. To some,
trend identification is as important as the timing of reversal points in
the market. Technical analysis books deal with the subject of trend
quite thoroughly and define it in numerous ways. One of the most
common approaches is the moving average.
Moving Averages and Smoothing
One of the simplest market systems created, the moving average,
works almost as well as the best of the complicated smoothing techniques. A moving average is exactly the same as a regular average
except that it “moves” because it is continuously updated as new
data becomes available. Each data point in a moving average is given
equal weight in the computation, hence the term arithmetic or simple
is sometimes used when referring to a moving average.
A moving average smooths a sequence of numbers so that the
effects of short-term fluctuations are reduced, while those of longerterm fluctuations remain relatively unchanged. Obviously, the time
span of the moving average will alter its characteristics.
J.M. Hurst in The Profit Magic of Stock Transaction Timing (1970)
explained these alterations with three general rules:

307 䊏
The Philosophy behind Candle Pattern identification

1. A moving average of any given time span exactly reduces
the magnitude of the fluctuations of durations equal to that
time span to zero.
2. The same moving average also greatly reduces (but does not
eliminate) the magnitude of all fluctuations of duration less
than the time span of the moving average.
3. All fluctuations greater than the time span of the average
“come through,” or are present in the resulting moving
average line. Those with durations just a little greater
than the span of the average are greatly reduced in
magnitude, but the effect lessens as periodicity duration
increases. Very long duration periodicities come through
nearly unscathed.
A somewhat more advanced smoothing technique is the exponential moving average. In principle, it accomplished the same thing as
the simple (arithmetic) moving average. Exponential smoothing was
developed to assist in radar tracking and flight path projection. A
quicker projection of trend was needed with more influence from the
most recent data. The formula for exponential smoothing appears
complex, but is only another way of weighting the data components
so that the most recent data receives the greatest weight. Even though
only two data points are required to get exponentially smoothed
value, the more data used the better. All of the data is used and is a
part of the new results.
A simple explanation of exponential smoothing is therefore given
here. An exponential average utilizes a smoothing constant that
approximates the number of days for a simple moving average. This
constant is multiplied by the difference between today’s closing price
and the previous day’s moving average value. This new value is then
added to the previous day’s moving average value. The smoothing

䊏 308

Chapter Six

constant is equivalent to 2/(n + 1) where n is the number of days used
for a simple moving average.
The Trend Method Used
After conducting numerous tests, a short-term exponential smoothing of the data was determined to best identify the short-term trend.
It gives the best, easiest, and quickest determination of the short-term
trend and is certainly a concept that one can understand. Simple concepts are usually more reliable and certainly more creditable.
Numerous tests were performed on vast amounts of data with the
finding that the exponential period of 10 days seemed to work as
well as any, especially when you recall that candlesticks have a shortterm orientation.

IDENTIFYING THE CANDLE PATTERNS
Previous chapters presented detailed descriptions of the exact relationships among the open, high, low, and close. Those chapters
deal with the concept of trend use, while this chapter focuses on
trend determination. In addition, a method of determining long
days, short days, doji days, etc. is needed, including the relationship between the body and the shadows. The latter is essential for
proper identification of patterns such as the Hanging Man and
Hammer. The following sections will show the multitude of methods used to accomplish these and similar tasks.

LONG DAYS
Any of three different methods are available, where each, or any
combination, of the three can be used to determine long days. The

309 䊏
The Philosophy behind Candle Pattern identification

tern minimum in these formulas refers to the minimum acceptable
percentage for a long day. Any day whose body is greater than this
minimum value will be considered a long day.
1. Long Body / Price − Minimum (0 to 100%)
This method will relate the day in question with the actual value of
the price for a stock or commodity. If the value is set at 5% and the
price is at 100, then a long day will be any whose range from open to
close is 5 points or more. This method does not use any past data to
determine a long day.
2. Long Body / High to Low Range − Minimum (0 to 100%)
This method uses the body length in relation to the high-low range
for a given day under this technique. If a candle does not have long
shadows, it is considered a long day. Used by itself, this is not the best
method; used in conjunction with one or both of the other methods,
it is good. This method will eliminate days that might appear more as
Spinning Tops when viewed with the surrounding data.
3. Long Body / Average Body of Last X Days
− Minimum (0 to 100%)
An average of the body sizes of the last X days is used to determine
a long body. The value for X should be anywhere between 5 and 10
days. If the percentage was set to 130, then a long day would be identified if it was 30% greater than this average. This method is good
because it falls in line with the general concept of candlesticks and
their use for short-term analysis.

䊏 310

Chapter Six

SHORT DAYS
The exact same concept for determining long days is used for short
days with one exception; instead of minimum percentages, maximum
percentages are used in the three formulas.
Small Body / Large Body Relationship
The Engulfing Pattern and Harami use both a large body and a small
body for their patterns. This large body and small body concept is not
the same as the long and short body concept discussed previously. Here
the large and small bodies refer only to their relationship with one
another. One must decide how much engulfing constitutes an Engulfing
Pattern. If the concept is held to the letter of the law, then only one tick
or minimum price movement is required to cause an engulfment. Can
this be at just one end of the body when the prices are equal at the other
end? In other words, can the open-to-close range be different by only
one tick? The following formula will let you control this situation.
Small Body / Large Body − Maximum (0 to 100%)
This inverse of this value can be used for the Harami. It is recommended to use values that represent what could easily be identified if
the determination were made visually. If a small body is engulfed by
a large body by 70%, it means that the small body cannot exceed
70% of the size of the large body. Said another way, the large body is
approximately 30% large than the small body.
