
Chapter 7 • Decision Making

slider low and away, or a change-up over the heart of the plate? By
the way, Mark McGwire’s up next. You have to put down a sign
quickly. The first one is going to be the right one. For most baseball
decisions I think you can train yourself to be right quicker than in
five seconds.”14
McCarver is talking about bare-bones decision making. Be
quick is his message. The transitioning from fast and frugal decision
making by a baseball player, McCarver, to fast and frugal decisionmaking by a baseball team owner and trader, John W. Henry, is
remarkably smooth. Henry was one of the first to publicly focus on
the use of heuristics in his trading. Traders after Henry, like David
Harding of Winton Capital, have taken heuristic decision making to
even higher levels of understanding.
But it was at a speech before the New York Mercantile Exchange
that the president of John W. Henry and Co. talked about why fast
and frugal decision making was core to their trading: “We’re a trend
follower; we use just price information and volatility in order to
make decisions. The reason why we do that is because we don’t
think that we can predict the future…[Further] I can’t be an expert
in every one of them [markets]. In fact I can’t be an expert in any
of them, so what I have to do is be able to be expert at being able to
move faster when I see information that’s important…So my way in
which I can move faster is to just use the price information that’s
the aggregation of everyone’s expectation…What we try to do is
extract the appropriate signals as quickly as possible so we can act
fast to limit our risk and also create opportunities…we’re frugal in
the senses that we use…very simple recognition heuristics…the
price information itself…what could be an example of this? We like
to think of those as non-linear models. But it’s no different than
what some people describe as breakout systems.”15
His simple heuristic for making trading decisions was no
surprise: price action. The truth is that the less traders involve
themselves in complicated analysis—the fewer trading decisions
they allow themselves to make—the better off they are. Many
people mistakenly think simple means unsophisticated. However,
simple methods of decision-making are more successful than more
complicated alternatives. This may seem counter-intuitive, but in a
complex world where decisions have to be made with limited
information and real-world time constraints, time to consider all
possible alternatives may not be an option.”17

215

There are lots of
misperceptions that
influence how people
think about and play
chess. Most people believe
that great players
strategize by thinking far
into the future, by
thinking 10 or 15 moves
ahead. That’s just not
true. Chess players look
only as far into the future
as they need to, and that
usually means thinking
just a few moves ahead.
Thinking too far ahead is
a waste of time: The
information is uncertain.
The situation is
ambiguous. Chess is
about controlling the
situation at hand.16

Leaving the trees could
have been our first
mistake. Our minds are
suited for solving
problems related to our
survival, rather than
being optimised for
investment decisions. We
all make mistakes when
we make decisions.
James Montier
Global Equity Strategy
Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein
Securities Limited

216

Sporting events, which
are played out step by
step in the most public of
settings, allow the
researchers to determine
the precise moment that
somebody veers from
good sense. The
professors say that
coaches and managers
often go awry when faced
with a decision involving
an obvious, yet ultimately
sensible, risk. They seem
to focus too much on the
worst-case scenario: the
Bonds home run, the
game-ending brick, the
failed fourth down.
Travelers who drive
hundreds of miles
because they are afraid of
a plane crash make the
same mistake. “It has to
be the case that sound
knowledge will win out
eventually,” Thomas
Gilovich, a psychology
professor at Cornell, said.
“But the path is tortuous
and slow.”20

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Trend following inherently is very simple, but nobody wants to
believe—especially investors—that something that simple can
make money. The reason they have done well is they have been
able to stay focused and stay very disciplined. They execute the
game plan—that is their real strength.18
However, not everyone agrees with the science of fast and frugal
heuristics as Gigerenzer states: “One group said this can’t be true,
that it’s all wrong, or it could never be replicated. Among them were
financial advisers, who certainly didn’t like the results. Another
group of people said, ‘This is no surprise. I knew it all along. The
stock market’s all rumor, recognition, and psychology.’”19
That being said, staying exclusively with a simple heuristic such
as price is not easy. Traders often can’t help themselves from trying
to improve their trading. They become impatient, greedy, lazy, or
even bored. Far too many simply like to make decisions even if
those decisions only suit short-term emotional needs that have
nothing to do with making a profit. It happens all the time.
For example, let’s say you have a trading signal to buy Google.
You buy the stock if it follows your philosophy and rules. You trust
your rules and your decision making, right? Then don’t try to make
it more complicated than it is—buy it when you get the signal.
That’s not to say that trend following is simple. However, the
decisions that go along with being a successful trend trader must be.

The Innovator’s Dilemma
Clayton M. Christensen, author of The Innovator’s Dilemma,
understands trend following. What Christensen understands, like
trend followers, are the concepts of odds and reactions. He saw this
as people attempted to decipher his writing:
“They were looking at my book [Innovator’s Dilemma] for
answers rather than for understanding. They were saying
‘tell me what to do’ as opposed to ‘help me understand so I
can decide what to do.’…[Wall Street analysts] are theoryfree investors. All they can do is react to the numbers. But
the numbers they react to are measures of past performance, not future performance. That’s why they go in
big herds. Wall Street professionals and business

Chapter 7 • Decision Making

consultants have enshrined as a virtue the notion that you
should be data-driven. That is at the root of the inability of
companies to take action in a timely way.”21
What Christensen is driving at is that you must be able to make
decisions without having all the facts, because you cannot foresee
how a changing market will look until the change has taken place
and then it’s too late. Take, for example, an up and down stock such
as Yahoo! You probably said to yourself, “I should have bought here
and sold there.” But there was no way you could have predicted the
future of Yahoo! You could only act early before the direction of the
trend was obvious. You must be in “ready, set, go” mode long before
the CNBC talking heads start telling you the hindsight 20/20 story
when the move is clear to everyone. Those people are the herders
and herds Christensen alludes to.

217

Charles Faulkner quotes
Ed Seykota as saying,
“I’ve made phenomenal
amounts of money for
very simple decisions but
I was willing to make
them. Somebody had to.”
Faulkner then comments,
“Others are looking for
highly complex ways of
interacting with the
markets, when most of
the time it’s only the
simple ones that are
going to work.”22

Here is another decision-making story similar to the pitcher &
catcher relationship in Tim McCarver’s earlier story. Years ago in
baseball, the catcher and the pitcher called the pitches. Today you
still have a catcher and a pitcher, but the coaches in the dugout are
usually calling the pitches. Why? So the pitcher can execute exactly
what he’s told to do. When the typical Major League pitcher gets a
signal to throw a curveball, he doesn’t stand out there on the mound
debating it. He says to himself, “This is the system we’re using. I
have a coach on the sidelines with a computer. He’s charted
everything. He knows I should throw a curve ball. The only thing
I’m going to worry about right now is throwing a curveball to the
precise location that I’m supposed to throw it.” The pitcher than
can concentrate solely on execution—the best pitch possible he can
throw.
Likewise, as a trend follower, you wake up and see the market
move enough to cause you to take action (such as buy signal). For
example, the rule says buy at price level 20. You do it. You don’t
debate it or second guess it. Sure, that might feel boring and it
might feel like you’re not in control. It might feel like there should
be something more exciting, more glamorous, more fun to do in
which case you might consider a trip to Las Vegas. If you want to
win, you execute the signal as prescribed. That means you trade at
price level 20, and you throw the curve ball when called for by the
coach. What do you want? Fun, excitement and glamour? Or do
you want to execute correctly and possibly win?

Everything should be
made as simple as
possible, but not simpler.
Albert Einstein

218

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Process Versus Outcome
The Greek philosopher
Archilochus tells us, the
fox knows many things,
but the hedgehog knows
one great thing. The fox—
artful, sly and astute—
represents the financial
institution that knows
many things about
complex markets and
sophisticated marketing.
The hedgehog—whose
sharp spines give it
almost impregnable
armor when it curls into
a ball—is the financial
institution that knows
only one great thing: longterm investment success
is based on simplicity.
John C. Bogle

The decision-making process is just that—a process. You can’t
make decisions based on what you want the outcome to be. Michael
Mauboussin and Kristen Bartholdson have presented a compelling
argument for “process”:
“In too many cases, investors dwell solely on outcomes without
appropriate consideration of process. The focus on results is to
some degree understandable. Results—the bottom line—are what
ultimately matter. And results are typically easier to assess and
more objective than evaluating processes. But investors often make
the critical mistake of assuming that good outcomes are the result
of a good process and that bad outcomes imply a bad process. In
contrast, the best long-term performers in any probabilistic field—
such as investing, sports team management, and pari-mutuel
betting—all emphasize process over outcome.”23
Building on those observations, Edward Russo and Paul
Schoemaker, professors in the field of decision making at the
Wharton School, presented a simple yet effective tool (see Chart
7.1) to map out the process versus outcome conundrum:

CHART 7.1: Process Versus Outcome24

The process versus outcome shown in Chart 7.1 is a simple tool
trend followers intuitively use within their trading systems every
day. For example, imagine the trading process you used to make a
decision is a good one. If your outcome is also good, you can view
your trading result as deserved. On the other hand, if you use a good
process, but your outcome is bad, you take solace and view your
trading failure as a bad break, but achieved with a good process.
Trend trader Larry Hite said it another way to me:
“There are just four kinds of bets. There are good bets, bad
bets, bets that you win, and bets that you lose. Winning a
bad bet can be the most dangerous outcome of all, because
a success of that kind can encourage you to take more bad
bets in the future, when the odds will be running against

219

Chapter 7 • Decision Making

you. You can also lose a good bet, no matter how sound the
underlying proposition, but if you keep placing good bets,
over time, the law of averages will be working for you.”
Smart advice.

Key Points
• Seykota: “Gigerenzer’s ‘fast and frugal heuristics’ is another
name for ‘rules of thumb.’ One pretty good one is: Trade with
the Trend.”
• Do not equate simplicity with unsophisticated thinking.
• As science looks closer, it is beginning to acknowledge that
intuition is not a gift, but a skill. Like any skill, it is something
you can learn.
• Occam’s razor: If you have two equal solutions to a problem,
pick the simplest.
• Fearless decision makers have a plan and execute it. They
don’t look back. Along the way if something changes, their plan
has flexibility built into it so they can adjust.
• Murray N. Rothbard, of Mises.org, states: “…if a formerly good
entrepreneur should suddenly make a bad mistake, he will
suffer losses proportionately; if a formerly poor entrepreneur
makes a good forecast, he will make proportionate gains. The
market is no respecter of past laurels, however large. Capital
does not ‘beget’ profit. Only wise entrepreneurial decisions do
that.”
• Mark Cuban: “With every effort, I learned a lot. With every
mistake and failure, not only mine, but of those around me, I
learned what not to do. I also got to study the success of those I
did business with as well. I had more than a healthy dose of
fear, and an unlimited amount of hope, and more importantly,
no limit on time and effort…The point of all this is that it
doesn’t matter how many times you fail. It doesn’t matter how
many times you almost get it right. No one is going to know or
care about your failures, and neither should you. All you have
to do is learn from them and those around you because…All
that matters in business is that you get it right once. Then
everyone can tell you how lucky you are.”

This page intentionally left blank

8

Science of
Trading
An interviewer asked Ann Druyan (Carl Sagan’s wife),
“Didn’t [Sagan] want to believe?” She responded,
“He didn’t want to believe. He wanted to know.”
“First principles, Clarice. Read Marcus Aurelius. Of each particular
thing ask, ‘What is it in itself? What is its nature?’”
—Hannibal Lector1

Trend followers approach trading as a science. They view the
world like a physicist. The following ‘physics’ definition is critical to
trading success:
“The science of nature, or of natural objects; that branch of
science which treats of the laws and properties of matter,
and the forces acting upon it; especially, that department of
natural science which treats of the causes that modify the
general properties of bodies; natural philosophy.”2
Physics and trend following are both grounded in numbers.
Both work off models that describe relationships. Physics, like trend
following, works best when it constantly tests models with realworld applications.
Managing money, just like a physics experiment, means dealing
with numbers and varying quantities. And the connection goes
221

If you can’t measure it, you
probably can’t manage it…
Things you measure tend
to improve.
Ed Seykota3

From error to error, one
discovers the entire truth.
Sigmund Freud

222

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

deeper. Physics is actually about developing general descriptions—
mathematical models—of the world around us. The models may
describe different types of complexity, such as the movement of
molecules in a gas or the dynamics of stars in a galaxy. It turns out
that similar models can just as well be applied to analogous complex
behavior in the financial markets.4
When I use the term “science of trading,” that is not a reference
to engineers and scientists who develop elegant and complex
academic models, but sometimes to their disadvantage, forget to
keep things simple. Keeping it simple is hard, because it is hardest
to do what is obvious. By no means will I cover a complete
undertaking of the philosophy behind the science of trading, but I
have tried to offer an overview of the scientific perspective taken by
trend followers.

Critical Thinking
It is remarkable that a
science which began with
the consideration of
games of chance should
have become the most
important object of
human knowledge…The
most important questions
of life are, for the most
part, really only problems
of probability.
Pierre Simon,
Marquis de LaPlace5

Trend followers, like physicists, approach their world with an
open mind. They examine and experiment. Like physicists, they
think critically and ask smart questions. The skill of asking
objective and focused questions (and then finding the answers) is a
key reason why trend followers excel. To be successful as a trader,
to be successful in life, you need to develop an ability to ask those
right questions, those smart questions. Examples of those include:
• Questions that come from digging deep to face the real
problem, instead of mindlessly going for an easy superficial
query.
• Questions that make clear why they are being asked. We need
to be completely honest with ourselves regarding the real
reason we want an answer.
• Questions that are not hypocritical, but instead help us
discover how we interpret the information before we ask the
question—in other words, questions that offer us the
opportunity to make a midcourse correction.
• Questions that enable us to face the cold facts about who
we are.
• Questions that enable us to face the reality of where the
answer leads us.

Chapter 8 • Science of Trading

• Questions that enable us to face our subjective take on the
world and factor in new objective data.
• Questions that enable us to see what is relevant in asking them
in the first place.
• Questions that engender important details we might have
missed had we not asked them.6
When I spoke with Charles Faulkner about the importance of
critical thinking and the questions surrounding it, he prioritized
favorites:

223

Probability theory is the
underpinning of the
modern world. Current
research in both physical
and social sciences
cannot be understood
without it. Today’s
politics, tomorrow’s
weather report, and next
week’s satellites depend
on it.8

“I think the questions that are most critical—in both senses
of that word—are the ones that question our assumptions,
our assumptions of what is or is not a fact or a truth or
possible. After this comes questions that assist statistical
thinking through. Finally, are those directed to checking
logic and consistency, which are important, but only if
applied to worthwhile assumptions and viable probabilities.”
Trend followers are insatiably curious about what is real. They
do not avoid asking a question if they’re suspicious that they might
not like the answer. They do not ask self-serving questions that
reinforce an opinion they might already have. They do not ask
mindless questions, and do not accept mindless answers. They are
content to ask questions knowing that there might not be an
answer. This is not easy.
Unfortunately, most people do not ask critical questions when
it comes to money and markets. (Bernard Madoff is the great
example I will never stop coming back to.) The questions they do
ask tend to be superficial and ill-informed because they have not
taken ownership of the issue. Instead they ask dead-end questions
such as, “Is this going to be on the test?” Their questions
demonstrate a complete lack of desire to think. They might as well
be sitting in silence; their minds on pause and mute. To think
critically, we want to stimulate our intellect with questions that lead
us to more questions, of course. We want to undo the damage
previous traditional “rote memorization” schooling has done to our
manner of learning. We want to resuscitate minds that are “dead”
with the intellectual equivalent of artificial respiration to make
dead minds come to life again.7

Do not believe in anything
simply because you have
heard it. Do not believe in
anything simply because
it is spoken and rumored
by many. Do not believe
in anything simply
because it is found
written in your religious
books. Do not believe in
anything merely on the
authority of your teachers
and elders. Do not believe
in traditions because they
have been handed down
for many generations. But
after observation and
analysis, when you find
that anything agrees with
reason and is conducive
to the good and benefit of
one and all, then accept it
and live up to it.
Buddha

224

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

I hope investors who have asked few questions so far and, as a
result, been beaten down by their rote memorization of the mantra
“buy-and-hold is good for you” will finally ask critical questions and
scientifically examine data for themselves.

Chaos Theory: Linear Versus Nonlinear
Everyone’s entitled to
their own opinion, but
they’re not entitled to
their own facts.
Donald Rumsfeld,
Secretary of Defense 200310

Chaos theory dictates that the world is not linear. The
unexpected happens. Spending your time looking for “perfect” is an
exercise in futility. The future is unknown no matter how educated
a fundamental forecast. Manus J. Donahue III, author of An
Introduction to Chaos Theory and Fractal Geometry, addressed a
chaotic, nonlinear world:
“The world of mathematics has been confined to the linear
world for centuries. That is to say, mathematicians and
physicists have overlooked dynamical systems as random
and unpredictable. The only systems that could be
understood in the past were those that were believed to be
linear, that is to say, systems that follow predictable
patterns and arrangements. Linear equations, linear
functions, linear algebra, linear programming, and linear
accelerators are all areas that have been understood and
mastered by the human race. However, the problem arises
that we humans do not live in an even remotely linear
world; in fact, our world must indeed be categorized as
nonlinear; hence, proportion and linearity is scarce. How
may one go about pursuing and understanding a nonlinear
system in a world that is confined to the easy, logical
linearity of everything? This is the question that scientists
and mathematicians became burdened with in the
nineteenth century; hence, a new science and mathematics
was derived: chaos theory.”9
Although acceptance of a nonlinear world is a new concept for
many, it is not a new proposition for trend followers. The big events
described in Chapter 4, “Big Events, Crashes, and Panics,” such as
the 2008 market crash, are nonlinear events. Trend followers won
those events because they expected the unexpected. Lack of
linearity, or cause and effect, was not something unanticipated
because their trading models were built for the unexpected. How
did they do this? Trend followers are statistical thinkers. Gerd

Chapter 8 • Science of Trading

225

Gigerenzer, featured in Chapter 7, “Decision Making,” is a
proponent of the power of statistical thinking:
“At the beginning of the twentieth century, the father of
modern science fiction, Herbert George Wells, said in his
writings on politics, ‘If we want to have an educated
citizenship in a modern technological society, we need to
teach them three things: reading, writing, and statistical
thinking.’ At the beginning of the twenty-first century, how
far have we gotten with this program? In our society, we
teach most citizens reading and writing from the time they
are children, but not statistical thinking.”11
