
1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

191

could not continue indefinitely; (3) Charlie and I did not at that
moment consider Berkshire to be undervalued.
Since I set down those cautions, Berkshire's intrinsic value has
increased very significantly ... while the market price of our shares
has changed little. This, of course, means that in 1996 Berkshire's
stock underperformed the business. Consequently, today's price/
value relationship is both much different from what it was a year
ago and, as Charlie and I see it, more appropriate.
Over time, the aggregate gains made by Berkshire shareholders must of necessity match the business gains of the company.
When the stock temporarily overperforms or underperforms the
business, a limited number of shareholders-either sellers or buyers-receive outsized benefits at the expense of those they trade
with. Generally, the sophisticated have an edge over the innocents
in this game.
Though our primary goal is to maximize the amount that our
shareholders, in total, reap from their ownership of Berkshire, we
wish also to minimize the benefits going to some shareholders at
the expense of others. These are goals we would have were we
managing a family partnership, and we believe they make equal
sense for the manager of a public company. In a partnership, fairness requires that partnership interests be valued equitably when
partners enter or exit; in a public company, fairness prevails when
market price and intrinsic value are in sync. Obviously, they won't
always meet that ideal, but a manager-by his policies and communications-can do much to foster equity.
Of course, the longer a shareholder holds his shares, the more
bearing Berkshire's business results will have on his financial experience-and the less it will matter what premium or discount to
intrinsic value prevails when he buys and sells his stock. That's one
reason we hope to attract owners with long-term horizons. Overall,
I think we have succeeded in that pursuit. Berkshire probably
ranks number one among large American corporations in the percentage of its shares held by owners with a long-term view.
F.

Segment Data and Consolidation 54

Despite the shortcomings of [GAAP], I would hate to have
the job of devising a better set of rules. The limitations of the existing set, however, need not be inhibiting: CEOs are free to treat
GAAP statements as a beginning rather than an end to their obli54

[1988.]

192

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

gation to inform owners and creditors-and indeed they should.
After all, any manager of a subsidiary company would find himself
in hot water if he reported barebones GAAP numbers that omitted
key information needed by his boss, the parent corporation's CEO.
Why, then, should the CEO himself withhold information vitally
useful to his bosses-the shareholder-owners of the corporation?
What needs to be reported is data-whether GAAP, nonGAAP, or extra-GAAP-that helps financially-literate readers answer three key questions: (1) Approximately how much is this company worth? (2) What is the likelihood that it can meet its future
obligations? and (3) How good a job are its managers doing, given
the hand they have been dealt?
In most cases, answers to one or more of these questions are
somewhere between difficult and impossible to glean from the minimum GAAP presentation. The business world is simply too complex for a single set of rules to effectively describe economic reality
for all enterprises, particularly those operating in a wide variety of
businesses, such as Berkshire.
Further complicating the problem is the fact that many managements view GAAP not as a standard to be met, but as an obstacle to overcome. Too often their accountants willingly assist them.
("How much," says the client, "is two plus two?" Replies the cooperative accountant, "What number did you have in mind?")
Even honest and well-intentioned managements sometimes stretch
GAAP a bit in order to present figures they think will more appropriately describe their performance. Both the smoothing of earnings and the "big bath" quarter are "white lie" techniques
employed by otherwise upright managements.
Then there are managers who actively use GAAP to deceive
and defraud. They know that many investors and creditors accept
GAAP results as gospel. So these charlatans interpret the rules
"imaginatively" and record business transactions in ways that technically comply with GAAP but actually display an economic illusion to the world.
As long as investors-including supposedly sophisticated institutions-place fancy valuations on reported "earnings" that march
steadily upward, you can be sure that some managers and promoters will exploit GAAP to produce such numbers, no matter what
the truth may be. Over the years, Charlie and I have observed
many accounting-based frauds of staggering size. Few of the perpetrators have been punished; many have not even been censured.

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

193

It has been far safer to steal large sums with a pen than small sums
with a gun.
Under one major change mandated by GAAP for 1988, we
have been required to fully consolidate all our subsidiaries in our
balance sheet and earnings statement. In the past, Mutual Savings
and Loan, and Scott Fetzer Financial (a credit company that primarily finances installment sales of World Book and Kirby products) were consolidated on a "one-line" basis. That meant we (1)
showed our equity in their combined net worths as a single-entry
asset on Berkshire's consolidated balance sheet and (2) included
our equity in their combined annual earnings as a single-line income entry in our consolidated statement of earnings. Now the
rules require that we consolidate each asset and liability of these
companies in our balance sheet and each item of their income and
expense in our earnings statement.
This change underscores the need for companies also to report
segmented data: The greater the number of economically diverse
business operations lumped together in conventional financial
statements, the less useful those presentations are and the less able
investors are to answer the three questions posed earlier. Indeed,
the only reason we ever prepare consolidated figures at Berkshire
is to meet outside requirements. On the other hand, Charlie and I
constantly study our segment data.
Now that we are required to bundle more numbers in our
GAAP statements, we have decided to publish additional supplementary information that we think will help you measure both
business value and managerial performance. (Berkshire's ability to
discharge its obligations to creditors-the third question we
listed-should be obvious, whatever statements you examine.) In
these supplementary presentations, we will not necessarily follow
GAAP procedures, or even corporate structure. Rather, we will
attempt to lump major business activities in ways that aid analysis
but do not swamp you with detail. Our goal is to give you important information in a form that we would wish to get it if our roles
were reversed.
G.

Deferred Taxes 55

I referred earlier to a major change in GAAP that is expected
in 1990. This change relates to the calculation of deferred taxes,
55

[Divided by hash lines: 1988; 1989; 1992.]

194

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

and is both complicated and controversial-so much so that its imposition, originally scheduled for 1989, was postponed for a year.
When implemented, the new rule will affect us in various
ways. Most important, we will be required to change the way we
calculate our liability for deferred taxes on the unrealized appreciation of stocks held by our insurance companies.
Right now, our liability is layered. For the unrealized appreciation that dates back to 1986 and earlier years, $1.2 billion, we have
booked a 28% tax liability. For the unrealized appreciation built
up since, $600 million, the tax liability has been booked at 34%.
The difference reflects the increase in tax rates that went into effect
in 1987.
It now appears, however, that the new accounting rule will require us to establish the entire liability at 34% in 1990, taking the
charge against our earnings. Assuming no change in tax rates by
1990, this step will reduce our earnings in that year (and thereby
our reported net worth) by $71 million. The proposed rule will also
affect other items on our balance sheet, but these changes will have
only a minor impact on earnings and net worth.
We have no strong views about the desirability of this change
in calculation of deferred taxes. We should point out, however,
that neither a 28% nor a 34% tax liability precisely depicts economic reality at Berkshire since we have no plans to sell the stocks
in which we have the great bulk of our gains.
A new accounting rule is likely to be adopted that will require
companies to reserve against all gains at the current tax rate,
whatever it may be. With the rate at 34%, such a rule would increase our deferred tax liability, and decrease our net worth, by
about $71 million-the result of raising the reserve on our pre-1987
gain by six percentage points. Because the proposed rule has
sparked widespread controversy and its final form is unclear, we
have not yet made this change.
. . . [W]e would owe taxes of more than $1.1 billion were we to
sell all of our securities at year-end market values. Is this $1.1 billion liability equal, or even similar, to a $1.1 billion liability payable
to a trade creditor 15 days after the end of the year? Obviously
not-despite the fact that both items have exactly the same effect
on audited net worth, reducing it by $1.1 billion.
On the other hand, is this liability for deferred taxes a meaningless accounting fiction because its payment can be triggered

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

195

only by the sale of stocks that, in very large part, we have no intention of selling? Again, the answer is no.
In economic terms, the liability resembles an interest-free loan
from the U.S. Treasury that comes due only at our election (unless,
of course, Congress moves to tax gains before they are realized).
This "loan" is peculiar in other respects as well: It can be used only
to finance the ownership of the particular, appreciated stocks and it
fluctuates in size-daily as market prices change and periodically if
tax rates change. In effect, this deferred tax liability is equivalent
to a very large transfer tax that is payable only if we elect to move
from one asset to another. Indeed, we sold some relatively small
holdings in 1989, incurring about $76 million of "transfer" tax on
$224 million of gains.
Because of the way the tax law works, the Rip Van Winkle
style of investing that we favor-if successful-has an important
mathematical edge over a more frenzied approach. Let's look at
an extreme comparison.
Imagine that Berkshire had only $1, which we put in a security
that doubled by yearend and was then sold. Imagine further that
we used the after-tax proceeds to repeat this process in each of the
next 19 years, scoring a double each time. At the end of the 20
years, the 34% capital gains tax that we would have paid on the
profits from each sale would have delivered about $13,000 to the
government and we would be left with about $25,250. Not bad. If,
however, we made a single fantastic investment that itself doubled
20 times during the 20 years, our dollar would grow to $1,048,576.
Were we then to cash out, we would pay a 34% tax of roughly
$356,500 and be left with about $692,000.
The sole reason for this staggering difference in results would
be the timing of tax payments. Interestingly, the government
would gain from Scenario 2 in exactly the same 27:1 ratio as wetaking in taxes of $356,500 verus $13,OOO-though, admittedly, it
would have to wait for its money.
We have not, we should stress, adopted our strategy favoring
long-term investment commitments because of these mathematics.
Indeed, it is possible we could earn greater after-tax returns by
moving rather frequently from one investment to another. Many
years ago, that's exactly what Charlie and I did.
Now we would rather stay put, even if that means slightly
lower returns. Our reason is simple: We have found splendid business relationships to be so rare and so enjoyable that we want to
retain all we develop. This decision is particularly easy for us be-

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

196

[Vol. 19:1

cause we feel that these relationships will produce good-though
perhaps not optimal-financial results. Considering that, we think
it makes little sense for us to give up time with people we know to
be interesting and admirable for time with others we do not know
and who are likely to have human qualities far closer to average.
That would be akin to marrying for money-a mistake under most
circumstances, insanity if one is already rich.
A new accounting rule having to do with deferred taxes becomes effective in 1993. It undoes a dichotomy in our books that I
have described in previous annual reports and that relates to the
accrued taxes carried against the unrealized appreciation in our investment portfolio. At yearend 1992, that appreciation amounted
to $7.6 billion. Against $6.4 billion of that, we carried taxes at the
current 34% rate. Against the remainder of $1.2 billion, we carried
an accrual of 28 %, the tax rate in effect when that portion of the
appreciation occurred. The new accounting rule says we must
henceforth accrue all deferred tax at the current rate, which to us
seems sensible.
The new marching orders mean that in the first quarter of 1993
we will apply a 34% rate to all of our unrealized appreciation,
thereby increasing the tax liability and reducing net worth by $70
million. The new rule also will cause us to make other minor
changes in our calculation of deferred taxes.
Future changes in tax rates will be reflected immediately in
the liability for deferred taxes and, correspondingly, in net worth.
The impact could well be substantial. Nevertheless, what is important in the end is the tax rate at the time we sell securities, when
unrealized appreciation becomes realized.
H.

Retiree Benefits and Stock Options 56

Another major accounting change, whose implementation is
required by January 1, 1993, mandates that businesses recognize
their present-value liability for post-retirement health benefits.
Though GAAP has previously required recognition of pensions to
be paid in the future, it has illogically ignored the costs that companies will then have to bear for health benefits. The new rule will
force many companies to record a huge balance-sheet liability (and
a consequent reduction in net worth) and also henceforth to recog56

[1992.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

197

nize substantially higher costs when they are calculating annual
profits.
In making acquisitions, Charlie and I have tended to avoid
companies with significant post-retirement liabilities. As a result,
Berkshire's present liability and future costs for post-retirement
health benefits-though we now have 22,000 employees-are inconsequential. I need to admit, though, that we had a near miss: In
1982 I made a huge mistake in committing to buy a company burdened by extraordinary post-retirement health obligations. Luckily, though, the transaction fell through for reasons beyond our
control. Reporting on this episode in the 1982 annual report, I
said: "If we were to introduce graphics to this report, illustrating
favorable business developments of the past year, two blank pages
depicting this blown deal would be the appropriate centerfold."
Even so, I wasn't expecting things to get as bad as they did. Another buyer appeared, the business soon went bankrupt and was
shut down, and thousands of workers found those bountiful healthcare promises to be largely worthless.
In recent decades, no CEO would have dreamed of going to
his board with the proposition that his company become an insurer
of uncapped post-retirement health benefits that other corporations chose to install. A CEO didn't need to be a medical expert to
know that lengthening life expectancies and soaring health costs
would guarantee an insurer a financial battering from such a business. Nevertheless, many a manager blithely committed his own
company to a self-insurance plan embodying precisely the same
promises-and thereby doomed his shareholders to suffer the inevitable consequences. In health-care, open-ended promises have
created open-ended liabilities that in a few cases 100m so large as
to threaten the global competitiveness of major American
industries.
I believe part of the reason for this reckless behavior was that
accounting rules did not, for so long, require the booking of postretirement health costs as they were incurred. Instead, the rules
allowed cash-basis accounting, which vastly understated the liabilities that were building up. In effect, the attitude of both managements and their accountants toward these liabilities was "out-ofsight, out-of-mind." Ironically, some of these same managers
would be quick to criticize Congress for employing "cash-basis"
thinking in respect to Social Security promises or other programs
creating future liabilities of size.

198

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

Managers thinking about accounting issues should never forget one of Abraham Lincoln's favorite riddles: "How many legs
does a dog have if you call his tail a leg?" The answer: "Four, because calling a tail a leg does not make it a leg." It behooves managers to remember that Abe's right even if an auditor is willing to
certify that the tail is a leg.

* * * * *
The most egregious case of let's-not-face-up-to-reality behavior by executives and accountants has occurred in the world of
stock options. In Berkshire's 1985 annual report, I laid out my
opinions about the use and misuse of options. 57 But even when
options are structured properly, they are accounted for in ways that
make no sense. The lack of logic is not accidental: For decades,
much of the business world has waged war against accounting
rulemakers, trying to keep the costs of stock options from being
reflected in the profits of the corporations that issue them.
Typically, executives have argued that options are hard to
value and that therefore their costs should be ignored. At other
times managers have said that assigning a cost to options would
injure small start-up businesses. Sometimes they have even solemnly declared that "out-of-the-money" options (those with an exercise price equal to or above the current market price) have no
value when they are issued.
Oddly, the Council of Institutional Investors has chimed in
with a variation on that theme, opining that options should not be
viewed as a cost because they "aren't dollars out of a company's
coffers." I see this line of reasoning as offering exciting possibilities
to American corporations for instantly improving their reported
profits. For example, they could eliminate the cost of insurance by
paying for it with options. So if you're a CEO and subscribe to this
"no cash-no cost" theory of accounting, I'll make you an offer you
can't refuse: Give us a call at Berkshire and we will happily sell you
insurance in exchange for a bundle of long-term options on your
company's stock.
Shareholders should understand that companies incur costs
when they deliver something of value to another party and not just
when cash changes hands. Moreover, it is both silly and cynical to
say that an important item of cost should not be recognized simply
because it can't be quantified with pinpoint precision. Right now,
57

[See the essay A Principled Approach to Executive Pay in Part I.E.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

199

accounting abounds with imprecision. After all, no manager or auditor knows how long a 747 is going to last, which means he also
does not know what the yearly depreciation charge for the plane
should be. No one knows with any certainty what a bank's annual
loan loss charge ought to be. And the estimates of losses that
property casualty companies make are notoriously inaccurate.
Does this mean that these important items of cost should be
ignored simply because they can't be quantified with absolute accuracy? Of course not. Rather, these costs should be estimated by
honest and experienced people and then recorded. When you get
right down to it, what other item of major but hard-to-preciselycalculate cost-other, that is, than stock options-does the accounting profession say should be ignored in the calculation of
earnings?
Moreover, options are just not that difficult to value. Admittedly, the difficulty is increased by the fact that the options given to
executives are restricted in various ways. These restrictions affect
value. They do not, however, eliminate it. In fact, since I'm in the
mood for offers, I'll make one to any executive who is granted a
restricted option, even though it may be out of the money: On the
day of issue, Berkshire will pay him or her a substantial sum for the
right to any future gain he or she realizes on the option. So if you
find a CEO who says his newly-issued options have little or no
value, tell him to try us out. In truth, we have far more confidence
in our ability to determine an appropriate price to pay for an option than we have in our ability to determine the proper depreciation rate for our corporate jet.
It seems to me that the realities of stock options can be summarized quite simply: If options aren't a form of compensation,
what are they? If compensation isn't an expense, what is it? And, if
expenses shouldn't go into the calculation of earnings, where in the
world should they go?
The accounting profession and the SEC should be shamed by
the fact that they have long let themselves be muscled by business
executives on the option-accounting issue. Additionally, the lobbying that executives engage in may have an unfortunate by-product:
In my opinion, the business elite risks losing its credibility on issues
of significance to society-about which it may have much of value
to say-when it advocates the incredible on issues of significance to
itself.

200

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

1.

[Vol. 19:1

Distribution of the Corporate Tax Burden 58

The Tax Reform Act of 1986 affects our various businesses in
important and divergent ways. Although we find much to praise in
the Act, the net financial effect for Berkshire is negative: our rate
of increase in business value is likely to be at least moderately
slower under the new law than under the old. The net effect for
our shareholders is even more negative: every dollar of increase in
per-share business value, assuming the increase is accompanied by
an equivalent dollar gain in the market value of Berkshire stock,
will produce 72¢ of after-tax gain for our shareholders rather than
the 80¢ produced under the old law. This result, of course, reflects
the rise in the maximum tax rate on personal capital gains from
20% to 28%.
Here are the main tax changes that affect Berkshire:
• The tax rate on corporate ordinary income is scheduled to
decrease from 46% in 1986 to 34% in 1988. This change obviously
affects us positively-and it also has a significant positive effect on
two of our three major investees, Capital Cities/ABC and The
Washington Post Company.
I say this knowing that over the years there has been a lot of
fuzzy and often partisan commentary about who really pays corporate taxes-businesses or their customers. The argument, of
course, has usually turned around tax increases, not decreases.
Those people resisting increases in corporate rates frequently argue that corporations in reality pay none of the taxes levied on
them but, instead, act as a sort of economic pipeline, passing all
taxes through to consumers. According to these advocates, any
corporate-tax increase will simply lead to higher prices that, for the
corporation, offset the increase. Having taken this position, proponents of the "pipeline" theory must also conclude that a tax decrease for corporations will not help profits but will instead flow
through, leading to correspondingly lower prices for consumers.
Conversely, others argue that corporations not only pay the
taxes levied upon them, but absorb them also. Consumers, this
school says, will be unaffected by changes in corporate rates.
What really happens? When the corporate rate is cut, do
Berkshire, The Washington Post, Cap Cities, etc., themselves soak
up the benefits, or do these companies pass the benefits along to
their customers in the form of lower prices? This is an important
question for investors and managers, as well as for policymakers.
58
