Trade Like

a Pro

Founded in 1 0'(, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing company in the Cnited States. With offices in North America, Europe,
Australia and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and marketing print and electronic products and services for our customers' professional and personal knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived
the market's ever changing temperament and have prospered-some by
reinventing systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether a nOvice
trader, professional or somewhere in-between, these books will provide
the advice and strategies needed to prosper today and well into the future.
For a list of available titles, please visit our Web site at w'vw. Wiley
Finance.com.

Trade Like
a Pro
15 High-Profit
Trading Strategies

NOBLE DRAKOLN

~

WILEY

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright © 2009 by Noble DraKoln. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without either the prior written per:mission of the Publisher, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. , 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at
www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201)
748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/per:missions.
Limit of LiabilitylDisciaimer of Warranty: Willie the publisher and author have used their best
efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied
warranties of merchanta bility or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created
or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies
contained herein may not be suitab le for your situation. You should consult with a
professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of
profit or any other commercial darnages, including but not limited to special, incidental,
consequential, or other damages.
For general infor:mation on our other products and services or for technical support, please
contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the
United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (3 17) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products,
visit our web site at www.wiley.com.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
DraKoln, Noble.
Trade like a pro : 15 high-profit trading strategies I Noble DraKoln.
p. cm. - (Wiley trading series)
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-470-28735-4 (cloth)
1. Investments. 2. Investment analysis. 3. Financial lisk management.
4. Stockbrokers. I. Title.
HG4521.D698 2009
332.6--dc22
2008036346
Printed in the United States of America.
10 9 8

7 6 5 4 3

2

To my friend, Mike Moone
Altlwugh you're gone, your wisdom and presence are stiUfelt.
Thanks for aU your support when you were here
and the good word
you have been putting in for me in the hereafter.

Contents

Preface

xi

Acknowledgments

xiii

PART I

Designing the Trade

t

CHAPTER t

From Retail Trader
to Professional Trader

3

Transitioning from Retail Trader to Professional Trader

5

Successful Professional Traders

16

Tightening Up Your Approach to the Markets

22

CHAPTER 2

25

Markets and Margin

Exchanges

27

What Does This Mean for the Market?

34

Daisy Chain Effect

37

Global Markets

42

Becoming a Sophisticated Trader

45

What Do These Changes Mean for
Your Trading?

CHAPTER 3

Some Essentials of Trading

46

47

Three Different Types of Traders

48

A Trader's Focus

52

Essential Trading Concepts

56

Using This Book to Its Fullest Potential

63

vii

CONTENTS

P -\R'I'

I(

CHAPTER 4

Basic Strategies

65

Holding the Bull and the Bear
by the Tails

67

Straddle, Strangle, and Execution

68

Getting the Right Options for the Job

75

Option Tutorial

78
89
89

Sample Straddle and Strangle Write-Up Sheets
Conclusion

CHAPTER 5

Precision Trading at Its Finest

What Is Hedge Trading?

91
91

Precision Trading Ground Rules

92

Identifying Market Trends

96

Conclusion

101

CHAP1'ER 6

Tl'ading with Hard Stops

103

Stop Loss Order

104

Options as an Alternative to the Stop

106

Conclusion

110

CHAPTER 7

The Markets on a Leash

113

Collar

114

General Collar Pitfalls

122

Day Traders

123

Conclusion

126

CHAPTER 8

Replacing Traditional Options with
Synthetic Options

127

Synthetic Option versus Standard Option

128

When to Use a Synthetic Option

133

Conclusion

141

CHAPTER 9

Everything in Its Season

143

Spread Opportunities

144

Conclusion

151

ix

Contents

CHAP'I'ER 10

Gunning for Premiums with Covered
Options

153

Problems with Selling Options

1 54

Covered Option Trading

156

Conclusion

167

CHAPTER 11

Outnanking the Market

169

Frontspreads and Backspreads

170

Trading Backspreads

172

Conclusion

179

PART III
CILAPTER 12

Advanced Strategies
Exposing Yourself to Loss

18t
183

Synthetic Futures, Long-Short

183

Primary Drawbacks

188

Intercommodity Spread

188

Primary Drawbacks

193

The Bull Call Spread and Bear Put Spread

193

Primary Drawbacks

195

Conclusion

196

CHAPTEll 13 Advanced Option Selling Strategies

197

Do 90 Percent of Options Expire Worthless?

198

What to Expect When Selling Options

200

Strangles, Straddles, or Naked Options

202

Sell Straddle

203

Sell Strangle

207

Naked Option Selling

212

Conclusion

21 5

CHAP1'ER 14

Retreat, Recovery, Opportunity

217

Manipulating the Strategies

219

Conclusion

242

x

CONTENTS

CHAPTER 15 Analyzing Charts and Strategies

243

S&P 500

244
246
249

Euro

Gold
Corn
Conclusion

251
253
255

CHAPTER 16 Applying These Strategies
'lUh Stocks

257

Stocks

258

Strategies
Conclusion

261
266

About the Author

267

Index

269

Oil

I

n 2000, approximately nine years ago, I released my first book, Futures
for Small Speculators. This book was meant to be a repudiation of all

of the misinformation that investors were receiving from brokers and
the industry. I was angry at how many and how often investors were losing
their money trading. I realized that losing was the norm for them and when
they did make money, they had a difficult time replicating their success.
Since then I have put out six publications-this being the sixth-and while
my anger has subsided, my hope is still to see investors readily able to trade
successfully.
This book is a logical extension of the book, Wi nning the Tradi ng
Game. That book broke down the three components of successful trading:
money management, technical analysis, and risk management. After it was
completed, I realized that to clarify the distinction between risk management and money management, I would have to write another book. I knew
this book would have to break down as many risk management techniques
as possible- in clear concise terms- with as many chart examples as I
could muster. I also needed to point out to stock investors, forex investors,
and futures investors that risk management transcends trading genres, and
in order to trade like professionals, they need to cross those barriers without hesitation.
Things have changed so much in the industry in the last decade, with
new exchanges, the weakening dollar, the growth of China and India,
and the creation of new tradable instruments like contracts for difference
(CFD). All of this change means more opportunities to profit. The old way
of looking at futures as too risky or of trading stocks with 100 percent
cash has become more fluid. This book is designed to help you make that
adjustment.
This book has 15 risk management strategies in two parts. There are
nine basic strategies, originally discussed in Wi nni ng the Trading Game,
and now, in Trade like a Pro, analyzed more in depth. In addition, there
are six advanced risk management strategies, that build on that knowledge.

xi

xii

PREFACE

. . . how you how to put the two sets of strategies to use to
of uccess.
book can teach you techniques on how to manage risk, it
really cannot make you money, nor can it lose you money. Only your intelligent reaction to the markets can do that and these tools are designed to
help you make those intelligent decisions. You still need to have a trading
plan, trading goals, a well-kept trading journal, and a sound money management plan, win or lose.
Your dedication to the craft of trading is constantly tested by the
demons of fear and greed. It is always tempting to go for a magic bullet,
but if it exists-I have yet to find it. Trading is difficult and requires a set
plan, built around discipline and perseverance. My book helps you erect
and maintain that plan and face the losses that occur with confidence.
Good fortune and good luck in all of your trading endeavors.
Finally.

Acknowledgments

his book was very difficult to complete in the face of my personal
adversity. Like so many other people I was affected by the economic
downturns in the real estate market as well. Couple that with the responsibilities that come with being a single father and I could have been
overwhelmed at any time. My faith in God not only sustained me, but
helped me thrive. I definitely want to acknowledge and thank God for his
presence in my life and the constant blessings I have received, which includes all of the wonderful people that have strived to help me both professionally and personally.
As a single father, I really would like to thank my two sons, Alex and
Zach. When I am writing, they may as well be writing too since they are
directly affected by it. I appreciate their love and their patience in dealing
with my odd writing hours and intense work schedule. I also want to thank
Lori for being a part of this process, again. You are so loving, supportive,
and encouraging. Just by having you around, you definitely made the writing process go easier. I also want to thank my mom, Celestine. You have
made me smile and laugh throughout the process and your calls to check
up on my writing helped get me to the finish line.
I also want to thank Meg Freeborn and Emilie Herman. Editors extraordinaire! You both have made my writing shine. Not being a writer by
trade has meant a lot of reliance on your notes and recommendations on
how to improve the manuscript, all of which have helped the quality of my
writing.
Without question, I must also acknowledge one of my favorite places
to write, Portfolio Coffeehouse. I have been writing there since 1994. Many
of my articles, large sections of my books, and a significant amount of my
ideas have come while sitting there sipping on a cup of black tea. Thanks.
Finally, I'd like to thank all of my colleagues, clients, customers, supporters, and friends for your constant prayers and well wishing. Your encouragement and positive energy is greatly valued.

T

xiii

I- \ Ie 'I' 1

Designing
the Trade

he next few chapters layout a set of ideas and concepts that help you
make the transition from a retail trader to a professional one. Professional traders approach the market with three distinct differences
that their retail counterparts don't have to consider.
First, the majority of professional traders are working for someone
else. This means that they have what is known as a fiduciary responsibility to their clients. They must, at all times, act in the best interest of their
clients at all times. This means that when choosing between risk and rewards, managing risk takes precedence in order to preserve the client's
principal.
Second, professional traders don't get paid unless their clients get paid.
While this can be stressful, it is the only way to keep the professional
traders focused on what's important-making their clients money. This
philosophy creates a spirit of cooperation in which everyone wins. If the
client doesn't make money, then the trader doesn't make money. This is a
simple philosophy that should be embodied in all forms of investing.
Finally, professional traders are looking for returns that are meant to
beat stock and bond returns, not necessarily to break the bank. For anyone
who has ever played baseball, you know that you don't hit for the fences
every time you are up at bat. In fact, you always take into consideration
what has happened before and what will happen after your tum. That
might require you to be conservative or loose with your playing, depending

T

:f

2

DES IGNING THE TRADE

on the situation. Trading is no different. Historically stocks have returned
12 percent annually and bonds have returned 7 percent; any program that
beats these returns is considered a success.
The ability to set aside greed is one of the professional trader's biggest
assets. If done correctly, setting realistic goals does not hinder opportunities; it simply diminishes the need to take unnecessary chances for unlikely
rewards.
When a retail trader recognizes that he has a fiduciary responsibility to
himself, pays himself from his profits, and makes greed take a backseat to
the reality of the situation, he has taken some solid steps to trading like a
professional.

From Retail
Trader to
Professional
Trader
October: This is one of the particularly dangerous
months to invest in stocks. Other dangerous months
are July, January, September, April, November,
May, March, June, December, August, and February.
-Mark Twain

hen it comes to the futures and forex markets, it is important to
understand the difference between trading and investing. The fastpaced nature ofthese markets, the high degree ofleverage, and the
limited nature of the contracts (from a few days to a few months) make it
difficult to invest in them for the long haul. It takes a significant amount of
active involvement in these markets to have even a chance at being successful. This means that as an investor you have two mental transitions to
make. The first transition is your ability to change a buy-and-hold mentality
to a buy-and-hold-as-Iong-as-I-need-to mentality. The second transition is to
make the leap from approaching the market like a retail trader to approaching the market like a professional trader. Let's tackle the first transition.
Investopedia defines a trader as "an individual who engages in the
transfer of financial assets in any financial market, either for themselves,
or on behalf of someone else." It further states that "the main difference
between a trader and an investor is the duration for which the person
holds the asset. Investors tend to have a longer term time horizon where as
traders tend to hold assets for shorter periods of time in order to capitalize
on short-term trends."
While all investors who make the transition to futures and forex believe that they are traders who focus on profiting from short-term trends, it

W

3

4

DESIGNING THE TRADE

quickly comes to light that they really do not !mow how to do it properly. In
my last book, Winning the Tr ading Game, chapter after chapter was devoted to dispelling classic stock market beliefs and busting various myths
that can be fatal to would-be traders. While the transition from investor to
trader is not easy, it can be accomplished through planning and a constant
vigilance of your mental attitude.
The second mental transition is a lot more difficult. Taking the leap
from the mentality of a retail trader to that of a professional trader is one
of the most difficult, yet rewarding, transitions any trader can make. While
there is nothing inherently more difficult about being a professional trader,
there are several factors, both personal and market oriented, that the retail
trader needs to take into consideration.
It is often said that the difference between amateurs and professionals
is that professionals get paid for their work. It is the same in the trading
industry. The professionals are typically paid a salary plus a bonus based
on their performance. While for many of them this setup is well-deserved,
for others, not so much.
From a December 18th, 2007, news report on Bloomberg, Goldman
Sachs announced a bonus pool of $12.1 billion, up 23 percent from the
prior year. Some of the top officers were expected to receive bonuses
in excess of $60 million, with average compensation per employee to
reach $661,490. What makes Goldman Sachs significant is that they are
one of the few investment banking firms that generate a significant portion of their revenue from their own in-house trading operations. This
is no small feat for a company with a market capitalization of over
$74 billion.
Your average retail trader is lucky if he can put together $50,000 to
trade, much less the $9 billion that Goldman Sachs has allotted in its own
fund, GS Capital Partners. This type of disparity between the Goldman
Sachs's of the world, professional traders, and you, the retail trader, leads
many to believe that the leap from retail trader to professional trader is not
only difficult, but impossible.
This is the wrong way to think. If simply the amount of trading capital
available to professional traders is what separates them from retail traders,
then we wouldn't see so many so-called professional firms having difficulties. In just the past few years we have seen two huge fiascoes. We have
seen a $6 billion meltdown occur at the Amaranth hedge fund in the natural gas market and a $7 billion loss at Societe Generale SA, each of them
collapsing because of the actions of just one of their traders. These were
both preceded by the well-publicized collapse of Barings Bank at the hands
of Nicholas Leeson in 1995. These large losses prove time and time again
that it's not just the amount of money you have to work with that makes
you a professional.

From Retail Trader to Professional Trader

5

In each one of these public debacles it is clear that the "traders"
working for these companies were far from professional when it counted
the most. Their motivations, financial attitude, and psychological makeup
made them operate more like amateurs with access to a lot of money, as
opposed to professional traders with a strict agenda and plan. These problems were further exacerbated by the lack of basic corporate checks and
balances.
In this chapter we explore what it takes to transition from a retail
trader to a professional one. We gain insight into professional traders' motivations, financial savvy, and the psychological differences from most retail traders. Successful professional traders are supposed to operate with
constraint and discipline and have loss minimization at the forefront of
their market trading strategy. We look to replicate this mindset for retail
traders. Finally, we review the impact that outside accountability to regulatory bodies, clients, and peers plays in keeping the professional trader
honest and the significant amount of pressure on professional traders to
simply do things right.
By mimicking the same high level of responsibility that professional
traders feel, retail traders can accurately assess their strengths and limitations while developing the necessary attitude it takes to trade in this increasingly competitive market environment. By taking a proactive role in
acting like a successful professional trader, you can make a realistic assessment of whether you should be trading or if you should hire a professional
trader to work for you.
There is little doubt that the market is becoming more saturated every
day. With trading competition going global and a huge breadth of contracts
strewed across every time zone, you need a competitive edge. To not only
survive, but thrive in this ever-changing environment, it is imperative that
you, the retail trader, take a page out of the professional trader's handbook
and ultimately tighten up your approach to the markets.

TRANSITIONING FROM RETAIL TRADER
TO PROFESSIONAL TRADER
They say "money can't buy happiness, " but the appropriate extension to
that is "nor can it tum you into a professional trader." As a retail trader,
the secret to transitioning to a professional trader is not about how much
money you bring to the table but a combination of your motivation, how
you deal with the money you have, and your mindset. From the outset you
must ask yourself the million-dollar question, "Are you more interested in
being right or being profitable?" The stage is set for your ultimate success

6

DESIGNING THE TRADE

or failure depending on how you answer this question, and your answer
will guide your motivations, how you manage your capital, and how you
mentally approach the market.
Many retail traders assume three things about professional traders
that are simply not true. First, they assume that almost every trade that
professional traders pick is a winner. Second, they assume that it takes
a lot of money to be a professional trader. Finally, they assume that
professional traders are secretly doing something that can't possibly be
done by retail traders.
None of these assumptions is correct and in fact we see time and
time again that it isn't the number of winning trades you pick, how much
money you have, or your privileged access to contracts that makes the
difference- it is how you behave.

Motivation
So are you more interested in being right or being profitable? Answer
carefully.
When asked this question, many people's knee-jerk response is to say
"profitable." What makes this strange is that they oftentimes do the opposite. They would rather pick the right market direction, regardless of how
fruitful the move itself may be. Then they will find any reason to support
their market-picking prowess; while the market is prepared for a reversal
or has actually gone in the opposite direction.
What motivates you more, being right or being profitable? This is a crucial question you must not only ask yourself, but also listen to your heart's
answer intently in order to make the transition from retail to professional
trader. The majority of retail traders are conditioned to believe that being
right about the market's direction is the same as being profitable. Every
advertisement on TV and trading system touts the percentage of successfully picked trades. Whether they are real world results or hypothetical
scenarios (which are more likely), many gurus do their best to optimize
the results of the system they are promoting in order to boost the number
of successful picks over the number of losing ones.
You only notice a kink in any of these programs when you run the numbers yourself. While the programs appear to be highly successful, it quickly
becomes apparent that there is a schism between the number of successful
picks and the actual amount of money made. In black and white you can
see that when the system fails, it really fails. Although there are allegedly
fewer losing picks than winning ones, the amounts of the losses can add
up to being greater than any individual win. You soon realize that not only
are there significantly more losses than wins, but if you were to incur them
at the wrong time in the system your account would be wiped out, and you
could never realize the potential pyramided profits that the programs tout.
