
 HFT programs should be respected but not feared. Always remember that the market is a dynamic and ever-changing place. What works today for traders may not work tomorrow. And because of this, HFT and computerized trading can never completely rule trading. There will always be the need for an intelligent trader who understands the market and price action in real time. And the market is always changing such that it is impossible to program all of the different variables that eliminate the need for trader discretion. There isn’t an algorithm that can be programmed to trade against the well-trained and disciplined trader. There are just too many variables in the markets. 

 I always remind my fellow traders who are annoyed by computers that there is really a much larger lesson here. As a day trader, you can complain about anything that takes your money, including of course the annoying algorithmic programs. If you don’t do your homework, and are unprepared and uneducated when you start your trading, they will indeed take your money. But you have a choice to either spend your energy complaining or to instead compete with them. I encourage traders to figure out how to use the programs to their advantage. For example, when a program forces short sellers to cover fast, ride the short squeeze on the up side with the program. Find the spots where the algorithms cannot take your money and discover the stocks where you can beat the programs. This is just another reason why you must be in the Stocks in Play (read Chapter 4). 

 You won’t get anywhere in day trading by complaining about algorithms. What will that accomplish? How will that help you make money? Many retail day traders are consistently making profits by day trading from their home offices. As I have written, new traders have a choice. The market is simply a pattern-solving exercise. Every morning, you need to solve a new puzzle. The algorithms and HFT make it more difficult to decipher these patterns, but they do not make it impossible. Yes, there will always be obstacles and unfair situations in the stock market for retail traders like you and me. We should take small and consistent steps and work harder to profit in the market with its ever-changing situations. But what we should not do, what a trader must never do, is to make excuses.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Trade the Best, Leave the Rest 

 As part of the algorithmic trading by computer systems, the majority of the stocks will trend with the overall market unless they have a reason not to. So, if the market is moving up, the majority of stocks will be moving up. If the overall market is going down, the prices of the majority of stocks will also go down. But, remember, there will be a handful of stocks that will buck the trend of the market because they have a catalyst. These are the Stocks in Play . This is what retail traders are looking for - that small handful of stocks that are going to be running when the markets are tanking, or tanking when the markets are running. 

 If the market is running, and these stocks are running too, that's fine. You just want to ensure you are trading stocks that are moving because they have a fundamental reason to move and are not just moving with the overall market conditions: Stocks in Play. You may ask, what is the fundamental catalyst for Stocks in Play that make them suitable for day trading? Stocks in Play generally have unexpected fresh news, either positive or negative. Here are some examples: 

 Earnings reports 
 Earnings warnings/pre-announcements 
 Earnings surprises 
 FDA approvals/disapprovals 
 Mergers/acquisitions 
 Alliances/partnerships/major product releases 
 Major contract wins/losses 
 Restructurings/layoffs/management changes 
 Stock splits/buybacks/debt offerings 

 When I do reversal trades (Chapter 7), my favorite reversal trades are on stocks that are selling off because there has been some bad news regarding that company. If there is a quick sell off because of bad news, many people will notice and start monitoring the stock for what is called a Bottom Reversal. If stocks are trending down with the overall market, such as oil was some time ago, you cannot do a good reversal trade. Their value pops up by 10 cents, and you think it’s a reversal, but then they are sold off for another 50 cents. They’re selling off because they’re trending with both the overall market and their sector. Oil was a weak sector for a while in 2014 and 2015 and the majority of the oil and energy stocks were selling off. When a sector is weak, that is not a good time to make a reversal trade. That’s where you have to differentiate. 

 So here’s the fourth rule of day trading: 

 Rule 4: Always ask, “ Is this stock moving because the overall market is moving, or is it moving because it has a unique fundamental catalyst ?” 

 That’s when you have to do a little bit of research. As you become more experienced as a trader, you will be able to differentiate between catalyst-based price action and general market trending. 

 As discussed, as a retail trader, you must be careful that you are not on the wrong side of the trade against institutional traders. But how do you stay out of their way? Instead of trying to find institutional traders, you find out where the retail traders are hanging out on that day and then you trade with them. Think about a schoolyard for a moment. You don’t want to be off in the sandbox doing your own thing, trading a stock that no one is paying attention to. You’re in the wrong place. Focus where everyone else is focused: focus on the stock that is moving every single day and receiving literally a ton of action. That is what day traders will be looking at. 

 Can you day trade stocks like Apple or Priceline or Coca-Cola or IBM? Of course you can, but these are slow moving stocks that are dominated by institutional traders and algorithmic traders, and in general terms they are going to be very hard to day trade. Think of it as the equivalent of hanging out in that isolated sandbox instead of hanging out with your peers in the playground where the cool cats are. 

 How do you determine what retail traders are focused on and your place in that playground? 

 There are a couple of ways to find your best place. One is by watching day trading stock scanners. I explain later in Chapters 4 and 7 about how I set up my scanner. The stocks that are gapping significantly up or down are going to be the stocks that retail traders are watching. Secondly, it's good to be in touch with social media and a community of traders. StockTwits and Twitter are usually good places to learn what is trending. If you follow a handful of traders, then you'll be able to see for yourself what everyone is talking about. There is a huge advantage to being in a community of traders, such as a chatroom, and there are many chatrooms on the Internet. 

 As the reader of this book, you are welcome to join our Bear Bull Traders chatroom. We have many traders and we talk about what is hot today. If you’re trading completely on your own, you're off in the corner of that proverbial playground. You're not in touch with what other traders are doing, and inevitably you will make it really hard on yourself because you will not know where the activity is. I have tried blocking out social media and trading in a bubble, basically doing my own thing, and it did not work. Draw on the laws of high school survival to guide you! 

 A little more about what I do. As a day trader, I don’t trade based on a company’s fundamentals such as product, earnings, earnings-per-share growth and financial statements. As I mentioned earlier, I’m not a value investor and I’m not a long-term investor. I don’t trade Options or Futures either, but I do use Futures to gain an understanding of the overall market direction in the near-term future. I am an intraday equity (stock) trader. I am also a swing trader. In swing trading, I personally do care very much about the fundamentals of the companies I choose to trade: their earnings, dividends, earnings-per-share, and many other criteria. But swing trading is not the focus of this book, so I won’t pursue that topic for now. 

 I’m also a Forex (foreign exchange market) trader and sometimes I trade commodities and currencies. But, in the mornings, I am mostly an equities day trader and I focus on the real stocks. The majority of day traders don’t trade penny stocks or on the over-the-counter (OTC) market. Penny stocks are extremely manipulated and they do not follow any of the rules of the standard strategies. We trade real stocks. Sometimes we may be trading Facebook (ticker: FB) and sometimes we may be trading Apple (ticker: AAPL), but we will always be trading the stocks that are having a big day. You may be surprised, but on almost every single day in the market, there's a stock having a big day because the company has released earnings, had a newsbreak, or had something bad or good happen to it. These are the fundamental catalysts that you must look for. 

 What does my day look like as a day trader? You will read about it in detail in Chapter 8, but my trading day typically starts at around 6 a.m. (which is 9 a.m. New York time) with pre-market scanning. I’m scanning to see where there is volume in the market. As early as 8:30 a.m. New York time, you’ll know what stocks are gapping up or gapping down. I then start scouring through the news for catalysts that explain the gaps. I start to put together a watchlist (the list of stocks I will monitor during the trading day). I rule some out and then I pick and choose which ones I do and don’t like. By 9:15 a.m. New York time I am in our chatroom, going over my watchlist with all of our traders. By 9:30 a.m., when the bell rings, my plans are ready. 

 From when the market opens at 9:30 a.m. until around 11:30 a.m. New York time, is when the market will have the most trading volume and also the most volatility. This is the best time to trade and to especially focus on momentum trading (which will be explained later). The advantage of having all of that volume is that it provides liquidity. This means there are plenty of buyers and plenty of sellers, which in turn means that you can easily get in and out of trades. 

 Around Mid-day, you can have good trading patterns but you won't have the volume. This means a lack of liquidity, which makes it harder to get in and out of stocks. This is especially important to consider if you want to take large shares. My focus has always been on trading at the market’s opening, which is 9:30 a.m. in New York (Eastern time). I personally trade only within the first one or two hours of the market’s opening. If you join the chatroom that I previously mentioned, you will see that I rarely make any trades after 11:30 a.m. New York time. 

 On a good day I have reached my goal by 7:30 a.m. Vancouver time (10:30 a.m. New York time) and I’m easing up. Often by lunchtime I've already hit my goal for the day and I'm going to be sitting on my hands unless there is that perfect setup. From 4 until 6 p.m. I am either in trading courses with our traders or reviewing my trades from the day. 

 I avoid pre-market trading because there is very low liquidity as there are very few traders trading. That means stocks can pop up a dollar, then drop a dollar, and you can’t get in and out with large shares. You have to go really small, and you have to use such small positions that, for me at least, it's just not worth it. If you don't mind trading in small shares, then you can certainly trade pre-market, but you need to first ensure your broker will allow you to do pre-market trading. 

 I live in Vancouver, Canada, so in my time zone the market opens at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time. This means that my days start really early. The great advantage for me is that I can be finished trading before many of the people in my city are even out of bed. I can then spend the rest of my day skiing, climbing, with family and friends, or focusing on other work and the other businesses that I have. I try to hit my daily goal by 7:30 a.m. my time (which is 10:30 a.m. New York time) and then ease up. You know how easy it is to lose money. Once you have some money in your pocket, you should hold on to it.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Chapter 3: Risk and Account Management 
 To be a successful day trader, you need to master three essential components of trading: (1) sound psychology, (2) a series of logical trading strategies, and (3) an eff ective risk management plan. These are like the three legs of a stool - remove one and the stool will fall. It is a typical beginner’s mistake to focus exclusively on trading strategies. Often, beginner traders who fail to make money in the markets get frustrated and go out and try to learn more about how the markets work, study new strategies, adopt additional technical indicators, follow some different traders, and join other chatrooms. They don’t realize that the main cause of their failure is often a lack of self-discipline, the making of impulsive decisions and sloppy risk and money management, not their technical knowledge. You are the only problem you will ever have for your trading career and, of course, you are the only solution to this problem. 

 A good trading strategy delivers positive expectancy; it generates greater profits than losses over a period of time. All of the strategies outlined in Chapter 7 have been demonstrated, if executed properly, to show positive expectancy. But, never forget, even the most carefully executed strategy does not guarantee success in every single trade. No strategy can assure you of never having a losing trade or even suffering a series of losing trades. This is why risk control must be an essential part of every trading strategy. 

 One of my favorite trading expressions is “live to play another day”. This simple saying says so much about the mindset of a professional trader. If you survive the learning curve, then the good times will come and you can become a consistently profitable trader. But you have to survive. And many just can’t. 

 The inability to manage losses is the number one reason that new traders fail in day trading. It’s a common human inclination to accept profits quickly and also to want to wait until losing trades return to even. By the time some new traders learn to manage their risk, their accounts are badly, if not irreparably, damaged. 

 To be a successful trader, you must learn risk management rules and then firmly implement them. You must have a line in the sand that tells you when to get out of the trade. It’s going to be necessary from time to time to admit defeat and say, “I was wrong,” or “The setup isn’t ready yet,” or “I'm getting out of the way.” 

 I’m a consistently profitable trader, but I still lose frequently. That means I must have found a way to be a really good loser. Lose gracefully. Take the losses and walk away. 

 If a trade goes against you, exit the trade. In day trading, the unexpected will occur, this is the name of the game. There is always another trade and another day. Holding a position that is trading against you because you are primarily interested in proving your prediction to be correct is bad trading. Your job is not to be correct. Your job is to make money. This career is called trading, not predicting. 

 I can’t emphasize enough how important it is to be a good loser. You have to be able to accept a loss. It’s an integral part of day trading. In all of the strategies that I explain in Chapter 7, I will let you know what is my entry point, my exit target, as well as my stop loss. 

 You must follow the rules and plans of your strategy, and this is one of the challenges you will face when you are in a bad trade. You may very likely find yourself justifying staying in a bad trade by saying, “Well, you know, it's Apple, and they make really great smartphones. They're definitely not going out of business. I'll just hold this a little longer.” 

 You do not want to do that. You must follow the rules of your strategy. You can always get back in, but it’s hard to recover from a big loss. You may think, “I don't want to take a $50 loss.” Well, you definitely don't want to take a subsequent $200 loss. And if you ended up taking an $800 loss, it would be really hard to recover from that. Take the quick losses, get out, and come back when the timing is better. 

 Every time you trade, you’re exposing yourself to the risk of losing money. How do you minimize that risk? You need to find a good setup and manage the risk with proper share size and stop loss. 

 Here is my next rule: 

 Rule 5: Success in day trading comes from risk management - finding low-risk entries with a high potential reward. The minimum win:lose ratio for me is 2:1. 

 A good setup is an opportunity for you to get into a trade with as little risk as possible. That means you might be risking $100, but you have the potential to make $300. You would call that a 3 to 1 profit-to-loss ratio. On the other hand, if you get into a setup where you're risking $100 to make $10, you have a less than 1 risk/reward ratio, and that's going to be a trade that you should not take. 

 Good traders will not take trades with profit-to-loss ratios of less than 2 to 1. That means if you buy $1,000 worth of stock, and are risking $100 on it, you must sell it for at least $1,200 so you will make at least $200. Of course, if the price comes down to $900, you must accept the loss and exit the trade with only $900 (a $100 loss). 

 Let me explain the risk/reward ratio in a real trade that I took. Molina Healthcare, Inc. (ticker: MOH) was on my watchlist on February 16, 2017. At the Open (at 9:30 a.m.) it was strong and it then went higher. I was watching it. Suddenly, around 9:45 a.m., MOH started to sell off heavily below Volume Weighted Average Price (VWAP, see Chapter 5 for some detailed commentary on my indicators). I decided to sell short MOH below VWAP at around $50. My profit target was the next daily support of $48.80. That was a $1.20 reward per share. My stop loss naturally should have been when the price of MOH went above VWAP, which in this case was $50.40, as marked on Figure 3.1 below. I could risk $0.40 per share in the hope of rewarding myself $1.20 per share. That is a 1:3 risk/reward. I indeed took this trade. 

 Figure 3.1 - Screenshot of my trade on MOH on February 16, 2017 showing my entry, exit and stop loss. As you can see, the profit-to-loss ratio is 3 to 1. 

 Now imagine if, in the above example, you missed the opportunity at 9:45 a.m. when the stock was being traded at around $50.20, and instead you went to go short a few minutes later at around $49.60 with the profit target of $48.80. In this case, your reward would be around $0.80 per share, but your stop loss should be above VWAP at around $50.20. In this case, you are then risking $0.60 per share to reward yourself $0.80 per share. This 1.3 ratio ($0.80/$0.60) is not a favorable profit-to-loss opportunity that I want to base a trade on. In this case, I would accept that perhaps I missed the opportunity. You may say, OK, if my entry is at $49.60, I will define a closer stop loss to have a more favorable profit-to-stop loss ratio? The answer is NO. Your stop loss should be at a reasonable technical level. Any stop loss below VWAP is meaningless in this case, because the stock can make a normal pull back toward VWAP at any time and then continue to sell off toward your target. This is actually what happened when, at around 10:20 a.m., MOH’s price pulled back toward VWAP, but did not reach to the VWAP, and then sold off toward $48.80. I’ve marked this on Figure 3.2 below. If you had defined a stop loss anywhere below VWAP, most likely you would have been stopped out at a loss. 

 Figure 3.2 - Screenshot of MOH on February 16, 2017. This is the example of a bad risk/reward. As you can see, the profit-to-loss ratio is less than 2 to 1 and is not tradeable. You have missed the opportunity. 

 If you cannot find a setup with a good profit-to-loss ratio, then you should move on and keep looking for another trade. As a trader, you are always looking for opportunities to get low-risk entries with big win potential. Being able to identify setups that have a big win potential is also part of the learning process. As a beginner trader you may not be able to differentiate between a range of setups. It may be difficult for you to recognize what a home-run Bull Flag is and what will end up being a “false breakout”. That’s something that comes with both experience and training. We will cover this in more depth in the coming chapters. You can learn from videos on YouTube and Google. You can also join our chatroom where I explain my trades in real time while I am trading them. You will be able to observe me, my monitor and my trading platform. 

 Using a 2 to 1 win:lose ratio, I can be wrong 40% of the time and still make money. Again, your job as a day trader is managing risk, it is not buying and selling stocks. Your broker is buying and selling stocks for you in the market. Your job is to manage your risk and your account. Whenever you click “buy” in your trading platform, you expose your money to a risk. 

 How do you manage that? You essentially have three steps in managing risk. You need to ask yourself: 

 Am I trading the right stock? 

 Do remember that risk management starts from choosing the right stock to trade. You can have the best platform and tools and be a master of many strategies, but if you are trading the wrong stock, you will definitely lose money. Chapter 4 focuses on finding the right Stocks in Play for day trading. I will explain in detail how to find stocks that are suitable for day trading and what criteria you should look for in them. You must avoid stocks that (1) are heavily traded by computers and institutional traders, (2) have small relative trading volume, (3) are penny stocks and are therefore highly manipulated, and (4) don’t have any reason to move (no fundamental catalysts). I will explain these points in more detail in Chapter 4. 
