Asset impairments or losses on sales of discontinued operations
Believe it or not, companies sometimes make poor business decisions. They
might try a new business concept, which flops spectacularly, or realize an
asset they bought has lost its value. When companies are hit with these
charges, accountants consider them to be costs and require the companies
to take a hit to the income statement. However, savvy fundamental analysts
know many of these flops don’t actually cost companies cash. And that’s why
many of these charges are added back to net income to arrive at cash from
operations.

Accounts receivable
If you’re worried about a company claiming it’s doing better than it really is, this
section of the cash flow statement is critical. As you discovered in Chapter 6, a
company’s accounts receivable is a tally of how much its customers owe for
products they’ve bought. If you see accounts receivable soar, that means
customers are mostly buying on credit instead of paying cash. The increase
in accounts receivable eats into a company’s cash because the company is
essentially giving customers a credit card.
If you’re worried a company might be stuffing the channel, pay close attention
to the change in accounts receivable. A big jump in accounts receivable compared to the increase of a companies’ revenue can be a tip-off.

Accounts payable
When you buy something using a credit card, you get the asset without using
cash. It’s the same concept with companies, who may buy supplies or materials on credit. They’re able to get their hands on the things they need to
conduct business, without using cash. When a company’s accounts payable
increases, it’s considered a boost to cash and added to net income.
If you notice accounts payable is rising relative to a company’s cost of goods
sold (discussed in Chapter 6), watch out. It might mean the company isn’t
paying its bills on time, which may inflate its cash.

Inventories
If you’ve ever read about just-in-time manufacturing, you understand why
companies go to great lengths to keep inventories low. Buying piles of materials needed for business consumes precious cash. So by keeping inventory
levels down, companies can hang onto cash. You’ll see this immediately on
the statement of cash flow. If inventories rise, the increase is subtracted from
net income to measure a company’s cash from operations. Likewise, if a company uses up inventory, it’s a boost to its cash levels.

12 506455-ch07.indd 112

9/24/09 10:30:13 PM

Chapter 7: Tracking Cash with the Statement of Cash Flow

113

Net cash (used in) / provided by operating activities
Here’s the end-all-be-all when it comes to measuring a company’s cash flow
from its operations. After making all the painstaking adjustments to net
income, to add back items that didn’t use cash and subtract those that did,
you get a company’s cash from operations or net cash (used in) / provided by
operating activities (see Table 7-2).
When net cash (used in) / provided by operating activities is positive, that
means the company generated cash from its normal line of business. If the
number is negative, that means the company burned cash. Some companies
will put the negative number in parentheses while others make the number
red in the financial statements.

Table 7-2

Kraft’s Cash From Operations in 2007

Item

In $ millions

Net income

$2,590

Depreciation and amortization

886

Deferred income tax benefit

(416)

Gains on divestitures

(15)

Asset impairment

209

Accounts receivable

(268)

Inventories

(191)

Accounts payable

241

Income taxes

124

Other

411

Net cash provided by operating activities

3,571

Source: Kraft Foods’ 2007 10-K

Considering a company’s
cash from investments
When you buy a company’s stock, you want to make sure it’s making adequate
investments in itself to keep things in working order. That’s where the section
of the cash-flow statement, called the cash from investing or cash provided by /
(used in) investing activities comes in.

12 506455-ch07.indd 113

9/24/09 10:30:13 PM

114 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
This part of the cash-flow statement lets you see how much cash the company is using to keep its factories humming or stores looking presentable.
Generally, investments companies make in themselves can consume large
amounts of cash for things including:
✓ Updating stores to remain relevant. A retailer, for instance, may need to
periodically remodel stores to keep them interesting to shoppers.
✓ Enhancing capacity. A manufacturer that’s running full tilt may need to
add warehouse space to handle increased demand.
✓ Upgrading equipment. A hospital may be able to improve patient satisfaction and reduce wait times by buying a state-of-the-art device that
works faster or is more effective.
✓ Acquisitions. Companies might decide it’s cheaper to buy a rival that’s
already in an area of business, instead of trying to launch its own business.
✓ Divestitures. When companies sell off a unit, they typically receive
cash. That cash received isn’t from operations. It’s from investing; at
least that’s what the accountants say. Even if a company technically lost
money on a unit that’s sold off, if it gets at least some cash, that’s still
considered a positive cash flow.
For simplicity, companies will often lump all their investments in improving,
enhancing or updating their facilities into a single item on the cash-flow statement called capital expenditures, or cap ex for short. If you’re interested in digging more deeply into what capital expenditures a company made, the details
will be provided in the footnotes in the 10-K.
Below in Table 7-3 you can take a look at the investments Kraft Foods made
to its business in 2007. Notice the huge drain of cash from acquisitions. Kraft
Foods bought the global biscuit business of Groupe Danone for $7.6 billion on
November 30, 2007.

Table 7-3

Kraft’s Cash From Investing Activities in 2007

Item

12 506455-ch07.indd 114

In $ millions

Capital expenditures

($1,241)

Acquisitions

(7,437)

Proceeds from divestitures

216

Other

46

Net cash (used in) investing activities

(8,416)

9/24/09 10:30:13 PM

Chapter 7: Tracking Cash with the Statement of Cash Flow

115

Getting into a company’s cash
from financing activities
Companies are often like politicians: They seem to be constantly raising
money. Instead of trying to line up financing for their campaigns, though,
companies need funding to keep themselves going.
A classic example would be a young retail company. The company may not
have enough cash to buy all the shirts, pants, and shoes it needs to put into
its store. The retailer, then, might borrow money to buy the merchandise,
and plan to pay it back after the goods are sold. The money borrowed is considered a positive cash flow from financing activities.
A company’s financing activities may bring in or use up cash in a variety of
primary ways. Generally, cash is brought in by borrowing money or selling
stock to investors. All this is summarized right in the cash from financing
activities section of the statement of cash flows. Table 7-4 shows an example
using Kraft. The biggest uses or generators of cash from financing activities
include:
✓ Increasing or decreasing the company’s debt load: As you discovered
while reading about the balance sheet in Chapter 6, companies can finance
themselves by using their profits, by borrowing or by selling stock to
shareholders. Each of these forms has its advantages and disadvantages.
Here, in this section of the statement of cash flows, you can see whether
or not a company is generating cash by borrowing or using cash by
paying back debt. If a company decides it has borrowed too much, for
instance, it may choose to use cash to pay down its debt.
Kraft’s cash-flow statement, in Table 7-3, distinguishes between its shortterm debt and long-term debt. Short-term debt is most pressing, as it’s due
within a year, while long-term debt matures in more than a year. Kraft in
2007 issued more than $12 billion in new long- and short-term debt.
✓ Buying back the company’s stock: From time to time, companies might
choose to buy their own stock. When they do this, they use cash to take
shares out of the hands of the public by buying them. This reduces the
number of slices a company’s profits are cut into, potentially making
each share more valuable.
✓ Paying out dividends to shareholders: Some companies, usually those in
mature businesses with stable cash flow, might generate more cash than
they need to run themselves. These companies generally will return cash
to shareholders by issuing dividends. These payments consume cash.

12 506455-ch07.indd 115

9/24/09 10:30:13 PM

116 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
✓ Net cash provided by / (used in) financing activities: After accounting
for all the cash brought in by borrowing and issuing stock, and cash used
by extinguishing debt, buying back stock and paying dividends, you get
the final result. Net cash provided by / (used in) financing activities, or
cash from financing activities, shows you whether the company was a net
gainer or user of cash after considering all money-raising events.

Table 7-4

Kraft’s Cash From Financing Activities in 2007

Item

In $ millions

Net issuance (repayment) of
short-term borrowings

$5,649

Long-term debt proceeds

6,495

Long-term debt repaid

(1,472)

Repurchase of common stock

(3,708)

Dividends paid

(1,638)

Other

(205)

Net cash (used in) investing
activities

5,121

How Investors May Be Fooled by
Earnings, But Not Cash Flow
Investors often pay very close attention to a company’s revenue and profits. Too much attention, probably. Every quarter, during so-called earnings
season, investors look at what companies said they earned, compare those
results with their expectations, and either buy or sell the stock.
The fact investors pay such close attention to earnings is not missed by companies’ managements. There’s a huge incentive for companies to never miss
earnings expectations, or how much investors think the company will make,
since doing so can cause a stock price to fall precipitously. Adding to the
incentive to not disappoint: Many executives’ pay packages are closely tied
to the companies’ stock price. If earnings disappoint and the stock falls, there
goes the Hawaiian vacation for the CEO.

12 506455-ch07.indd 116

9/24/09 10:30:13 PM

Chapter 7: Tracking Cash with the Statement of Cash Flow

117

Meanwhile, due to the flexibility of accounting rules, there are ways for management to manage earnings. The term “manage earnings” describes a whole
host of things management can do to even out net income and earnings each
quarter, and reduce the chances of disappointing investors.
Management’s ability to manage earnings largely stems from the way the
income statement is constructed. Generally, financial transactions use accrual
accounting. Accrual accounting records revenue when sales are made, and
costs when they’re incurred. That is very different from cash accounting,
which records revenue when sales are collected and costs are paid.
When a company’s profit is widely different from the cash it’s bringing in,
that’s something of great importance to a fundamental analyst. I’ll show you
how fundamental analysts watch for this potentially disturbing trend later in
this chapter.
Companies can also inflate the cash. The most common way would be to
avoid paying their bills. Eventually, though, this tactics will catch up with a
company when its suppliers or other creditors threaten legal action or stop
shipping supplies and raw materials.

A quick-and-dirty way to monitor
a company’s cash flow
You can spend hours analyzing the statement of cash flows. And later in the
book, I’ll share with you some financial ratios and other things you can do to
analyze the cash coming into and out of a company.
But here, I want to share with you one of the fastest and most effective fundamental ways to analyze a statement of cash flows. It’s such a simple form of
analysis, it’s not a bad idea to do with any company you invest in or have an
interest in.
If you recall, profits certainly are important. But cash flow is king. You could
have a company making giant profits according to the income statement, but
without bringing in much cash. Remember the lemonade stand discussed
earlier in the chapter? The answer: Compare a company’s net income with
its cash from operations. It’s very simple fundamental analysis to do. All you
need is the company’s statement of cash flows.
If a company is generating as much cash as it’s reporting in net income, that
can be a good indication it has high-quality earnings. High-quality earnings are
those that are backed up by cold hard cash, not just smoke and mirrors made
possible from accounting rules.

12 506455-ch07.indd 117

9/24/09 10:30:14 PM

118 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
If this analysis seems confusing, keep reading. Once you follow the steps
below and practice a few times, you’ll be surprised at how easy it is to compare a company’s net income with its cash from operations.
Don’t assume the tightening of accounting standards in the early 2000s
stomped out low-quality earnings. Certainly, many companies cleaned up
their accounting in 2002 and 2003 in the wake of Enron. Even so, the number
of firms with lower-quality earnings have been creeping up again. Table 7-5
shows the number of companies in the Standard & Poor’s 500 that reported
net income that was greater than their cash from operations.

Table 7-5

Earnings Quality Rises and Falls

Year

Number of companies in S&P 500 with higher net
income than cash flow from operations

2007

72

2006

84

2005

73

2004

53

2003

42

Source: Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ. Based on members of S&P 500 as of 2008, cash flow from operations in 2007 and net income in 2007

Below I’ll show you how to perform this form of cash-based earnings-quality
analysis on Kraft, with the following steps:
1. Look up the company’s net income. As you learned in Chapter 5, a
company’s net income is available on the income statement. But you
can also take it from the very top line of the statement of cash flows. For
Kraft, net income was $2.6 billion in 2007.
2. Look up the company’s cash flow from operations. Cash flow from
operations is how much the company generated from its business. It’s
kind of like the cash version of net income. If you recall, Kraft’s cash flow
from operations was $3.6 billion in 2007.
3. Compare net income with cash flow from operations. You’ll want to
see cash flow from operations be at least equal to, if not larger, than net
income. That tells you that the company is generating as much cash as
it purports to generate in earnings. Table 7-6 summarizes what you need
to know.
For instance, at Kraft, the company brought in $1 billion in cash above
its reported earnings in 2007, giving you decent confidence the company
has high-quality earnings.

12 506455-ch07.indd 118

9/24/09 10:30:14 PM

Chapter 7: Tracking Cash with the Statement of Cash Flow

Table 7-6

119

Sizing Up a Company’s Earnings Quality

If cash from operations is . . .

It means the company . . .

Greater than net income

Generates more cash than it reports to shareholders as earnings. It has high-quality earnings.

Less than net income

Generates less cash than it reports to shareholders as earnings. It has low-quality earnings

Just because a company’s net income is less than its cash flow from operations doesn’t mean it’s committing fraud. It just means a substantial portion
of the profit it’s reporting isn’t materializing in cash. This might happen, for
instance, when a fast-growing company sells goods so rapidly it must book
profits before it can collect cash from customers. Still, when you see cash flow
from operations that’s less than net income, it’s a reason to be concerned and
dig further to determine the cause.

Understanding the Fundamentals
of Free Cash Flow
Face it. Earnings may impress investors, but cash flow pays the bills. Even
if a company posts remarkable revenue growth, if it can’t get money into
the doors fast enough to pay its own bills, it’s toast. That’s where free cash
flow comes in. Free cash flow tells you how much cash a company generates
(or uses) during the normal course of doing business, including the cost of
upgrading and maintaining its equipment and facilities.
That’s a mouthful, I know. Just remember free cash flow is a relatively easy
fundamental analysis tool that can tell you a great deal about a company’s
generation or burning up of cash. Watching a company’s free cash flow is
kind of like watching the fuel gauge when you’re driving. Just as you want to
know when fuel is running low, you want to know when cash is drying up.
There are many ways to analyze cash flow. Some analysts attempt to determine
how much cash a company is throwing off by studying earnings before interest,
taxes, depreciation and amortization, or EBITDA. EBITDA adjusts a company’s
net income by adding back interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization.
EBITDA can be another way to study how profitable a company is and offers
a rough idea of how able a company is to pay its interest costs. But don’t
make the mistake of assuming EBITDA is a company’s cash flow, even though
many analysts do. EBITDA doesn’t factor in the cash eaten up by inventory,
extending credit to customers or used to buy new equipment. Trust me on
this one. When you want to know how much cash a company is using up, rely
on free cash flow as described in the section below.

12 506455-ch07.indd 119

9/24/09 10:30:14 PM

120 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
Enron’s lack of earnings quality
The implosion of Enron left many investors
flabbergasted. But for fundamental analysts
who know how to measure a company’s earnings quality, there were some huge red flags to
warn them. When Enron’s stock price was still
relatively lofty at $63 a share, the company’s
financial statements showed shockingly low
earnings quality. When the company published
its earnings press release, it wowed investors with a better-than-expected profit of $425

million for the quarter. But fundamental analysts
knew better. An examination of the company’s
cash-flow statement showed Enron burned
$464 million in cash during the same quarter it
reported spectacular earnings. That was a huge
warning signal, and a big reason how a fundamental analyst would have known to avoid this
disastrous stock that ended up losing nearly its
entire value.

Calculating free cash flow
The term free cash flow might sound pretty complex and academic. But you
might be surprised at how easy it is to calculate a company’s free cash flow.
Everything you need to measure free cash flow is available on the statement
of cash flows.
In fact, if you’ve followed the calculation of a company’s cash from operations in that part of the chapter above, you’re more than halfway to arriving
at free cash flow. The formula for free cash flow looks like this:
Free cash flow = Cash from operations – Capital expenditures
Again picking on Kraft as an example, you can calculate the company’s free
cash flow by subtracting its capital expenditures of $1.241 billion from its cash
from operations of $3.571 billion, to arrive at free cash flow of $2.3 billion. Kraft
is generating cash. But that’s not always the case. In the next section of this
chapter, I’ll show you how to analyze a company that’s burning through cash
and find out how long it’ll take before it burns through its entire wad.
Some beginning fundamental analysts are uncertain why capital expenditures
should be subtracted from cash flow from operations to arrive at free cash
flow. The idea is a company cannot continue very long without reinvesting
and upgrading its infrastructure. The example of a manufacturing company is
especially helpful. After a certain period of time, machinery that’s left with no
maintenance will break down or not work properly. Putting money into keeping up equipment is critical if a company is to remain in business.

12 506455-ch07.indd 120

9/24/09 10:30:14 PM

Chapter 7: Tracking Cash with the Statement of Cash Flow

121

Measuring a company’s cash-burn rate
One of the great reliefs of reality shows is that eventually, the contestants
with no talent finally get the boot. Whether it’s the singer with the horrible
voice in “American Idol” or the clumsy player in “Survivor,” eventually those
that don’t belong are eliminated.
The same brutal and harsh reality applies in the business world. Companies
that run out of cash are often history (unless they’re able to get a bailout). And as a fundamental analyst, it’s important to understand how this
Darwinism works.
When a company relies on borrowed money, the death toll occurs when a company misses interest payments on its debt. At that point, lenders can take over
the company and force it to restructure itself. But what if a company hasn’t
borrowed? For these companies, the music stops when they run out of cash.
And at this point, you have all the basic skills you need to measure when
a company will run out of cash, or its cash burn. When you do a cash-burn
analysis, you measure how long a company’s cash pile will last if it continues
to consume cash at its current rate.
Some of the best examples of cash burn occurred during the dot-com boom.
Several Internet companies raised gobs of money during the boom. But after
the Internet bubble burst, many were unable to either sell stock or borrow.
That meant they only had the cash they’d saved to survive on.
Since many Internet companies were losing money and burning cash at such
a rapid pace, they stood to run out of cash before they could ever make
a dime for investors. In April 2000, USA TODAY found that three of the 14
largest online retailers would burn through their cash piles in less than 12
months. All three ended up either filing for bankruptcy protection or being
acquired by rivals for pennies a share, all but wiping out investors.
Fundamental analysis can help you steer clear of these situations. Here’s the
formula you need:
Year’s supply of cash = Cash and cash equivalents / free cash flow
If the company burned cash, it will have a negative free cash flow. Convert it
into a positive number before using the formula above.
An example is Value America, an online retailer that was a darling on Wall
Street during the Internet boom. During 1999, the company burned $109.9
million in cash from operations. Value America spent an additional $16.3
