
Dancing into the investing world: Nicholas Darvas
The Darvas box was popularized by Nicholas
Darvas, a man who turned $25,000 into $2.25
million in 18 months. What made his success
all the more remarkable was that Darvas was
neither a stockbroker nor an investment banker.
In fact, Darvas was in a profession that may be
as far away from investing as you can get: He

was a professional ballroom dancer who traveled the world performing. But in his spare
time, he read books on investing and trading.
He stumbled onto his system after trading for
a few years and reviewing which methods
worked best.

Chapter 4: Char ting the Market

Head and shoulders: The top-off
Not to be confused with the shampoo, the head-and-shoulders pattern is a
distribution pattern that marks the end of an uptrend, forms for psychologically based reasons, and is among the most reliable of all chart patterns.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York even published a paper called “Head
and Shoulders: Not Just a Flaky Pattern.” The organization said that the pattern
appeared to have some predictive value and produced profits in certain markets.
The head-and-shoulders pattern is composed of three hills, with the middle
hill being the tallest and the left and right hills roughly the same height. In
this way, the hills resemble a head and shoulders, as you can see in Figure
4-9, which highlights shares of homebuilder Lennar (symbol: LEN).
In January 2007, shares rallied and met resistance at $54 per share. This occurrence formed the left shoulder of the head-and-shoulders pattern. Buyers
attempted to raise prices a second time and succeeded, driving Lennar’s stock
north of $56 per share. Sellers stepped in and brought shares back to the same
level as the left shoulder ($52) to complete the head. Finally, buyers attempted
once again to raise prices but were only able to push Lennar’s stock up to the
level established in the left shoulder, a move that completed the right shoulder.
Drawing a trendline through the lows of the left shoulder and the right shoulder
establishes the neckline. (Flip ahead to the last section for tips on drawing trendlines.) A head-and-shoulders pattern isn’t complete until a stock breaks below
this point, a movement that’s usually followed by lower prices. The head-andshoulders pattern is typically marked by decreasing volume, which shows a lack
of conviction among buyers.

Figure 4-9:
Shares of
LEN formed
a head-andshoulders
pattern in
early 2007
that signaled the
beginning
of a
downtrend.

73

74

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
Head-and-shoulders patterns give yardsticks as to how much a security’s
price will fall after breaking the neckline. Simply measure the distance
between the head and the neckline and project that downward to estimate
how far the stock will fall at a minimum. In the case of Lennar, the neckline
was around $52 and the head was around $56. So you could’ve expected the
stock to fall by at least $4 ($56 – $52) from the neckline ($52) and reach $48.
Lennar actually exceeded that estimate.
You should short stocks as they break below the neckline of a head-andshoulders pattern. Swing traders who hold shares of a company experiencing
this pattern should only exit on the break of the neckline or the fulfillment of
another selling rule.
An inverse head-and-shoulders pattern, which marks the end of a downtrend,
literally looks identical to the head-and-shoulders pattern except that it’s
turned on its head (pardon the pun). Figure 4-10 highlights an inverted headand-shoulders pattern in shares of Lan Airlines (symbol: LFL). The measuring
technique used in the traditional head-and-shoulders pattern applies to an
inverted pattern as well.

The cup and handle: Your signal
to stick around for coffee
The cup-and-handle pattern is a bullish one that signals shares are being accumulated and the security is preparing for an upward move. Cup-and-handle
formations must be preceded by an uptrend, because they’re a continuation
formation, a pattern that indicates the continuation of a trend. (For tips on
distinguishing among trendlines, flip to the later section, “Measuring the
Strength of Trends with Trendlines.”)

Figure 4-10:
Shares of
LFL formed
an inverted
head-andshoulders
pattern in
July 2006.

Chapter 4: Char ting the Market
The cup and handle first forms after shares rally to some peak. Then for some
reason — perhaps fundamental or technical in nature — sellers bring shares
down 10 to 20 percent from that peak. Amateur investors who buy near the
peak kick themselves for their mistake and agonize over the 10 to 20 percent
loss on their investments. They think, “After I break even on this dud, I’ll sell.”
As it happens, shares of the security give amateur investors that opportunity
when they rally back to their previous peak. Then those disgruntled shareholders unload the security en masse, creating a resistance level and leaving
shares unable to surpass that peak. However, shares don’t fall back to their
prior low. Instead, they remain elevated as smart money accumulates shares
at a slight discount. Shares may fall 5 percent or so from the peak at this
point. On the second attempt to surpass the peak, shares break through and
complete the cup-and-handle formation. Volume is key and should rise heavily on the breakout from the handle.
Figure 4-11 illustrates a cup-and-handle pattern in shares of Compania de
Minas Buenaventura (symbol: BVN). Shares of BVN rallied to $45 per share
in July 2007. Then a general decline in the overall market helped send the
shares down to $35, representing a 22 percent loss for shareholders who
bought near the peak. Anxious to recoup their losses, these investors
unloaded their lot when shares of BVN rose near $45 in September and kept
BVN from piercing that level. But the underlying fundamentals of BVN were
strong, and investors on the sidelines didn’t let BVN decline much — only
$5 from the $45 peak. On the second attempt to break through $45, shares
sprinted higher and passed that peak on heavy volume.
My selection of numerous foreign securities in this chapter is to illustrate that
these patterns occur in both domestic and international securities. Moreover,
the greatest opportunities, in my opinion, are in foreign securities.

Figure 4-11:
Shares of
BVN formed
a cup and
handle in
2007 during
an uptrend.

75

76

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
The cup-and-handle pattern isn’t as accurate as the head-and-shoulders pattern,
which I describe in the preceding section. I’ve seen it form time and time again
only to fail on the breakout. The key question to ask yourself to avoid being a
victim of a false breakout is, “What is the security’s general market and industry group doing?” The stronger the security’s overall market and industry
group, the more likely the formation won’t fall flat on its face. However, if one
or the other is weak, the pattern may be prone to failure.

Triangles: A fiscal tug of war
Triangle chart patterns (shown in Figure 4-12) provide traders with measurement moves, an estimate of how far the ensuing trend will travel after breaking
out from the triangle. Think of triangles as a reflection of the tug of war that
occurs between buyers and sellers. Sometimes buyers have the upper hand;
other times sellers have it; and occasionally both sides are evenly matched.
To make use of triangle patterns in your swing trading, you need to get familiar
with the three types of triangles and how to calculate price movement with each:
 Ascending: Ascending triangles form when buyers maintain a level of
strength while sellers continually weaken, so buyers have the upper hand
here. Graphically, buyers maintaining their strength is reflected in prices
maintaining a certain price level. Each time sellers push prices down,
bulls step in and push shares back. Every decline stops at a higher level
than the previous decline — a sign that bears are unable to push prices
lower. Eventually, buyer strength overwhelms the sellers, and the security
breaks upward. To estimate how far, at a minimum, prices will move after
a breakout occurs, add the height of the triangle to the breakout price
level. The height of the triangle is the vertical distance between its support
and resistance levels.
 Descending: Descending triangles represent the opposite of ascending
triangles. Sellers maintain their strength during the formation of the
descending triangle, and buyers continually weaken, thus giving sellers
the upper hand. Graphically, this weakening is depicted as prices falling
to a certain level and subsequent rallies ending at lower peaks. Sellers
maintain their strength during the descending triangle, while buyers are
unable to push prices to or beyond their previous peaks. Eventually,
the buying pressure dries up, and prices break downward. (Think of
descending triangles as an amateur boxer fighting a heavyweight. Try as
he may, the amateur eventually goes down.) Subtract the height of the
triangle from the breakout price level to estimate price movement after
a breakout.

Chapter 4: Char ting the Market
 Symmetrical: Symmetrical triangles represent a stalemate; buyers and
sellers are evenly matched. Each rally ends at a lower peak than the
previous rally, whereas each decline ends at a higher trough than the
previous decline. You can’t easily tell who’s going to win, but you can
generally expect prices to continue in the same direction as the trend
prior to the formation of the symmetrical triangle. To estimate price
movement in this case, add or subtract the triangle’s height from the
breakout level, depending on which way prices break.
With any triangle chart pattern, be sure to watch for volume on the actual
breakout to distinguish between false breakouts and true ones.
Ascending and descending triangles are the easiest triangles to trade because
you don’t encounter ambiguity on the likely direction of the breakout. Stick to
these patterns and skip symmetrical triangles.

Ascending Triangle
(Bullish)
Figure 4-12:
A depiction
of idealized
ascending,
descending,
and symmetrical
triangles.

Descending Triangle
(Bearish)

?
Symmetrical Triangle
(Ambiguous)

Gaps: Your swing trading crystal ball
Gaps occur frequently in prices; they represent a break in price continuity.
For example, a security may be trading in the $19 to $20 range and then gap
up to $25. Gaps may represent a seismic shift in the fundamentals of a security,
or they may mean nothing. In this section I cover the four types of gaps.

77

78

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
Common gaps
I hate to tell you this, but a common gap is meaningless. Prices gap up or down
one day but quickly “fill the gap” in a matter of days. This phrase is a simpler
way of saying the security’s price returns to the area where the gap exists. If a
security trades at $50 for several days and gaps higher to $52 the next day, its
price fills the gap by trading back down to $50. Figure 4-13 shows two common
gaps occurring in late 2006 in a chart of Diana Shipping (symbol: DSX).
Don’t trade common gaps. They typically have light volume and don’t represent conviction on the part of buyers or sellers.

Breakaway gaps
A breakaway gap occurs on heavy volume and indicates seismic shifts are
occurring in the security. Often the percentage move up or down is significant (more than 5 percent in a single day), and the volume is at least double
the average daily volume. Breakaway gaps are preceded by congestion periods. A security’s price trades for several weeks or months in a certain price
area and then violently gaps higher or lower one day. The strength of the
move indicates a major change is occurring in the way investors value the
security. Figure 4-14 highlights a breakaway gap using shares of Contango Oil
& Gas Company (symbol: MCF).
Breakaway gaps don’t necessarily require swing traders to immediately buy
or sell, because several things can happen after the gap, and the gap has to
be confirmed. So if you think you see a breakaway gap, take note, but wait for
confirmation.

Figure 4-13:
Common
gaps
appeared
in shares of
DSX in late
2006.

Chapter 4: Char ting the Market

Figure 4-14:
This chart of
MCF shows
a consolidation period
followed
by a clear
breakaway
gap.

Continuation gaps
A continuation gap crops up in the midst of an uptrend or downtrend and
signals — you guessed it — the continuation of the previous trend. Figure 4-15
highlights a continuation gap that followed a breakaway gap in shares of
Flowserve Corp. (symbol: FLS). Note: Not all continuation gaps are preceded
by a breakaway gap.
Some swing traders actually estimate how far a security will rise or fall based
on the price appreciation or depreciation from the beginning of a trend until
the continuation gap, and then project that forward. This approach can be
somewhat subjective. Instead, look to add or enter a position on a continuation gap in the direction of the gap (for example, buy if the gap is up and short
if the gap is down). Place a protective stop loss within the gap. If the gap is
truly a continuation gap, shares don’t return to fill it.

Figure 4-15:
FLS shares
form a
continuation
gap.

79

80

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
Exhaustion gaps
An exhaustion gap, which occurs in the direction of a trend, resembles a
continuation gap and marks the end of that trend. If a security has been falling for several weeks and then gaps down, you may think that gap is a continuation gap. However, if the gap fills quickly, it’s likely an exhaustion gap.
Figure 4-16 offers an example of an exhaustion gap occurring at the end of an
uptrend in shares of Sigma Designs (symbol: SIGM).
The exhaustion gap doesn’t offer any call to action for you as a swing trader.

Figure 4-16:
An exhaustion gap
appears in
a chart of
SIGM.

Letting Special Candlestick Patterns
Reveal Trend Changes
You can find dozens of candlestick chart patterns out there, but I cover
only the ones I feel are most accurate. The next four sections feature candlestick chart patterns that are easy to identify and that may signal a change in
momentum or a continuation of a trend. (For help discerning one trend from
another, flip ahead to “Measuring the Strength of Trends with Trendlines,”
later in this chapter.)

Hammer time!
A hammer represents the bottom of a trend. It looks identical to a hanging
man (see the following section) and occurs at the end of a downtrend.

Chapter 4: Char ting the Market
Hammers have small real bodies in the upper portion of the candlestick bar.
They have long lower shadows and small upper shadows (if any). Hammers
signal that after the price of the security opened on the market, sellers drove
it down. By the end of the day, buyers had recouped much of the losses to
end the day near or at the high.
I like to see hammers that extend below recent price action. If a hammer
occurs within the price action of previous days, I don’t consider it a reliable
indicator of a bottom.
Figure 4-17 sheds some light on the difference between a hammer that forms
below recent price history and one that forms within price history using
shares of Western Digital (symbol: WDC), which bottomed on April 10, 2007.
Notice how the high and low on that bottoming day were well below recent
price history. Contrast this hammer formation to the apparent hammer that
formed on March 14, 2007. This second hammer’s body was within previous
price action, but ultimately, it didn’t mark the bottom of the downtrend.
No hammer is complete without confirmation. If the price action directly after
the hammer is down, then no hammer has occurred. A true hammer can’t
have its low violated by subsequent price action. So watch to see how subsequent days unfold before trading a hammer so as to avoid whipsaws.
Volume, again, should be kept in mind. Hammers that form on heavy volume
are usually genuine, whereas those that form on light volume probably aren’t
the real McCoy.

Figure 4-17:
Shares
of WDC
represent
a clearly
defined
hammer
on April 10,
2007.

81

82

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis

The hanging man (Morbid, I know)
A hanging man looks identical to the hammer (see the preceding section).
However, it occurs at the end of an uptrend rather than a downtrend. It crops
up on heavy volume and is followed by price action confirming the top. If the
high of the hanging man is surpassed, then its signal is invalid.

Double vision: Bullish and bearish
engulfing patterns
My favorite candlestick charting patterns are the bullish and bearish engulfing patterns, which involve two candlestick bars, not one.
Bullish engulfing patterns occur when a candlestick bar opens lower than the
previous candlestick’s close and closes higher than the previous candlestick’s open. In candlestick terminology, the pattern begins with a candlestick
bar that has a small real body and is followed by a candlestick bar whose
body engulfs the previous day’s body.
Why is this pattern so bullish? It represents a major defeat, so to speak, for
bears. When the second candlestick bar opens, sellers are already pushing
prices below the prior day’s close. However, buyers step in and begin purchasing en masse. Not only are they able to reverse the direction from the
open but they also manage to push prices higher than where sellers began
the previous day. Think of a bullish engulfing pattern as a surprise victory in
a battle where an infantry division loses not only the gains it made in the previous day but also much more.
I’ve found bullish engulfing patterns to be accurate (otherwise I wouldn’t be
covering them). Look for subsequent price action to confirm the reversal. If
prices trade below the pattern, you can bet your bottom dollar that the
pattern failed.
Figure 4-18 highlights a bullish engulfing pattern in shares of NewMarket
(symbol: NEU) that fell in mid-2006 from $62 to less than $40. Notice how the
open on June 14, 2006, completely engulfed the entire body of the prior day.
Subsequent price action confirmed the bottom.
Bearish engulfing patterns occur at the end of uptrends and mark important
reversals. They’re characterized by two bar formations. The first candlestick
consists of a small real body. The second candlestick opens higher than the
previous bar’s close and closes lower than the previous bar’s open, thus
engulfing the first candlestick. Figure 4-19 highlights a bearish engulfing pattern that formed in shares of Diamond Offshore (symbol: DO) in late 2007 and
signaled the end of the prior uptrend.

Chapter 4: Char ting the Market

Figure 4-18:
Shares of
NEU form
a bullish
engulfing
pattern.

Wait for confirmation before shorting a bearish engulfing chart pattern since
not all bearish engulfing patterns lead to lower prices. If the engulfing pattern
is genuine, prices should decline after the formation and shouldn’t exceed the
high of the bearish engulfing bar.

Figure 4-19:
Shares of
DO formed
a bearish
engulfing
pattern in
late 2007 to
mark the
end of an
uptrend.

The triple threat: Morning
and evening stars
Morning and evening stars are reversal chart patterns that consist of three
candlesticks. Morning stars mark the end of a downtrend and the beginning of
an uptrend. Evening stars mark the end of an uptrend and the beginning of a
downtrend.

83

84

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
A morning star occurs at the end of downtrends, which means that sellers (the
bears) are in force prior to the reversal, and consists of
 A long, black-bodied candlestick that pushes the downtrend lower
 A second candlestick that gaps lower at the open (but doesn’t necessarily
have to be completely below the first candlestick) and forms a small body
 A long, white-bodied candlestick that gaps higher from the second
candlestick and closes near the upper portion of the first candlestick
Conversely, an evening star occurs at the end of uptrends, reflecting the last
gasp of buyers (the bulls), and is made up of
 A long, white-bodied candlestick that pushes the uptrend higher
 A second candlestick that gaps higher at the open (but doesn’t necessarily
have to be completely above the first candlestick) and forms a small body
 A long, black-bodied candlestick that gaps lower from the second
candlestick and closes near the lower portion of the first candlestick
Figure 4-20 is an example of an idealized morning and evening star. Both
patterns reflect the inability of the ruling party, bulls or bears, to consolidate
previous gains. The star (the middle bar) is an exhaustion attempt by buyers
(in the case of an evening star) or sellers (in the case of a morning star) to
push prices definitively higher or lower, respectively. That’s why the second
bar in the morning or evening star formation is small: The day begins with a
gap in the direction of the trend, but the initial enthusiasm dies down. The
third bar shows a swing in momentum as bulls or bears take over.

Figure 4-20:
The morning star and
evening star
patterns. Morning Star Reversal
(Bullish)

Evening Star Reversal
(Bearish)

To see one of these star patterns in the context of a chart, take a look at
Figure 4-21, which shows the evening star reversal in action in shares of
China Mobile Limited (symbol: CHL) in February 2007. Notice how the star
(the middle candlestick in the formation) gapped higher than the previous
bar. The third bar represented a resounding defeat for bulls, as bears were
able to push prices to the level of the first candlestick.

Chapter 4: Char ting the Market

Figure 4-21:
Shares
of China
Mobile
Limited
(symbol:
CHL) formed
an evening
star in
February of
2007.

Measuring the Strength of
Trends with Trendlines
Quite literally, trendlines connect price points together and form either a horizontal, rising, or falling line. They’re helpful in establishing support and resistance levels. When a trendline breaks, shares may or may not reverse course.
The most you can take away is that the trend in question has ended. A consolidation period (sideways movement) may follow, a continuation of the trend
may arise, or the trend may reverse. All three scenarios are possible.
The stock market isn’t some perfect universe where stocks stop and rally on a
dime. There are gray areas, and trendlines should be drawn through them. Of
course, trendlines aren’t perfect either and may at times intersect with prices.
But if trendlines are valid, these intersections shouldn’t be significant (in how
deeply they intersect) or often (the number of times they intersect with prices.)
Much ink has been spilt on the construction of trendlines, but there’s really
no science to them. So don’t expect one trendline drawn at an angle of 65
degrees to be right and one drawn at 63 degrees to be wrong. The basics of
drawing trendlines can be summarized in three simple rules:
 A trendline must touch three different price points to be valid.
Otherwise, you can draw a line pretty much anywhere.
