
6.4

Financials

N/A (sector posted
large loss in 2008)

N/A (no earnings,
no P-E)

Health care

5%

10.7

Industrials

-0.5%

6.8

Information
technology

-7.2%

13.3

Materials

-49.3%

14.4

Telecommunications

-0.6%

11.4

Utilities

5%

9.5

Source: Standard & Poor’s based on operating earnings, http://www2.standardandpoors.com/
portal/site/sp/en/us/page.topic/indices_500/2,3,2,2,0,0,0,0,0,0,6,0,
0,0,0,0.html

When evaluating the profit and growth of individual companies, as discussed
in Chapter 5, it’s a good idea to compare the results to that of the sector. This
might help you identify companies that are pulling ahead of their peers.

Tracking the stock performances of sectors
Studying sectors’ fundamentals, such as earnings growth, is just one part
of industry analysis. To get a full picture of how the sectors are faring, it’s
important, too, to monitor their stock price changes.

23 506455-ch16.indd 259

9/24/09 10:39:40 PM

260 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
The stock market can give you an early signal to where the economy is headed
three to six months in the future, as shown in Chapter 15. You can apply the
market’s same early-warning signal to industry analysis. When you start to see
stocks in a sector rising or falling, for instance, that tells you investors think
the sector’s fundamentals will follow.
If you really want to keep yourself busy an entire weekend, you could get
price quotes for every stock in a sector. But why go to all that trouble if
someone else makes it so easy? There are a few sources that provide helpful
industry performance data, including:
✓ Summary of how the sectors have done over time: Standard & Poor’s
provides the performance of all 10 of its sector indexes on a daily,
monthly, quarterly and year-to-date basis. You can download the data
into a spreadsheet for further analysis. The data are available here:
http://www2.standardandpoors.com/portal/site/sp/en/us/
page.topic/indices_500/2,3,2,2,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0.
html.
✓ Up-to-date daily industry information: Yahoo Finance provides an
industry analysis page that shows you which industries are doing the
best or worst during a trading day. The data are available here: http://
biz.yahoo.com/ic/
✓ Graphical view of industry group data: If you’re looking for an easy way
to see which industry groups are leading or lagging over time, USA TODAY
provides a large informational graphic every Monday. The chart lets you
quickly find which industry groups are charging forward or falling behind.
An online version of the graphic is available at money.usatoday.com.

Using exchange-traded funds to
monitor sectors and industries
Exchange-traded funds, or ETFs, are one of the more exciting things to happen
to the investment business. Investors who want to invest in a basket of
stocks, for instance, can buy just one ETF and spread their money over
dozens, hundreds or even thousands of individual stocks.
But what do ETFs have to do with fundamental analysis? ETFs are excellent
tools to get real-time information on industries and sectors. Since most ETFs
track various stock indexes, or mathematical calculations that measure the
value of a group of stocks, they can be tremendously useful when tracking
industries, too.
The beauty of using ETFs as a way to see how a sector or industry is doing is
that you can get real-time stock quotes on ETFs as you would with any stock.
Just enter the ETF’s stock symbol into a financial Web site to get a price. The
prices of ETFs show you how sectors are doing. Many financial Web sites will

23 506455-ch16.indd 260

9/24/09 10:39:40 PM

Chapter 16: Digging into an Industry’s Fundamentals

261

also provide fundamental details about the ETF, giving you a deeper look at
how things are going in the industry. Table 16-5 lists some ETFs that track all 10
sectors.

Table 16-5

ETFs That Let You Analyze the 10 Sectors

S&P Sector

ETF symbol

Consumer discretionary

XLY

Consumer staples

XLP

Energy

XLE

Financials

XLF

Health care

XLV

Industrials

XLI

Information technology

XLK

Materials

XLB

Telecommunications

TTH

Utilities

XLU

Source: State Street Global and Merrill Lynch

Adding Industry Analysis to Your
Fundamental Approach
You may have hated it when teachers announced, on the first day of class,
that they were planning to use the dreaded curve. The curve is pretty brutal,
since getting a 90% on a test doesn’t automatically mean you get an A. If half
the class gets a 90% too, you could very well end up with a C.
The same curve-like mentality applies in industry analysis. Sometimes it’s not
good enough for a company to post strong revenue, earnings and cash flow.
If the rest of the industry is doing just as well or better, even a seemingly outstanding performance by a company may not be impressive.
Companies cannot be analyzed in isolation, but rather, relative to their peers.

23 506455-ch16.indd 261

9/24/09 10:39:40 PM

262 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Sizing up a company’s financials
relative to its industry’s
Whenever you look up a piece of financial data, the first thing that should
pop into your head as a fundamental analyst is “what does this mean?”
Generally, no single piece of financial data is meaningful by itself. Financial
ratios, covered in Chapter 8, are especially irrelevant by themselves.
Traditionally, fundamental analysis requires you to either compare a company’s financial data with its historical results or against other companies in
the sector or industry.
Virtually any piece of financial data you can extract from the financial statements can be compared against other companies in an industry. You can
also compare financial data to industry averages to give you a better idea of
where a company stands in its respective field.
Comparing a stock’s valuation, or measure of how pricey or cheap it is compared to its fundamentals, is one of the easiest things for investors to do.
After you measure a stock’s P-E, you can then compare the P-E against the
valuation of the industry or the stock market to get an idea of how richly
valued a stock is.
You can even evaluate statements made by a company’s management using
industry analysis. Here’s an example. For many years, Dell Computer often
talked about just how efficient its factories were. Industry analysis lets you
see if the company’s claims are true.
One way to verify a company’s efficiency is by comparing its inventory turnover in days, or how rapidly a company clears out inventory from its warehouses, to the industry. A more efficient production system would have a
rapid turnover, so the inventory turnover in days should be a small number.
The formula is:
Inventory turnover in days = Average inventory / cost of goods sold * 365
Dell in 2008 churned through its inventory every 7.5 days. You know that
because inventory turnover in days is:
7.5 = Average inventory ($1,024) / cost of goods sold ($50,144) * 365
How does Dell’s inventory turnover in days compare with the industry? It’s
excellent. The computer hardware industry turns over its inventory every
34 days using 2008 data, according to Thomson Reuters. So it seems Michael
Dell does know a thing about running a tight ship.
You don’t have to calculate the financial ratios for all the companies in a
sector to get a comparison basis. Thomson Reuters provides industry data

23 506455-ch16.indd 262

9/24/09 10:39:40 PM

Chapter 16: Digging into an Industry’s Fundamentals

263

for you at www.reuters.com/finance/stocks. All you need to do is enter
the stock symbol of the company you’re studying, select the Ratios button
and click the Go! button.
One thing to keep in mind, though, is sometimes you need to convert
industry ratios generated by systems like Thomson Reuters to match your
calculation method. For instance, Thomson Reuters doesn’t convert inventory turnover in days, as I did above. For the computer hardware industry,
Thomson Reuters gives a turnover rate of 10.69 for the industry. To convert
that into inventory turnover in days, just divide 360 by 10.69 to convert the
industry number into days.

Find out who a company’s competitors are
Sometimes you might find yourself getting interested in learning more about
an industry or a sector. Perhaps you want to perform fundamental analysis
on several companies that are competitors to one you’re looking into.
There are several ways fundamental analysts can get a list of the other companies in an industry, including the:
✓ The 10-K: Most companies will provide a list of all the companies they
deem to be their archrivals in their 10-K, or the annual report required
by regulators. Flip back to Chapter 12 to refresh your memory on where
this information is located in the rather lengthy financial document.
✓ Web-based research tools: Several leading financial Web sites will give
you a list of all the companies that compete with each other in a given
industry. Enter any stock symbol at Yahoo Finance, at finance.yahoo.
com, and click the “Get Quotes” button. Next, click on the “Competitors”
link on the left-hand side of the page and you’ll find a list of the top
rivals and some of their fundamental data.

Considering industry-specific data
Financial ratios are among the favorite tools used by fundamental analysts.
You can quickly determine whether or not a company has borrowed too much,
wastes too much money or isn’t growing very fast by studying financial ratios.
Most of the popular ratios that will work most of the time are discussed in
Chapter 8.
But, when performing industry analysis, sometimes the off-the-shelf ratios
aren’t enough. Some industries might have unique characteristics, which
requires additional analysis.

23 506455-ch16.indd 263

9/24/09 10:39:40 PM

264 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Companies in the financial sector are an excellent example of how industry
analysis may need to be tweaked to handle different industries. Most of the
traditional free cash flow measures and cash burn techniques, discussed in
Chapter 7, just don’t apply to financials. Banks and brokerages, often, have
cash on deposit from their customers. That cash cannot be used to fund
operations.
Due to the special way fundamental analysis must be applied to certain
industries, analysts often adopt unique methods. Such industry-specific financial measures can help you better analyze some of the oddities of certain
industries.
Again, the financials are a great example. Many financial analysts know to truly
see how strong a bank is financially, they must examine both its Tier 1 and Tier
2 capital. Tier 1 is considered to be a much more reliable measure of financial
staying power than Tier 2 capital. Banks must disclose how much Tier 1 and
Tier 2 capital they have, but getting that information requires digging into the
footnotes to the financial statements.
Fundamental analysts who specialized on financial companies also study
industry-specific measures such as a bank’s level of loans that are 90 days
past due, loans that have been completely written off, and the level of
reserves a bank has taken to cover loans if they go bad.
Some of the fundamental analysts who took the time to do industry-specific
analysis saw that many of the banks were less solid than the traditional ratios
implied.

Taking stock of raw material costs
Much of fundamental analysis dwells on the end result. You assess a company’s bottom line and see how many assets and liabilities it ends up with after
selling goods and services to customers.
But industry analysis encourages you to examine a company, almost the way
the executives running the firm would. And that includes paying attention
to how much a company must pay for its raw materials. As you know from
analyzing income statements, the amount of money a company spends to
buy raw materials used to make products is considered a direct cost, and is
included in its cost of goods sold, or COGS. The more a company pays for raw
materials, the higher its COGS, and the lower its profit.
Sometimes, increased demand for a commodity, such as energy or agricultural
products, can drive the price of raw materials up. As a fundamental analyst, if
you see the prices of raw ingredients rising, that might be a tip-off a company
or industry that buys those ingredients might see its future profits fall.

23 506455-ch16.indd 264

9/24/09 10:39:40 PM

Chapter 16: Digging into an Industry’s Fundamentals

265

Bloomberg keeps an up-to-date list of prices of many commodities companies
use as raw materials. You can access this information, for free, here: http://
bloomberg.com/markets/commodities/cfutures.html.
Remember, just because the prices of a commodity a company relies on is
rising doesn’t mean profits will take a hit immediately. Many companies use
hedging, or complex financial instruments that let them lock in raw material
prices for many months, or even years. You can find out if, or how, a company is hedging the risk of higher commodity prices in the 10-K.

It’s mine! Paying attention
to market share
One of the most dramatic ways of paying attention to what’s going on in a
company’s industry is market share. Market share tells you how much of a
certain line of business a company controls.
You can measure a company’s share of either large industries or smaller
sub-sets of the industry. For instance, if you’re studying a software company,
you might want to find out what the company’s share of the overall software
industry is. Or, you might drill down, and find out what percentage of the
Web-browser software market a company has.
While market share may be measured on very precise markets, that level of
industry analysis usually requires analysis that goes beyond what’s available
in the financial statements. Sometimes, you need to consult with specialized
market research firms if you want to know what percentage of total sales of a
product type a company has.
For instance, going back to the software example above, the leading makers
of Web browsers, including Microsoft (Internet Explorer), Mozilla (Firefox),
Google (Chrome) and Apple (Safari) may or may not disclose what they estimate their market share to be. There are firms that estimate market share for
this type of software.
Still, using routine fundamental analysis, you can get a pretty good idea when
other companies are eating each others’ lunches, so to speak. You can use
the financial statements to monitor changes in revenue, for instance, to see
who is benefitting from the weakness of some of the players in the business.
Market share analysis demonstrates the counterintuitive fact that a company
may be able to increase profit, even in a tough economic environment, if it’s
able to steal business from rivals.

23 506455-ch16.indd 265

9/24/09 10:39:40 PM

266 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Table 16-6 presents a simple demonstration on how you can see whether one
company in an industry may be taking business away from other players. The
table shows total revenue reported by three large computer makers, HewlettPackard, Dell and Apple.
Examining this chart shows you how Apple, which is a smaller PC maker
than the other two, may have profited by cutting into the computer business. Apple’s slice of the total revenue generated by the big three PC makers
doubled between 2000 and 2008 to 15.3%. Meanwhile, Dell saw its total share
of revenue fall a bit to 29%.
Using total revenue to measure a company’s market share is kind of a blunt
financial analysis instrument. Companies may generate revenue from many different businesses. The companies listed in Table 16-6, for instance, don’t just
make computers. HP has a large computer services business, and Apple sells
music downloads. But the analysis can give you an idea of the shifts between
the industry players and how this type of industry analysis is performed.

Table 16-6

Battle between Three Leading Computer Makers

Company

2008 revenue
($ millions)

% of
total

2000 revenue
($ millions)

% of total

HewlettPackard

$118.4

55.8%

$48.9

59.5%

Dell

$61.1

28.8%

$25.3

30.8%

Apple

$32.5

15.3%

$8.0

9.7%

Total

$212.0

$82.2

Source: S&P’s Capital IQ, based on each company’s fiscal year

23 506455-ch16.indd 266

9/24/09 10:39:40 PM

Chapter 17

Pinpointing Trends Using
Fundamental Analysis
In This Chapter
▶ Understanding why financial trends are an important aspect of fundamental analysis
▶ Discovering several popular methods to pinpoint trends in a company’s fundamentals
▶ Spotting trends in legal insider trading information and what they indicate
▶ Using computerized screens to help spot notable company and industry trends

P

art of what you’re trying to do, as a fundamental analyst, is to understand what a company’s future might look like. You’re not poring
through all of a company’s financial statements because you enjoy it. Well,
maybe you do. But the end game of all the work you’re putting into fundamental analysis is to try to get an understanding of how profitable companies
might be next year or beyond. That information will, hopefully, help you
determine whether an investment is worth buying.
Monitoring financial trends is an important aspect of trying to forecast a company’s future. Studying how a company has done, while not necessarily an
ironclad predictor of its future, can give you a decent idea of what to expect.
At least it’s a place to start.
This chapter will drill down even further into how you can analyze a company’s historical fundamentals to get a decent expectation for the future.
Specifically, you will examine how to build a long-term index-number trend
analysis and a moving average analysis. You’ll also discover whether insiders
are signaling a trend by either buying or selling shares of their companies’
stock. And lastly, you’ll get an introduction into computerized stock screening
tools, popular databases used by fundamental analysts to find investments
that might have potential and be worth more study.

24 506455-ch17.indd 267

9/24/09 10:40:28 PM

268 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Understanding Why to Consider Trends
Historians like to say that while history may not repeat itself, it definitely
rhymes. And that’s the same idea when it comes to searching for trends, or
patterns, in a company’s fundamentals. Companies that experience high profitability and have large barriers to entry are often able to protect themselves
against the ravages of competition and deliver solid results to investors
over time. Fundamental analysts who track a company’s long-term record,
or trend, can then get a decent estimate of what the future might hold. Trend
analysis, therefore, can be a key part of fundamental analysis.
Businesses that are very difficult, or very costly, to start up from scratch are
said to have high barriers to entry. Barriers to entry might also be the regulatory hurdles that must be cleared before a new company can get into business. Another barrier might be the existence of a company in the field with a
dominant brand name or technology. Companies that enjoy barriers to entry
tend to have financials that are more stable and predictable, since competition
is less of a threat.

When trends can be very telling
about a company’s future
Everyone has a bad day once in a while, if not a bad month or even year. The
same goes for companies. It’s not uncommon for a company to hit a rough
patch, perhaps due to an unexpected economic slowdown. A company’s net
income or revenue or both might take a big hit in any given year.
But when is a bad year something to get worried about? Investors who don’t
perform trend analysis might make the common error of placing too much
focus on the latest data from a company. If a company reports a bad quarter,
for instance, some investors might rush to conclusions and assume it’s game
over for the company, and its profits are about to go into free fall.
Trend analysis can save you from myopic and short-term thinking. Sometimes
it’s best to consider an example. Rewind back to 2002. Just to refresh your
memory, that year, technology companies were suffering a dramatic downturn
in their business. Technology spending fell off a cliff in 2002 as companies cut
back. Technology stocks started to crash in 2000 and continued falling for
years as investors figured the industry’s best days were over.
Oracle, a dominant maker of corporate software, wasn’t spared by the tech
downturn. After years of delivering strong profit growth, Oracle stunned
investors on June 18, 2002 with uncharacteristically weak financial results for
the fiscal year ending May 31, 2002. The company posted operating income,
or income excluding one-time charges and taxes, of $3.6 billion. That was a

24 506455-ch17.indd 268

9/24/09 10:40:28 PM

Chapter 17: Pinpointing Trends Using Fundamental Analysis

269

decline of 5.5% from the $3.8 billion the company posted in fiscal 2001. Some
investors, buying into the tech-is-dead argument, didn’t like what they saw.
But fundamental analysts who took the time to examine Oracle’s long-term
trend were unfazed. If anything, 2002 results were the anomaly, a disruption
in what had been many years of steady growth. By studying Oracle’s previous
five years of operating income, fundamental analysts saw the company had
grown by an compound annual growth rate, or CAGR, of 30.6% between fiscal
1997 (ended May 31, 1997) and fiscal 2001 (ended May 31, 2001). Table 17-1
below shows how steady Oracle’s operating income had been leading up to
the 2002 slowdown.

Table 17-1

Oracle’s Steady-As-She-Goes Results

Fiscal year

Operating income
($ millions)

1997

$1,299.8

1998

1,411.3

1999

1,872.9

2000

3,080

2001

3,777

Source: Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ

Hopefully you’re wondering how I just calculated the CAGR, because I’m about
to show you. CAGR is calculated using the same present value formula you discovered in Chapter 11, just rearranged a bit. The formula looks like:
CAGR = (Last amount / starting amount) ^ (1 / number of years)
Yikes. I know what you’re thinking: That’s one ugly-looking formula. You’re
right: it’s not going to win any beauty contests. But using the Oracle data as
an example, it won’t be so bad. All you need to know is the:
✓ Last amount: This is the financial result for the latest year that you’re
studying. For Oracle, this is operating income for fiscal 2001, or $3,777.
✓ Starting amount: Here is the starting financial amount. For Oracle, this
is operating income for fiscal 1997, or $1,299.8.
✓ Number of years: The sum of the years you’re calculating the average
return. This is a little tricky. While we’re analyzing five years of Oracle’s
financial history, there are really only four full years of growth: from 1997
to 1998, from 1998 to 1999, from 1999 to 2000 and from 2000 to 2001.
