
F I G U R E

6 - 1

Equity Curves for Each Model and Moving Average Combination

slope-based models (Curves 5 through S), although this reflects a larger number of
trades, not greater losses on a per trade basis.
TESTS OF COUNTER-TREND MODELS
As with trend-following models, countertrend models vary in the moving averages
used, the rules that generate signals, and the orders posted to effect entry. The
same moving averages used in the trend-following models are studied here. Both
single and dual moving average models are examined. Entry orders studied are the
market-at-open, stop, and limit.
Tests 25 through 36 evaluate the standard moving average crossover model
turned upside-down. As before, entry signals occur when prices cross the average,
or when a shorter average crosses a longer one. In traditional trend-following
crossover models, the trader buys when the price (or a shorter moving average)
crosses above a longer moving average, and sells when it crosses below. In the
contrarian crossover model, the trader sells when prices cross above, and buys
when prices cross below. In these tests, brute force optimization was performed on
the in-sample data by stepping the length of the shorter moving average from 1 to
7, in increments of 1; the longer moving average was stepped from 5 to 50, in

increments of 5. Only cases where the longer moving average was longer than the
shorter moving average were considered. The parameters minimized the probability that any observed profitable performance was due to chance. The model was
run on the out-of-sample data using the best parameter set found in-sample.
In tests of the support/resistance model (37 through 48), the trader buys when
prices bounce off a moving average from above, and sells when they hit a moving
average from below. In this way, the moving average serves as a line of support or
resistance where prices tend to reverse. The rules are almost the same as for Tests 25
through 36, except that not every penetration of a moving average results in an entry.
If prices are above the moving average and penetrate it, a buy is generated; however, when prices bounce back up through the moving average, the second crossover
is not allowed to trigger a sell. If prices arc below the moving average and rise into
it, a sell is triggered, no buy is triggered when the prices bounce back down. This
behavior is achieved by adding one element to the contrarian crossover model: A signal is generated only if it is in the direction of the slope of the slower moving average. Performance was brute force optimized on the in-sample data by stepping the
length of the shorter moving average from 1 to 5, in increments of 1, and the longer
moving average from 5 to 50, in increments of 5. A moving average length of 1
caused the shorter moving average to become equivalent to the prices; therefore, in
the optimization, the model in which prices were compared to the moving average
was tested, as was the model in which one moving average was compared to anotb
er. Only cases where the longer moving average was strictly longer than the shorter
moving average were examined. The parameters were chosen to minimize the probability that any profitable performance was due to chance. The model was then run
on the out-of-sample data using the best parameter set found in-sample.
Tables 6-4 and 6-5 show, for Tests 25 through 48, the commodities that the
model traded profitably and those that lost, in-sample (Table 6-4) and out-of-sample (Table 6-S). The plus and dash symbols may be interpreted in the same manner as for Tables 6-1 and 6-2.
Table 6-6 provides the results broken down by the moving average, model,
order, and sample. The last two columns on the right, and the last four rows of
numbers on the bottom, are averages. The numbers at the bottom were averaged
over all combinations of moving average type and model. The numbers at the right
were averaged over order type.
Overall, the best models in-sample were the simple moving average support/resistance and the front-weighted triangular average support/resistance. The
simple average support/resistance with a stop order was unique in that it showed
small profits in both samples: an average trade of $227 and a 4.2% retum-onaccount in-sample, $482 per trade and a 14.8% return-on-account out-of-sample.
The front-weighted triangular average with the stop was profitable in-sample, but
lost heavily out-of-sample. Both models, especially when combined with a stop,
had relatively few trades: consequently, the results are less statistically stable.

T A B L E

6 - 4

In-Sample Performance Broken Down by Test and Market

Overall, in-sample, the stop order was best for contrarian crossovers and for support/resistance models, in which the stop led to an average profitable result, and
the other two orders led to losses; the market-at-open was the worst order. Out-ofsample, the market-at-open order was still, overall, worst for both the contrarian
crossover and the support/resistance models; the limit was best. There were much
greater losses out-of-sample than in-sample for both models.
The countertrend models pertormed less well than the trend-following ones;
however, there were outstanding combinations of counter-trend model, average we,
and entry order that performed far better than most other combinations tested.
On the basis of the moving average and breakout results, it appears that,
with trend-following models, a limit order almost always helps performance; for

Out-of-Sample Performance Broken Down by Test and Market

countertrend models, a stop sometimes provides an extra edge. This tendency
might result from trend-following models already having a trend detection element: Adding another detection or verification element (such as an entry on a
stop) is redundant, offering no significant benefit; however, the addition of a limit
order provides a countertrend element and a cheaper entry, thus enhancing performance. With countertrend models, the addition of a trend verification element
provides something new to the system and, therefore, improves the results.
Sometimes it is so beneficial that it compensates for the less favorable entry
prices that normally occur when using stops.
On a market-by-market basis, model-order combinations that were strongly
profitable in both samples could be found for T-Bonds, JO-Year Notes, Japanese

Summary of Countertrend Moving Average Entry M o d e l s B r o k e n
Down by Order, Moving Average Type, Model, and Sample

Yen, Deutschemark, Swiss Franc, Light Crude, Unleaded Gasoline, Coffee,
Orange Juice, and Pork Bellies.
Figure 6-2 depicts equity curves broken down by model and moving average
combination; equity was averaged over order type. The best two models were the
front-weighted triangular average support/resistance and the simple average support/resistance. The best support/resistance models performed remarkably better
than any of the contrarian crossover models. There were three eras of distinct
behavior: the beginning of the sample until October 1987, October 1987 until June
1991, and June 1991 through December 1998, the end of the sample. The worst
performance was in the last period.

FIGURE

6-P

Equity Curves by Model and Moving Average Combination

--sM&CC
----EM*-CC
---mc
-~-~AMAZC
. . . . ..*M*-8a
-FwnA&sR
1

On the basis of the equity curves in Figure 6-2, as well as others not
shown, it is evident that the countertrend models were better in the past, while
the trend-following models performed better in recent times. In-sample, the
stop order was best for every model-average combination, and, out-of-sample,
for three of the six (two combinations had no trades so were not considered);
entry at the open was worst in all but two cases. The stop was generally superior to the limit order, in-sample; out-of-sample, the limit was only marginally
better than the stop.
CONCLUSION
In general, the trend-following models in Tests 1 through 24 performed better than
the countertrend models in Tests 25 through 48, with a number of exceptions discussed above.
The best models apparently are those that combine both countertrend and
trend-following elements. For example, attempting to buy on a retracement with
a limit, after a moving average crossover or breakout, provides better results than
other combinations. In the countertrend moving average models, those that have

a trend-following element (e.g.. a stop) perform better. Pure countertrend models
and pure trend-following models do not fare as well. Moreover, adding a trendfollowing filter to an already trend-following system does not seem beneficial,
but may instead increase entry cost. Traders should try combining one of these
countertrend models with something like the ADX trend filter. Although the ADX
filter may not have helped breakouts (because, liethe stop, it represents another trend-following element added to an already trend-following model), in a
countertrend model such an element may provide an edge. As true with break
outs, the limit order performed best, except when the stop was beneficial due to
its trend filtering characteristics,
The results suggest certain generalizations. Sometimes a stop can provide
enough benefit to overcome the extra transaction costs associated with it, although
a limit order generally performs best because of its ability to reduce costs. While
such a generalization might help guide a trader’s choices, one has to watch for
potential interactions within the moving average type-model-order combinations
that may cause these generalizations to fail. The variables interact: Although each
variable may have its own characteristic effect, when put in combination with
other variables, these effects may not maintain their integrity, but may change due
to the coupling; this is demonstrated in the tests above. Sometimes variables do
maintain their integrity, but not always.
WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED?
. When designing an entry model, try to effectively combine a countertrend
element with a trend-following one. This may be done in any number of
ways, e.g., buy on a short-term countertrend move when a longer-term
trend is in progress; look for a breakout when a countertrend move is in
progress; or apply a trend-following filter to a countertrend model.
n If possible, use orders that reduce transaction costs, e.g., a limit order for
entry. But do not be rigid: Certain systems might perform better using
another kind of order, e.g., if a trend-following element is needed, a stop
might be advisable.
n Expect surprises. For the slope-based models, we thought the adaptive,
moving average, with its faster response, would provide the best performance; in fact, it provided one of the worst.
. Even though traditional indicators, used in standard ways, usually fail (as
do such time-honored systems as volatility breakouts), classical concepts
like suppoa/resistance may not fail; they may actually be quite useful. In
breakouts, models based on the notion of support/resistance held up better than did, e.g., volatility breakouts. Likewise, moving average models

using the concept of support/resistance did better than others. The support/resistance implementation was rudimentary, yet, in the best combination, it was one of the best performers; perhaps a more sophisticated
version could provide a larger number of more profitable trades.
Although support/resistance seems to be an important concept, further
research on it will not be easy. There are many variations to consider
when defining levels of support and resistance. Determining those levels
can be quite challenging, especially when doing so mechanically.

C H A P T E R

7

Oscillator-Based Entries

0.scdlators have been popular among technical traders for many years. Articles
that describe oscillators appear quite frequently in such magazines as Technical
and Futures. The subject is also covered in

Analysis of Stocks and Commodities
many books on uading.

Most widely used, in both their classic forms and variations, are Appel’s
(1990) Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD) oscillator and MACDHistogram (MACD-H). Also highly popular are Lane’s Stochastic, and Williams’s
Relative Strength Index (RSI). Many variations on these oscillators have also
appeared in the literature. Other oscillators include Lambert’s Commodities
Channel Index (CCI), the Random Walk Index (which might be considered an
oscillator), and Goedde’s (1997) Regression Channel Oscillator. In this chapter,
the primary focus is on the three most popular oscillators: the MACD, Stochastic&
and the RSI.
WHAT IS AN OSCILLATOR?

An oscillator is an indicator that is usually computed from prices and that tends to
cycle or “oscillate” (hence the name) within a fixed or fairly limited range.
Oscillators are characterized by the normalization of range and the elimination of
long-term trends or price levels. Oscillators extract information about such transient phenomena as momentum and overextension. Momentum is when prices
move strongly in a given direction. Overextension occurs when prices become
excessively high or low (“overbought” or “oversold”) and are ready to snap back
to more reasonable values.

KINDS

OF

OSCILLATORS

