
The Turtles

39

whether or not he got the job because he had “this great conversation
with people that were incredibly intelligent.” Dennis and Eckhardt
peppered Cavallo with questions. They asked him how much he knew
about markets, on a scale of a zero to one hundred. He recalled, “I
answered, ‘sixty,’ being not just an interview gamesmanship response,
just the kind of response where I thought I was at.”
Later, Dennis liked to tell the story that he had asked that question
of everybody and that Curtis Faith had replied “ninety-nine” and Liz
Cheval had replied “one.” Dennis always fondly said, “I hired both of
them because that way I ﬁgured I had everything that you could know
about commodities.”
There was obviously no way you could second-guess what answers
Dennis was looking for. And let’s face it; The odds were stacked against
potential students if they gave pat “Harvard Business School graduate”
responses. Cavallo knew in the Fortune 500 world that people would
not get a job answering the way Faith and Cheval did. As he commented, “A lot of places would say, ‘Oh well, this guy is too arrogant
and he thinks he knows more than he does and he’s headed for a fall.’
And they might say, ‘She’s too timid.’ But in fact, certain things that
they liked most other places wouldn’t necessarily like.”
On the other hand, Mike Carr’s answer to Dennis’s question about
what person he admired the most could easily have been interpreted as
politically incorrect. Carr recalled, “I remember Rich asking me, ‘Why
Rommel?’ I was the only one who cited Field Marshal Erwin Rommel,
the famed ‘Desert Fox,’ as the person from history I most admired. Despite being a German general during the Second World War, he was
not a Nazi. Most telling of all, he was highly respected by military men
on both sides, as a general and as a man.”
After the interview was over, Mike Cavallo was the only Turtle to
mention that he was on to the clever ploy that the interview didn’t end
after he left the room. After the interview, Dale Dellutri took Cavallo
to the elevator and said, “Well, how did it go?” Cavallo told him how
great he thought the interview was, but he quickly realized that question was part of the interview itself: “I said I liked Rich and Bill so
much. Whereas other people might have said, ‘Oh God, they really put
me through the ringer’ or something like that.”
The Dennis brain trust was showing their hand. You had to play

40

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

their “game.” The elevator ﬁlter must have eliminated students from
the process who otherwise would have made it. That’s brutal. Perhaps,
as they read this, former interviewees who did not make the cut will
realize that when they said something foolish to Dale Dellutri at the
elevator, it was at that point that they were eliminated from the candidate pool. No one ever said life was fair.
Mike Cavallo was under no false illusion and knew that obvious
candidates with his type of résumé were not what Dennis had in mind.
He was surprised that he was even in the running. At the end of the day,
Dennis and Eckhardt ﬁgured too many Cavallos and Rabars would
have too many bad habits to unlearn.
Those who think a Harvard MBA is the only ticket to business success, wake up. Cavallo was the exception, not the rule. Dennis and
Eckhardt clearly believed that hiring all Harvard MBAs would have
been a bust.
All these potential students saw the interview process from different
vantage points. Jeff Gordon thought the selection process came down
to a “games” aptitude: “I didn’t have a résumé at the time so I wrote
him a letter that indicated that I had spent more time playing chess
than attending law school. The funny thing is my girlfriend read the
letter and said, ‘You can’t say that!’ I said, ‘No, that’s not true, Rich
Dennis is a different kind of guy, I think he’ll be looking for people who
are a little bit different.’ ”
During his interview, Gordon was logically assuming that he had a
lot to learn from Dennis and Eckhardt, but they said to him. “Well, you
might actually be disappointed.” Dennis was worth hundreds of millions at the time, yet he was self-deprecating and humble.
Mike Carr’s previous job for Dungeons and Dragons may have been
the key to convincing the C&D brain trust to hire him because both
Dale Dellutri and William Eckhardt said their sons enjoyed playing
the game and, as Carr commented, “I knew that couldn’t hurt!” That
said, Carr had no real idea of Dennis’s style of trading and fumbled
through parts of the interview. He recalled, “Richard Dennis was renowned as a technical trader, but I wasn’t aware of that at the time.”
During the interview, he had asked Dennis, “Do you trade technically
or fundamentally?” Dennis replied, “We trade technically.” Carr then

The Turtles

41

said, “Is fundamental trading dead?” Dennis sarcastically shot back,
“We hope not.”
Jim DiMaria, the relative insider already working for Dennis as a
broker, knew the importance of his hometown for his trading ambitions: “It’s just part of the ﬁber of Chicago. If I were from Baltimore or
Los Angeles. I probably would never have done anything like this.” 9
But before DiMaria was ever picked for the experiment, he knew he
ultimately wanted to be the person making the trading decisions, not
just someone else’s ﬂoor broker.10 He had to ﬁnd a way to get there, and
Dennis’s experiment was it. DiMaria, however, was completely bamboozled by the selection process: “For whatever reason I was selected.
I don’t know if anyone knows why they were selected. I’ve heard that
some of the people from Rich’s entourage were selected as a control
group. Like let’s just grab this guy. Like maybe me? I don’t know.”
All the prospective students knew the chance of a lifetime was staring them in the face whether or not they understood exactly what they
were getting into. For example, near the end of her interview, when she
realized she might be making a good impression, Liz Cheval’s knees
went weak: “I couldn’t have gotten through the interview, had I known
[it might work out; it was] like winning the job lottery.” 11 She was conﬁdent in the interview because she couldn’t believe she had gotten that
far. She knew her worst-case scenario if selected was that her résumé
would be enhanced by even a few weeks spent under Dennis’s tutelage.
There was nothing to lose.
All in all, the hiring process was far from headhunter precise. Dennis and Eckhardt had no formal training in job recruitment or in developing questionnaires designed to select those people most able and
ready to learn. It was one thing for them to trade and make fortunes,
but it was a very different thing to execute a “nature versus nurture”
experiment with live human beings.
The Turtle Contract
Once accepted into Dennis’s program, Turtles had to adhere to a strict
conﬁdentiality agreement. It was titled “Synopsis of Contract for Trading Advisor Trainees” and said in part that each participant would have

42

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

a ﬁve-year contract, which could be terminated without notice by Dennis at any time. There was no assurance of staying in the program, but
the agreement did clearly state students would not be held accountable
for losses that they might generate trading Dennis’s money: “The
trainee will not be obligated to repay advances, which are not covered
by earned performance fees, nor will the trainee be liable for losses due
to adverse trading performance.” And for those students thinking ahead
about how to get-rich-quick now that they had Dennis’s “secrets,” the
agreement had no ﬂexibility. During the term of the contract they were
prohibited from trading for their own account and prohibited from
trading for anyone other than Dennis. The agreement went on to
clearly preclude competing against Dennis or disclosing any conﬁdential or proprietary information the participants might learn. Lastly, at
the end of the agreement all students were prohibited from disclosing
Dennis’s proprietary trading methods for another ﬁve years.
For those with a legal background, this agreement could have been
a deal-breaker. That said, no one declined to join the Turtle program
even though there were no real guarantees and many potential restrictions on their future activity. Once the agreement was signed, the Turtles headed off to class.
Chicago was a different place when the Turtles entered class in January 1984. Harry Caray was the announcer at Wrigley Field, and Ryne
Sandberg’s rookie year was underway. The Apple Macintosh had just
been introduced, and Hulk Hogan defeated The Iron Sheik for the
World Wrestling Federation Championship. Politically, Dennis would
be very unhappy with Reagan heading toward a landslide defeat of
Mondale.
In the context of that world, the lucky few chosen to learn how to
trade for big money still had to absorb trading rules that would have
made investors like Warren Buffett cringe. There would be no buying
and holding, or buying low and selling high. What they were about to
learn was the antithesis of what was and still is taught in ﬁnance departments at the world’s ﬁnest universities. Run this story by a college ﬁnance professor today and take note of his reactions.

The Turtles

43

The Classroom
If Dennis had been worth only $100,000 at the time of the experiment,
would the Turtles have listened as intently? No. Dennis knew the Turtles were the “dumb stumps” and that the only reason that they bought
into everything was that he had made $200 million.
If he said, “On Monday, you will buy the S&P 500 stock index when
it’s up exactly 35 ticks no matter what’, all of the Turtles would have
gone over a cliff to follow orders. One Turtle said that when a guy has
made $200 million and he says, ‘You can walk on water’, people are
going to say, ‘Okay I can walk on water.’ You have just crossed that unbelievable emotional hump that we all have in our brains.”
Crossing the “emotional hump,” whether in trading or baseball, is
reaching that point at which you are intellectually and emotionally
challenged and respond by saying, “I can do it.” Between Dennis’s
reputation and the self-conﬁdence that came from being chosen from
over a thousand applicants, the Turtles crossed that hump with ease.
The bottom line was that two trading superstars had selected them as
students. Motivation was a given.
That same kind of aura surrounded Jim Leyland, manager of the
2006 pennant-winning Detroit Tigers baseball team. This was a team
that only a few years prior had lost over a hundred games in one
year—a horrendous record. But now they had a manager, Leyland, in
whom everyone believed. There wasn’t a Detroit Tiger who didn’t
suddenly feel like he could deliver in the clutch. “If I walk in there
tomorrow and ﬁnd my name and I’m batting cleanup, I’d expect to
get a hit,” pitcher Todd Jones said. And, of course, pitchers are not
counted on to hit!
The Turtles had the same attitude. The two weeks of training consisted of Dennis and Eckhardt ﬁguratively yelling “jump” and the Turtles responding, “How high?” However, years of legend-building have
made the entire process of the Turtles’ training sound a great deal more
elegant and sophisticated than it really was.
They were put up in the Union League Club in downtown Chicago. Mike Cavallo described it as “sort of one of those old-fashioned
fancy clubs where there were elderly people dozing under their newspaper.”

44

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

He was not exaggerating. Tom Willis and I tried to have lunch
there in 2006, but were asked to leave because I was wearing jeans. The
Union League Club remains an old-world bastion for those who made
their market fortunes way back when. With dark wood paneling, worn
Oriental carpets, and leather-upholstered furniture, and staffed by elderly union workers moving in slow motion, it is well past its prime.
Clearly, not much had changed at the club since the Turtles walked
in the door. That Richard Dennis should belong to such a club in 1983
was amusing given how anti-establishment he was. However, he was
simply being practical, because the club was close to the Chicago
Board of Trade and C&D Commodities’ ofﬁces.
The Turtles spent their two weeks of training at the Union League
Club as well. They all had to wear a jacket and tie at all times—including Dennis. Only half of the more than two dozen students in the training room were Turtles, if you deﬁned Turtles as those students who
would trade only Dennis’s money. It was HBO’s hit show Entourage
for sure.
Right before training began the Turtles attended a welcoming party,
since Dennis liked to throw lavish cocktail parties during the Christmas holidays. The newcomers got a glimpse of what passed for Dennis’s
Chicago social scene and had the chance to meet each other. But the
party did little to assuage the jitters. The ﬁrst day of training had many
feeling the stomach clutch of starting grade school all over again. They
walked into the classroom fully unnerved.
Richard Dennis, William Eckhardt, and Dale Dellutri handled the
training the same way they had managed the interview process. It turns
out that the C&D Commodities brain trust had met each other at
St. Laurence Catholic High School. As fate would have it, they became
close friends only because they were seated in alphabetical order.
On the ﬁrst day of Turtle class you could hear a pin drop. Palpable
excitement was in the air. The possibility of making money like Dennis
had everyone jacked. The ﬁrst hours consisted of Dellutri discussing
how things would work procedurally and laying out “housekeeping”
matters for people who had never traded.
Dellutri was assigned the role of Turtle “team mom.” He encouraged the Turtles to ask questions during class, but few did at the outset.
To everyone’s disappointment, Dennis was not there during that ﬁrst

The Turtles

45

class. Instead, it was Eckhardt who launched into the challenge of
“managing risk” as the ﬁrst topic.
Managing risk was not what new traders would assume as a logical
starting point. That Eckhardt would choose to begin with risk management was the ﬁrst indication that the Turtles were starting an unconventional journey. Instead of introducing the course with a lecture on
making money, he was laying the foundation for what the students had
to do when they lost money.
Another C&D colleague, Robert Moss, was brought in on several
occasions to discuss order execution. He wanted the class to understand what really was going on in the pit when their orders went in. “I
think Bill and Rich wanted them to have a pretty good understanding
given that some of them had never really been involved in the industry
before,” he said.
Once the students were past the initial jitters there was some give
and take, with questions and discussion. However, the class was primarily a lecture with note-taking. The Turtles with experience quickly realized that Dennis and Eckhardt knew far more than they did. Mike
Cavallo said, “A lot of the stuff that they were talking about I knew, but
I had no idea they weighted some stuff at so much more importance.”
Contrary to popular belief among those familiar with the Turtle experiment, Dennis’s absence that ﬁrst day of class was not an aberration.
William Eckhardt taught the Turtles a great deal of what they learned
during those two weeks in the classroom (there was only one week of
training the second year).
The irony is that while it was Eckhardt who bet against people being
able to learn how to trade, in the classroom he taught much of “the
meat and potatoes.” It was Dennis who added a succession of trading
war stories and anecdotes.
To those who saw them up close, Dennis had the capacity to make
an observation in an instant that would take someone else weeks of
painstaking math to ﬁgure out. Even Eckhardt marveled as Dennis’s
knack to intuitively see “it”: “Look what this means. Look at the deep
axiom in here. It works.” That said, Eckhardt was the mathematical
genius. He was the master of probability. Combining their observations
was the magical mixture.
Mike Shannon saw the importance of their symbiotic relationship:

46

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

“In fact, a lot of the system development wasn’t Richard Dennis. It was
indeed Bill Eckhardt. They both hatched it up between them and
they’re both certainly responsible for it.”
To many it seemed Eckhardt was along for the ride, appreciating the
Turtle experiment from a psychological point of view, but he deﬁnitely
wanted his credit for the Turtles after it was over. Today, his regulatory
disclosures emphasize that he “co-developed” the systems “co-taught”
to the Turtles. Without Eckhardt, there would have been no Turtles.
Mike Cavallo thought there was a more important, though subtle,
aspect in their collaboration: “Bill did a lot of the real mathematical
work on developing the systems. I think he didn’t have Rich’s trading
genius, which is why I think in their discussion, he thought the trading
genius was the main part whereas Rich thought the system was the
main part.”
To this day, Eckhardt has had a terriﬁc trading career. He has arguably achieved much greater wealth over the long term than Dennis.
His hedge fund is now near $800 million USD. Yet when Eckhardt and
Dennis ﬁrst started working together, Dennis was the one who had
made the fortune trading and Eckhardt was the original Turtle learning
from him.
It was clear to Mike Shannon that Dennis had a massive head start
over Eckhardt in terms of wealth and trading experience. He said, “Bill
was more inclined at the time to intellectually pursue the concept of
trading more so than he was in it for serious ﬁnancial gain.” Over time,
Eckhardt realized that he had to strike a balance between the business
end and the actual trading. Shannon added, “I think Bill probably is
worth more, but once you get over being worth a quarter of a billion
dollars . . .”
Eckhardt always good-naturedly admitted that he had lost the nurture-versus-nature battle, in which he had taken the point of view that
their systems could not be taught to kids off the street: “I assumed that
a trader added something that couldn’t be encapsulated in a mechanical program. I was proven wrong. By and large, [the Turtles] learned to
trade exceedingly well. The answer to the question of whether trading
can be taught has to be an unqualiﬁed yes.” 12 He also scoffed at the
argument that the Turtles’ success was based on sheer luck: “The prob-

The Turtles

47

ability of experiencing the kind of success that we have had and continue to have by chance alone has to be near zero. The systems worked
for us year after year. We taught some of these systems to others, and it
worked for them. They then managed other people’s money, and
it worked again.” He acknowledged the possibility that their achievement could have been the result of luck, but he saw the probability of
that being inﬁnitesimally small.13
Nor did Eckhardt buy into the inﬁnite monkey theorem that says out
of the millions of monkeys in the world, one, simply by randomly hitting the keyboard, would eventually produce the collected works of
Shakespeare. To this day, many regularly push the notion that successes
such as Eckhardt and the Turtles were simply the lucky survivors from
the whole monkey population.
Some critics have attempted to explain away the Turtles as a careful
selection of very smart students. Michael Cavallo, after all, could play
ﬁve people at once at chess while blindfolded and beat them fast. He
exempliﬁed the fact that brainpower wasn’t lacking in the C&D ofﬁce.
Eckhardt disagreed, saying that he had not seen much correlation between good trading and intelligence:
Some outstanding traders are quite intelligent, but a few aren’t.
Many outstandingly intelligent people are horrible traders. Average intelligence is enough. Beyond that, emotional makeup is
more important. This is not rocket science. However, it’s much
easier to learn what you should do in trading than to do it.14
Eckhardt was saying that, as with anything in life, most people know
what the right thing to do is but fail to do it. Trading is no different.
Dennis’s partner and right-hand man personally learned how hard it
was to do the right thing as an early acolyte of Dennis—just like the
many other young traders in Chicago during the 1970s. His galvanizing experience with Dennis was on the morning of November 1, 1978.
President Carter was trying to halt a sinking U.S. dollar. It was a lesson
in “emotional fortitude” forever etched in Eckhardt’s memory.
There was a rate hike and intervention in the currency markets—not
good news for Dennis and Eckhardt, who held large long positions in

48

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

gold, foreign currencies, and the grains. The markets collapsed on the
open. Gold opened below the $10-an-ounce trading limit, so they could
not exit. Silver, though down sharply, was still trading. The Comex in
New York told them they could still trade it. So they started selling silver “short,” aiming to proﬁt as it decreased in order to protect themselves against further losses from the gold. But they were also concerned
that silver might rally. Decisions had to be made, and fast. There was a
lot at stake.15
Dennis asked Eckhardt calmly, “What should we do?” Eckhardt
panicked and froze at the controls. Dennis shorted silver and seconds
later it was limit down, too (a big winner). Eckhardt enthused, “In my
book that was Rich’s best trade ever because he did it under maximum
duress. If he hadn’t done it, we both would have been bankrupted by
the subsequent slide in gold.” 16
One Turtle gushed in awe that Dennis still had the “balls” to execute
that trade “when they were dumb, deaf, and broke”: “They were going
the wrong way and for Dennis to just totally cover and totally reverse
was amazing. He was one of the few people who could pull the trigger
on big numbers and pull the trigger intelligently. There are some people that just go nuts and they melt down. Especially when they’re on
the wrong side of the trade and it’s going to send them to the poor
house.”
Many people can trade small amounts day in and day out and not
worry about losing money. But as the size of their trading is increased,
say by 100 percent, their trading decisions become more signiﬁcant
and problematic. They begin to think about how much they’re winning or losing, and it becomes harder to keep a level head about trading “big.” Emotions rise to the surface, and objectivity becomes harder
and harder to maintain. Disassociating the dollars from the trading was
a huge part of what was instilled in the Turtles.
Robert Moss saw the qualities in Dennis that allowed that silver
trade to happen: “There are some people who can trade one lot or two
lots or a ﬁve lot and handle that position and perform not thinking
about the money.” Moss had never seen anybody better. Tom R. Willis, the son of Tom Willis and close enough to Dennis to consider him
an uncle, said that Dennis simply had a sense of proportion that
was different from the rest of the world’s: “When he perceived that
