
249

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

Sampling
Distribution
of the Mean

)

•

Means
&

I

90% Confidence
Intervals
for
10 Independent
Samples

confidence Intervals
Derived from
Sampling Distribution

•

I

.:

I
1-1---4••:--II
I

•
•
•
•

•

u
FIGURE 5.20 The connection between the confidence interval and the sampling
distribution.

Hypothesized
Value
Population
Parameter

Mean Return
in
Historical Sample

Sampling Distribution
Positioned for
Hypothesis Test

Sampling Distribution
Positioned for
Confidence Interval

0%
FIGURE 5.21

7%

The sampling distribution positioned for a hypothesis test and
positioned for a confidence interval.

250 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
method has nothing to do with estimating the value of a population parameter or testing a claim made about its value. As previously mentioned,
the Monte Carlo permutation method tests a claim about the information
content of the rule's signals. Specifically, the Ho asserted under the Monte
Carlo permutation method is that the long and short positions dictated by
the rule are devoid of useful information about future market changes. Because there is no reference to a population parameter (e.g;, mean rule return) there is nothing to create a confidence interval for!
The bootstrap percentile procedure for constructing the confidence
intervals works as follows: Suppose the rule's returns have been resampled 5,000 times and a mean is computed for each resample. This would
result in 5,000 different values for the resampled mean return. We know
that because of sampling variability, these means will differ. Next suppose
that the set of 5,000 values is arranged in rank order from highest mean to
lowest. Then, depending on the confidence interval desired, the highest x
percent and lowest >x percent of values are removed from the ordered
list, where

x = 100 - Confidence Interval Desired
2

So if a 90 percent confidence interval is desired, one would remove
the highest 5 percent and the lowest 5 percent of the values in the 5,000 resampled means. This would require removing the highest 250 and the 250
lowest values of the resampled mean. After these extreme values are removed, the highest remaining resampled mean would be the upper bound
of the 90 percent confidence interval and the lowest remaining resampled
mean is the lower bound.The 99 percent confidence interval would result
by removing only the highest 25 (top .5 percent) and the lowest 25 (bottom .5 percent) from the set of 5,000 resampled means comprising the
sampling distribution.
Hypothesis Tests versus Confidence Intervals: "otential ConDiet. Some astute readers may have envisioned a problem. It is possible

for a hypothesis test and a confidence interval to lead to different conclusions about a rule's expected return. This prospect stems from the fact
that a hypothesis test focuses on the right tail of the sampling distribution
whereas the confidence interval focuses on the left tail of the sampling
distribution. This means it is possible for the lower bound of a 90 percent
confidence interval to imply that there is a 5 percent probability that a
rule's expected return is less than zero, while a hypothesis test conducted
at the .05 significance level rejects Ho' In other words, it is possible for the

251

Hvpothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

confidence interval to tell us that the rule does not have predictive power
while the hypothesis tells us that it does. In theory, the hypothesis test
and the confidence interval should come to the same conclusion on this
issue. That is to say, if the lower bound of a 90 percent confidence interval tells us that the rule's expected return is less than 0 percent, then a
hypothesis test at the .05 significance level would presumably not reject
the null hypothesis.
Conflicting conclusions can arise when the sampling distribution is
not symmetrical (i.e., is skewed to the right or left). This is illustrated in
Figure 5.22. The sampling distribution, which is clearly skewed to the left,
is shown in two positions. In the lower portion of Figure 5.22, the sampling distribution is positioned as it would be for conducting a test of Ho'
Because less than 5 percent of the sampling distribution's right tail lies
above the mean return of the back-tested rule, the test indicates the rule is
significant at the .05 level. In other words, Ho can be rejected in favor of
the alternative hypothesis, HA , that claims the rule has an expected return
that is greater than zero.
The upper portion of Figure 5.22 shows the sampling distribution as
it would be positioned to construct a 90 percent confidence interval using the bootstrap percentile method. Note that the lower bound of the
confidence interval is below a zero rate of return. This tells us there is
greater than a .05 probability that the rule's true rate of return is less
than zero. In other words, the 90 percent confidence interval leads to a
conclusion that is opposite to the conclusion of the hypothesis test. The

Mean Back-Test Return
Historical Sample
Lower Bound
90% Confidence
Interval Below 0

Sampling Distribution
Positioned for
Confidence Interval

Sampling
Distribution
Positioned for
Test of
Null Hypothesis

Less than .05
of Sampling Distribution
Above Mean Return

o
FIGURE 5.22
dence interval.

10

Potentially conflicting conclusions: hypothesis test versus confi-

252 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

figure shows that the ambiguity is due to the asymmetrical shape of the
sampling distribution.
Fortunately this problem does not afflict the research conducted in
this book, which uses the sample mean as a performance statistic. The
all-important Central Limit Theorem assures us that the sampling distribution of the mean will not be seriously skewed (asymmetrical) as long
as the sample size is large. To recap, the Central Limit Theorem tells us
that, as sample size increases, the sampling distribution of the mean
tends toward a symmetrical bell shape. Other performance statistics
may not behave this way. In situations where the sampling distribution
is not symmetrical, there are bootstrap techniques, which involve pivoting the sampling distribution to alleviate this problem. Unfortunately,
these other methods can have problems of their own. In any case, this
all makes the mean return an attractive performance statistic to use in
rule testing.
Confidence Intel'Vals fol' the '1"1~4·91 Itllie.

This section gives an
example of the confidence interval for the rule TT-4-91. Figure 5.23 shows
the 80 percent confidence interval superimposed on the bootstrapped

0.1 2 r - - - - - - - - - - - - - , - - - - , - - - - - - - - - - ,
. - - 80%--+
0.10
0.08 -------------------------------------------------------------------0.06 -----------------------------------------------------------------0.04 ------------------------------------------------------------

0.02 ------------------.--..----..--.--..- ----

-0.15
FIGURE 5.23
rule TT-4·91 .

-0.10

-0.05

--..

o

0.05

0.10

0.15

Sampling distribution and 80 percent confidence interval for

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

253

sampling distribution positioned at the rule's observed back-tested return
of +4.84 percent. The lower bound of the 80 percent confidence interval is
+0.62 percent. The upper bound is +9.06 percent. This tells us that if rule
TT-4-91 were to be back tested on 100 independent samples of data and an
80 percent confidence interval were to be placed around the mean return
in each sample, in approximately 80 of the samples, the true expected return of the rule would be enclosed by the confidence interval.

Data-Mining
Bias: The Fool's
Gold of
Objective TA

n rule data mining, many rules are back tested and the rule with the best
observed performance is selected. That is to say, data mining involves a
perfonnance competition that leads to a winning rule being picked. The
problem is that the winning rule's observed performance that allowed it to
be picked over all other rules systematically overstates how well the rule is
likely to perform in the future. This systematic error is the data-mining bias.
Despite this problem, data mining is a useful research approach. It
can be proven mathematically that, out of all the rules tested, the rule
with the highest observed performance is the rule most likely to do the
best in the future, provided a sufficient number of observations are used
to compute performance statistics. l In other words, it pays to data mine
even though the best rule's observed performance is positively biased.
This chapter explains why the bias occurs, why it must be taken into account when making inferences about the future performance of the best
rule, and how such inferences can be made.
I begin by introducing this somewhat abstract topic with several anecdotes, only one of which is related to rule data mining. They are appetizers
intended to make later material more digestible. Readers who want to start
on the main course immediately may choose to skip to the section titled
"Data Mining."
The following definitions will be used throughout this chapter and are
placed here for the convenience of the reader.

I

• Expected performance: the expected return of a rule in the immediate practical future. This can also be called the true performance of
the rule, which is attributable to its legitimate predictive power.

255

256 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
• Observed performance: the rate of return earned by a rule in a back
test.
• Data-mining bias: the expected difference between the observed
performance of the best rule and its expected performance. Expected
difference refers to a long-run average difference that would be obtained by numerous experiments that measure the difference between the observed return of the best rule and the expected return of
the best rule.
• Data mining: the process of looking for patterns, models, predictive
rules, and so forth in large statistical databases.
• Best rule: the rule with the best observed performance when many
rules are back tested and their performances are compared.
• In-sample data: the data used for data mining (Le., rule back testing).
• Out-of-sample data: data not used in the data mining or back-testing
process.
• Rule universe: the full set of rules back tested in a data mining
venture.
• Universe size: the number of rules comprising the rule universe.

FALLING INTO THE PIT: TALES OF THE
DAm-MINING BIAS
This following account is apocryphal. Some years ago, before I took up
the study of statistics, I was approached by an impresario seeking backers
for a show business venture that he claimed would be enormously profitable. The show was to feature a monkey that could write Shakespearian
prose by dancing on the keyboard of a word processor.
At each show, the literate monkey, whom the promoter had named the
Bard, would be placed at a keyboard and a large screen would display to
an audience what the monkey wrote, as it was being written. Surely, people would rush to see the Bard, and my share of ticket sales would yield a
handsome return on the required investment of $50,000. At least, that was
the promoter's claim. "It can't miss!" was his refrain.
I was intrigued, but wanted some proof that the monkey could actually produce Shakespearian prose. Any investor would. I was given proof
... of a sort. It was what accountants call a cold-comfort letter. The letter
said, "We have examined the Bard's previous works and he has in fact
written the words 'To be or not to be, that is the question.' We are, however, unfamiliar with the circumstances under which these words were
written."
What I really wanted was a live demonstration. Regrettably, my

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Cold of Objective TA

257

request could not be accommodated. The impatient promoter explained
the monkey was temperamental and besides, there were many other
anxious investors clamoring to buy the limited number of shares being
offered. So I seized the opportunity and plunked down $50,000. I was
confident it was just a matter of time before the profits would start
flowing in.
The night of the first show arrived. Carnegie Hall was packed to capacity with a crowd that anxiously awaited the first words. With everyone's eyes glued to the big screen, the Bard's first line of text appeared.
lkasl dlk5jf wo44iuldjs skOek 123pwkdzsdidip'adipjasdopiksd

Things went downhill quickly from there. The audience began
screaming for refunds, I threw up, and the Bard defecated on the keyboard before scampering off the stage. My investment went up in a cloud
of smoke.
What happened? Thinking it unimportant, the promoter failed to
disclose a key fact. The Bard had been chosen from 1,125,385 other
monkeys, all of whom had been given the opportunity to dance on a
keyboard every day for the past 11 years, 4 months, and 5 days. A computer monitored all their gibberish to flag any sequence of letters that
matched anything ever written by Shakespeare. The Bard was the first
monkey to ever do so.
Even in my state of statistical illiteracy, I doubt I would have invested
had I known this. Mere common sense would have told me that chance
alone favored the occurrence of some Shakespearian quote in such a
large mass of nonsense. The freedom to data mine the trillions of letters
generated by an army of monkeys raised the probability of a lucky sequence of letters to a virtual certainty. The Bard was not literate, he was
just lucky.
The fault, Dear Brutus, lay with the sincere but statistically naIve
promoter. He was deluded by the data-mining bias and attributed too
much significance to a result obtained by data mining. Despite my loss,
I've tried not to judge the promoter too harshly. He sincerely believed
that he had found a truly remarkable monkey. He was simply misled by
intuition, a faculty inadequate for evaluating matters statistical and
probabilistic.
By the way, the promoter has kept the Bard as a pet and still allows
him to dance on that once-magical keyboard in hopes of new evidence of
literacy. In the meanwhile, to keep body and soul together, he is now selling technical trading systems developed along similar lines. He has a
throng of dancing monkeys developing rules, some of which seem to work
quite well, in the historical data.

258 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
Proving the Existence of God with Baseball Stats
Collectors of sports statistics have also been seduced by the data-mining
bias. For example, there is Norman Bloom, who concluded that interesting and unusual patterns found in baseball statistics prove the existence
of God. After thousands of searches through his database, the dedicated
data miner found patterns he believed to be so amazing they could only be
explained by a universe made orderly by God.
One of Bloom's patterns was as follows: George Brett, the third baseman for Kansas City, hit his third home run in the third game of the playoffs, to tie the score 3-3. Bloom reasoned that, for the number three to be
connected in so many ways, compelled the conclusion it was the handiwork of God. Another interesting pattern discovered by Bloom had to do
with the stock market: The Dow Jones Industrial Average crossed the
1,000 level 13 times in 1976, miraculously similar to the fact that there
were 13 original colonies that united in 1776 to form the United States.
As pointed out by Ronald Kahn,2 Bloom committed several errors on
the way to his unjustified conclusions. First, he did not understand the
role of randomness and that seemingly rare coincidences are in fact quite
probable if one searches enough. Bloom found his mystical patterns by
evaluating thousands of possible attribute combinations. Second, Bloom
did not specify what constituted an important pattern before he began his
searches. Instead, he took the liberty of using an arbitrary criterion of importance defined after the fact. Whatever struck his fancy as interesting
and unusual was deemed to be important. Kahn points out that one is
guaranteed to discover "interesting" patterns when they are searched for
in such an undisciplined manner.

Discovering Hidden Predictions in
the Old Testament
Even Bible scholars have fallen into the data mining pit. In this instance,
the well intentioned but statistically unsophisticated researchers found
predictions of major world events encoded in the text of the Old Testament. Knowledge of the future would certainly imply that the words had
been inspired by an omniscient Creator. However, there was one small
problem with these predictions, known as Bible Codes. They were always
discovered after the predicted event had taken place. In other words, the
codes predict with 20/20 hindsight. 3
The Bible Codes are clusters of words imbedded in the text that are
discovered by linking together letters separated by a specific number of
intervening spaces or other letters. These constructed words are referred
to as equal letter sequences or ELS. Code researchers grant themselves

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Gold of Objective TA

259

the freedom to try any spacing interval they wish and allow the words
comprising the cluster to be arranged in virtually any configuration so
long as the cluster occurs in what the researcher deems 4 to be a compact
region of the original text. What constitutes a compact region and what
words constitute a prediction are always defined after a code has been
discovered. Note the use of an evaluation criterion defined after the fact.
This is not scientifically kosher.
The Bible Code scholars contend that the occurrence of a code is so
statistically unlikely that it can only be explained by its having been put
there by God. Their fundamental error-the error made by all naive data
miners-is the failure to understand that given enough searching (data
mining), the occurrence of such patterns is actually highly probable. Thus,
it is likely that researchers will find codes that correspond to names,
places, and events of historical importance. For example, the word 1990
in the same region of text as Saddam Hussein and war are not rare
events requiring a metaphysical explanation. However, when found in
1992, after the first Iraq war had taken place, the word pattern seemingly
predicted the 1990 Iraq war. Bear in mind that the words Bush, Iraq, invasion, and desert storm would serve just as nicely as a code that also appears to predict the 1990 Iraq war. Indeed, there are a huge number of
word combinations that would correspond to the 1990 war, after the particulars of that historical event are known.
In his 1997 book, The Bible Code, author Michael Drosnin, ajournalist
with no formal training in statistics, describes the research of Dr. Eliyahu
Rips. Dr. Rips is an expert in the mathematics of group theory, a branch
of mathematics that is not particularly relevant to the problem of datamining bias. Though Drosnin claims that the Bible Codes have been endorsed by a roster of famous mathematicians, 45 statisticians who
reviewed Rips's work found it to be totally unconvincing. 5 Data-mining
bias is, at its heart, a problem of faulty statistical inference.
Statisticians take a dim view of the unconstrained searching practiced by Bible Code researchers. It commits a mathematical sin called the
excessive burning of degrees of freedom. To the statistical sophisticate,
the stench produced by this incineration is most foul. As pointed out by
Dr. Barry Simon, "A Skeptical Look at the Torah Codes,"6 in Chumash,
just one of the 14 books comprising the Torah, approximately 3 billion
possible words can be produced from the existing text when the ELS
spacing interval is allowed to vary from 1 to 5,000. Searching this set of
manufactured words for interesting configurations is no different than
searching through tons of gibberish written by an army of monkeys dancing on keyboards.
The foolishness of the Bible Code scholars' search algorithms becomes apparent when they are applied to non-Biblical texts of similar

260 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
length, such as the Sears catalogue, Moby Dick, Tolstoy's War and Peace,
or the Chicago telephone directory. When these texts are searched, coded
after the fact predictions of historical events are also found. This suggests
the codes are a by-product of the search method and not of the text being
searched.
In a more recent book by Drosnin, The Bible Code II: The Counldown, he shows how the codes "predicted" the terrible events of 9/11/01.
Why, you ask, didn't he warn us before the events happened? He did not
because he could not. He discovered the predictions after the tragedy occurred. Drosnin is another example of a well-intentioned but naive researcher fooled by the data-mining bias.

Data-Mining Newspaper Reporters
Newspaper reporters have also been duped by the data-mining bias. In the
mid 1980s, they reported the story of Evelyn Adams, who had won the
New Jersey state lottery twice in four months. 7 Newspaper accounts put
the probability of such an occurrence at 1 in 17 trillion. In fact, the probability of finding a double winner was far higher and the story far less
newsworthy than the reporters had thought.
The before-the-fact (a priori) probability that Ms. Adams or any other
individual will win the lottery winner twice is indeed 17 trillion to one.
However, the after-the-fact probability of finding someone who has already won twice by searching the entire universe of all lottery players is
far higher. Harvard statisticians Percy Diaconis and Frederick Mosteller
estimated the probability to be about 1 in 30.
The qualifier after-the-fact is the key. It refers to a perusal of data after
outcomes are known. Just as the probability that any individual monkey
will in the future produce a Shakespearian quote is extremely small, the
probability that there exists some monkey, among millions of monkeys,
that has already produced some literate prose, is substantially higher.
Given enough opportunity, randomness produces some extraordinary outcomes. The seemingly rare is actually quite likely.

Mining the UN Database for Gold
and Finding Butter
David J. Leinweber, on the faculty of California Institute of Teclmology
and formerly a managIng partner at First Quandrant, a quantitative pension management company, has warned financial market researchers
about the data-mining bias. To illustrate the pitfalls of excessive searching, he tested several hundred economic tin1e series in a UN database to
