
115

116
said, "You'd better get home and watch this day!
All the world markets have crashed, and it looks like
the Dow Jones is going to open 200 points lower!" When I heard that, I thought to myself, "Boy, this is great.
This is the buying opportunity I've been waiting for." I rushed home and turned on the news. Everyone was
talking panic,
panic, panic. Silly old contrarian me is thinking, "This is terrific. Let's see how low we can open the
market." As you recall, the market kept plummeting all through the day. I had to force myself to hold back
from buying. Finally, in the early afternoon, I couldn't wait any longer. I bought one S&P futures contract. In
the final hour of trading, I kept on buying, as the market moved lower. By the end of the day, I was long ten
contracts.
==== When the market closed, were you down for the day? ====
Oh sure. The market closed near its lows. I was down about a $100,000.
==== Did that bother you? ====
No, not really. Of course, I was a little annoyed with myself for not being more patient, because I could
have gotten a better average price if I had waited. However, I really wasn't concerned about the initial loss
on the position. The futures market was at such a large discount relative to the cash stock index that I was
sure it would open higher the next day, which it did.
==== Did you get out on the higher opening? ====
I took profits on only part of the position. My plan was to stay long. I thought that we had seen such a
level of stupidity in the market, with people virtually throwing away stocks that had value, that I felt it just
had to be a selling exhaustion point. As one example, I remember when I first went down to the floor of the
Philadelphia Stock Exchange, Salomon Brothers stock was trading at $32. It eventually ran up to over $60.
Here it was on the day of the crash down to $22. To me, it seemed ridiculous that people were pricing stocks
that way.
==== You make it sound like you completely shrugged off the panic that engulfed the markets that week.
====
I don't think I underestimated the risk of the trade when I bought ten S&P futures on the day of the crash.
However, in retrospect, I certainly was naive in having faith that the markets, clearing firms, and banks
would continue to function. The subsequent realization that if the Fed had been less aggressive, my clearing
firm, along with many others, could have gone bankrupt, obliterating my account equity in the process, really
shook me up.
==== Does it ever bother you when you lose? ====
Not at all. It never bothered me to lose, because I always knew that I would make it right back. I always
knew that no matter what happened, I could go into any marketplace, with any amount of money, and make
a living.
==== Could you describe the mistakes you've made in your trading career that served as learning
experiences? ====
My own particular weakness has always been being a bit premature on entering positions. As the saying
goes, "The pioneers are the ones with the arrows in their backs." I've learned to think to myself, "Patience,
patience, patience." I try to wait until things set up just right before I take a trade. Then, when I'm ready to
take the trade, I slowly count to ten before I pick up the phone. It's better to have the wrong idea and good
timing than the right idea and bad timing.
Another mistake I've frequently made is participating in too many markets at one time, which leads to
sloppy trading. I've also found that it's my smallest positions that cause my biggest losses, because they
tend to be neglected. It's natural to be cautious and attentive to big positions. With the small positions, it's
easy to fall into the trap of being complacent. My awareness of this pitfall has made me more careful with
such positions.
I realize that I'm only human, and that I'll always make mistakes. I just try to make them less frequently,
recognize them faster, and correct them immediately!
==== What percentage of your trades are profitable? ====
About 70 percent.
==== Is your average winner also larger than your average loser? ====
On my short-term trades, on a per contract basis, my average win is about $450 (the figure would be
higher if I included longer-term trades), and my average loss is just over $200.
==== With both the percentage and average magnitude of your winning trades outdistancing the losers by
a better than two-to-one ratio, it sounds like you would be profitable in every month. ====
Every month! My philosophy is to try to be profitable every day! Of course, I don't quite achieve that
consistency, but that's my goal. I'm probably profitable nearly every week. Remember, I do this for a living,
and I use my own money. I really value the fact that I've learned to trade as a craft. Like any craft, such as
piano playing, perfection may be elusive-I'll never play a piece perfectly, and I'll never buy the low and sell
the high-but consistency is achievable if you practice day in and day out.
==== I assume that, in part, your consistency can be attributed to the intensity with which you follow the
markets. When you described your trading earlier, it sounded like you virtually followed a market tick by
tick* I assume this type of approach must limit the number of markets you can trade. How many markets do
you follow at one time? ====
It varies. I analyze twenty markets. But at any given time, I trade no more than about six markets.

116

117
Ideally, I would like to trade every market, every
day, but I know that's physically impossible.
==== Couldn't you train assistants to apply your methodologies to the markets you can`t watch? ====
I've tried that. I hired and trained someone for a year. He was the nicest person you could hope to meet.
Any organization would have been proud to have him as an employee. He was extremely hardworking and
loyal. He was in perfect physical shape-he ate well and practiced karate every day. Emotionally, he was on
such an even keel that I never once saw him get angry at anyone. I put a lot of time and effort into training
him. I even gave him his
own account, because I thought that the only way he could learn to trade was by doing it. Unfortunately,
it didn't work out.
==== What went wrong? ====
He didn't seem to have any passion for trading. He couldn't pull the trigger. I think he didn't like the idea
of taking risks. [Linda describes a typical conversation with her assistant:]
"OK, Steve, what's your game plan for today?"
"I think I'm going to buy wheat today," he says, explaining his reasons for the trade.
'That's great!" I say, trying to encourage him.
At the end of the day, I ask him, "Did you buy the wheat?"
"No," he answers.
"Well, what did you do?"
"I watched it go up."
[She laughs wholeheartedly at the recollection.]
==== Why do you believe you have excelled as a trader? ====
I believe my most important skill is an ability to perceive patterns in the market. I think this aptitude for
pattern recognition is probably related to my heavy involvement with music. Between the ages of five and
twenty-one, I practiced piano for several hours every single day. In college, I had a dual major of economics
and musical composition. Musical scores are just symbols and patterns. Sitting there for hours every day,
analyzing scores, probably helped that part of my brain related to pattern recognition. Also, practicing an
instrument for several hours every day helps develop discipline and concentration-two skills that are very
useful as a trader.
==== Could you elaborate some more on the parallels between music and the markets? ====
A musical piece has a definite structure: there are repeating patterns with variations. Analogously, the
markets have patterns, which repeat with variations. Musical pieces have quiet interludes, theme development, and a gradual crescendo to a climax. The market counterparts are
price consolidations, major trends, and runaway price moves to major tops or bottoms. You must have
patience as a musical piece unfolds and patience until a trade sets up. You can practice, practice, practice,
but you're never going to play a musical piece perfectly, just as you're never going to buy the low and sell
the high on a trade. All you can hope to do is to play a piece (or trade) better than before. In both music and
trading, you do best when you're relaxed, and in both you have to go with the flow.
A fmal analogy may explain the type of trading I've gravitated toward. You must be able to read individual
notes and learn a piece of music measure by measure before you can play the whole piece through. Perhaps
that's why I spend most of my energy on short-term trades rather than analyzing the long-term picture.
==== There are so few full-time women traders. Do you believe there are any obstacles to women trying to
get into the field? ====
I have sometimes felt that I had to work twice as hard to gain respect or to be taken seriously. But, quite
honestly, that perception was probably based on my own beliefs rather than grounded in reality. In
retrospect, I don't think that being a woman has ever really hindered me. In fact, if anything, it sometimes
seemed that people made an extra effort to be helpful to me, perhaps because there are so few women
traders.
Of course, there may be pockets in the industry in which women do encounter barriers-for example, the
large New York institutional firms and banks. I have known women who felt that sexism interfered with their
ability to land a job on a trading desk. But, again, I have never personally encountered such difficulties.
I would strongly encourage women who have the confidence to become traders to make the effort. There
is no reason for women to feel any fears of intimidation. Trading, more than any other field, is a bottom-line
business. People look at your performance numbers. They don't care if you're a man or a woman. If you
perform well, you'll get financial backing. Conversely, if you're incompetent as a trader, just being a man is
certainly not going to help.
Women may also have intrinsic advantages over men as traders. For example, women are less likely to
use trading as an ego trip. They aren't prone to making the macho-type trades [putting on a large position with the intent of feeling a sense of power in moving the market], which I have seen lead to the
financial ruin of a number of male traders. Even the largest women traders I know tend to be very low-key,
almost reserved, as traders.
==== Are there any other differences between women and men as traders? ====
Women may be more intuitive. I certainly feel that I can see patterns that other people can't, but I don't
know if that's because I'm a female. 1 think it's often more acceptable for a woman to rely on intuition than it
is for a man to do so, and intuition certainly comes into play in trading. For example, when I'm watching the
price quotes, I never say something like, "Oh, the market is down exactly 62 percent, I have to buy right
here." Rather, I might think, "Gee, it looks like we've corrected enough and the price has stopped going

117

118
down, so I'd better buy."
==== In our initial phone conversation, you mentioned that you've shared your trading methods with other
traders. Aren't you concerned that revealing your approach could destroy its effectiveness as other people
start to use it? ====
I truly feel that I could give away all my secrets and it wouldn't make any difference. Most people can't
control their emotions or follow a system. Also, most traders wouldn't follow my system, even if I gave them
step-by-step instructions, because my approach wouldn't feel right to them. They wouldn't have the same
confidence or comfort in the trading method as I do. But for argument's sake, let's say that showing my
methods to other traders did eventually cause some of the patterns that I follow to change. If these patterns
changed, new ones would be created, and I'm confident that I would find them.
==== What advice would you give novice traders? ====
Understand that learning the markets can take years. Immerse yourself in the world of trading and give
up everything else. Get as close to other successful traders as you can. Consider working for one for free.
Start by finding a niche and specializing. Pick one market or pattern
and leam it inside out before expanding your focus. My favorite exercise for novice traders is pick one
market only. Without looking at an intraday chart, jot down the price every five minutes from the opening to
the close. Do this for an entire week. Be in tune to the patterns. Where are the support and resistance levels?
How does price act when it hits these levels? What happens during the last half-hour? How long does each
intraday price move last? You won't believe how much you can leam from this exercise.
Never fear the markets. Never fear making a mistake. If you do make a mistake, don't complicate the
position by trying to hedge it- just get out.
Stay actively involved with the market. Don't just sit passively in front of a monitor, or simply stare at
charts. Notice how many old-timers who have been successful for years still construct their own point-andfigure charts by hand intraday. They keep the same routine day after day. Develop your own routine for
taking periodic market readings.
Never be greedy. It's OK to leave money on the table. If you can't get in at a favorable price, let the trade
go and start looking for the next trade.
Finally, remember that a trader is someone who does his own work, has his own game plan, and makes
his own decisions. Only by acting and thinking independently can a trader hope to know when a trade isn't
working out. If you ever find yourself tempted to seek out someone else's opinion on a trade, mat's usually a
sure sign that you should get out of your position.
==== What are your goals? ====
There's no better satisfaction than playing a piece well, whether the instrument is a piano or the markets.
I measure my progress not in dollars but in my skill in predicting market patterns-that is, in how close I can
come to pinpointing my entries and exits to the market turns. I believe that I can go into any market with
just a quote machine and out-trade 98 percent of the other traders. Over the next ten years, I would like to
significantly step up my trading size. I really believe that I can become one of the best traders around.
Certainly one of the primary common characteristics I have found among the great traders is an almost
compelling sense of confidence in their ability to succeed. Linda Raschke personifies this type of confidence as
well as any trader I have interviewed. There is not the slightest doubt in my mind that she could start over in
any market with minimal funds and excel. She truly believes that she will become one of the best traders
ever, and I for one certainly wouldn't take the other side of that bet.
Are traders like Raschke confident because they succeed, or do they succeed because they are confident?
Probably a little bit of both. However, the key point is that exuberant confidence appears to be one of the
essential elements in exceptional achievement as a trader, and I assume in many other endeavors as well.
Occasionally, an interview provokes me to reassess my view of reality. I have long assumed that markets
might be predictable over the long term but that short-term price movements are largely random. Raschke
holds exactly the opposite point of view. She believes that in the markets, much as in weather forecasting,
short-term predictions can be quite accurate but long-term forecasting is a virtual impossibility. With her
ability to see patterns that others don't, she has been able to trade short-term price swings with a
consistency that would defy die laws of probability, if indeed there were no patterns in these movements.
Raschke has made me a believer. Clearly, there are predictable movements in price even over periods as
short as a few days or a single day.
Raschke reminds us that traders are people who do their own work, make their own decisions. One
particularly insightful observation made by Raschke is that the temptation to seek out other peoples' opinions
on a trade is a sure sign that the trade should be liquidated.
Among the characteristics that Linda Bradford Raschke cites as essential to being a good trader are a
passion for trading, self-reliance in developing trading ideas and making trading decisions, the willingness to
take risk, the ability to correct mistakes immediately (because they are inevitable), and patience, patience,
patience.

118

119
PART VI The Money Machines

119

120
CRT: The Trading Machine
You guys make money every day," said the floor broker to Mark Ritchie in a reference to CRT (Chicago
Research and Trading). His voice was a mixture of envy, disgust, and admiration. He was holding a long
position, and the market had moved locked limit-down against him, in one of the periodic painful setbacks
that are a bane to even successful traders. The amazing thing is that the exasperated broker was
exaggerating only slighdy. CRT may not make money every day, but it is profitable virtually every month, if
not every week. Think about that!
The story of CRT is one of the most incredible in the investment world. A mere fifteen years ago, Joe
Ritchie (Mark's brother), the firm's founder and leading force, was so broke that he had to borrow his
brother's wholesale suit to visit the Chicago Board of Trade. Today, Joe is the helmsman of a trading
company of eight hundred employees, including a primary dealer of government securities, that has been
estimated to have garnered close to $1 billion in trading profits. To generate that profit, Joe Ritchie estimates
that the firm has done over $10 trillion in transactions. (That's trillion like the figures used to describe the
total U.S. debt-we're talking big numbers here.)
CRT doesn't go for home mns. It is in the business of extracting the many modest profit opportunities that
are continually created by the small inefficiencies in the marketplace. Are options on one exchange slightly
higher priced than equivalent options on another exchange? If so, CRT uses its state-of-the-art information
and execution capabilities to buy the option that is low and sell the one that is dear. Do options in a given
market provide a better risk/reward profile than the underlying market? Or vice versa? If such a discrepancy
exists, CRT trades one position against the other. There are literally hundreds, if not thousands, of variations
on this theme.
CRT is constantly tracking approximately seventy-five different markets, traded on nineteen worldwide
exchanges, with sophisticated trading models instantaneously signaling which financial instruments are
relatively underpriced and which are overpriced. Other models continuously evaluate the net risk of all the
firm's positions, with the goal being to reduce net exposure as close to zero as possible. In taking advantage
of these small profit opportunities and keeping net risk to a minimum, CRT has come as close as any firm to
creating a successful trading machine.
How does CRT operate? Floor brokers have sheets generated by the firm's proprietary computer models,
telling "them what price they can bid or offer for each option at any given market price level. The calculated
figures take into account not only the matter of determining the option's value but also how that option
interrelates with the firm's overall position. For example, if a given option position helps bring the firm's net
risk exposure closer to zero, the indicated bid price for that option might be skewed upward.
The floor traders are supported by teams of upstairs traders, who use the firm's computer models to
monitor the impact of fluctuating prices and the firm's constantly changing portfolio on option values. The
upstairs traders feed the floor traders a constant stream of updated information. On very volatile trading
sessions, runners may bring the floor traders revised computer valuation sheets as often as twenty times in
one day.
When the floor trader implements an option trade, he or she immediately offsets the positions with an
equivalent opposite trade in the outright market. For example, if a trader sells T-bond 98 calls, he will buy
the equivalent amount of T-bond futures to counterbalance the position. This hedge is implemented
instantaneously. As soon as the floor trader posts the option trade, he hand signals an arbitrage clerk
standing on the top step of the bond futures pit fifty feet away. Within a second or two, a futures trader has
placed the offsetting order, and the transaction is complete.
The initial hedge placed m the outright market virtually eliminates any significant near-term risk on the
position. However, as the market moves, the position will become unbalanced. Once the initial trade and
offsetting hedge are booked, the responsibility for managing the position is transferred to an upstairs position
manager. The job of this manager is to keep the risk exposure of the firm's constantly changing portfolio as
close to zero as possible. CRT is so rigid about risk control that it even has a backup risk control group. The
backup group assures that the firm is always ready to handle even the most extraordinary trading events
(e.g., the October 1987 stock market crash and huge price moves triggered by the outbreak of the Persian
Gulf War).
The complexity of monitoring the positions placed by hundreds of traders, reevaluating thousands of
interrelationships between different market instruments traded worldwide, and tracking the firm's portfolio
risk balance continuously, all while prices and positions are changing every second, requires enormous
computer support. CRT has nearly an entire floor in its office building devoted to computers. There are
departments for developing new proprietary software, and the firm even has its own on-site hardware repair
unit.
CRT's computer software programs are highly sophisticated. Bvery effort has been made to translate data
into graphic displays, reflecting the belief that the human mind can draw information much more readily if it
is in visual form. A new generation of CRT software, which was in an advanced stage of development when I
visited the company, provides three-dimensional displays. These computer images will allow the traders to
view the firm's real-time position for an option market across both a range of strike prices and a range of
expiration dates in one picture, with different colors used to represent different concentrations of positions.
All the high tech aside, ask anyone at CRT about the firm's success, and they will tell you that teamwork is
the key. It may sound corny, but it is obviously an absolutely essential element of CRT's philosophy. You
either buy into that philosophy or you are in the wrong place. Self-centered maverick traders, no matter how
talented, need not apply.
