
AU3772_book.fm Page 429 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-five:

Two Touchy Questions

429

the ethics, as well as the practical procedure of short selling, that we may
perhaps be pardoned for saying a few more words in its defense.
All of the popular ideas about short selling mentioned in the preceding
paragraph may be branded as so much nonsense. There is nothing more
reprehensible about selling short than buying long. Each is a speculation in
relative values. The truth is that money is a commodity, just as much as a
share of stock. There is no moral or practical difference between borrowing
money to buy stock because you believe that the latter will go up in value
in terms of the former, and borrowing stock in order to “buy” money because
you believe the latter is going to go up in value in terms of the former. In
each case, you are obligated eventually to repay the loan whether it be money
or stock. In each case, you are taking a risk on the basis of your considered
forecast as to the future trend of relative values.
There are, in fact, many common business practices which are more or
less analogous to selling stocks short. For example, every time the publisher
of a magazine accepts cash in advance for a subscription he is making
something like a short sale. His ultimate profit or loss will depend on what
the magazines he will eventually supply have cost him by the time the
subscription runs out.
When you sell stocks short, you (or rather your broker) receives the
proceeds of the sale at once but you are obligated to turn back an equal
number of the same shares at some future date to the man from whom the
stock certificates were borrowed. EN: One of the advantages or edges that professionals enjoy over private investors is the credit of short sales to their accounts
and the payment of interest thereon. While the proceeds are credited to the private
investor, no interest is generally paid on it, unless the investor has influence with
the broker. A favorable situation is created, however, in that, if a short sale of
$100,000 were made on, say, 50% margin, a credit of $150,000 would be made to
his account, and no interest would be charged. Any dividends the trader paid on
the transaction would be expensible. Consequently, sooner or later, you have to
go into the market again and buy those shares. When you buy them, you
(or rather your broker) returns the shares to the original lender, thus discharging your obligation. If the cost of your purchase was less than the
proceeds of the earlier sale, the difference is your profit. If it costs you more
to buy in the shares — or as it is termed, cover your short — then the
difference represents a loss. Of course, you do not enter into a short-side
transaction unless you expect the price of the stock to go down and, hence,
show you a profit.
One of the little-appreciated results of a large volume of short selling is
actually to strengthen the market. Every short seller is a potential buyer.
Most short sellers are glad to cover and take their profits on a relatively
Minor Decline. Consequently, if there is a big short interest at any given time
in a particular issue, that means that there are many people waiting to buy
that stock when it goes down. This situation tends to “cushion” bad breaks.
Some astute operators will actually buy a stock when they learn that there
is a very large short interest in it (that is, that a great many shares of it have

AU3772_book.fm Page 430 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

430

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

been sold short and not yet covered) because they realize that competition
among the short sellers to buy the stock whenever it has a small decline may
result in a very fast and profitable Short-Covering Rally. Any stock is stronger, technically, if there is a good-sized short interest in it.
There is one further objection raised against short selling. It will be
pointed out that when you buy stock, your loss, if worse comes to worst,
can be no more than the total amount you paid for it. But in the case of a
short sale, the price of your stock could, theoretically, rise against you to $50,
$100, $1000, $10,000 a share; in other words, could rise without limit. This
argument sounds much more alarming than it really is. Certainly there is no
occasion to lose sleep over it. Stocks do not go up without limit all of a
sudden. It is just as easy to set a stop on the loss you are willing to take on
a short-side transaction as it is on a long purchase. Such situations as the
famous 1901 corner in Northern Pacific are not likely ever to occur again
under present regulations. EN: The famous “short squeeze.” Short squeezes still
occur but extremely rarely in big liquid issues. A famous short squeeze occurred in
the silver markets of the 1980s when the Hunt brothers trapped Exchange members
and almost bankrupted them. The Members, of course, being in control, retaliated
by quintupling margin requirements and bankrupted the Hunts. The authors
realize that nothing they can say, and probably no amount of cold-blooded
analysis on the part of the reader himself, will remove entirely the trepidation
which most nonprofessional traders experience when they sell short. The
mental hazards will always be slightly greater than in buying long. Nevertheless, from every practical angle, a short sale is exactly the same thing
(although in a reverse direction) as a long purchase, with no greater risk,
with actually somewhat greater chance of quick profit, and differing only in
details of execution.
A commitment in commodity futures contracts, whether long or short,
though quite different in theory, has some similarities to a short sale of stock.
In making a contract, no actual sale takes place, and no loan of either cash
or the commodity is involved. Such a contract is simply a binding legal
agreement to accept delivery or to deliver a certain commodity at a certain
price at a certain time. In this respect, it is different from a short sale of stock.
It is also different in that it must be closed out on or before a definite date.
But the purchase or sale of a commodity contract is similar to a stock short
sale in that: (1) it is necessarily a margin transaction, and (2) it creates an
“open” or incomplete transaction which must eventually be liquidated.
A short sale of stock must always and necessarily be a margin transaction. Thus, if you buy 100 shares of stock outright at 20, it can sink to 15 and
you cannot be called for more margin. You have lost $500, but the stock is
still yours. If you sell, you get back $1500, disregarding commissions. On
the other hand, if you sell a stock short at 20, putting up a margin of 100%,
and the stock rises to 25, you will also have lost $500. The broker, under
certain conditions, such as the 100% margin requirements in effect at one
time, might call on you for $500 additional margin. Or, if the transaction
were to be closed out at that point, you would receive back $1500 less

AU3772_book.fm Page 431 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-five:

Two Touchy Questions

431

commissions, the same as in the long transaction. In the case of this short
sale, had the price dropped to 15, your profit would have been $500.
On short-term moves, the effect of short selling is exactly the same as
the buying of long stock, but in the opposite direction. You simply apply the
same methods here in reverse, during a Bear Market, that you would use in
a Bull Market. As we have already seen, the various technical indications
that point to upward moves in a Bullish Phase have their counterparts in
downside signals during a Bearish Phase.
Execution of short sales cannot be made at any time and at any price
you wish. A short sale must be made in a rising market. You are not permitted
to sell a stock short on the New York Stock Exchange during a market break
when each regular sale is at a lower price than the one before it (EN9: the
uptick rule). However, this need not bother you much since, ordinarily, you
would make such a sale on the rally as it reached your price, and this would
naturally fill the requirement of a rising market. Your broker can give you,
in detail, the special rules and regulations that apply to short sales. It will
pay you to study these so that you can place your orders correctly when the
proper time comes to make such sales. EN9: At the AMEX short sales on ETFs
and some HOLDRS are exempt from the uptick rule as are futures contracts on the
futures exchanges.

AU3772_book.fm Page 432 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 433 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter twenty-six

Round Lots or Odd Lots?
(EN: Or, Put Another Way, Size?)
One of the minor tactical questions bound to plague you is whether to trade
in round lots of 100 shares or odd lots (less than 100 shares in active stocks).
EN: In Internet Age markets this question has virtually lost its relevancy. In
Magee’s time, there was a distinct disadvantage to trading odd lots, and one only
traded odd lots if hampered by limited capital. Now that an investor can achieve
full diversification in an odd lot position by buying odd lots of SPDRs and
DIAMONDs there seems little point in discussing it. There is, of course, always
the question of broker commission — if the broker has a fixed commission rate
regardless of the size of the trade, then the small investor gets nicked. It would seem
that this follows the old adage that the rich get richer. But now the small investor
can strike back by finding a broker who does not charge commissions. At first I
thought that commission-free brokers were making up their profit on volume. But
there are in fact other ways to make a profit on trades than charging a commission —
for example, directing the execution of the orders to a trader who needs “order flow.”
In the Internet Age, the question of what size a trade or investment should be
is different from the question which confronted traders of, as it were, ancient times.
Now it is not so much a matter of cost disadvantage in trading odd lots as it is a
much deeper question — that of risk and portfolio management. So how does the
aware investor determine the size of any individual trade?
I am indebted to a longtime friend, colleague and broker, and fellow trader,
William Scott, for articulating the common sense procedure here for calculating
trade size and controlling risk.
First, we determine the percentage of our capital we want to risk on any given
trade. Among many professional traders of our acquaintance, this figure is often
2 or 3%. For the sake of illustration, using round numbers, if we have $100,000
capital this means we will be risking $3000 on a trade. Let us say that we are going
to buy a $20 stock and defend our position with a stop-loss order $5 away. Our
formula for computing position size is
3000 5 = n number of shares, or 600 shares

433

AU3772_book.fm Page 434 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

434

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

If we were going to accept a $10 risk, our trade size would be 3000/10 =
300 shares. Thus we adjust our trade size to fit our risk parameters.
This is a simple, practical, elegant way to implement risk control at the individual trade level.

AU3772_book.fm Page 435 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter twenty-seven

Stop Orders
We are going to take up two kinds of stop orders, or, rather, two entirely
different uses of the mechanism of stop orders.
First, let us look at the protective stop order. At best, it is not a happy
subject. Stop orders of this type are like fire extinguishers. The occasions
when they are put into operation are not times of rejoicing. Stop orders are
used for emergency rescue when things get so bad that there seems no
reasonable hope for a situation.
Wherever you set your protective stop, it is likely to be touched off at
what seems to be the worst possible moment. You will set it at a safe distance
under a certain bottom. The stock will break through, catch your stop, and
then proceed to build a new bottom at this level for the next rise, or to rally
at once and make new highs. No matter. You had your reasons for setting
the stop. The stock did not act the way it should have. The situation is not
working out according to Hoyle, and certainly not the way you hoped it
would. Better to be out of it, even at a loss, rather than face a period of
uncertainty and worry. If the stock has started to act badly, you cannot tell
how much worse it is going to behave. If you fail to set a stop, you may go
on day after day hoping for a rally that never comes, while your stock sinks
lower and lower, and eventually you may find (as millions have found) that
what started to be a small reaction, and an annoying but trivial loss, has
turned out to be a ruinous catastrophe. Stop orders cannot always be placed.
In certain cases in active stocks, the exchanges may even restrict the use of
stop orders.
The question is where and when to set the stop, realizing that there is
no perfect and absolutely satisfactory rule. If the stop is too close, you will,
of course, take unnecessary losses; you will lose your holdings of stocks that
eventually forge ahead and complete the profitable rise you hoped for. If
stops are too wide (too far away), you will take larger losses than necessary
in those cases where your stock definitely has broken out of pattern.
Now it will be obvious that the setting of stop orders depends on the
price of the stock and its habits. You would not place your stop level at the
same percentage distance under a Bottom in a conservative, high-priced
stock when it is selling at 80 that you would to protect a speculative issue
at a time when it is selling at 8.
The higher-priced stocks, as we already have seen, make smaller percentage moves. Conversely, the lower-priced stocks make wider percentage
435

AU3772_book.fm Page 436 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

436

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

