
220
The call or letters generally go like this, "Gee, Larry, this stuff of trading commodities is hard, I don't
understand it, it's just over my head. Would you please refund my subscription fee?"
We do.
But I don't want to ... I want to grab them by the lapels and tell them this is not an easy business, that
whoever told you this seriously misled you. After almost 30 years of trading most all of the market is still over
my head. As trite as it sounds, I am still cobbling away, learning how very little I know about the market ... it
seems to me I will never be able to learn very much and some things I have to relearn. Over and over.
Yet despite all this, I've made millions of dollars trading ... something few people can say ... and I never
would have made those hard-earned $$ had I let the notion of "stuff being over my head" thwart my
intentions of making money. That's my first reaction. But upon some reflection what I should say is ...
"Where did you ever get the idea that making money is easy-in this or any other business? Is it easy to
make money in your business? If so, stay there. Refrain from trading.
"Money is made, in any endeavor, by an exchange of one thing of value for another. In this business the
exchange a winning trader makes are his dollars at risk and his intelligence. He or she pays for his earnings
with hours of study.
"There is just no way you can blindly follow some market guru and blissfully make money day after day,
year after year. At some point you MUST go to work, figure this stuff out yourself, walk on your own. I'll
help you, but bear in mind this is not an easy business, that to get money from any source requires an output
of energy. There is no bliss or Nirvana in this business."
As my daddy used to tell me, and my children's father tells them, "There ain't no free lunches ... we don't
deserve anything. We earn it."
I LOOKED FEAR AND GREED IN THE FACE
And here's what I found ...
It's no secret that a trader's worst enemy is his/her emotions. Some have even gone on to identify that the
emotions that kill us are the mutually entwined powers of fear and greed.
But's, so what, you ask. Is just knowing this enough to help a trader? The mumbo-jumbo crowd tells us
that on that basis we can deal with the identified problem.
No way. I've known of these Gemini like emotional forces for years but it was not until recently that I
fully understood (I think) how to avoid the negative downside of all this.
First, let me establish once and for all that Greed is the strongest of these two emotions.
Indeed, greed may be the strongest motivator, after sexual drive, that we all possess.

221
How do I know this, from watching my trading-and people like you-who hope to recoup losses. We do it
in a host of ways. Why do you not use stops? Greed, pure and simple. You want to make money so you hang
on too long. Alexander Pope said it best, "Hope springs eternal in the human breast." We all hope to make
money, hope to get out of margin calls or bad marriages. We want to make money so badly that some of us
cheat. steal, lie, even rob the local 7-11. Why, because of our greed to have more.
The secret of winning as a trader is simpler than most think. The operating rule is that if you lose, or can
control your losses, who will probably become a winner.
What causes loss is greed. We get so greedy-crying for profits-that we get either; (1) sloppy in our money
management or (2) fail to cut our losses as our hopes are too high that every trade will turn into a winner at
some point. The desire for profits is the killer. just last week I held onto a long position, refusing to bail out
taking my profit as I wanted to believe the market would move higher. I bucked the system. Why, because I
wanted to make more. It is not my fear that screws me up, it is my greed. When looking these two emotions in
the face I found that it is my greed that causes me to not follow my systems (do the right thing).
You can bet from now on I will be on alert when I "want" to make more money. I know my enemy, I
have stared it in the face, it is not fear . . . it is my greed. And you know what? You are just like me.

October 1993

Volume 30, Issue 70
The Show Must Go On

A loss I am not proud of and a reaction I am.
just because I've had the audacity to write several books about the market and publish a letter, some
subscribers seem to think I never have the same problems trading they do.
That's wrong ... real wrong. I go through the same emotions, and though I may harness them better, they
still tug away at my heart and soul. Daily.
About a month ago I screwed up, big time. Oh, not enough to wipe me out, like maybe I would have done
in the old days. But, enough to get my attention, my anger and raise those old questions of self-doubt I
thought had been put to rest years ago.
Probably the first step to being a winning trader is getting rid of most of the self-doubt. When you "know
that you know" you are on your way. Mentally, and physically, at that point you have become a professional.
Why? Well, I thinks it's because you are no longer the effect of the market ... you are the cause of what you
are doing.

222
That's an important edge ... my screw up had cut me like some giant pack rat slipped into my office to
chew away at the fibers of my being. The self-doubt built as I went through several losing trades, until,
naturally, the worst screw up of the year came.
I was humiliated by what I had done, felt as stupid as I'd felt in years, and just wanted to stop trading.
"Forever," that voice in my head screamed. While I don't know much about the market, or trading, I do know
there are no losers ... only quitters. Professional people all have "off nights." Did that stop Joe Montana? I
remember he had an off season just before elevating himself to the status of the greatest quarterback to ever
play the game. Nor did similar poor performances end the careers of other greats.
Clearly, I'm not a "great," but I can sure learn from them. That's what I decided.
So, the morning after my screw up, there I was, at 5:10 A.M., placing an order to buy the S&P. The show
would go on. Both trades won, not much, but they were my biggest wins of 1993.

October 1997

Volume 34, Issue 10
Broken Noses, Cauliflower Ears, and Bad Trades

Like boxing, trading is not only risky it is also a very difficult and dangerous business.
AS 1 WRITE THIS ... I'm angry. The last few days I haven't been able to find subscribers a winning trade
for love nor money and my own trading, which was ablaze with glory and domination a few days ago, has lost
quite a bit of its luster.
I'm angry about the markets. I'm angry with myself and I'm angry about this business where people
advertise seemingly unlimited and easy wealth to be made trading commodities. So I reflect on my limited
days as a boxer; I got beat up and quite a bit, yet still enjoyed the sport. Why? And how does this relate to
trading. Why do I always turn to sports to find parallel or analogy to trading?
Fights, like the markets are not fixed. Guys really do get hit in the ring. They bleed, their eyes puff up and
stay that way for days, and their facial cuts take weeks for the transformation to a scar. The differences
between a true champion fighter and the wannabes is the champs climb back, continue fighting and after a
loss still work at their craft (yes, it is a craft, no more brutal than trading) they stay in condition, they rethink
strategy ... but above all they continue. It is anger that propels them. When younger my anger was abated with
drinking until I learned well channeled anger is a powerful force, so I now focus anger, using it to help push
myself.
When I ask fighters how they can continue, I'm told, "This is what I love, this is really all I know, and
getting beat up is just the nature of the game." The ones that cannot accept the bloody noses and cauliflower

223
ears never make it to the top. I have yet to see a champion without a marked up face, even Ali, up close,
shows plenty of damage.
Champions, just like traders get beat up. That's par for the course, the sooner you accept and
constructively channel your anger behind the losses the sooner you will also rise to champion status.

May 1995

Volume 32, Issue 5
Learning How To Lose Money

Ha, bet you thought you didn't need help in learning how to drop your hardearned dollars trading. My bet
is that you have no idea how to lose; hence, you lose.
ANYONE CAN WIN ... It takes no great feat to win in commodity trading, all you have to do is get in
and out at the right places. Winning is a glorious feeling, hence something you can pretty well control, handle,
or take care of in your own fashion. The world loves a winner, and a winner loves the world. Life is easy then
... all green lights and blue skies.
But losing, man that's another story. Life's a bitch when you're down 30 percent to 40 percent of your
money ... even tougher when you are down 80 percent to 90 percent. I know: I've been there, only all too
often. I took some nasty trips in my younger days I hope never to see the likes of again, However, they did
teach me a few things I'd like to pass on to you.
Profits pretty well take care of themselves, losses don't. This means YOU must take care of the losses.
Indeed, this is more a business of damage control than it is price exploitation. Control the losses, and you are
probably going to come out a winner.
So, how do you control loss? There is only one correct answer. Are you ready? Do you really want to
hear it? And will you follow it? (I doubt if you honestly answer "yes" to all of the above.)
The answer is not always use a stop. Always.
Before you continue reading, grab a dictionary. Check out what "always" means. It does not mean some
of the time. Believe me, those "some of the times" you leave off stops will be the time losses wipe you out.
At a younger age I traded with no stops, believed in my fiscal immortality, and ended up going deficit.
Several times I had to sign notes to brokerage firms. That's a bitter reality. It's not fun and games being
hounded by brokerage firms' lawyers. (Ah, the 60s ... what a glorious time period.)
The only question left is where should one place his or her stops. There are two answers. (1) With your
broker, not as "desk" stop. And again, that's always. (2) Since the purpose of a stop is damage control, it

224
should be based, most often, on limiting risk. The best rule of thumb I have is that stops should be about $800
to $1,200 away, except in the S&P where I use stops of $1,750 to $2,500.
Sometimes I use what looks like a key market turning point as a stop, or perhaps an opposite signal, or
even the end of the day. The end of the day (a time stop) may be coupled with a dollar stop. But in any event,
NEVER FORGET that the closer your stop is the more often you will be stopped out.
Only a genuine masochist uses tight stops. NO ONE knows absolute highs, lows and turning points. We
can only be generally correct, which is why stops must give the market some leeway ... just not too much.
Look, I don't like stops any better than you. I hate using them, but I us them. Always.

March 7995

Volume 32, Issue 3

I know what evil I'm about to do, but my irrational self is stronger than my resolution.
-Medea
MAYBE IT'S JUST ME AND MEDEA ... but it probably isn't. The first lesson I ever learned in
Psychology is that if I have frequent thoughts about something (sex, money, power, catching large rainbow
trout), my peers are probably having the same thoughts and/or dreams.
No, don't think I've gone California Kooky on you. But I'll be the first to admit I have a constant dialogue
with my inner selves (there are probably two of them) while trading. Some might say they hear voices ... I
would not be one of these. But these selves, or voices, exercise a tremendous power over my trading
decisions. Therefore, I've been spending a lot of time listening to those voices or selves, and thinking about
them. This is what I have learned:
First is the awesome power these selves seem to have over our judgment. just to make certain I wasn't
going batty (yet), I talked with a few other traders I respect. They too mentioned the voices or their inner-self
dialogue ... and how much an impact it has upon their decisions.
Like Medea, who uttered her classic statement just before killing her children, I confess I have taken
trades I knew would lose, and actually felt helpless to do otherwise. Some compelling drive seems to lurk in
the soul of we mortal traders.

225
Greatest Trading Breakthrough of the Century?
The breakthrough would be that of getting control of what can be very selfdestructive behavior from this
part of our mind. In a minute, I'll tell you some things you can do if you, like me, are under such an influence.
For now, though, lets look at what's going on here.
The reason I really got turned on to all this is two weeks ago I did not take a buy signal in the Bond
market that I sure as heck should of. Why? Real simple. One of those "voices" (me) talked me out of the
trade. The mental chatter went something like, "Hey, Lar, you lost on the last trade, you better be careful here
... this is pretty scary stuff ... cool your heels here ... wait for a better looking trade ... at least wait for the
signal then get a pull back or something . . ." Meanwhile, the other voice is saying something like, "Well,
you've got to do what you've got do."
The striking difference is in the voice trying to protect me. In other words, that part of me that deals with
survival has tossed up a bushel-basket full of fear. And make no mistake about it, the "voice" argued longer
and harder than the second one. Hence, it carried the day and in the process I sidestepped what was a very
good trade.
In short, the inner voice based on fear will talk you out of more good trades than bad trades you will ever
talk yourself into.
I have focused on this problem a great deal the last few weeks. My observation are that you can get in
touch with these sides of yourself. You can feel or hear which one is the fear, or survival-based one. That is
the one you need to get to know. Or, if you are not such a touchy-feely person, just realize that the inner
message aimed at talking you out of doing something is the survival "voice," and the one you need to avoid.
By paying careful attention to these inner selves, you will be able to key off of them, as opposed to reaching
to their negative dribble. Here's your exercise for the month: as you make your next 10 trades, write down
what you are feeling or hearing on an emotional level. Let all the diatribe out, and really listen up so you can
identify the two voices (I say two based only you my experience. But other traders I have interviewed to do
this article also mention two crosscurrents going on inside their noggins). By doing this, you will be able to
not only confront your emotions, but also catalog and codify them so you can deal with them in the future.

226
April 7994

Volume 3 7, Issue 4
Hillary, Highs Hopes, and Heartaches

Over the last two weeks, I've carefully reviewed-at the request of the New York Post-all the commodity
trading activity of our First lady. What an entertaining account it is! Since much of Hillary's trading was not
correctly covered by the media, I thought you might like to know what I unearthed.
Hillary (by the way, she used her maiden name, Rodham, and not Clinton, on the account) had a great
introduction to trading; on her first trades she made right at $10,000. What looks particularly irregular,
though, is that the trades required close to $8,000 in margin. Yet she pulled it off on only a $1,000 check,
which may not have been placed in the account until after the first profitable trade had been recorded.
If there is a trading pattern to the account, it is one of day trades for winners, and holdovers for loser ... as well
as a real gutsy approach. As an example, on 2/12/80 she was long 10 Wheat which she exited on 2121. The
margin back then was about $1,000 per contract. Hillary had $3,911.20 in the account. While newspaper
articles have largely focused on her Cattle trading, the records I was given also show numerous transactions in
Copper, Wheat, Lumber, Sugar, and Bonds. She paid $41 for sugar commissions, $50 on everything else. So
she paid a little high, but then look at what she got! On many occasions she had positions totaling over
$45,000 in margin, while she actually had less than $10,000 in the account.
Like you and me, she did have margin calls. Unlike you and me, she never had to meet them. In one case,
March 13, 1979, she had $53,478 worth of positions-with some $26,000 in the account. There are lots of 1
and 2 lot orders that did make money, but the vast majority of the profits come from huge positions on day
trades, or huge positions where margin calls were never met. Here is another confounding sample of Hillary's
trading style. In early June 1979, she carried a bewildering 45 cattle ... on a mere $3,765.
Also a distinguishing characteristic in Hillary's trading is that the instant she made profits, she cashiered them
out of the account. Even her famous first trade of $1,000 down on 10/11/78, with an immediate profit of
$6,300 the next day, shows she siphoned $5,000 out of the account before any more trading transpired. I
suppose this is a lesson we can all learn from. The long and short of it appears to me as this: Mrs. Rodham had
a broker who did her some big-time favors.

227
February 1995

Volume 32, Issue 2
Nervous Nellies-Heaven Bound

If money is only made by holding on, we'd better learn how to hold on!
There is nothing easier than making money in commodities. It's a piece of cake. All you have to do is catch a
move and hold on until price mingles with the angels of speculation some place up in the clouds.
You're thinking to yourself, "easier said than done," right? And very easy to do in hindsight. Yet there
are some lessons we can learn-from hindsight-that I would like to write about this month.
We currently have pretty nice trades going ... long the Canadian Dollar, short Copper and Cotton. IF THESE
ARE LONG-TERM PLAYS, our objective will be to hold them until they bottom/top out, or reach an area of
major support. That's the game plan. Piece of cake.
Not really; following the game plan is very difficult. It's no wonder there are so few winners. So few people
can sit tight and hold onto their positions long enough to allow time to maximize winnings.
As an aside, but a most important one, never, ever forget that it is time that creates large winnings. The
longer a system's time frame, the greater the potential for a large profit. It takes time for redwood trees to
grow. Seldom do huge profits come overnight. That's why short-term traders are doomed to small profits.
They tighten down the hatches of their frame so much that profits are never given the time to "mature" or
"grow."
The problem really is twofold. It is essential to develop a state of mind that allows you to sit through
corrections on the way to the ultimate prize zone. The second problem is developing an indicator or system
that tell us when to bail out, regardless of our mental conditioning. After all, even the tallest trees in the forest
never quite reach heaven.
"Preframing" Ourselves
Now there's a term I wish I would have bumped up against earlier in life. The idea is that if you preframe
your belief system as to what the future will be like, you can better handle the future. It is one of the most
valid psychological concepts I have ever used.
At the start of every trading year, I preframe myself to equity dips by telling myself that at some point
during the year I will lose money ... and a good amount of it at that. I reframe an equity dip, preframe that it
may last a month or longer, and that to get through it I simply have to get through it.
When it comes to holding on to trades, it's the same thing ... which I hope the following charts illustrate.
Notice how in each example the ideal strategy was to hold. Also note that there were big pullbacks against the

228
trend. These pullbacks took time and money away from you. Usually we mere mortals get shaken out by the
flames of eternal damnation, just before the up move resumes.
However, if we preframed ourselves to realize that in all large trend moves there will be substantial any trend
moves, I have found it easier to suffer through the brimstone.

March 7991

Volume 28, Issue 3

Secrets of System Developing and Trading
Over 20 years ago I uncovered an amazing little secret that I have been trying to disprove ever since ...
and so have subscribers.
The "secret" is that effective commodity systems do better without a protective stop loss than with one-if they
are not reversal systems.
It is strange but true. If you have a system that is always in the market ... and does a decent job of it ... you
cannot improve its performance by tinkering around with tighter money management stops!
I will reiterate the point. If you have a decent system-forget about "improving" it with a protective dollar
risk stop loss. The reason I have repeated this point is that I find myself, 20 years later, still trying to twist and
improve systems with protection stops. They continue not making much difference, and usually hurt system
performance.
Many subscribers have written, called or canceled their subscriptions because our stops "are so big."
About that they are correct. Our stop and reverse points are a good distance away from the market ... but ... it
works better that way.
As strange as is seems ... for 20 years I have kept trying to improve good systems by using money
management stops and they have yet to make much difference. What you gain in protection you lose in
accuracy and profit per grade. Typically a $ stop will cut your percentage on winning trades by 10 percent to
15 percent and lop your average profit per trade by up to 1/3. What you get for what you lose, is not worth it.
Here's the proof: results of a system I have been working on this past week for short-term trading in
Coffee (see Table 14.1). Notice that as the stop gets larger, the accuracy-net profits and total dollars won-all

229
Table 14.1
Coffee Trading System with Different Stops Produces Drastically Different Results

increase!! At the same time drawdown on the $1,000 stop of $12,553 gets bumped up to $14,855 with a
$4,500 stop, but you make almost $30,000 more!
The Second Secret
This one is even wilder ... you cannot improve, appreciably, a good system by using targets.
Go ahead, reread what I just wrote just for you. The knack of a trendfollowing system's ability to make money
is that it catches some really big trend moves. Those large wins pay off all the little losses.
We all know the rule-let your profits run-and it is proven when you try to add targets (cutting your
profits short) with objectives. This also bothers new traders ... they want to take profits or get out once price
hits some magic number, a Gann line, Cyclical window, support/resistance or the like.
For 20 years my studies keep coming back with the same answer ... you dampen the efficiency of a system by
using fixed targets. I am certain that few, if any, subscribers will be able to ride our big winners all the way.
The recent basesloaded home run we scored in the currencies is a good case in point.
You would think our phones would be ringing off the hook with people talking about their profits. That,
Red Ryder, is not the case. People are calling up wanting to know "where to get back in."
