
Comparing a company’s promises with reality
One of the top secrets of many fundamental analysts is to always have last
year’s annual report handy when reading this year’s. By comparing the two
reports side-by-side, a fundamental analyst might pick up some interesting
information about how well a company executes on its promises.

18 506455-ch12.indd 205

9/24/09 10:36:07 PM

206 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
A Coke and a risk
While much of Coke’s annual review focused on
the exciting things going on with the company,
Coke’s 10-K highlights some of the real risks the
company faces.
The dedicated risk section of Coke’s 10-K provides a laundry list of concerns. But perhaps
interesting for fundamental analysts is seeing
which risks the company decides to focus on in
the MD&A. The MD&A discussion pulls out four
distinct risks that the company calls its “four
key challenges.” Those include obesity and
inactive lifestyles, which the company in not so

many words says could lead to closer scrutiny
of where high-calorie sugary soft drinks may
be served. Secondly, water quality and quantity. The company points out water is its primary
raw material and expresses concern about its
availability in the future. Next is evolving consumer preferences, something the company
learned in the 2000s as many younger consumers started drinking new sodas instead of the
traditional brands their parents consumed.
Lastly, is increased competition.

Company executives love to make big claims about the future. Especially in
the glossy annual report to shareholders, a company might say that it’s investing big-time in its future. Fundamental analysts, though, have long memories
and the ability to check the facts. When a company, for instance, claims in
2007 it’s going to invest in its future, you can find out what really happened by
reading the 2008 10-K. Simply look up the company’s research & development
spending and see how its compares with 2007 levels.
Johnson & Johnson is a good example. In the CEO letter at the front of its
2007 annual report to shareholders, the health care company stated “We continue to invest aggressively in research and development.” But interestingly,
in 2008, J&J actually reduced its research expense by 1.3% to $7.6 billion.
Certainly, $7.6 billion is a huge amount of R&D spending. But the fact R&D
spending fell reflects a slightly different reality than indicated in the letter to
shareholders.

Being aware of legal skirmishes
Since companies seemingly get sued all the time, it’s easy to get jaded about
lawsuits. A vast majority of legal claims get dismissed with little cost to the
company, other than the time of the legal staff.
However, if you’re investing in a company involved in an industry that’s especially vulnerable to legal action, you want to pay attention to this section.
Altria, the parent company of cigarette maker Philip Morris, is named in so

18 506455-ch12.indd 206

9/24/09 10:36:07 PM

Chapter 12: Using the Annual Report (10-K) to See What a Company Is Worth

207

many lawsuits that it provides a table of the number of suits and what type
they are. Altria also breaks down how many of the verdicts have been ruled
in its favor.
If you’re going to invest in a so-called sin stock, or a company that makes products deemed to have a potentially harmful effect on society, you’ll want to
understand the litigation risks it faces.

Paying close attention to amended 10-Ks
You might assume the 10-K is practically chisel onto stone and preserved for
the ages. But many fundamental analysts are surprised to find out that companies periodically modify numbers that appear in the 10-K and other financial
documents for that matter. This is very important for you to remember, since
it’s possible, that data on an old 10-K is outdated and has since been revised.
You must monitor such changes since they can greatly affect your opinion on
a company and its stock.
Revisions and restatements are more common than you might think, as you
read above. And even large companies have been known to go back and
change numbers in the 10-K either to fix errors or update numbers with more
accurate data that became evident after the 10-K was filed.
General Electric, for instance, made a number of modifications to its past
financials between 2005 and 2008. Much of the changes pertained to changes
in the way the company accounted for complex financial instruments called
swaps as well as sales from locomotives and aircraft engines.
When you see a company making changes to financial data that appeared in
the 10-K, you need to pay close attention. As a fundamental analyst you want
to be sure you understand why the changes were made, how significant the
changes are and whether the modifications indicate any more serious issues
at the company. Most importantly, you want to get an idea of whether or not
the company may have padded financial results in order to make itself look
good and keep its stock price moving higher.
Fundamental analysis who paid close attention to GE’s restatements, for
instance, were right on the money. In August 2009, the Securities and
Exchange Commission charged GE of fraudulently misrepresenting its
financial performance in 2002 and 2003 in order to make sure it topped the
expectations of investors. GE paid a $50 million penalty to settle the charges
without admitting or denying guilt.

18 506455-ch12.indd 207

9/24/09 10:36:07 PM

208 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
Examining What the Auditor’s
Opinion Means For Investors
Investing takes a bit of faith. After all, you’re not permitted to stroll into the
headquarters of a company and look over its financial books and records,
even if you’ve invested in the company. The role of oversight is left to the
board of directors, as discussed in Chapter 9. But the other key watchdog for
you, as an investor, is the auditor. This auditing firm’s job is to look over the
company’s 10-K and ensure the books accurately represent the financial
condition of a company.
While the auditing firm is your watchdog inside the company, keep in mind
there is a potential for conflict, too. The auditing firms are paid by the companies, as discussed in Chapter 9, so there’s a risk an auditing firm will not want
to upset a big client. That’s why if you see any red flag raised by an audit firm,
that’s a giant warning and should not be ignored.

Paying attention to tiffs between
a company and its auditors
When a company and its auditors disagree in large degree, the squabble
must be disclosed in the Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on
Accounting and Financial Disclosure section. Generally, you really don’t like
to see a company getting into a fight with its auditor. For an auditor to disagree to the point of putting the dirty laundry into a public filing, it must be a
pretty big deal.
Keep a watchful eye if a company abruptly announces it’s replacing its auditor.
Some companies, which disagree with their auditor, go auditor shopping and
try to find an accounting firm that’s willing to sign off on the books. Replacing
an auditor before the 10-K is put out helps a company get a clean audit opinion,
as described below. Companies are required to file a Form 8-K stating they’ve
replaced the auditor and whether or not there was a disagreement at the time.

Understanding the importance
of financial controls
Both the board of directors and the auditing firm are required to assess the
company’s financial controls. You may need to check two places in the 10-K to
get the board’s take on controls as well as the auditor’s take. You will find the
board’s verdict on internal controls in the Controls and Procedures section of

18 506455-ch12.indd 208

9/24/09 10:36:07 PM

Chapter 12: Using the Annual Report (10-K) to See What a Company Is Worth

209

the 10-K. And many times, the auditing firm will attach a separate page called
the Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on Internal Control
Over Financial Reporting.
The 2007 10-K for computer maker Dell gave a lengthy discussion of the problems with financial controls at the company that year. The board of directors
went a step further and described to investors changes that were made to
accounting to prevent such problems in the future.

Reading the audit opinion
The Enron debacle put a new fear into the hearts of accountants everywhere.
The alleged mistakes and omissions made by Arthur Andersen in the audits
of those giant companies ultimately took the accounting firm down with it.
Ever since the fall of Arthur Andersen, auditing firms have been even more
vigilant before signing off on a company’s financial statements. And that signoff, called the audit opinion and found in the Report of Independent Registered
Public Accounting Firm section of the 10-K, is critical for fundamental analysis.
In this section, the auditing firm will say it gives its blessing to the books,
usually using wording like “fairly represent the financial position” of the company. Don’t just stop reading there, though. The auditing firm may point to
some accounting changes made by the company it thinks investors should be
aware of.
Always scan the audit opinion for the words going concern. Usually an
accounting firm doesn’t make a commentary on a company’s prospects. The
auditor is just in charge of making sure the books are accurate. So when an
accounting firm has doubts a company may continue as a “going concern,”
that’s a gigantic red flag to fundamental analysts that investing in this company is highly speculative.

18 506455-ch12.indd 209

9/24/09 10:36:07 PM

210 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis

18 506455-ch12.indd 210

9/24/09 10:36:07 PM

Chapter 13

Analyzing a Company’s Public
Comments and Statements
In This Chapter
▶ Discovering what to look for from conference calls companies hold with

analysts and investors
▶ Finding out how to evaluate the importance and value of news coming

from company executives
▶ Uncovering what happens at annual shareholder meetings
▶ Parsing through news about individual companies and stocks in media reports

U

nless you belong to an exclusive country club, are in a Rolls Royce
collectors’ club, or jet out to Davos for the World Economic Forum
every year, you probably aren’t on a first-name basis with the CEOs of the
companies you invest in. In fact, you might never have heard the CEOs’
voices, even though you’re entrusting them with your money.
With very few exceptions, most individual investors won’t get a chance to sit
down face-to-face with a company’s CEO to discuss the future of the business.
The relative unavailability of management to investors is one reason why a
vast majority of fundamental analysis is based on closely examining a company’s written financial reports and regulatory filings.
There are times, though, when members of a company’s management team
speak to investors. The most substantive meeting top-level executives have
with investors is typically during analyst conference calls at the end of each
quarter. These meetings, usually available to all investors on a limited basis,
can contain critical pieces of information fundamental analysts need to be
aware of. There’s also the shareholders’ meeting, an annual gathering of a company’s executives and investors. These meetings are mostly marketing events,
but can be worthwhile for fundamental analysts to monitor. Finally, companies
may release important fundamental data while appearing in the media.

19 506455-ch13.indd 211

9/24/09 10:36:44 PM

212 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
In this chapter, you’ll find out how to extend your fundamental analysis
beyond the financial statements to include monitoring conference calls,
shareholders’ meetings, and media appearances.

Using Analyst Conference Calls as a
Source of Fundamental Information
Every quarter, investors eagerly anticipate when companies they’re interested
in will report their financial results. As soon as the results are available, fundamental analysts start poring through the quarterly earnings press release,
as discussed in Chapter 4, to get an idea of how the company did during the
most recent three months.
And while the earnings press release is pretty complete and usually provides
the income statement, balance sheet, and sometimes the statement of cash
flows, fundamental analysts still may have plenty of questions. Some analysts
might wonder, for instance, why certain costs rose but can’t find a reason for
the increase in the earnings press release. Other fundamental analysts might
notice a surprisingly large decline in cash.
That’s where the analyst conference call comes in. Usually, shortly after the
earnings press release is disseminated, the company sets up a telephone call
for Wall Street analysts, who cover the stock, to call in and listen to a discussion
about how the quarter went.
While most companies’ analyst conference calls are designed for Wall Street
analysts, that doesn’t mean you should ignore them. I’ll show you, later
in this chapter, how you can listen into analyst conference calls and even
access transcripts when they’re over.

Understanding the purpose of
analyst conference calls
Analyst conference calls aren’t a chance for the CEO to trade recipes and golf
stories with Wall Street analysts. While some of these calls sometimes seem
oddly chummy, they are supposed to serve several primary purposes including:
✓ Discuss and summarize the company’s performance during the quarter.
Typically the CEO and chief financial officer will read key parts of the
earnings press release and point out items of note.

19 506455-ch13.indd 212

9/24/09 10:36:44 PM

Chapter 13: Analyzing a Company’s Public Comments and Statements

213

✓ Field questions from Wall Street analysts. All the analysts who cover
the company are usually permitted to ask questions about the quarter’s
results. Many of the analysts also try to extract more forward-looking
information from the CEO, to get an idea of what the next quarter’s
results might look like.
Some companies are trying to give regular investors greater ability to
ask questions during the analyst conference calls. Morningstar, a market
research firm, for instance, allows any investor to e-mail questions to
management. The questions are then collected and answered by the
management team each month. It’s a good idea to see if a company
you’re analyzing will allow you to pose questions.
✓ Provide future guidance. One of the most widely watched aspects of
the analyst conference call is whether the company will indicate what it
expects to happen in the immediate future. This tip-off to what the
company thinks is likely for future financial results is called guidance.

The dimming guiding light of guidance
Some investors are initially surprised to hear some companies provide earnings guidance. It might seem somewhat strange to think CEOs would be willing to make promises to investors about the future, when the future is far
from certain. And you might think that, if a CEO says the next quarter will be
strong, that you can quickly make a profit by jumping into the stock.
But guidance isn’t as mysterious as it might seem. For one thing, many companies have a pretty good idea of what their book of business, or expected
deals with customers, will look like months in advance. And that’s why when
CEOs give guidance, they might not be taking as much of a leap as you’d
think. Some CEOs, too, might give guidance they think will be easy to beat.
That way, even if the quarter was just as expected, investors might view the
financial results as better-than-expected and buy the stock.
Just because a company issues positive earnings guidance and says the future
is bright doesn’t mean investors have a license to cash in. Many times, by
boosting investors’ expectations, if the company either misses the guidance or
sometimes doesn’t top even the lofty expectations, the stock price can suffer.
Some companies, seeing the often perverse way some investors use earnings guidance, are not giving it out anymore. Companies including Berkshire
Hathaway, Google, Coke, Citigroup and Ford have, at one point or another in
recent years, stopped giving earnings guidance to investors.
If a company suddenly stops giving earnings guidance, there’s reason to
pay attention. Generally, investors assume companies stop giving earnings

19 506455-ch13.indd 213

9/24/09 10:36:44 PM

214 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
guidance when they foresee a rough future. And for that reason, typically, a
company’s stock price will suffer around the time it stops giving guidance,
according to an academic research report called “Is Silence Golden? An
Empirical Analysis of Firms that Stop Giving Quarterly Earnings Guidance.”
Also, when a company stops giving guidance, the growth forecasts from analysts for the company may be all over the map. You will want to keep in mind
whether or not a company provides guidance when using analysts’ forecasts
for earnings, as described in Chapter 17. If you’re interested, you can read
more about earnings guidance here: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=820644

Unique things to look for in
analyst conference calls
During a conference call, you’ll want to make sure the management team
adequately steps through and describes the just-completed quarter’s results.
That’s really the most basic reason for the call. But as a fundamental analyst,
some of the others things you should watch for in the analyst conference call
include the:
✓ Tone of the executives: Be on the lookout for CEOs and top management
who act like it’s their company instead of the investors’. One warning sign
that a management team doesn’t understand it’s beholden to the public
is if executives act agitated when answering questions from analysts or
investors.
The classic case study of what you don’t want to hear happen in an analyst conference call occurred while Enron was discussing its quarterly
results in April 2001. Prior to the discovery of the massive accounting
scam, one analyst pressed executive Jeff Skilling for reasons why the
company continued to provide scant financial details in the earnings
press release. Skilling fired back angrily, directing profanity toward the
analyst. That’s not a good sign.
✓ Lack of availability: While nearly all companies conduct an analyst
conference call, they are not required to do so by regulators. Regulators
only require the timely filing of regulatory documents, including the
financial statement. It’s up to the company to decide whether or not to
hold an analyst conference call.
However, when a company doesn’t provide a conference call with analysts, that lack of dialogue is somewhat problematic for the fundamental
analyst. Some analysts also grouse when companies only provide highly
scripted and pre-recorded conference calls.
Wells Fargo, one of the largest U.S. banks, only provided a recorded
statement and offered no opportunity for investors to ask questions when
the company reported fourth-quarter 2008 results in January. Some found

19 506455-ch13.indd 214

9/24/09 10:36:44 PM

Chapter 13: Analyzing a Company’s Public Comments and Statements

215

the lack of an opportunity for investors to ask questions amid the financial crisis to be problematic. That prompted some fundamental analysts,
such as Gradient Analytics, to call attention to a “troubling lack of transparency.” Transparency is an industry term to describe how forthcoming a
company is with its financial information.
✓ Completeness of answers: If you start noticing the management team
is constantly deflecting questions, refusing to answer queries or providing very canned answers, your fundamental analysis radar should start
flashing. Company management should be forthcoming in providing
information to shareholders.

How to access the analyst conference calls
Now that you’ve read about the analyst conference calls and discovered how
they can tell you things you can’t pick up from the financial statements, you
might wonder how to get access to them.
Investors are increasingly demanding to be included in the analyst conference
calls. And fairly recent regulations, especially Regulation FD, described in
more detail below, prohibit companies from only sharing material information
with Wall Street insiders and analysts.
Most companies make their analyst conference calls available to all shareholders in a variety of ways including:
✓ Dial-in numbers: Some companies provide a toll-free telephone number
for anyone to use to listen in on the analyst conference call. Typically,
though, unless you’re an analyst, you are not able to ask questions.
The phone numbers are available on the bottom of the earnings press
release or on the company’s Web site.
✓ Web-streams of calls: A growing number of companies allow investors
to listen to conference calls using their computers. Typically, you’ll find
the links to the online audio broadcasts by visiting the investor relations
section of companies’ Web sites. Some companies, including General
Electric, are also offering streaming video of the calls with investors.
Can’t listen to the call while it’s going on? No problem. Some companies
also let you download or stream previous analyst conference calls.
If you can’t find a link to a company’s conference call on its Web site, don’t
assume it’s not available. Yahoo Finance provides many analyst conference
calls, too. Log onto finance.yahoo.com, enter the company’s ticker symbol
into the blank in the upper left-hand corner and click the “Get Quotes”
button. Next, click on the Company Events link on the left-hand side of the
screen. And if you don’t see an analyst conference call there, you can try
BestCalls.com, a site dedicated to analyst conference calls.

19 506455-ch13.indd 215

9/24/09 10:36:44 PM

216 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
✓ Transcripts and FAQ: Another popular way for companies to share their
analyst conference calls with investors is by offering a typed transcript
when they’re over. These transcripts are typically posted on a company’s
Web site in the investors relations area shortly after the call is completed.
Some companies, such as Morningstar, provide written answers to
questions posed by all investors and analysts.
Companies will often conduct analyst conference calls before the stock
market opens at 9:30 a.m. Eastern or after it closes at 4 p.m. Eastern. This is
done intentionally to give companies a chance to fully explain their results
before investors rush to conclusions and either buy or sell the stock.
Be highly skeptical when a company decides to release its earnings after the
market closes on Friday. It’s highly unusual do to this, since it leaves investors
all weekend unable to buy or sell the stock during normal stock market hours.
Generally, companies with very bad news try to slip it through late Friday and
hope, I guess, that investors won’t notice.
If you’re not sure whether what’s being discussed on the analyst conference
call is good or bad, always check after-hours trading. Most financial Web
sites will show you how the stock is behaving in special electronic trading
that occurs after the stock market exchanges close at 4 p.m. But don’t think
you need to start trading after hours yourself. Since the amount of stock
being traded after hours is much lighter than during the regular hours, you
might end up paying more for a stock you’re buying or getting less for a stock
you’re selling than you would if you’d waited.
