
Safe-deposit box rent
Have a safe-deposit box down at the bank? You can deduct the rent on it if
you use it to store investment-related documents. If you also keep jewelry
that you inherited and never wear or other personal items in the same box,
you can only deduct part of the rent.

Investment interest
If you borrow money as part of your strategy, and most day traders do, you
can deduct the interest paid on those loans as long as it is not from a home
mortgage (because that interest is already deductible) and as long as you
are not subject to other limitations set forth in the IRS code, such as the
Alternative Minimum Tax. There’s always a catch, isn’t there? In most cases,
the catch is margin interest (see Chapter 9 for more information on margin).
For most day traders, margin interest is relatively small because few day traders borrow money for more than a few hours at a time.
If you borrow money against your account for anything other than investing or
trading, you can’t deduct the interest. And yes, most brokerage firms let you
take out margin for your own general spending, as a way to let you stay in the
market and still get cash.

State income taxes
If you itemize your deductions, you can deduct, as taxes, state income taxes
on interest income that is exempt from federal income tax. But you cannot
deduct, as either taxes or investment expenses, state income taxes on other
exempt income. In most cases, exempt income is related to government bond
transactions, and few day traders work in those markets.

255

256 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
The 50 states all have different rules about taxation of investment income.
Some states with little or no tax on earned income handle investment income
differently. Because there are so many different issues, state taxation is
beyond the scope of this book. Check with your state revenue department
and a state-savvy tax expert to see what you need to know where you live.

What you can’t deduct
As you day trade, you’ll probably incur expenses that can’t be deducted from
your taxes. Disappointing, I know, but if you know what these nondeductible
expenses are upfront, you can plan accordingly.

What? I can’t deduct commissions?
Every time you make a trade, you have to pay a commission to your broker.
It may be small, just a few cents per share or a few dollars per trade, but you
have to pay it. And you can’t deduct that cost.
Before you splutter in outrage, read this: You can’t deduct it, but you can add
it to cost and subtract it from the proceeds of your trade. Here’s an example:
You buy 100 shares of Microsoft at $29.40 per share, paying a $6.00 commission on the trade. Your total cost for IRS purposes is ($29.40 × 100) + $6.00,
which equals $2,946. Later in the day, you sell all 100 shares for $30.00 per
share at a $6.00 commission, so your total proceeds for the deal are ($30.00 ×
100) – $6.00, or $2,994. Your total profit for tax purposes is $2,994 – $2,946, or
$48.00.
Including the commission in the basis of your trade works like a deduction in
terms of the amount of tax you pay, but because it’s not a deduction, it’s not
subject to the limitations that affect the deductibility of other expenses.
If your state charges transfer taxes on securities, they are handled the same
way as commissions.

Attending stockholders’ meetings
Companies hold annual meetings for their shareholders, usually at or near
the company headquarters. Sometimes these meetings are deathly dull: The
board of directors sits around a conference room in a law office and goes
through a boilerplate agenda with nothing to discuss. Others are extravaganzas where the company shows off new products, showcases major
accomplishments, and takes questions from anyone in attendance. And a few
involve contentious issues that can lead to protests and fighting, which is
entertaining to watch if you aren’t directly affected.

Chapter 15: Taxes for Traders
For long-term investors, these meetings can offer valuable insights on a
company’s prospects. Day traders probably wouldn’t find them very useful,
and it’s just as well, because the IRS won’t let anyone deduct the costs of
transportation, hotel stays, meals, and other expenses that may be involved
in attending a stockholders’ meeting.

Attending investment seminars
The financial-services industry offers all kinds of conventions, cruises, and
seminars for day traders. You can spend your days attending training seminars
instead of actually trading, if you’re so inclined. You’re welcome to go to these,
and in many cases, you should. You may learn things that would help you
trade more effectively. However, you can’t deduct the costs. Bummer.
Although you can’t deduct the costs of attending seminars, you can deduct
the costs of investment counsel and advisory services. Some seminars may
qualify as investment advice. These idiosyncrasies are why you need an
experienced tax adviser to help you.
Did you notice that two of the nondeductible expense categories have the
potential to involve travel? The IRS doesn’t want people buying ten shares of
Hawaiian Electric Industries stock and then trying to write off a trip to the
company’s annual meeting in Honolulu, nor does it consider cruises that
happen to include a talk by the author of a book on investing to be bona fide
investment counsel. It sees these activities as vacations, and vacations are not
tax deductible. (Of course, if an author of an investment book happened to be
on such a cruise, that may be a deductible cost for book promotion. Most
likely. Um, not like I know any authors of investment books who may have
looked into this or anything.)

Naturally, there are limitations!
You didn’t think the IRS would let you take all your deductions automatically,
did you? Of course not. Your deductions may be limited, especially if you
don’t meet the IRS definition of trader.

At-risk rules
The IRS says that your loss is limited by the amount of property you contribute
to your investing activities, including money you borrow. In most cases, day
trading losses meet the risk definitions, but if you pursue a naked trading
strategy that causes you to lose more than your initial investment, you may
fall into this category.

257

258 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
Passive activity losses and credits
The IRS defines a passive activity as an investment where the investor does
not play an active role but does make money. You can deduct passive activity
losses only up to the amount of your passive activity income, and you can
use credits from passive activity losses only against tax on the income from
passive activities. Day trading is generally considered to be active, because
you are materially participating, but if you are generating passive losses from
other investment activities, you probably won’t be able to use them to offset
your day-trading gains.

Interest expense limitations
The IRS allows you to deduct investment interest up to the amount of your
net investment income, which is your investment income less all your
allowable deductible expenses except for interest. If you lost money trading,
you can’t use the interest deduction to reduce your taxes. What you can do,
though, is carry the undeducted investment interest into next year and
use it to reduce your taxes on those profits.
You also can’t deduct interest expenses on straddles. A straddle is an options
strategy that involves buying both a put option and a call option on the same
stock with the same strike price and expiration date. In most cases, the
nondeductible interest and related carrying charges are added to the basis of
the straddle (just as commissions are — see the earlier section “Calculating
capital gains and losses: Covering all your basis”).

Two percent limit
If you do not qualify as a trader to the IRS, you can deduct investment
expenses and other miscellaneous itemized deductions only if they add
up to more than 2 percent of your adjusted gross income.

Top Secret Tax Information for
IRS-Qualified Traders Only
If you meet the IRS qualifications for being a trader (see the earlier section
“Stock trading”), you can avoid some of the tax headaches faced by people
who trade but are not considered by the taxman to be traders. If you trade as
your job, make thousands of trades a year, and rarely hold any position for
more than a day, then you can fill out something called Form 3115, Application
for Change in Accounting Method, and tell the IRS that you want to use the
mark-to-market election in calculating your capital gains and losses. Form 3115
isn’t an easy form to fill out, so you should have a professional do it for you.

Chapter 15: Taxes for Traders
The form has to be submitted with your prior year’s tax return. If you want
to use mark-to-market accounting in 2012, for example, you need to submit
Form 3115 when you send your 2011 tax return in April 2012.
You can’t use the election in your first year of trading. You first have to prove
that you are a trader before you are allowed to get the tax benefits that go
with the title. Consider it an apprenticeship.
If you qualify for trader status, you receive two benefits: mark-to-market
accounting and increased expense deductions. I cover both in the following
sections.

Mark-to-market accounting
Under mark-to-market accounting, you no longer have to track capital gains.
Instead, you pretend to sell your portfolio at the end of the year and then
pretend to repurchase everything at the beginning of the new year so that all
capital gains fall into income.
Because day traders usually close all their positions at the end of the day
anyway, mark-to-market accounting may not seem like a big deal, but it is: In
effect, converting all capital gains to income means that your trades are no
longer subject to the wash-sale rule. For most day traders, this lowers taxes
and results in fewer paperwork hassles.
If you use mark-to-market accounting, you can no longer get the 15 percent
rate on any long-term capital gains from your trading activities. Unless you
work with listed options on market indexes, which are considered to show
profits that are 60 percent long-term capital gains and 40 percent short-term
capital gains, you may not have any long-term capital gains from your trading
activities.

Greater deductibility of business expenses
In general, the IRS allows investors to deduct business expenses only if these
expenses exceed 2 percent of adjusted gross income. However, anyone who
gets to join the charmed circle of IRS-qualified traders gets to deduct 100
percent of expenses, regardless of their adjusted gross income. They get to
deduct all their investment interest, too.
One caveat, though: The IRS assumes that people are in the business of trading
because they are making money at it. If you lose money for three out of five years,
even if it’s because your expenses exceeded your investment profits rather than
due to trading losses, the IRS will probably kick you out of the club.

259

260 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
Other Important Tax Info: Forms
and Deadlines
Knowing what constitutes income, what expenses you can deduct, and what
special rules apply if the IRS considers you a qualified trader is all well and
good, but when it comes right down to it, you still need to know the more
mundane things like what tax forms to fill out and when they’re due. This
section has the details.

Using the right tax forms
Many of the differences in income and expenses discussed already in this
chapter make more sense when you think about how they are reported on
your income tax return. In this section, I give you the highlights of some of the
most exciting forms for the modern day trader. Note that they are different
for those who qualify as traders by IRS standards (refer to the earlier section
“Stock trading”) than for everyone else who day trades.
✓ Forms for qualified traders: If you make the mark-to-market election
on Form 3115 (refer to the section “Mark-to-market accounting”), you’re
considered to be in the business of trading. Business expenses for individual tax filers are put on Schedule C of Form 1040, Profit or Loss from
Business. Then your trading gains and losses are recorded on Part II
of Form 4797. If you have any securities at the end of the year in your
trading account, pretend that they were sold on the last business day of
the year at current fair market value and then immediately reacquired.
✓ Forms for everyone else: Day traders who are not considered traders
by the IRS should itemize business deductions and investment interest
expenses on Schedule A of Form 1040. You should attach Form 4952
if you used it to figure your investment interest expense. You report
capital gains and losses from your trading on Schedule D of Form 1040,
subject to all the limits on losses.

Paying all year: The joy of estimated taxes
If you have been an employee for years and years, all your tax liabilities may
have been covered by your payroll tax deductions. The IRS likes it best that
way, because then it gets money all year round. Face it: the easier it is to pay,
the more likely you are to do it.

Chapter 15: Taxes for Traders
People who are self-employed or who have significant earnings from investments and day trading may generate more income than can be covered from
payroll withholding. What you need to do is estimate your tax liability four
times a year and then write a check for those amounts. (Otherwise, you could
face a penalty at tax time.) Estimated taxes are paid on Form 1040 ES and are
due April 15, June 15, September 15, and January 15.

Using Self-Directed IRAs
Much of the tax hassle associated with day trading is eliminated if you trade
through a self-directed individual retirement account, or IRA. Most brokerage
firms can set them up for you and handle the necessary paperwork. Although
individuals can contribute only $5,000 per year ($6,000 for people older than
50), the money can be substantial for those who have been contributing for a
long time. Also, you can roll over money from an employer’s retirement plan,
such as a 401(k), into an IRA after you leave.
You don’t have to pay taxes in an IRA until you retire, and then withdrawals
are generally treated as ordinary income. For this reason, an IRA is a great
vehicle for day traders: You can post big gains, count all your losses, and
avoid wash-sale rules for trading within your IRA. It’s a sweet way to let your
profits accumulate and compound for years. Of course, there’s a catch: You
can’t sell short, you can’t use all options strategies, and your brokerage firm
may not want to clear funds through the IRA.
If you are a full-time trader, consider keeping your retirement fund completely
separate from your trading funds. That way, you can pay the bills in your
golden years without worrying about what happens every trading day. It’s a
way to reduce stress, plus many retirement funds have tax benefits that may
help the bottom line on your trading business.
You can’t withdraw money from an IRA account until you turn 59 ½. If you take
money out earlier, you pay a 10 percent tax penalty, and that offsets a lot of
the advantages. If you need income from your trading activities to cover your
living expenses before then, an IRA is probably not the best way to set up your
day-trading account.

261

262 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading

Chapter 16

But Did You Make Money?
Testing, Tracking, and
Evaluating Performance
In This Chapter
▶ Testing before you trade
▶ Tracking while you trade
▶ Evaluating performance after the trade

A

ny one trade involves a lot of variables: price bought, price sold, commissions charged, volume traded, and amount of leverage used. And each of
these affects your overall performance. In the heat of a trading day, it can be
hard to juggle all these factors and determine just how well you did or didn’t do.
Performance calculation starts before you trade. You want to test your strategies and see whether they work for you, which requires backtesting and
paper trading. You want to keep track of your trades in real time with the
help of a trading diary. And then, on a periodic basis (at least monthly), you
should review your progress to see how much money you’re making and
whether you need to change your strategy.

Before You Trade: Testing Your System
Performance measurement starts before the trading does. That’s because you
want to figure out how you’ll trade before you start working with real money.
Chapter 3 describes some of the different securities that can be traded on a daily
basis, whereas Chapters 6 through 11 cover some of the strategies that day traders use. After you figure out the combinations of securities and strategies you
want to use, you want to see whether they would have made you money in the
past. Then you should try them to see whether they still work now.

264 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
The happy news? You can do all this without risking a dime, except of course
for the money you may spend on backtesting and simulation software. You
knew there had to be a catch, right? Consider it an investment in the success
of your business.

Backtesting
In backtesting, a trader specifies the strategy that he or she would use and
then runs that strategy through a database of historic securities prices to see
whether it would have made money. The test includes assumptions about
commissions, leverage, and position size. The results give information on
returns, volatility, and win-loss ratios that you can use to refine a trading
strategy and implement it well.

Starting with a hypothesis
What trades do you want to do? After you figure out what and how to trade,
you can start setting forth what your strategy will be. Will you look for highmomentum, small-cap stocks? Seek price changes related to news events
in agricultural commodities? Ride large-cap stocks within their ranges?
Arbitrage stock index futures and their options?
After you do your research, you can lay out your strategy as a hypothesis,
which may be something like this: “High-momentum, small-cap stocks tend
to close up for the day, so I can buy them in the morning and make money
selling them in the afternoon.” Or this: “News events take at least half an
hour to affect corn prices, so I can buy or sell on the news and make a
profit.” With this statement, you can move on to the test to see whether
your hypothesis holds.
One of the most valuable parts about backtesting is that you have to be very
specific about what your trading rule is. Computers cannot understand vague
instructions, and if you find that your trading strategy is too complicated to
write out and set into a backtesting program, it’s probably too complicated for
you to follow.

Running the test
Say you start with something simple: Maybe you have reason to think that
pharmaceutical companies that are moving down in price on decreasing
volume will turn and close up for the day. The first thing you do is enter that
into the software: the industry group and the buy pattern that you’re looking
for. The results will show whether your hunch is correct and how often and
for what time periods.

Chapter 16: Testing, Tracking, and Evaluating Performance
If you like what you see, you can add more variables. What happens if you
add leverage (use borrowed money) in your trades? Leverage increases your
risk of loss, but it also increases your potential return. How does that affect
your trade? Suppose you increase the size of your trades, making fewer
but larger ones. Would that help you make more money or less? By playing
around with the system, you can get a good sense of the best way to make
money with your trade ideas. You can also get a sense of when your rule
won’t work, which can help you avoid problems.
If your strategy doesn’t work in testing, you want to ask yourself why
not. Is your theory not as good as you thought, or are the markets
different now? And if they are different now, how are they different? Unless
you can answer those questions, you’re just engaging in wishful thinking, and wishful thinking will destroy any trader, no matter what the test
results may be.
Most backtesting software allows for optimization, which means that it can
come up with the leverage, position, holding period, and other parameters
that will generate the best risk-adjusted return given the data on hand. You
can then compare this result to your trading style and your capital position
to see whether it works.
Backtesting is subject to something that traders call over-optimization, mathematicians call curve-fitting, and analysts call data mining. All these terms
mean that the person performing the test looks at a past time where the
market performed well and then identifies all the variables and specifications that generated that performance. Although over-optimization sounds
great, what often happens is that the test generates a model that includes
unnecessary variables and that makes no logical sense in practice. If you
find a strategy that works when the stock closes up one day, down two
days, then up a third day, followed by four down days when it hits an intraday high, you probably haven’t made an amazing discovery; you’ve just fit
the curve.
People often have elaborate ideas of how the random shuffle feature works
on their MP3 players. Ask and they’ll give you their own interesting theory for
how certain types of songs show up more often than others, how songs with
similar titles seem to be played together, and other patterns that they are sure
must be there. Why? Because human beings have evolved to see patterns,
even when no pattern exists. It’s the same with the market. It’s entirely possible that, although the results of your test look great, they only show a random
event that happened to work once. That’s why you need to keep testing, even
after you start trading.

265

266 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
Comparing the results with market cycles
The markets change every day in response to new regulations, interest rate
fluctuations, economic conditions, nasty world events, and run-of-the-mill
news events. (It’s like the joke about weather: If you don’t like it now, wait a
minute, and it’ll change.) Different securities and strategies do better in some
market climates than in others.
When you backtest, be sure to do so over a long enough period of time so
that you can see how your strategy would work over different market conditions. Here are some things to check:
✓ How did the strategy do in periods of inflation? Economic growth? High
interest rates? Low interest rates?
✓ What was happening in the markets during the time that the strategy
worked best? What was happening when it worked worst? How likely is
either of those to happen again?
✓ How does market volatility affect the strategy? Is the security more volatile than the market, less volatile, or does it seem to be removed from
the market?
✓ Have major changes occurred in the sector over the period of the test?
Examples of these types of changes include new technologies that
increase demand for certain commodities or changes in regulation that
make industries obsolete. Does this mean that past performance still
applies?
✓ Have there been changes in the way that the security trades? For
example, the bulk of trading in most commodities used to take place in
open-outcry trading pits. Now, trading is almost entirely electronic. How
do your test results look given current trading technologies?
In the capital assets pricing model, which is a key part of academic finance
theory, the market risk is known as beta. The value that a portfolio manager
adds to investment performance is known as alpha. In the long run, conventional finance theory says that the return on a diversified portfolio comes
from beta; alpha doesn’t exist, so investors can’t beat the market in the long
run. In the short run, where day traders play, this relationship may not be so
strong.
Remember the maximum maxim in finance: Past performance is not indicative
of future results. A strategy may test perfectly, but that doesn’t mean it will
continue to work. Backtesting is an important step to successful day trading,
but it is only one step.
