
24. COMPUTERS IN TRADING

117

Toolboxes

If you want to work with wood or metal, you can go to a hardware store and
buy a toolbox with a set of tools. You must learn how to use those tools to
work smarter and more efficiently. A technical analysis toolbox provides a
set of electronic tools for processing market data.
A toolbox draws daily and weekly charts, splits the screen into several
windows, and plots prices and indicators. A good toolbox includes many
popular indicators, such as moving averages, channels, MACD, MACDHistogram, Stochastic, the Relative Strength Index, and a dozen others. It
allows you to fine-tune all indicators. For example, it lets you switch from a
5-day to a 9-day Stochastic at the push of a button.
A quality package allows you to write your own indicators into the system. You may have a favorite formula that you want to follow, along with
ready-made indicators. Avoid programs that limit you to canned indicators.
A good toolbox allows you to compare any two markets and analyze
their spreads. If you trade options, your toolbox must include an options
valuation model. Advanced packages allow you to test the profitability of
trading systems.
There are good toolboxes at all price levels. At the high end, CompuTrac'sT"
list of indicators runs to two pages, it allows you to test profitability, and it is
highly automated. Most of the charts in this book were drawn using CompuTrac.
Financial Trading Seminars, Inc. maintains a list of recommended resources for
computerized traders- software packages at all price levels, data services, computer configurations, and so on. This list is updated every few months and
offered to traders as a public service. You can receive this timely information by
contacting our company at the address that appears in the back of this book.
Black Boxes

Black box software tells you what to buy and sell and when to buy or sell it
without telling you why. You put data into a black box, lights blink, gears
click, and out comes a piece of paper telling you what to do. Thousands of
traders pay good money for this.
Most black boxes are sold by hustlers to gullible or insecure traders.
Black boxes always come with impressive track records showing profitable
past performance. Every black box self-destructs because markets keep
changing. Even systems with built-in optimization do not work because we

118

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

do not know what kind of optimization will be needed in the future. There is
no substitute for mature judgment in trading. The only way to make money
from a black box is to sell one.
Each black box is guaranteed to fail, even if sold by an honest developer.
Complex human activities such as trading cannot be automated. Machines
can help but not replace humans.
Trading with a black box means using a slice of someone else's intelligence,
as it existed at some point in the past. Markets change, and experts change
their minds, but a black box keeps churning out its buy and sell signals.
Trading with a black box is like having sex using a penile implant- you may
deceive your partner for a while, but you will never deceive yourself.

Gray Boxes

Like a black box, a gray box generates trading signals based on a proprietary
formula. Unlike a black box, it gives you a general understanding of its formula and allows you to fine-tune its operations to some degree. The closer a
gray box is to a toolbox, the better it is.
Well-known gray boxes include such programs as MESA. It is considered
the best program for identifying market cycles.

Computers

Different software programs run on different machines. This is why it is better to choose your software before you buy a computer. Get the most modem
machine, so that it will remain useful for years. Traders keep demanding
more memory and speed - I never heard anyone complain about having too
much of either. Buy a fast modem for collecting data from a database. Get a
laser printer if you need to print high-quality charts.
Most programs allow you to automate studies and print them out. You
push a button and leave the computer alone. When you return, there is a
ream of charts with indicators piled in front of the printer. The tedious work
is done, and you can go to work making trading decisions.
It pays to hire a person who already uses the package to set up your system. I often do that when I start using a new piece of software - it saves a lot
of time and energy. Once you know which buttons to push, you can run most
programs without knowing much about computers.

24. COMPUTERS IN TRADING

119

Market Data

Each trader needs to start with a historical database and update it daily. In the
old days, both had to be created manually. Now historical data for any given
market costs less than a dollar per month, and updates are cheap. It takes less
than a minute to update a dozen markets by modem, using your regular
phone line. There are many reliable databases offering a variety of stock,
currency, futures, and options data.
Some traders collect their data around the clock. They use satellite dishes,
FM receivers, and dedicated phone lines. Real-time data is necessary for
day-trading, but not for position trading.
Position traders enter and exit positions within days or weeks. Day-traders
enter and exit trades within a few hours if not minutes. You need to become a
competent position trader before you can day-trade. You can compare position
trading and day-trading to playing a video game at level one or level nine. You
run the same mazes and dodge the same monsters, but the pace of the game is
so fast that at level nine your reactions must be almost automatic. If you stop
to think, you are dead. Learn to analyze the markets and trade at level onelearn to be a position trader before attempting to day-trade.
When you buy historical data, it pays to cover two bull markets and two
bear markets. Starting to analyze a new market, I usually review a monthly
chartbook covering 20 years of trading to see whether the market is historically high or low. I buy three to five years' worth of weekly data and one
year of daily data.
When you begin using a computer, focus on six or fewer markets and add
more later. For example, you may follow Treasury Bonds, Standard & Poor's
500, gold, and Japanese Yen or the German Mark. Change this list if you
want to follow agricultural or industrial markets. Choose a few technical
indicators, and run them daily on each market. After you learn them well,
add new ones. I use a battery of 10 or 12 indicators at any given time, plus
one new indicator. I watch it for several months and compare its signals to
others. If it proves useful, I add it to the standard package.

Three Major Groups of Indicators

Indicators can help you identify trends and their turning points. They can
provide a deeper insight into the balance of power between bulls and bears.
Indicators are more objective than chart patterns.

120

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

The trouble with indicators is that they often contradict one another. Some
of them work best in trending markets, others in flat markets. Some are good
at catching turning points, while others are better at following trends.
Most beginners look for a single indicator - a silver bullet to kill the confusion in the markets. Others lump together many indicators and try to average their signals. Either way, a careless beginner with a computer is like a
teenager with a sports car - an accident waiting to happen. A serious trader
needs to know which indicators work best under different conditions. Before
you use any indicator, you must understand what it measures and how it
works. Only then can you have confidence in its signals.
Professionals divide indicators into three groups: trend-following indicators,
oscillators, and miscellaneous. Trend-following indicators work best when
markets are moving but give bad and dangerous signals when the markets are
flat. Oscillators catch turning points in flat markets but give premature and
dangerous signals when the markets begin to trend. Miscellaneous indicators
provide special insights into mass psychology. The secret of successful trading
is to combine several indicators from different groups so that their negative
features cancel each other out while their positive features remain undisturbed.
This is the aim of the Triple Screen trading system (see Section 43).
Trend-following indicators include moving averages, MACD (moving
average convergence-divergence), MACD-Histogram, the Directional
System, On-Balance Volume, Accumulation/Distribution, and others. Trendfollowing indicators are coincident or lagging indicators- they turn after
trends reverse.
Oscillators help identify turning points. They include Stochastic, Rate of
Change, Smoothed Rate of Change, Momentum, the Relative Strength
Index, Elder-ray, the Force Index, Williams %R, the Commodity Channel
Index, and others. Oscillators are leading or coincident indicators and often
turn ahead of prices.
Miscellaneous indicators provide insights into the intensity of bullish or
bearish market opinion. They include the New High-New Low Index, the
Put-Call Ratio, Bullish Consensus, Commitments of Traders, the
AdvanceDecline Index, the Traders' Index, and so on. They can be leading
or coincident indicators.

25. MOVING AVERAGES
Wall Street old-timers claim that moving averages were brought to the financial markets by antiaircraft gunners. They used moving averages to site guns

25. MOVING AVERAGES

121

on enemy planes during World War 11 and applied this method to prices. The
two early experts on moving averages were Richard Donchian and J. M.
Hurst- neither apparently a gunner. Donchian was a Merrill Lynch
employee who developed trading methods based on moving average
crossovers. Hurst was an engineer who applied moving averages to stocks in
his now-classic book, The Profit Magic of Stock Transaction Timing.
A moving average (MA) shows the average value of data in its time window. A 5-day MA shows the average price for the past 5 days, a 20-day MA
shows the average price for the past 20 days, and so on. When you connect
each day's MA values, you create a moving average line.
Simole MA =

P1+p2t...+p~

where P is the price being averaged
N is the number of days in the m6ving average (selected by trader)
The value of MA depends on two factors: values that are being averaged and
the width of the MA time window. Suppose you want to calculate a 3-day simple moving average of a stock. If it closes at 19,21, and 20 on three consecutive
days, then a 3-day simple MA of closing prices is 20 (19 + 21 + 20, divided by
3). Suppose that on the fourth day the stock closes at 22. It makes its 3-day MA
rise to 21-the average of the last three days (21 + 20 + 22), divided by 3.
There are three main types of moving averages: simple, exponential, and
weighted. Most traders use simple MAS because they are easy to calculate,
and Donchian and Hurst used them in precomputer days. Simple MAS, however, have a fatal flaw - they change twice in response to each price.
Twice as Much Bark

A simple MA changes twice in response to each piece of data. First, it
changes when a new piece of data is added to the moving average. That is
good-we want our MA to reflect changes in prices. The bad thing is that
MA changes again when an old price is dropped off at the end of the moving
average window. When a high price is dropped, a simple MA ticks down.
When a low price is dropped, a simple MA rises. Those changes have nothing to do with the current reality of the market.
Imagine that a stock hovers between 80 and 90, and its 10-day simple MA
stands at 85 but includes one day when the stock reached 105. When that
high number is dropped at the end of the 10-day window, the MA dives, as if

122

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

in a downtrend. That meaningless dive has nothing to do with the current
reality of the market.
When an old piece of data gets dropped off, a simple moving average
jumps. A simple MA is like a guard dog that barks twice - once when someone approaches the house, and once again when someone walks away from
it. You do not know when to believe that dog. Traders use simple MAS out of
inertia. A modem computerized trader is better off using exponential moving
averages.

Market Psychology

Each price is a snapshot of the current mass consensus of value (see Section
12). A single price does not tell you whether the crowd is bullish or bearish-just as a single photo does not tell you whether a person is an optimist
or a pessimist. If, on the other hand, someone brings ten photos of a person
to a lab and gets a composite picture, it will reveal that person's typical features. If you update a composite photo each day, you can monitor trends in
that person's mood.
A moving average is a composite photograph of the market - it combines
prices for several days. The market consists of huge crowds, and a moving
average identifies the direction of mass movement.
The most important message of a moving average is the direction of its
slope. When it rises, it shows that the crowd is becoming more optimisticbullish. When it falls, it shows that the crowd is becoming more pessimistic- bearish. When the crowd is more bullish than before, prices rise
above a moving average. When the crowd'is more bearish than before, prices
fall below a moving average.

Exponential Moving Averages

An exponential moving average (EMA) is a better trend-following tool than
a simple MA. It gives greater weight to the latest data and responds to
changes faster than a simple MA. At the same time, an EMA does not jump
in response to old data. This guard dog has better ears, and it barks only
when someone approaches the house.

25. MOVING AVERAGES

EMA = Ptod K + EMAyest (1- K)
where K =

5
,

N+1
N = the number of days in the EMA (chosen by the trader).
Ptod= today's price.
EMAyest = the EMA of yesterday.

Technical analysis software allows you to select the EMA length and calculate it at a push of a key. To do it by hand, follow these steps:
1. Choose the EMA length (see below). Let us say, we want a 10-day
EMA.
2. Calculate the coefficient K for that length (see above). For example, if
you want a 10-day EMA, K equals 2 divided by 10 + 1, or 0.18.

3. Calculate a simple MA for the first 10 days-add closing prices and
divide the sum by 10.
4. On the 11th day, multiply the closing price by K, multiply the previous
day's MA by (1 - K), and add the two. The result is the 10-day EMA.

5. Keep repeating step 4 on each subsequent day to obtain the latest
EMA (see worksheet, Figure 25-1).
An EMA has two major advantages over a simple MA. First, it assigns
greater weight to the last trading day. The latest mood of the crowd is more
important. In a 10-day EMA, the last closing price is responsible for 18 percent of EMA value, while in a simple MA all days are equal. Second, EMA
does not drop old data the way a simple MA does. Old data slowly fades
away, like a mood of the past lingering in a composite photo.

Choosing the Length of a Moving Average
A relatively short EMA is more sensitive to price changes-it allows you to
catch new trends sooner. It also changes its direction more often and produces
more whipsaws. A whipsaw is a rapid reversal of a trading signal. A relatively
long EMA leads to fewer whipsaws but misses turning points by a wider margin.

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

124

Gold
Day

Close

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

447.3
456.8
451 .O
452.5
453.4
455.5
456.0
454.7
453.5
456.5
459.5
465.2
460.8
460.8

10-EMA

-

453.7
454.8
456.6
457.4
458.0

Figure 25-1. Ten-Day EMA Worksheet

Begin by calculating a simple moving average. The first value in column
3 is a simple MA. Then calculate an exponential moving average on

each subsequent day, according to the formula provided in the chapter.

When computers first became available, traders crunched numbers to find
the "best" moving averages for different markets. They found which MAS
worked in the past-but it did not help them trade because markets kept
changing. Our brokers do not let us trade the past.
It pays to tie EMA length to a cycle if you can find it. A moving average
should be half the length of the dominant market cycle (see Section 36). If
you find a 22-day cycle, use an 11-day moving average. If the cycle is 34
days long, then use a 17-day moving average. Trouble is, cycles keep changing their length and disappearing. Some traders use software such as MESA
to look for valid cycles, but MESA shows that noise is greater than cycle
amplitude most of the time.
Finally, traders can fall back on a simple rule of thumb: The longer the

25. MOVING AVERAGES

125

trend you are trying to catch, the longer the moving average you need. You
need a bigger fishing rod to catch a bigger fish. A 200-day moving average
works for long-term stock investors who want to ride major trends. Most
traders can use an EMA between 10 and 20 days. A moving average should
not be shorter than 8 days to avoid defeating its purpose as a trend-following
tool. I have been using a 13-day exponential moving average for most of my
trading in the past several years.

Trading Rules

A successful trader does not forecast the future - he monitors the market and
manages his trading position (see Section 17). Moving averages help us to
trade in the direction of the trend. The single most important message of a
moving average is the direction of its slope. It shows the direction of the
market's inertia. When an EMA rises, it is best to trade the market from the
long side, and when it falls, it pays to trade from the short side (Figure 25-2).
1. When an EMA rises, trade that market from the long side. Buy when
prices dip near or slightly below the moving average. Once you are
long, place a protective stop below the latest minor low and move the
stop to the break-even point as soon as prices close above their EMA.
2. When the EMA falls, trade that market from the short side. Sell short
when prices rally toward or slightly above the EMA, and place a protective stop above the latest minor high. Lower that stop to the breakeven point as soon as prices close below their EMA.
3. When the EMA goes flat and only wiggles a little, it identifies an aimless, trendless market. Do not trade using a trend-following method.

Mechanical Systems

The old mechanical trading methods using moving averages usually had four
steps: (1) Buy when the MA rises and prices close above it; (2) sell when
prices close below the MA; (3) sell short when the MA declines and prices
close below it; (4) cover shorts when prices close above the MA. This
mechanical method works in trending markets but leads to whipsaws when
markets go flat.
Trying to filter out whipsaws with mechanical rules is self-defeating - fil-

126

Figure 25-2

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

Thirteen-Day Exponential Moving Average

When the EMA rises, it shows that the trend is up and the market should
be traded from the long side. The best time to buy is when prices return
to their EMA-not when they are high above it. Those trades offer a better
riswreward ratio.
When the EMA declines, it shows that the trend is down and the market should be traded from the short side. It is best to sell when prices
rally back to their EMA. When the EMA goes flat, as it did in December,
it tells you that the market has stopped trending. Stop using a trend-following method but continue to track this indicator, waiting for it to enter
a trend.

ters reduce profits as much as losses. An example of a filter is a rule that
requires that prices close on the other side of MA not once, but twice, or that
they penetrate MA by a certain margin. Mechanical filters reduce losses, but
they also diminish the best feature of a moving average-its ability to lock
onto a trend early.
The favorite approach of Donchian, one of the originators of trading with
moving averages, was to use crossovers of 4-, 9-, and 18-day MAS. Trading
signals were given when all three MAS turned in the same direction. His

26. MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE-DIVERGENCE

127

method, like other mechanical trading methods, only worked in strongly
trending markets.
A trader must accept that an EMA, like any other trading tool, has good
and bad sides. Moving averages help you identify and follow trends, but they
lead to whipsaws in trading ranges. We will look for an answer to this
dilemma in Chapter 9 on the Triple Screen trading system.

More on Moving Averages
Moving averages serve as support and resistance zones. A rising MA tends
to serve as a floor below prices, and a falling MA serves as a ceiling above
them. That's why it pays to buy near a rising MA, and sell short near a
falling MA.
Moving averages can be applied to indicators as well as prices. Some
traders use a 5-day moving average of volume. When volume falls below
its 5-day MA, it shows reduced public interest in the minor trend, which is
likely to reverse. When volume overshoots its MA, it shows strong public
interest and confirms the price trend.
The proper way to plot a simple moving average is to lag it behind prices
by half its length. For example, a 10-day simple MA properly belongs in the
middle of a 10-day period, and it should be plotted underneath the 5th or 6th
day. An exponential moving average is more heavily weighted toward the
latest data, and a 10-day EMA should be plotted underneath the 7th or 8th
day. Most software packages allow you to lag a moving average.
Moving averages can be based not only on closing prices but also on the
mean between the high and the low. MAS of closing prices are used for
daily analysis, but day-traders prefer to apply MAS to median prices.
An exponential moving average assigns greater weight to the latest day of
trading, but a weighted moving average (WMA) allows you to assign any
weight to any day, depending on what you deem important. WMAs are so
complicated that traders are better off using EMAs.

26. MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE-

DIVERGENCE (MACD) AND MACD-HISTOGRAM
Moving averages identify trends by filtering out daily price ripples. A more
advanced indicator was constructed by Gerald Appel, an analyst and money

128

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

manager in New York. Moving Average Convergence-Divergence, or
MACD for short, consists not of one, but three exponential moving averages.
It appears on the charts as two lines whose crossovers give trading signals.

How to Create MACD

The original MACD indicator consists of two lines: a solid line (called the
MACD line) and a dashed line (called the Signal line). The MACD line is
made up of two exponential moving averages (EMAs). It responds to
changes in prices relatively quickly. The Signal line is made up of the
MACD line smoothed with another EMA. It responds to changes in prices
more slowly.
Buy and sell signals are given when the fast MACD line crosses above or
below the slow Signal line. The MACD indicator is included in most programs for technical analysis. Few traders calculate it by hand-a computer
does the job faster and more accurately.
To create MACD:
1. Calculate a 12-day EMA of closing prices.
