year basis is very arbitrary. What you really want to know are the odds for profitable performance
in a holding period of any length. In our simulations, Peter determined that 90 percent of all the sixmonth holding periods, 97 percent of the twelve-month periods, and 100 percent of the eighteenmonth periods would be profitable. After over seven years of actual trading, the numbers turned out
to be 90 percent, 99 percent, and 100 percent.
I will tell you how confident I am of the future validity of our evaluation process. There is a fellow
who works for us who used to be a colonel in the British army. His service specialty was
dismantling bombs all over the world. I asked him, "How did you do it?" "It wasn't that difficult,"
he says. "There are different styles of bombs; a bomb in Malaysia is different from a bomb in the
Middle East. You go there and see what kind of bomb it is and take it apart." I said, "Let me ask
you a question. What happens when you come across a bomb that, you don't know?" He looks me
in the eye and says, "You record your first impression and hope it is not your last."
I came into the office one day and found this same steel-nerved individual virtually on the brink of
tears. I asked him what was wrong. It turned out that the Fed had made a major policy change,
which dramatically reversed many major market trends. Overnight, our fund, which had gone from
a starting value of $10 to nearly $15, had fallen back to under $12, just after he had opened a major
Swiss bank as an account. I told him, "Get them on the phone." "What?" he asked somewhat
confused. I repeated [speaking more slowly and emphatically], "G-e-t t-h-e-m o-n t-h-e p-h-o-n-e."
When I was a broker, my boss taught me that if you don't call your client when he is losing money,
someone else will. And, to be honest, when I was a broker, I did the same thing. When I called
prospects and they complained about their broker, I would say, "Oh, how could he put you in that
trade?"
So I get the account on the phone and explain that our simulations show that this type of event will
occur once every few years and that I am confident that in nine months the fund will be back to a
new high. "In fact," I said, "I have just borrowed some money to add to my own investment in the
fund." "You really did that?" he asked in a surprised tone. I assured him that I did.
Well, the account doubled up on their investment, and the fund immediately shot straight up. Today
that account is one of our biggest clients. How could I be so sure? I knew what those systems were
about. What makes this business so fabulous is that, while you may not know what will happen
tomorrow, you can have a very good idea what will happen over the long ran.
The insurance business provides a perfect analogy. Take one sixty-year-old guy and you have
absolutely no idea what the odds are that he will be alive one year later. However, if you take
100,000 sixty-year-olds, you can get an excellent estimate of how many of them will be alive one
year later. We do the same thing; we let the law of large numbers work for us. In a sense, we are
trading actuaries.
I have a friend who went broke trading futures. He can't understand how I can trade by following a
computerized system religiously. We were playing tennis one day and he asked me, "Larry, how
can you trade the way you do; isn't it boring?" I told him, "I don't trade for excitement; I trade to
win." It may be very dull, but it is also very lucrative. When I get together with other traders and
they start exchanging war stories about different trades, I have nothing to say. To me, all our trades
are the same.
There are many money managers who use trend-following systems—and quite a few of those
don't second-guess their own systems. What makes Mint different? How have you been able
to achieve return/risk ratios far above the industry average?
Because we know that we don't know. No matter what information you have, no matter what you
are doing, you can be wrong. I have a friend who has amassed a fortune in excess of $100 million.
He taught me two basic lessons. First, if you never bet your lifestyle, from a trading standpoint,
nothing bad will ever happen to you. Second, if you know what the worst possible outcome is, it
gives you tremendous freedom. The truth is that, while you can't quantify reward, you can quantify
risk. I will give you an example how important this advice is. One of the world's largest coffee
traders invited me to his house in London. When I walked into his library, I noticed he had just
about every book ever written on power. He took me to one of the finest restaurants I have ever
been at. At dinner, he asked me, "Larry, how can you know more about coffee than me? I am the
largest trader in the world. I know where the boats are; I know the ministers." "You are right," I
89

answered, "I don't know anything about coffee. In fact, I don't even drink it." "How do you trade it
then?" he asked. I told him, " I just look at the risk." Well this great meal lasted for several hours.
Five times he asked me what I did, and five times I told him that I managed the risk.
Three months later I heard that he had blown $100 million in the coffee market. He obviously
didn't get the message. And you want to know something? He does know more about coffee than I
do. But the point is, he didn't look at the risk.
So the very first rale we live by at Mint is: Never risk more than 1 percent of total equity on any
trade. By only risking 1 percent, 1 am indifferent to any individual trade. Keeping your risk small
and constant is absolutely critical. For example, one manager I know had a large account that
withdrew half the money he was trading. Instead of cutting his position size in half, this manager
kept trading the same number of contracts. Eventually, that half of the original money became
lOpercent of the money. Risk is a no-fooling-around game; it does not allow for mistakes. If you do
not manage the risk, eventually they will carry you out.
The second thing we do at Mint is that we always follow the trends and we never deviate from our
methods. In fact, we have a written agreement that none of us can ever countermand our system.
The trades are all the same. That is the reason why we have never had a bad trade at Mint. There
are really four kinds of trades or bets: good bets, bad bets, winning bets, and losing bets. Most
people think that a losing trade was a bad bet. That is absolutely wrong. You can lose money even
on a good bet. If the odds on a bet are 50/50 and the payoff is $2 versus a $1 risk, that is a good bet
even if you lose. The important point is that if you do enough of those trades or bets, eventually
you have to come out ahead.
The third thing we do to reduce risk is diversify. We diversify in two ways. First, we probably trade
more markets worldwide than any other money manager. Second, we don't just use a single best
system. To provide balance, we use lots of different systems ranging from short term to long term.
Some of these systems may not be that good by themselves, but we really don't care; that is not
what they are there for.
The fourth thing Mint does to manage risk is track volatility. When the volatility of a market
becomes so great that it adversely skews the expected return/risk ratio, we will stop trading that
market.
Essentially, our approach has three lights in determining the acceptance of trading signals. When
the light is green, we take all signals. When the light is yellow, we will liquidate an existing
position on a signal, but we will not put on a new position. Finally, when the light is red, we
liquidate existing positions automatically, and we do not take any new positions.
For example, in 1986, when coffee went from $1.30 to $2.80 and back to $1.00, we got out of our
long positions on the way up at $1.70 and didn't trade the market for the rest of the price climb and
subsequent collapse. Now, while we may have lost some additional profits, being out of markets
like that is one of the ways we are able to achieve such rigid risk control.
So one of the key differences between you and other trend-following managers is that you
have developed a way of defining when not to play?
In any situation or game, you can define a positional advantage for any player—even the weakest
one. In trading, you can define three categories of players: the trade, the floor, and the speculator.
The trade has the best product knowledge and the best ways of getting out of positions. For example, if they are caught in a bad position in the futures markets, they can offset their risk in the
cash market. The floor has the advantage of speed. You can never be faster than the floor. While
the speculator doesn't have the product knowledge or the speed, he does have the advantage of not
having to play. The speculator can choose to only bet when the odds are in his favor. That is an
important positional advantage.
You mentioned before that you used increased volatility as a signal to stop trading a market.
How many days of past data do you use to determine your volatility filter?
Anywhere from ten to 100 days.
When you say ten to 100, are you trying to be deliberately ambiguous or do you mean you use
different time frames within that range?
We look at different time windows in that range.
90

I fully understand the logic of your 1 percent stop-loss rule. However, my one question is:
Once you are stopped out of a position without the system providing an opposite signal,*
what gets you back into the trade if the market reverses to its original direction? Isn't it
possible that you could get stopped out on a moderate price reaction and then miss a
subsequent major move?
If the market makes a new high, we get back in.
*For example, if a long position is stopped out on a money management rule without a sell signal
actually being generated, the system will still be in a long mode and no buy signal will be
generated, no matter how high prices go. (If, however, a sell signal were generated, the system
would begin monitoring for a buy signal.)
But suppose that the market goes into a wide trading range, might you not get continuously
whipped between being stopped out and reentering the position at new highs?
That happens, but not enough to be a problem.
You have an incredibly strong respect for risk. Were there any personal events in your
trading career that ingrained you with that attitude?
When I first became involved in commodities, I noticed that if you bought pork bellies in
September and sold them before July, you almost always made a profit. So I formed a fund with a
group of friends, and I put on this trade. It worked. I doubled the money. I felt like a genius.
At the time, I had a friend who followed the corn market. I didn't know anything about corn; I only
knew about pork bellies. He talked me into buying the new crop corn and selling the old crop.
Since this was supposed to be a relatively safe trade, in that I was offsetting my long position in one
contract month with a short position in another month, I really loaded up. Shortly thereafter, the
government released a surprising crop estimate. In response, the month I was long went limit-down
and the month I was short went limit-up.
I was in such despair that I remember walking out to the stairway and literally getting down on my
knees and saying out loud, "Dear God, I don't care how much I lose, but please don't let the account
go into a debit." At the time, I was working for a sophisticated international firm, and just as I was
making my providential plea, a Swiss banker came walking down the staircase. To this day, I still
wonder what he must have thought.
Were there any other personal traumatic experiences caused by a failure to heed market
risk?
Not for myself, but throughout my financial career, I have continually witnessed examples of other
people that I have known being ruined by a failure to respect risk. If you don't take a hard look at
risk, it will take you.
When I was a kid and got my first motorcycle, I had an older friend who would always get into
fights. He told me, "Larry, when you are on a motorcycle, never argue with a car. You will lose."
The same lesson applies to trading: If you argue with the market, you will lose.
The Hunt brothers are a perfect example. Somebody once asked me, "How could the Hunts lose?
They were worth billions." Let's say you have a billion dollars, and you buy $20 billion worth of
silver—I am making these numbers up for the sake of the example—you are in exactly the same
risk position as the guy with $1,000 who owns $20,000 worth of silver.
I have a good friend who started from very humble beginnings; his father was a sanitation man.
Anyway, he is a very bright guy and he got into option arbitrage. He was extremely good at it and
made a fortune. I remember visiting him at a palatial estate he bought in England.
Well, he may have been a great arbitrageur, but he turned out to be a bad trader. He developed a
trading system that made money. One day he said to me, "I am not taking the sell signal in gold; it
doesn't look right to me. Besides, almost 50 percent of the signals are wrong anyway." Not only
didn't he take the sell signal, he actually wound up going long. Sure enough, the market went down.
I told him, "Get out!" but he insisted, "The market will come back."
Well, he didn't get out, and he lost the mansion and everything else. Now he lives in a rented box
on a street with a hundred other ticky-tacky houses. To this day, I still remember the name of his
estate: "Beverly." He is still one of my best friends, and his loss of that huge house had an
enormous emotional impact on me. He had it and lost it all! And all because of one trade. The irony
91

is that if he had followed his system, he would have made a fortune on that trade.
I will tell you another story. I have a cousin who turned $5,000 into $100,000 in the option market.
One day I asked him, "How did you do it?" He answered, "It is very easy. I buy an option and if it
goes up, I stay in, but if it goes down, I don't get out until I am at least even." I told him, "Look, I
trade for a living, and I can tell you that strategy is just not going to work in the long ran." He said,
"Larry, don't worry, it doesn't have to work in the long run, just till I make a million. I know what I
am doing. I just never take a loss." I said, "OK..."
In his next trade he buys $90,000 worth of Merrill Lynch options, only this time, it goes down, and
down, and down. I talk to him about one month later, and he tells me he is in debt for $10,000.1
said, "Wait a minute. You had $100,000 and you bought $90,000 in options. That should still leave
you with $10,000, even after they expired worthless. How could you have a deficit of $10,000?" He
said, "I originally bought the options at $4k. When the price went down to $1,1 figured out that if I
bought another 20,000, all it had to do was go back to $2^ for me to break even. So I went to the
bank and borrowed $10,000."
Respect for risk is not just a matter of trading; it applies to any type of business decision. I once
worked for a firm where the company president, a very nice guy, hired an option trader who was
brilliant, but not stable. One day the option trader disappeared, leaving the firm stuck with a losing
position. The president was not a trader, and he sought my advice. "Larry, what do you think I
should do?" I told him, "Just get out of the position." Instead, he decided to hold on to the trade.
The loss got a little worse, but then the market came back, and he liquidated the position at a small
profit.
After this incident, I told a friend who worked at the same firm, "Bob, we are going to have to find
another job." "Why?" he asked. I answered, "We work for a man who has just found himself in the
middle of a mine field, and what he did was close his eyes and walk through it. He now thinks that
whenever you are in the middle of a mine field, the proper technique is to close your eyes and go
forward. Less than one year later, this same man had to liquidate a huge delta neutral spread
position in options [a balanced position whose value will change very little for small price moves in
either direction]. Instead of just getting out, he decided to get out of the position one leg at a time.
By the time he finished liquidating that position, he had gone through all of the firm's capital.
Besides errors in risk control, why do people lose money trading?
Sometimes, because their trades are based on a personal bias, instead of a statistical approach. For
example, there is a regular panelist on "Wall Street Week" who is about sixty-five or seventy years
old. On the show one day, he said that the lesson his father taught him was, "Bonds are the
cornerstone of your portfolio." Think about that! Since this man first got into the business, he has
seen interest rates go down only once out of every eight у ears. [Bonds go up when interest rates
decline.] Obviously, the name "bonds" means a lot more to him than the reality.
You trade a very wide variety of markets. Do you trade them all the same way?
We don't trade markets, we trade money. Mickey Quenington, who is our marketing director, once
introduced me to a former chief executive of this firm [E. F. Man, the firm to which Hite gave 50
percent ownership in his management company in exchange for financial backing]. This guy was a
tough, old Irishman and he asked me, "How do you differentiate between gold and cocoa in your
trading?" I answered, "They are both a 1 percent bet; they are the same to me." He was outraged.
He practically shouted back at me, "You mean to tell me that you don't see any difference between
gold and cocoa?" I think if it wasn't for the fact that he liked Mickey so much, he would have
thrown me out of his office.
I married a very proper English woman who is always concerned that her family considers me a bit
crass. I was once interviewed by a reporter from the London Times, who asked me what I thought
about the future direction of the London cocoa market. I told him, "Frankly, I don't see markets; I
see risks, rewards, and money." I was the last person quoted in that article. He finished it by saying,
"Mr. Hite doesn't care about the cocoa market, all he cares about is money." My wife read the
article and said, "Great. Now I'll never be able to go home; this will just prove to my family that
they were right about you all along."
I assume that if you trade all markets the same, you probably don't believe in optimization.
92

[Optimization refers to the process of testing many variations of a system for the past and
then selecting the best-performing version for actual trading. The problem with this finetuned approach is that the link between past and future performance is often a very rough
one.]
Absolutely. We have a saying here: "It is incredible how rich you can get by not being perfect." We
are not looking for the optimum method; we are looking for the hardiest method. Anyone can sit
down and devise a perfect system for the past.
Are there any technical indicators that you have found to be overrated?
Overbought/oversold indicators. None of them seem to prove out in testing.
Any types of indicators you consider particularly valuable?
Although I don't really trade off of them, there are two that come to mind. First, if a market doesn't
respond to important news in the way that it should, it is telling you something very important. For
example, when the news of the Iran/Iraq war first came out over the newswire, gold was only able
to move up $1.1 said to myself, "A Middle East war has just broken out and the best the gold
market can do is go up $1; it has to be a great sale." The market broke sharply after that. The
second item is something that Ed Seykota taught me. When a market makes a historic high, it is
telling you something. No matter how many people tell you why the market shouldn't be that high,
or why nothing has changed, the mere fact that the price is at a new high tells you something has
changed.
Any other lessons that you learned from Ed Seykota?
Ed Seykota actually explained his philosophy one day: "You can risk 1 percent of your capital, you
can risk 5 percent, or you can risk 10 percent, but you better realize that the more you risk, the
more volatile the results are going to be." And he was absolutely right.
Besides your partners, who I know were integral in developing your trading systems, were
there any other traders who taught you valuable lessons?
Absolutely. Jack Boyd, who hired me as a broker/analyst. Having read that Handy and Harman had
said in their annual report that silver stocks totaled either three billion or seven billion ounces, I
wrote a report on the silver market in which I said, "According to Handy and Harman, there is
either twice as much silver as some people think or less than half." That report went over very big
with Jack and helped me land the job.
Jack had been putting out trading recommendations for his firm for many years. I found that if you
followed all of his recommendations, you would have made money in every year. Finally, I asked
Jack how he did it. You have to picture that Jack was six foot-four. He said, "Larry, if you want to
know where a market is going, all you have to do is this." He threw his charts on the floor and
jumped up on his desk. He said, "Look at it, it will tell you!"
I assume by that, he meant get a perspective of the big picture.
Right, because I don't know of too many people who get rich by taking small profits. Working with
Boyd was extremely important forme. From the time I met him, I knew that his approach was the
right way to do it. In other words, I knew that if you traded across the board, controlled your risk,
and went with the trend, it just had to work. I could see it absolutely clearly.
Any final words?
I have two basic rales about winning in trading as well as in life: (1) If you don't bet, you can't win.
(2) If you lose all your chips, you can't bet.
There are two basic elements to Hite's trading philosophy. First, contrary to the opinion of many
academics, Hite is firmly convinced that the markets are inefficient. This means that if you can
develop a method that places the odds in your favor (and it doesn't have to be by very much), you
can win. Second, an effective method is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition to win. In order to
survive and thrive at trading, you also have to respect market risk. If you don't, sooner or later, it
will get you. Hite controls risk rigorously by applying four basic principles:
1. His system never trades counter to the market trend. There are no exceptions, and he always
