
The other half is free cash flow. Figure 9.2 shows Clorox’s free cash flow
over the past decade; the firm generated about $600 million in free cash flow
in 2003. So, our cash return on Clorox will be $600 million/¢10,100 million,
or §.9 percent.

With 10-year treasuries yielding just 4.5 percent in late 2003 and corporate
bonds yielding a higher (but still relatively paltry) 4.9 percent, that 5.9 percent
cash return from Clorox looks pretty good. Throw in the fact that Clorox’s
free cash flow is likely to grow over time, whereas those bond payments are
fixed, and Clorox starts to look like a pretty solid value.

Cash return is a great first step to finding cash cows trading at reasonable
prices, but don’t use cash return for financials or foreign stocks. As I discuss in
Chapter 17, cash flow isn’t terribly meaningful for banks and other firms that

earn money via their balance sheets. And because definitions of cash flow can

Free Cash Flow ($mil) 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 o 02 03

Cash operations ($mil}) 266.8 290.9 406.7 362.1 3127 588.0 658.0 747.0 876.0 803.0
Cap expenses ($mil) 66.6 629 -848 95.2 -99.0 -176.0 -158.0 -192.0 -177.0 -205.0

Free cash flow ($mil) 210.2 228.0 321.9 266.9 213.7 412.0 500.0 555.0 699.0 598.0

Figure 9.2 Annual cash flows far Clorox.


INVESTOR’S CHECKLIST

vary widely in other countries, a foreign stock that looks cheap based on its

cash return may simply be defining cash flow more liberally.

Investor's Checklist: Valuation—The Basics

> Be picky about valuation. You'll do well over the long haul by buying
companies that are undervalued relative to their earnings potential.

> Don’t rely on any single valuation metric because no individual ratio tells
the whole story. Apply a number of different valuation tools when you're
assessing a stock.

> Ifthe firm is cyclical or has a spotty earnings history, use the price-to-sales
ratio. Companies with P/S ratios lower than their historical average can
sometimes be bargains.

> The price-to-book ratio is most useful for financial firms and firms with
numerous tangible assets, and it’s least useful for service-oriented firms.
In addition, firms with higher ROEs will typically be worth a higher
P/B ratio.

> You can compare a company’s P/E with the market, with a similar firm, or
with the company’s historical P/E. In each case, you'll want the company’s
P/E to be lower than the benchmark, but make sure you're aware of any
differences in risk or growth rates between the company you're valuing
and the benchmark. The most reliable benchmark is likely to be the com-
pany’s own historical valuations, assuming the company hasn’t changed
very much oyer time.

> Use the PEG with caution because fast-growing firms also tend to be
riskier. Don’t overpay for expected growth that may never materialize.

> The lowest P/E isn’t always the best. Firms with high growth, low risk,
and low capital reinvestment needs should have higher P/E ratios. You'll
likely be better off in the long run paying more for a low-risk firm that’s
generating large amounts of cash than paying less for a cyclical company
that’s very capital intensive.

» Check the earnings yield and cash return, and compare them with the
rates available on bonds. An earnings yield or cash return above current

bond rates can indicate an undervalued stock.

137




IO

Valuation:—Intrinsic Value

THE BIG DRAWBACK of the ratios we discussed in the previous chapter is
that they're all based on price—they compare what investors are currently pay-
ing for one stock to what they're paying for another stock. Ratios do not, how-
ever, tell you anything about value, which is what a stock is actually worth.

Without knowing what a stock is worth, how can you know how much
you should pay for it? At Morningstar, we're firm believers that stocks should
be purchased because they're trading at some discount to their intrinsic value,
not simply because they're priced at a higher or lower point than similar com-
panies. Comparing ratios across companies and across time can help us un-
derstand whether our valuation estimate is close to or far from the mark, but
estimating the intrinsic value of a company gives us a better target.

Having an intrinsic value estimate keeps you focused on the value of the
business, rather than the price of the stock—and that’s what you want be-
cause, as an investor, you're buying a small piece of a business. Intrinsic valua-
tion also forces you to think about the cash flows that a business is generating
today and the cash it could generate in the future, as well as the returns on
capital that the firm creates. It makes you ask yourself: If T could buy the
whole company, what would I pay?


140 VALUATION—INTRINSIC VALUE

Second, having an intrinsic value gives you a stronger basis for making
investment decisions. Without looking at the true determinants of value,
such as cash flow and return on capital, we have no way of assessing whether
a P/E of, for example, 15 or 20 is too low, too high, or right on target. After
all, the company with the P/E of 20 might have much lower capital needs
and a less risky business than the company with the P/E of 15, in which case
it might actually be the better investment.

In this chapter, ’'m going to walk you through a simplified version of
how we estimate intrinsic values at Morningstar. Even if you choose not to go
through the entire exercise yourself for every stock you think about buying—
and you very well may not—knowing the basic principles will help you make
better investment decisions.

A warning: This can be some difficult stuff, so don’t be discouraged if

youre a bit confused. It does get easier with practice, though—I promise!

Cash Flow, Present Value, and Discount Rates

Our first step is answering a basic question—what's a stock worth? Luckily,
we can stand on the shoulders of giants such as economists Irving Fisher and
John Burr Williams, who answered this question for us more than 60 years
ago: The value of a stock is equal to the present value of its future cash flows.
No more and no less.

Let’s take this idea apart carefully, because understanding it is crucial to
properly valuing stocks. Companies create economic value by investing capi-
tal and generating a return. Some of that return pays operating expenses, some
gets reinvested in the business, and the rest is free cash flow.

Remember, we care about free cash flow because that’s the amount of
money that could be taken out of the business each year without harming its
operations. A firm can use free cash flow to benefit shareholders in a number
of ways. It can pay a dividend, which essentially converts a portion of each
investor's interest in the firm to cash. It can buy back stock, which reduces
the number of shares outstanding and thus increases the percentage owner-
ship of each shareholder. Or, the firm can retain the free cash flow and rein-
vest it in the business.

These free cash flows are what give the firm its investment value. A pres-

ent value calculation simply adjusts those future cash flows to reflect the fact


CASH FLOW, PRESENT VALUE, AND DISCOUNT RATES

that money we plan to receive in the future is worth less than money we re-
ceive today.

Why are future cash flows worth less than current ones? First, money that
we receive today can be invested to generate some kind of return, whereas we
can’t invest future cash flows until we receive them. This is the t#me value of
money, Second, there’s a chance we may never receive those future cash flows,
and we need to be compensated for that risk, called the “risk premium.”

The time value of money is essentially the opportunity cost of receiving
money in the future versus receiving it today, and it’s often represented by the
interest rates being paid on government bonds. It’s pretty certain that the
U.S. government will be around to pay us our interest in a few years.

Of course, not many cash flows are as certain as those from the feds, so we
need to tack on an additional premium to compensate us for the risk that we
may never receive the money that we've been promised. Add the government
bond rate to the risk premium, and you have what's known as a discount rate.

The oddly named discount rate makes more sense when you think about
it in these terms: What rate of return would you need to make you indifferent
between receiving some quantity of money right now versus at some time in
the future? The old saying that a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush ex-
presses the same concept in a different way: We know we have the bird in the
hand, so we need two birds in the bush to make us indifferent between the
two options. In a similar vein, money to be received in the future is worth less
to us because we don't know if we'll get it, and if we get it today, we could in-
vest it to earn a return.

For example, if you were about to take a one-week vacation, but your
boss asked you at the last minute to postpone it for a year, you might ask your
boss for an extra day off to compensate for the delay. In other words, six days
off next year is equivalent to five days off right now, because you'd rather take
the trip now and because something else could crop up over the next year
that would force you to delay the trip again.

So, your mental discount rate for vacation time is 20 percent. That’s the
rate at which five days becomes six days in a year (6 days— 5 days/s days).
And if you thought your boss might get fired—which would make it less cer-
tain that her promise of an extra day would be honored—you might ask for

two extra days off next year. In that case, your mental discount rate would be

141


142

VALUATION—INTRINSIC VALUE

40 percent, which is the rate at which five days becomes seven days in a year
(7 days — 5 days/s days).

Now you can start to see why stocks with stable, predictable earnings often
have such high valuations—investors discount their future cash flows at a
lower rate, because they believe that there’s a lower risk attached to the likeli-
hood that those future cash flows will actually show up. Conversely, a business
with an extremely uncertain future should logically have a lower valuation be-
cause there’s a substantial risk that the potential future cash flows will never
materialize.

You can see why a rational investor should be willing to pay more for a
company that’s profitable now relative to one that promises profitability only
at some point in the future. Not only does the latter carry higher risk (and
thus a higher discount rate), but the promised cash flows won't arrive until
some years in the future, diminishing their value still further.

This can be a tough concept, so let’s look at an example with some real

numbers. Figure 10.1 illustrates the difference that changing discount rates and

StableCorp CyeliCorp RiskCorp

Free Cash Discounted Free Cash Discounted Free Cash Discounted
Year Flow ($) at 9% Flow ($) at 12% Flow ($) at 15%
2003 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 0 0
2004 2,200 2,018 2,200 1,964 0 0
2005 2,420 2,037 1,980 1,578 0 0
2006 2,662 2,06 2,378 1,691 2,000 1,315
2007 2,928 2,074 2,851 1,812 2,540 1,452
2008 3,221 2,093 3,421 1,941 3,226 1,604
2009 3,543 2.413 3,207 1,625 4,097 177
2010 3,953 2,162 3,900 1,764 5,203 1,956
2011 4,327 2472 4,681 1,891 6,608 2,160
2012 4,146 2,185 5,383 1,941 8,325 2,366
sum 32,000 20,910 31,999 18,207 31,999 12,624

Figure 10.1. Timing and uncertainty have a big effect on present value. The langer you have to
wait to receive a set of cash flows and the less certain you are that you'll eventually receive them,
the less they're warth to you today. Source: Morningstar, Inc.


CALCULATING PRESENT VALUE

the timing of cash flows can have on present value. In all three examples—
StableCorp, CycliCorp, and RiskCorp—the sum of the zndiscounted cash flows
is about $32,000.

However, the value of the discounted cash flows is quite different from com-
pany to company. In present value terms, CycliCorp is worth about $2,700 less
than StableCorp. That’s because StableCorp is more predictable, which means
that investors’ discount rate isn’t as high. CycliCorp’s cash flow increases by 20
percent some years and shrinks in some years, so investors perceive it as a
riskier investment and use a higher discount rate when they're valuing its
shares. As a result, the present value of the discounted cash flows is lower.

The difference in the present value of the cash flows is even more
acute when you look at RiskCorp, which is worth almost $8,300 less than
StableCorp. Not only are the bulk of RiskCorp’s cash flows far off in the fu-
ture, but also, we're less certain that they'll come to pass, so we assign an
even higher discount rate.

Believe it or not, you now know the basic principles behind a discounted
cash flow model. Value is determined by the amount, timing, and riskiness of a
firm's future cash flows, and these are the three items you should always be
thinking about when deciding how much to pay for a stock. That's all it re-
ally boils down to.

Calculating Present Value
Now that you know the theory behind an intrinsic value calculation, here’s
how you can do it in practice. To find the present value of a $100 future cash
flow, divide that future cash flow by 1.0 plus the discount rate. Using a 10 per-
cent discount rate, for example, a cash flow of $100 one year in the future is
worth $100/1.10, or $90.91. A $100 cash flow two years in the future is worth
$100/(1.10)”, or $82.64. In other words, $82.64 invested at 10 percent becomes
$90.91 in a year and $100 in two years. Discount rates are really just interest
rates that go backwards through time instead of forwards.

Generalizing the previous formula, if we represent the discount rate as R,
the present value of a future cash flow in year N equals CF /(1+ R)’. Sup-
pose, for example, that we have a $500 cash flow two years in the future with

az percent discount rate. The present value of that cash flow is:

143


144. VALUATION—INTRINSIC VALUE

$500 _ $500

= $436.
(1.07)" 1.449 ae

That same cash flow three years in the future is worth $408.16 today:

$500 _ $500

(07) = 125 = $408.16

Looking three years into the future and changing our discount rate back
to 10 percent, our present value is $375.66 today:

$500

(If you want to do this in a spreadsheet program such as Excel, remember

4

to use the carat [“] symbol to insert an exponent. Thus, 1.10* would be writ-

ten as 1.1044 in an Excel formula.)

Fun with Discount Rates

Now that we have the formula down, we need to figure out what factors de-
termine discount rates. How do we know whether to use 7 percent or 10 per-
cent? From our previous example of the delayed vacation, we know that
opportunity cost—or time value—is one factor and that the other big deter-
minant of our discount rate is risk.

Unfortunately, there is no precise way to calculate the exact discount rate
that you should use in a discounted cash flow (DCF) model, and academics
have filled entire journal issues with nothing but discussions about the right
way to estimate discount rates—but trust me, it’s not a discussion in which
you want to be involved.

Here’s what you need to know for practical purposes: As interest rates in-
crease, so will discount rates. As a firm’s risk level increases, so will its dis-
count rate. Let’s put these two together. For interest rates, you can use a

long-term average of Treasury rates as a reasonable proxy. (Remember, We Use


FUN WITH DISCOUNT RATES

the interest rate on treasuries to represent opportunity costs because we're
pretty certain that the government will pay us our promised interest.) In mid-
2003, the average yield of the 10-year bond over the past decade was about 5.5
percent, so we'll use that. Because this isn’t an exact science, you may want to
use § percent or 6 percent.

Now for risk, which is an even less exact factor to measure. According to
standard finance theorists, risk is the same thing as volatility, and the risk level
of a company can be estimated simply by looking at how much its shares have
bounced around relative to how much the market has bounced around. Thus,
if a firm’s shares suddenly drop from $30 to $20, this theory holds that the
stock has just become much riskier.

We're not big fans of this definition of risk at Morningstar because we
think stocks that are cheap are generally less risky than stocks with high price
tags. (This assumes that nothing dramatic has changed with the underlying
business, which isn’t always the case when a stock drops.) We think it's better
to assess risk by looking at the company, rather than by looking at the stock,
and that a firm’s riskiness is determined by the likelihood that it will or won't
generate the cash flows that we're forecasting.

Why? Because what the share price has done in the past may have little
bearing on what cash flows the company generates in the future. We think it
makes more sense to define risk as the chance of permanent capital impair-
ment—in other words, the likelihood that our investment will be worth
much less when we go to sell it than it is today. Here are some factors we

think should be taken into account when estimating discount rates.

Size
Smaller firms are generally riskier than larger firms because they're more vul-
nerable to adverse events. They also usually have less diversified product lines

and customer bases.

Financial Leverage

Firms with more debt are generally riskier than firms with less debt because
they have a higher proportion of fixed expenses (debt payments) relative to
other expenses. Earnings will be better in good times, but worse in bad times,

with an increased risk of financial distress. (Financial distress means that the

145


VALUATION—INTRINSIC VALUE

firm is having trouble paying its debts.) Look at a firm’s debt-to-equity ratio,
interest coverage, and a few other factors to determine the degree of a com-

pany’s risk from financial leverage.

Cyclicality

Is the firm in a cyclical industry (such as appliances or semiconductors) or a
stable industry (such as breakfast cereal or beer)? Because the cash flows of
cyclical firms are much tougher to forecast than stable firms, their level of risk

increases.

Management/Corporate Governance

This factor boils down to a simple question: How much do you trust the
folks running the shop? Although it’s rarely black or white, firms with pro-
motional managers, managers who draw egregious salaries, or who exhibit
any of the other red flags covered in Chapter 7 are definitely riskier than

companies with managers who don’ display these traits.

Economic Moat

Does the firm have a wide moat, a narrow moat, or no economic moat? The
stronger a firm’s competitive advantage—that is, the wider its moat—the
more likely it will be able to keep competitors at bay and generate a reliable

stream of cash flows.

Complexity
The essence of risk is uncertainty, and it's tough to value what you can't see.
Firms with extremely complex businesses or financial structures are riskier than
simple, easy-to-understand firms because there’s a greater chance that some-
thing unpleasant is hiding in a footnote that you missed. Even if you think
management is as honest as the day is long and that the firm does a great job
running its operations, it’s wise to incorporate a complexity discount into your
mental assessment of risk—unless you really want to memorize all 700 pages of
the last 10-x filing.

How should you incorporate all of these risk factors into a discount rate?
As I said earlier, there’s no right answer. At Morningstar, we use 10.5 percent as

the discount fate for an average company based on the factors in the preceding


CALCULATING PERPETUITY VALUES

list, and we create a distribution of discount rates based on whether firms are
riskier or less risky than the average. As of mid-2003, firms such as Johnson &
Johnson, Colgate, and Wal-Mart fall at the bottom of the range, at around 9
percent, whereas riskier firms—such as Micron Technology, JetBlue Airways,
and E*Trade—top out at 13 percent to 15 percent.

The key is to pick a discount rate you're comfortable with. Don't worry
about being exact—just think about whether the company you're evaluating is
riskier or less risky than the average firm, along with how much riskier or less
risky it is, and you'll be fine. In addition, remember that assigning discount

rates is an inexact science—there is no “right” discount rate for a company.

Calculating Perpetuity Values

We're almost there—we have cash flow estimates, and we have a discount
rate. We need only one more element, called a perpetuity value, and we're
ready to put the whole thing together. We need a perpetuity because it’s not
feasible to project a company’s future cash flows out to infinity, year-by-year,
and because companies have theoretically infinite lives.

The most common way to calculate a perpetuity is to take the last cash
flow (CF) that you estimate, increase it by the rate at which you expect cash
flows to grow over the very long term (g), and divide the result by the dis-
count rate (R) minus the expected long-term growth rate. In formula terms,

this equals:

CF (1+)

(R-g)

The result of this calculation then must be discounted back to the pres-
ent, using the method I discussed previously. Let’s run through an example to
show you what I mean.

For example, suppose we're using a 10-year DCF model for a company
with an 11 percent discount rate. We estimate that the company’s cash flow in
year 10 will be $1 billion and its cash flows will grow at a steady 3 percent an-
nual rate after that. (Three percent is generally a good number to use as

your long-run growth rate because it’s roughly the average rate of U.S. gross

147


148

VALUATION—INTRINSIC VALUE

domestic product [GDP] growth. If you're valuing a firm in a declining in-
dustry, you might use 2 percent.)
First, multiply sz billion by 1.03 to get an estimated $1.03 billion cash flow

in year I.
$1 billion x 1.03 = $1.03 billion
Divide $1.03 billion by 0.08 (our 11 percent discount rate minus 3 percent

long-run growth rate) to get $12.88 billion in estimated cash flows from year
