
Fig 5.17 The Buying Climax – Firework Show ( Again!)
The buying climax is simply a selling climax in reverse. The insiders have taken the market lower, panic has
been triggered and fearful sellers are closing positions. See Fig 5.17.
The insiders then move into the accumulation phase to restock the warehouse, and move prices back and forth
in a tight range, to shake out any last remaining tenacious sellers.

Towards the end of this phase, the insiders than mark prices down rapidly, flushing out more sellers, before
moving the price higher later in the session to close somewhere near the opening price, helped higher by their
own buying in the market, with bargain hunters also sensing that the market is 'over sold' at this level.
This is repeated several times, with panic selling continuing as frightened investors and speculators can take
no more. They capitulate and throw in the towel. This is the last hurrah.
The insiders are now ready, with warehouses over flowing with stock, to start the march north, and begin the
bullish trend higher, in nice easy steps, towards the target price for distribution.
Once we accept the fact that all markets are manipulated in one way or another, then the rest of the story simply
fits into place.
The above is very logical, and common sense, but don't be misled into thinking that this is simply not possible
with the current legislative authorities now in place. Nothing much has changed since the days of Wyckoff and
Ney, and here let me quote from 'Making it in the Market' published in 1975.
This was a telephone conversation that Richard Ney had with an SEC (Securities and Exchange Commission)
official. The SEC is supposed to regulate the financial world in the US.
Remember, this is 1975, and this it what was said on the telephone call, when the official was asked about
checks on specialists and how they are regulated:
“specialists are under the Exchange. We don't get too concerned with them. They're not directly regulated by
the Commission. They all operate under self regulation. They make their own rules – the Commission just O.K's
them. Only if the Commission feels there is something not proper does it take exception. We check brokerdealers but we never go onto the Exchange to check out specialists.”
So has anything changed?
In reality very little, except to say that trading is now largely electronic, and one of the many problems faced
today by the SEC is HFT or High Frequency Trading.
There are the usual cases, where individuals and firms are taken to task to prove that the SEC and others have
some sort of control and to assuage the public, that the markets are regulated in a fair and open way.
Sadly, as I hope the above shows, and in using VPA live will quickly prove to you, this is most certainly NOT
the case. The insiders are FAR too experienced and wily to allow their golden goose to be killed off. They
simply devise new and more elegant ways to manipulate prices for their own ends.
Let me quote from a recent release from the SEC in response to the issue of HFT :
“There are a number of different types of HFT techniques, and an SEC Concept Release [6] broke them down
to four main types of strategies:
Market making: like traditional market making, this strategy attempts to make money by providing liquidity on
both sides of the book and earning the spread.
Arbitrage: Trading when arbitrage opportunities arise ( e.g. from mis-pricing between Indices, ETF's or ADRs
and their underlying constituents.
Structural: These strategies seek to take advantage of any structural vulnerabilities of the market or certain
participants, and include latency arbitrage or quote stuffing.
Directional: These strategies attempt to get ahead of – or trigger – a price move, and include order anticipation
and momentum ignition.”
And the date of this report? - late 2012.
I don't wish to labor the point, but I am conscious that some people reading this book may still consider me to be
a 'conspiracy theorist'. I can assure you, I am not.

As Ney himself points out :
“ most of those in government doing the investigating are beholden to the Stock Exchange in one way or
another (via campaign contributions or through their law firms), or hope (if they are commissioners and
chairmen of the SEC) to be employed in the securities industry at some not too distant date, nothing ever comes
of these investigations.”
Let me round off this chapter by creating a simple schematic, which I hope will help to put all of this into
perspective.
Here it is, the complete market cycle, or as I like to call it – ‘another day at the office’ for the insiders, and this
should hold no surprises. See Fig 5.18
The first campaign is the accumulation phase. The insiders start to fill their warehouses, which are empty
following the sharp move lower, at wholesale prices.
Once the warehouses are almost full, the buying climax then begins, with some volatile price action to draw in
more stock, but once complete, they then exit from the price region and test for supply. If all the selling has been
absorbed, the insiders can start marking the market higher in steps, building confidence back into shell shocked
investors and speculators who are still recovering.
As confidence returns, so the trend starts to gather momentum, drawing in buyers who now believe that the
market will 'go to the moon'. Even cautious investors succumb and buy, just as the price is reaching the target
area for retail prices.
With the market now at the retail level, more buyers are sucked in as the distribution phase starts in earnest,
with prices moved higher to draw in more buyers, then lower to lock them in to weak positions. Finally the
selling climax begins, with volatile price action, and the remaining inventory is cleared from the warehouses.
Once empty, the market breaks lower, through this price area, and once again a test is executed, this time of
demand. If the test confirms that buying in this region has been absorbed then the campaign is complete, and
the market is moved lower fast.
The cycle is complete, and it only remains for the insiders to count their profits and repeat the exercise, again,
and again, and again and … well I'm sure you get the picture.

Fig 5.18 The Market Cycle – Another Day At The Office!
The important point to remember here, is that this cycle could be in any time frame and in any market. The
above could be on a 5 minute chart for example of a currency pair, and perhaps over a few hours. It could
equally be on a daily chart of a stock, and perhaps last weeks or even months. It could be on an hourly chart for
a futures contract, and in this case the insiders would be the large operators, with the cycle perhaps lasting a
few days or a week. The time scale is unimportant, other than in remembering Wyckoff's rule of 'cause and
effect'.
Once we begin to study charts in detail we start to see this cycle occurring repeatedly, and armed just with the
information in these early chapters, is enough to help traders and investors truly understand how the markets
work and trade with confidence, as a result.
However, for a VPA trader it is just the starting point.
Before moving on to the next chapter let me try to 'frame' the context of what I have covered so far, not least
because it is something that took me some time to absorb when I first started studying Volume Price Analysis.
Therefore, what I want to do here is to summarise what has been covered so far, starting with the concept of
market manipulation, and try to explain what we mean by this phrase. Do we mean the insiders are free to
simply move prices higher and lower at random and whenever it suits them to do so. The answer is NO. What I
mean by market manipulation, which is perhaps different to other peoples view, is that this simply means using
every available resource, to either trigger fear or greed in the retail traders mind. This means using every piece
of news in the media to influence the buying and selling, and to move the market in the direction that the
insiders require, either higher to a distribution phase, or lower to an accumulation range.
This is what I consider to be market manipulation. It is the creation of an environment, which in turn creates
either fear or greed in the mind of the investor or the speculator. As I said earlier, market manipulation is not so
much about manipulating the price, but manipulation of the twin emotions of fear and greed. Fear triggers
selling and greed triggers buying, and the media in all its forms, is the perfect tool to create both.

Next, whilst the insiders all work together, this is NOT a cartel. There are many hundreds of specialists and
market makers, and this simply would not be feasible. What does happen however, is that the insiders will all
see strength and weakness at the same time. They have the advantage of seeing both sides of the market, all
the buy orders and all the sell orders, and therefore true market sentiment.
What they cannot hide is volume, which is why it is so powerful. It is the only way we have of seeing when the
insiders are involved in the price action, and if they are, whether they are buying or whether they are selling.
When they are buying in the buying climax, we see it, because we have high volumes. When they are selling in
the selling climax, we see it, because the volumes are high, and this is what you have to understand. It is the
volume which is important not the manipulation element of the VPA, which brings me to another point.
I am often asked how the insiders decide on the target levels for accumulation and distribution, and this was
something I struggled with myself. Are these just arbitrary levels decided in advance, or is there some logic that
can help us to make sense of this aspect of price behaviour. Well the 'make sense' element is really this, which
also helps us to understand the price behaviour that we see at these levels.
On any price chart, there are levels of price congestion that create the natural levels at which markets could be
considered to be 'over sold' or 'over bought', terms which I introduced earlier in the chapter. These price levels
are absolutely fundamental to the principles of VPA for two reasons. First, they represent areas where the
market is either likely to find support, or is equally likely to struggle. They define barriers, areas where the
market has paused in the past, and either moved on or reversed from these regions. I will explain these in more
detail shortly, but for the time being accept the fact they exist, and are created during the phases of
accumulation and distribution, as the market moves into sideways consolidation.
Now these 'phases' of price action appear all over our charts and in every time frame, and the insiders will be
well aware of where these are and whether they are well developed areas, or simply minor areas where price in
the past has perhaps paused before moving on. In preparing any campaign, the insiders therefore target these
regions, as potential natural points for accumulation and distribution. This also explains the price action once
we finally arrive at these areas.
Let's start with the distribution phase and consider what is actually happening during the selling climax?
The market has risen higher and accelerated on bullish news, and has arrived at the target area, which is
potentially one where the market can be considered to be 'over sold', in other words, potentially weak and/or
exhausted. We know this because these are the areas that insiders target before a campaign starts. Following
the bullish trend higher, which has been supported with positive news, and increasing numbers of buyers
entering the market, the insiders now pause at this level, and begin the job of distribution.
The initial phase of the distribution is executed purely from the momentum already driven into the market by the
insiders, so the volume here will be high but not excessive. On any 'up' candles the volumes here will represent
'natural' buying by investors and speculators. In other words the insiders are not having to 'force' the market
higher at this stage. They are simply selling into demand that has been created during the trend higher, and
buyers are now in the 'greed' mindset. Any selling at this level, at this stage is again, 'natural' selling, as holders
who have bought into the trend earlier, perceive that the market is perhaps struggling at this level, and decide to
take their profits. The key point here is that the associated volumes during this phase are likely to be well above
average but not excessive.
There will certainly be signals of weakness as we will see shortly, once we start to study the charts in detail, but
this first phase of distribution, is what I call the 'natural' phase. This is the insiders simply meeting demand from
greedy investors and speculators. Any selling is absorbed back into their inventory, and resold. The news is
then used to move the market higher and lower in this range as the warehouse stock continues to dwindle.
The final phase is the selling climax, and this is where effort is required by the insiders. Now the market is very
weak at this level. Perhaps the news is not quite so bullish as before, and the insiders are having to 'force' the
price higher, using whatever news they can to pull in more buyers.
But with a weak market the buyers are now becoming overwhelmed with the sellers, which is why we see the
price action reflected in the candles during the selling climax. The insiders now have a real struggle on their
hands, desperately trying to keep the market propped up, forcing it higher, desperately selling in large volume to

buyers, but as the volumes of selling increase, this in turn leads to falling prices, adding downwards pressure
on the market.
This is the problem that all campaigns have eventually. The problem is simple. Sell in large enough volumes
and ultimately the price will fall, working against you. It is this battle to keep the price high, but also to move
inventory in volume that we are seeing played out in this final dramatic scene. It is the battle that insiders have
to face at this stage.
The problem is one of moving large volumes fast, without moving the price down fast, undoing all the good work
of earlier in the campaign. It is a fine balance, and this is the balance that you see in those last few candles at
the end of the selling climax. The insiders are battling to force prices higher, supply the demand in ever
increasing volumes without letting the price collapse, which is why we see the price behaviour in these
candles. Let's take another look.

The Selling Climax

Fig 5.19 Selling Climax
What is happening here in Fig 5.19 is that in trying to meet demand by selling in large volumes, the selling by
the insiders, is forcing the price back down again. We really only have to equate this to some real life examples.
Scarcity in a product increases its value. Think of designer goods, branded items, luxury goods. If we want to
increase the value of something then we make a 'limited edition'. This allows us to sell the item at a higher
price, as there are fewer available and they are therefore more desirable. By contrast the price of a mass market
product will be much lower by virtue of the numbers made, and the market unlikely to stand any increase in
price.
Whenever large institutions have to sell large blocks of stock at the top of the market, they don’t just place one
order for the entire block. This would drive the price down and reduce the profit on the sale, so in order to
overcome this problem there is a facility which many large companies use called 'dark pools'.

Now I did say at the start of this book that volume was the only activity that could not be hidden. Well this is not
strictly true. Large institutions use dark pools to hide large transactions, and the details are not made public until
after the trade has been completed.
There is no transparency, and once again, is something few traders or investors are ever aware of. It's not a
huge issue for us, and anyway, there is little than can be done about it.
However, this does reinforce the point. When a large block has to be sold, executing this in one order would
drive the price down too far, so the alternative is to either break the order into smaller blocks and sell in smaller
volume, or to use the dark pool to hide it completely.
The same problem occurs in the buying climax, where the insiders are buying in large volume, which in turn
starts to raise the market as a result. Nick Leeson, the rogue trader who bankrupted Barings Bank had the same
problem. His positions were so large, that it was impossible to unwind them without moving the market against
his own buying and selling.
Finally, another example is when trading an illiquid stock, or currency. Buying in volume will very quickly put
the price up against you. Sell in volume and the price will move lower. This is the problem that the insiders face,
when they are selling or buying in large volume. The price will always move against them as a result, which is
why they cannot simply complete all their selling or buying in one session.
It has to be done over two, three or four, and is another reason why the distribution process, the selling climax
and the buying climax have to be spread over a period. This was one of the issues I struggled with for some
time when I first started, but I soon learnt we simply have to be patient, and wait for the climax to complete.
Remember it takes time to sell large volumes quickly!

The Buying Climax
It is the same problem with the buying climax. It is the sheer scale of their own buying which results in the
market price rising, coupled with short holders closing positions. But, the predominant effect, once the insiders
enter the market is the volume effect on price. If we go back to our buying climax example once more :

Fig 5.20 Buying Climax
The market is still bearish, and the insiders are forcing the market lower with negative news, and then buying in
volume to fill the warehouses which in turn is moving the market higher against them. The action is stopped and
the market moves sideways, temporarily.
More bad news is then used to send the market lower, where large volumes are bought once again, with the
market rising on the insider buying. This is repeated until the warehouses are full.
In many ways, it doesn't really matter whether we believe the market manipulation aspect of price behaviour or
not. What is EXTREMELY important, is that you do believe in the relationship between price and volume in
these phases of market behaviour.
The ultra high volumes are showing us, more clearly than anything else, that the market is preparing for a
reversal in trend. When we see the price action and high volumes associated with a selling climax, then we
know that there is a trend reversal lower in prospect. When we see the price action and high volumes of a
buying climax, then we know that we are likely to see a bullish trend starting soon. It’s guaranteed.
This is what high volume and the associated price action is telling us. It really couldn't be any clearer.

Chapter Six
Volume Price Analysis – The Next Level
I never argue with the tape.
Jesse Livermore (1877-1940)
In the last few chapters we have gradually started to build our knowledge and understanding of VPA, beginning
with a very simple analysis of price and volume at the micro level, the ticker tape level if you like. From there,
we moved out to consider some simple concepts of price and volume at the macro level, and finally in the last
chapter, the 'global' view and the cycles of behaviour that markets follow with the ebb and flow of volume as the
insiders push and pull the price action, this way and that, using the media as their primary vehicle.
However, as I said at the start of this book, there is nothing new in trading, and volume has been around for over
100 years. One thing that has changed since, is the introduction of candlesticks as the 'de facto' standard for
analysing price action on the chart. All the original books and articles mentioned so far have one thing in
common, namely that the charts use bars to describe the price action. Candlesticks have only been adopted by
Western traders since the early 1990’s. Again I was fortunate in having been taught the basics by Albert, and I
have used candlesticks ever since for a number of reasons.
For me, candles are so much more descriptive than any bar can ever be. VPA with candlesticks is my own
methodology. By combining the power of candlesticks with VPA gives us a deeper perspective of market
behaviour.
In this chapter I want to move to the next level and explain the various candle and candle patterns that we build
into our VPA analysis and education. I must stress, that this chapter is NOT intended as another book on
Japanese candlesticks. There are plenty of those already available, and perhaps I may write one myself in the
future.
In this chapter I want to explain those candles and candle pattern combinations which are the ones to watch
when analysing a chart using VPA. We're going to look at lots of examples using schematics before moving to
actual annotated chart examples in subsequent chapters.
However, before moving forward I would like to explain some broad principles which apply, and which we need
to keep in mind in any analysis when using candlesticks.

Principle Number One
The length of any wick, either to the top or bottom of the candle is ALWAYS the first point of focus because it
instantly reveals, impending strength, weakness, and indecision, and more importantly, the extent of any
associated market sentiment.

Principle Number Two
If no wick is created, then this signals strong market sentiment in the direction of the closing price.

Principle Number Three
A narrow body indicates weak market sentiment. A wide body represents strong market sentiment.

Principle Number Four
A candle of the same type will have a completely different meaning depending on where it appears in a price
trend. Always reference the candle to the location within the broader trend, or in the consolidation phase.

Principle Number Five
Volume validates price. Start with the candle, then look for validation or anomalies of the price action by the
volume bar.
So, let me start with two of the most important candles, the shooting star and the hammer candle.

The Shooting Star Candle

Price action - weakness.
The shooting star candle is one of our three premier candles in VPA that we watch for in all time frames, and in
all instruments and markets.
The price action is revealing weakness, since the price has risen and then fallen to close near the opening
price, with the sellers overwhelming the buyers in the session.
Shooting star candles appear in every trend, both bullish and bearish, and at every point within the trend. Their
appearance DOES NOT signal an immediate reversal. Their appearance signals POTENTIAL WEAKNESS at
that point in the price action. The candle will ONLY gain significance based on the associated volume.
The shooting star price action appears in every up and down trend. It is the classic signal of weakness, and it is
only volume which can give a CLEAR signal as to the relative strength of this weakness, and consequently the
extent of any reversal. The best way to understand these variants is with some examples.
In a bullish up trend any shooting star with below average volume is simply signalling a possible pause in the
upwards trend, with a potential short term pull back. Following such a signal, we would then be considering the
previous and subsequent price action for confirmation of a continuation of the trend.
As the trend develops further, this initial weakness may be confirmed further with additional shooting star
candles, with average volumes. Once we have two candles of similar proportions in a trend, and in the same
time frame, we can then compare volume between the two candles. If the first candle was an initial sign of
weakness, then the second, with increased volume is confirming this weakness further. After all, if the volume
on the second shooting star is higher than the first, so 'weakness' has increased as more selling is coming to
the market and forcing prices lower in the session.
This brings me to an important point which I would like to introduce here. It is perhaps an obvious point, but
nevertheless one which is worth making.
If we see one shooting star, this can be taken as a sign of weakness. If we see two consecutive shooting stars,
or two relatively close to each other, this is increasing the bearish sentiment. If a third appears then this is
adding yet more bearish sentiment. In other words, single candles are important, multiple appearances of the
same candle, in the same price area, exponentially increase the level of bearish or bullish sentiment. And
remember, this is JUST based on price action alone. Add in the volume aspect and this takes our analysis to
another level, which is why I find it so strange that PAT traders don't use volume!
