
 Clark sat down with a piece of paper—a piece of paper!—and drew this little diagram: 

 The way he drew it, it came out a neat little diamond. The Magic Diamond. Clark thought a minute about the spot in the middle (*), which is of course where he assumed any company he would create belonged. Say, there was maybe one-third of a trillion and a half dollars a year of pure waste. Say, he cut out half of that and kept the rest as profit. He’d still be bigger than Microsoft, and Microsoft was on its way to becoming the most highly valued company on the New York Stock Exchange. If he was going to create the most valuable company in America, the company would need a name. He might as well have written in “Jim Clark Enterprises,” for that is what it amounted to. Instead, he wrote “Healthscape.” 

 Any other human being would have been tossed into an asylum for thinking such grandiose thoughts. Clark had invented Jim Clark, and so he was taken seriously.

The New New Thing 

 7 

 Throwing Sand in Capitalists’ Eyes 

 N ot long after he drew the Magic Diamond with himself at the center of the U.S. health care industry, Clark drove up to Sand Hill Road to see the venture capitalists. The venture capitalists advertised themselves as the great financial risk takers of the Valley, but you could learn everything you needed to know about their attitudes toward risk, simply by driving up Sand Hill Road. Sand Hill Road was where the venture capitalists clustered together for safety, like ducks in a park waiting for the bread crumbs to fall. Each time Clark made this trip, the ducks came out of it worse than the time before. The price of the crumbs rose; and they had to quack louder for them. When Clark had gone to see the venture capitalists about Netscape, it was with the understanding that he would act as the CEO until the company was up and running. This time he proposed not only that he take home the lion’s share of the stock in the new company but that the venture capitalists do all of the actual work. Clark had no plans to spend even a day in the Healthscape offices. He had ceased to be a businessman and become a conceptual artist. Having articulated the new new thing, Clark intended to return to the important work of teaching his computer to sail his new boat. 

 Amazingly, the question in his mind was not whether a venture capitalist would accept this deal, but which venture capitalist he would grace with his presence. The venture capitalists had learned a hard lesson from Netscape. Before Netscape went public, a lot of venture capitalists had thought John Doerr and his firm, Kleiner Perkins, had been mad to agree to Clark’s terms. Clark had charged Doerr three times the going rate for start-up capital. Doerr had cleared $500 million or so in eighteen months, or thirty times his original investment, and become the most talked-about venture capitalist on Sand Hill Road. The other venture capitalists were forced to concede the point: the new, higher price for concepts, and the people who dreamed them up, was obviously worth paying. 

 Dick Kramlich from New Enterprise Associates (NEA), the Valley’s biggest pile of venture money and health care expertise, made the strongest pitch to Clark. Clark still complained about the way Kramlich had joined forces with Ed McCracken to muscle him aside at Silicon Graphics. But Kramlich was one of those gentle souls who just want everyone to get along, and he was, at least on the surface, willing to subordinate his ego to others. “If there is crow to eat and groveling to do,” says one of his colleagues, “Dick is the first in line to do it.” Kramlich had turned up at one of Netscape’s meetings with investors immediately before the IPO, and told Clark how happy he was for his success. This act of self-abasement—a formal acknowledgment that Clark was too important to ignore—encouraged Clark to rethink his opinion of Kramlich. He still hadn’t forgiven Kramlich for siding with Ed McCracken, and he never would, but he was, let us say, touched by the gesture. 

 As it happened, Clark had a motive for reconsidering his irritation with Kramlich: he was now even more irritated with John Doerr. Whenever Doerr’s name came up, Clark’s mouth went into full-pucker mode. When Clark had offered Doerr the chance to invest in Netscape, Doerr had been rather down on his luck. Between 1991 and 1993 Doerr had persuaded a lot of people, himself included, that the future of the Valley was in pen computing. Pen computing was a version of the Palm Pilot, ahead of its time. Doerr had burned tens of millions of capital on a dramatic failure to stuff computers into ordinary people’s pockets called GO. After GO, Doerr seized on interactive television. He took to making futuristic speeches the theme of which was that interactive television would transform the world. (He’d give the same speech right through to the end of the decade, simply replacing “interactive television” with “the Internet.”) Clark had rescued Doerr from that particular blind alley, and then helped him to cook up other new Internet companies. One of those companies was @Home. Clark and Doerr shared an obsession with Microsoft. Both felt that the Internet would be too big for Microsoft to ignore. They assumed, further, that a few years down the road the Internet would enter people’s homes through their television cables, which could transmit data much faster than phone lines. Ergo, Microsoft would seek to dominate the cable Internet industry. @Home was designed to secure the cable industry for Silicon Valley. 

 The important work was in the concepts, so far as Clark was concerned, and the concept for @Home had been at least as much his as Doerr’s. And yet Doerr’s firm, Kleiner Perkins, had denied Clark the chance to buy a piece of @Home, at least at first. Kleiner Perkins hewed to the old venture capital model, which relegated entrepreneurs like Clark to the sidelines of any business they did not explicitly create. They declined to pay Clark at his new conceptual-artist rates. Clark responded by telling Doerr that he planned to go elsewhere with his concepts. 

 Now he had one: the Magic Diamond. Once again he had put his name on a concept and was off and running down his long, dark tunnel. A few weeks after he saw Kramlich at the Netscape gathering, Clark drove up Sand Hill Road and paid a call on NEA, Kramlich’s venture capital firm. Kramlich finally seemed to understand that the world had changed, and that the engineer with the beautiful concept was its natural ruler. That was a big point in Kramlich’s favor. Kramlich gathered his partners into the conference room. Clark drew the Magic Diamond with Healthscape at the center of America’s only $1.5 trillion industry, the world’s single largest market, and announced he was going to “fix the U.S. health care system.” Of course, no one who actually understood the U.S. health care system would have dared to make such a grandiose statement. And, of course, Clark knew he did not understand it—and knew also, or at least sensed, that his lack of understanding was a psychological advantage. No one who understood the U.S. health care industry would bother to try to fix it. 

 Kramlich and his partners responded just as Clark assumed they should. They wanted a piece of the action. They asked him to come up and talk to them again. Soon. The failure to land Netscape had already cost Kramlich half a billion dollars. That failure was in part blamed on Alex Slusky, the young Harvard Business School graduate who had been assigned to trail behind Clark after he quit Silicon Graphics. Slusky had been forced to move on from NEA shortly after Netscape went public. (“They ‘fired’ Alex because he didn’t land Jim,” says another former NEA employee. “Fired in this case just means they made Alex’s life so miserable that he left.”) 

 To handle Clark this time around, Kramlich lined up two senior partners, whom I’ll call Phil and Bill. Phil and Bill were NEA’s health care specialists. Phil and Bill were also pretty much everything Clark hated about venture capitalists. Both were self-consciously “professional” men who knew how to dress down for meetings with engineers and how to dress up for meetings with Wall Street financiers and never said anything in any of these meetings that surprised anyone. They were conventional people who assumed that conventions made the world go round, which, of course, they usually do. In any case, they didn’t really believe in the possibility of change, and so did not bring the passion of revolutionaries to their work. As one of their NEA colleagues explains it, “Phil and Bill were totally unwilling to work nights and weekends, to write a business plan, brainstorm, spend time with Jim during the off hours, etc.” Phil and Bill, even more than Dick Kramlich, viewed Clark as a dangerously volatile, perhaps even mad, character who needed to be “managed.” 

 Clark looked around Dick Kramlich’s conference table filled with NEA partners and said he wanted nothing to do with Phil and Bill. He wanted Hugh. 

 Hugh was Hugh Reinhoff, a young doctor with little business experience who had just quit one job at Johns Hopkins and taken another in NEA’s Baltimore office. So far as Phil and Bill were concerned, Hugh was an interloper. So far as Clark was concerned, that was fine. Clark often preferred young, inexperienced people over older, more experienced ones. Even if they didn’t quite know what they were doing, at least they hadn’t learned the wrong things. They hadn’t lost their passion; they hadn’t become Business Bores. And so, in September 1995, at Clark’s fierce insistence, Hugh took over where Alex Slusky left off. He became Clark’s personal minder on the sprint down the long, dark tunnel. “My job,” Hugh later said, “was not to leave Jim’s side—to make sure that NEA got a piece of whatever Jim created.” 

 Improbably, Clark had been catapulted to the top of the capitalist food chain. Once there, he insisted that the people who had spent their careers there act more like him. He expected the venture capitalists to join him in throwing money at the idea and letting his engineers work out the details. Up until then the businesses funded by Silicon Valley venture capitalists may have been adventurous by the standards of American commerce, but the adventure was well planned. Now the adventure was reckless; Clark was making it up as he went along. Deep in his intuitive soul he thought “business plans” and “business models” and “management structures” were a waste of time. Time was the one commodity you could not waste if you wanted to make a billion dollars from the Internet. Once he had identified the new new thing, all he needed was some really smart, passionate engineers to chase after it and make it happen. After all, the idea was simple: eliminate the paperwork, the waiting around, and the market illogic from the U.S. health care system by bringing all the people in that system together on a single network. 

 The idea was not nearly as astonishing as Clark’s audacity in putting it across to the venture capitalists. At the same time that he was telling them how to invest their money, and plotting to take over the $1.5 trillion health care industry, Clark was working nearly full-time as a computer programmer. He took on the world’s single largest market as a part-time job. When he woke up in the morning, he wrote code for his boat; when he went to bed at night, he stared at the ceiling and thought about the bugs in the boat’s code. He communicated with the venture capitalists chiefly by e-mail—which is to say that he rarely actually had to see them anymore. 

 A chapter could probably be written on the effect of e-mail on the American business imagination. Within about eighteen months it had gone from being exotic to essential. Those businessmen who were uncomfortable with computers cheated and pretended to use e-mail. Netscape’s CEO, Jim Barksdale, for instance, did not actually fetch his own e-mail but had his secretary type it up for him. But all of the people with whom Clark dealt were now available at his fingertips whenever a whim might strike him at three in the morning. He had a lot of whims. 

 Most of Clark’s early missives betrayed his concern with finding people he liked to run Healthscape. He wanted to hire people he trusted rather than people the venture capitalists recommended. For instance, on October 24, 1995, Clark wrote to Hugh Reinhoff, 

 “TJ [Clark’s old engineering buddy Tom Jermoluk, now president of Silicon Graphics] could absolutely do the job of CEO [of Healthscape] but I doubt he’s interested because although he’d like to make more money, he’s not risk oriented. I also met with the best software manager at SGI and he is interested…keep this highly confidential, because while he expressed interest in going, I don’t want anyone else to get wind of this. 

 Clark didn’t want anyone else to “get wind of this,” because it was a breach of his contract. The moment Netscape went public, it started getting résumés from Silicon Graphics’ engineers. Already Clark had received letters from Ed McCracken’s lawyers threatening to sue him if he recruited engineers from Silicon Graphics. 

 The Valley’s leading venture capitalists did not instantly adopt all of Clark’s assumptions about work and life. But they entertained them. And they tended to let Clark have his way. Clark now possessed a new kind of power—he could go anywhere he wanted with his precious concepts, and if the venture capitalists did something he did not like, he would. 

 Inevitably, the venture capitalists did something he did not like. Toward the end of October, Dick Kramlich invited Mark Perry, the vice chairman of Silicon Graphics and an Ed McCracken sympathizer, to become a partner at NEA. In theory, this should have been none of Clark’s business; in practice, Clark now had a lot to say about what happened inside any venture capital firm that wanted his concepts. On October 31, 1995, Clark fired off an intemperate e-mail to several NEA employees: 

 Dick is nuts for getting Mark Perry as partner of NEA. Your firm went down a notch when I heard that. [It] calls into question Dick’s judgement…. Quite an insult to the rest of the partners. Sorry to be soblunt. 

 With that out of his system, he made some small attempt at conciliation: 

 I do like Mark, but he is still Vice Chairman of SGI, which when added to Dick’s role there [Kramlich remained on the board of Silicon Graphics] makes me very uncomfortable that SGI will hear that I’m talking to TJ…and this would not be good. I intend to recruit heavily from SGI. 

 Then he gave up being sweet: 

 Anyway, I think you’ll probably have to co-invest with KP [Kleiner Perkins], and if I detect any problems with these guys hearing about my recruiting, I will move away from NEA pronto. 

 Breaking up was never all that hard for Clark to do. E-mail made it easier. As he was well aware, the whole point of Hugh’s shadowing him was to prevent him from drifting into the arms of other venture capitalists. Kramlich’s nightmare was Clark wandering up the road to John Doerr at Kleiner Perkins—who simply by following Clark’s lead was already being treated as the venture capitalist of the future. Clark’s tiff with Doerr had given Kramlich his opening; now Clark was saying that his new irritation with NEA exceeded whatever lingering resentment he felt toward Doerr. 

 Inside NEA the situation quickly went from bad to worse. One of NEA’s partners, who called Clark a “psychopath,” took to pasting magazine photos of him on the office walls, with homemade captions that cast Dick Kramlich as “the unfortunate father” and Clark as “the troubled son” in an Oedipal melodrama. Another partner complained regularly that Clark was mucking up their entire investment portfolio by persuading them of his latest ideas about the Internet, which he often himself abandoned. Half the firm was furious that Kramlich had done a deal with the devil; the other half was furious that the deal had not been fully consummated. And once it was clear they might lose control of Clark to John Doerr, all hell broke loose. Kramlich tried to pull Hugh Reinhoff off Clark and slide in, once again, the older and more established pair, Phil and Bill. Phil wrote Hugh, instructing him to back away from Clark. Hugh wrote Phil and said he’d do so, gladly. 

 The trouble was that, whether or not Hugh knew it, Clark now was in control of Hugh. And Clark didn’t like being told that he had to deal with Phil. He wanted Hugh and, as was now abundantly clear, what Clark wanted Clark got. He shot off another e-mail that found its way to Dick Kramlich: 

 I’m really pissed at Phil’s attitude. He is a fucking partner there…. I’m not going to let NEA have as much of the deal because of his childish behavior. That is a fucked up partnership, with babies like him as General Partners. 

 Within days Clark had called a meeting with NEA that included John Doerr. Within weeks he had agreed to split the equity into eleven parts, he and Kleiner Perkins each taking four parts and NEA getting only two. In mid-November 1995 the Kleiner employer David Schnell, writing “on behalf of NEA and Kleiner Perkins,” sent Clark an e-mail, “reviewing our discussion on your business model.” 

 Thanks for getting the NEA and KPCB groups together to share ideas. Like Netscape we believe [Healthscape] should be built first by capturing all the plans, employees and employers in enterprises (eg. corporations, universities, non-profits) with services they demand now and will pay for. Establishing that beachhead then allows [Healthscape] to attack other opportunities. 

 P.S. John Doerr’s now predicting that you may be the only entrepreneur on the planet to found THREE ventures worth more than a billion $. 

 Schnell was yet another medical doctor who had decided that he wanted to be a venture capitalist. He was now a Kleiner employee who had been told by his bosses that, if he wanted to make partner, he needed to prove himself. The bosses’ idea of how Schnell might prove himself was to become a captain of one of Jim Clark’s ships. If Schnell went out with Jim Clark’s imprimatur and came back with a few hundred million dollars in profits, he could be a partner at Kleiner Perkins. Schnell, who knew perfectly well what it meant to be a captain of Jim Clark’s ship, politely declined. In the end, he was given no choice, and he became, reluctantly, Healthscape’s acting CEO. 

 The sycophantic tone of his e-mail to Clark suggested that Schnell, like every other venture capitalist, felt Clark needed to be “managed.” He sought to give Clark the feeling that he was in control of what might become the world’s largest company without giving him actual control. As a result, it wasn’t long before Clark found fault with Kleiner Perkins—or at least with David Schnell. Schnell, together with Hugh Reinhoff at NEA, kept trying to pin Clark down, by offering up various “business models” and “business plans” for Healthscape. In early December, Clark wrote to both, 

 The problem I have with the way this discussion with KP/NEA and me has been going is that it is more or less in the abstract—that is, we’re cooking up a business plan without a management team. This may be the way some companies are formed, but I’m more interested in finding bright people with a passion to change the way things are. 

 Clark had required only about six weeks of very part-time work to sow strife inside Dick Kramlich’s partnership. He required only a few weeks more to disrupt John Doerr’s. A month after his first e-mail to Clark, David Schnell sent another e-mail to everyone but Clark who was even slightly involved with Healthscape to complain about “JC’s behavior here.” David Schnell had new fears. The guy inside the venture capital firm who worked with Clark, he grumbled, was always the guy who got fired. He was more prescient than he knew. 

 That was how it was now with Clark and the venture capitalists who now sat on top of American capitalism, funding the many people newly engaged in the search for the new new thing. Clark was at best ambivalent about young men in suits who had gone to business school and never run a real risk in their lives. He certainly was never going to let them have their way, unless their way happened to be his way. This raises an obvious question: Why did the world’s most important venture capitalists put up with Clark? Surely, it would have been easy enough for Kleiner Perkins or NEA to announce that they were backing someone else to do the same thing as Clark. Valley venture capitalists stole each other’s ideas all the time. Right from the start Clark put much less effort into his enterprise than they did—though even they did not know that he was spending most of his time computerizing a boat. (“I knew Jim was doing this on the side,” Reinhoff said, much later. “He had the big vision…the details fell to those in the company. I really didn’t know what else he was doing. I assumed it was Netscape that took up most of his energy.”) And yet not once did anyone dare to suggest that Clark was not carrying his load, or that the business would be better off without him. 

 That was the miracle of Jim Clark: by the end of 1995 he had created a money-making machine in which he was the least easily replaced part. The venture capitalists, the investment bankers, the CEOs—they were all fungible. If you were going to seize control of a $1.5 trillion industry you needed a certain authority with the engineering class. In the fall of 1995 no one in the Valley had the same authority with the engineers as Clark. That aura was why every one of the e-mails sent from Kleiner and NEA to people who might come to work for Healthscape boasted right up front that the Magic Diamond was Jim Clark’s idea. In late 1995 a new kind of faith was in the engineering mind. Engineers believed that if Jim Clark said he was going to do something new, however outlandish his proposal, he would do it. And Clark responded to the faith by cooking up ever more outlandish new things to do. 
