
The “futures” market lets buyers and sellers agree to exchange commodities like cocoa or gold or bananas in
the future at a price agreed upon today. In exchange for a small fee, Graham-Newman could arrange to sell
its cocoa beans at a known price for a specified period of time, thus eliminating the risk that the market price
would drop. The person on the other side of the trade—who was acquiring the risk that the price would
drop—was speculating.7 If cocoa beans got cheaper, Graham-Newman was protected, because the speculator
would have to buy Graham-Newman’s cocoa beans for more than they were worth.8 The speculator’s role,
from Graham-Newman’s perspective, was to sell what amounted to insurance against the risk of the price
dropping. At the time, of course, neither knew which way cocoa prices would move.
Thus, the goal of the arbitrage was to buy as many Rockwood shares as possible while at the same time
selling an equivalent amount of futures.
Graham-Newman assigned Warren to the Rockwood deal. He was made for it; he had been arbitraging stocks
for several years, buying convertible preferred stock and shorting common stock issued by the same
company.9 He had studied arbitrage returns over the preceding thirty years in detail and had discovered that
these “riskless” deals typically returned twenty cents for every dollar invested—a lot more than the seven or
eight cents profit from the average stock. For several weeks, Warren spent his days shuttling back and forth
to Brooklyn on the subway, exchanging stock for warehouse certificates at Schroder Trust. He spent his
evenings studying the situation, sunk in thought while singing “Over the Rainbow” to Little Sooz and shutting
out the screams as Big Susie struggled to give Howie a bottle.
On the surface, Rockwood was a simple transaction for Graham-Newman: Its only cost was subway tokens,
thought, and time. But Warren recognized the potential for even more “financial fireworks” than GrahamNewman had.10 Unlike Ben Graham, he did not do the arbitrage. Thus he did not need to sell cocoa futures
either. Instead, he bought 222 shares of Rockwood stock for himself and simply kept it.
Warren had thought through Pritzker’s offer carefully. When he divided all the beans Rockwood
owned—not just the beans attributed to the cocoa-butter business—by the number of Rockwood shares, it
amounted to more than the eighty pounds per share that Pritzker was offering. So people who did not turn in
their shares would end up with stock worth more cocoa beans per share. Not only that—all the extra beans
left on the table by those who did turn in their stock would bump the number of beans per share even more.
Those who kept their stock would also profit because they wound up with a share of the company’s plant, its
equipment, money due from customers, and the rest of the Rockwood business that was not being shut down.
Warren had inverted the situation, thinking about it from Pritzker’s point of view. If Jay Pritzker was buying,
he wondered, why did it make sense to sell? And after doing the math, he could see that it didn’t make sense.
The side to play on was Jay Pritzker’s. Warren had looked at the stock as a little slice of the business.
With fewer shares outstanding, his slice was worth more. He was taking more risk than had he simply done
the arbitrage—but he was also making a calculated bet with odds heavily in his favor. The $2 profit from the
arbitrage was easy to earn, however, and riskless. When the price of cocoa beans dropped, the futures
contracts protected Graham-Newman. They, and a significant percentage of other shareholders, accepted
Pritzker’s offer and left a lot of cocoa beans on the table.
Hanging on to the stock, however, turned out to be a brilliant call. Those who played the arbitrage, like
Graham-Newman, made their $2 a share. But Rockwood stock, which had traded for $15 before Pritzker’s
offer, shot up to $85 after it was over. So instead of making $444 from his 222 shares, as he would have from
the arbitrage, Warren’s calculated bet earned him an extraordinary sum—around $13,000.11
In the process, he had also made a point of getting to know Jay Pritzker. He figured anybody smart enough to
have figured out that deal “was going to do more smart things later.” He went to a shareholders’ meeting and
asked some questions, and that was his introduction to Pritzker.12 Warren was then twenty-five, Pritzker
thirty-two.

Even working with a relatively small amount of capital—less than $100,000—Warren saw that by using this
kind of thinking he could open up a world of possibilities for himself. His only constraints were the money,
energy, and time he had available. It was lumberjack labor, but he loved doing it. This was nothing like the
way most people invested: sitting in an office and reading reports that described research performed by other
people. Warren was a detective, and he naturally did his own research, just as he had collected bottle caps
and thought about fingerprinting nuns.
To do his detective work he used the Moody’s Manuals—Industrial, Banks and Finance, and Public Utility.
Often he went down in person to Moody’s or Standard & Poor’s. “I was the only one who ever showed up at
those places. They never even asked if I was a customer. I would get these files that dated back forty or fifty
years. They didn’t have copy machines, so I’d sit there and scribble all these little notes, this figure and
that figure. They had a library, but you couldn’t select from it yourself. You had to request things. So I
would name all these companies—Jersey Mortgage, Bankers Commercial, all these things that nobody’d
ever requested, ever. They’d bring them out, and I’d sit there taking notes. If you wanted to look at SEC
documents, as I often did, I went down to the SEC. That was the only way to get them. Then, if the company
was nearby, I might very well go see the management. I didn’t make appointments ahead of time. But I got a
lot done.”
One of his favorite sources was the Pink Sheets, a weekly printed on pink paper, which gave information
about the stocks of companies so small that they were not traded on a stock exchange. Another was the
National Quotation book, which came out only every six months and described stocks of companies so
minuscule that they never even made it into the Pink Sheets. No company was too small, no detail too
obscure, to pass through his sieve. “I would pore through volumes of businesses and I’d find one or two that
I could put ten or fifteen thousand dollars into that were just ridiculously cheap.”
Warren was not proud; he also felt honored to borrow ideas from Graham, Pritzker, or any useful source. He
called that riding coattails and did not care whether the idea was glamorous or mundane. One day he
followed up on a lead of Graham’s, the Union Street Railway.13 This was a bus company in New Bedford,
Massachusetts, selling at a big discount to its net assets.
“It had a hundred sixteen buses and a little amusement park at one time. I started buying the stock because
they had eight hundred thousand dollars in treasury bonds, a couple of hundred thousand in cash, and
outstanding bus tickets of ninety-six thousand dollars. Call it a million dollars, about sixty bucks a share.
When I started buying it, the stock was selling around thirty or thirty-five bucks a share.” The whole
company was selling for half the value of its cash in the bank. Buying the stock was playing a fifty-cent slot
machine that was virtually guaranteed to pay off a buck.
Under the circumstances, the company was, naturally, trying to buy its own stock, running an ad in the local
New Bedford paper inviting shareholders to sell it to them. Warren, facing competition, began running his
own ad: “Write to Warren Buffett at such-and-such address if you want to sell your stock.” “Then, because
it was a regulated utility, I got the list from the public-utility commission in Massachusetts that showed the
largest shareholders. And I worked that to find more stock. And I wanted to see Mark Duff, who ran the
company.”
Visiting management was part of Warren’s way of doing business. He used those meetings to learn as much
as he could about a company. Getting personal access to management played to his ability to charm and
impress powerful people with his knowledge and wit. And he also felt that by becoming friendly with the
management of a company, he might be able to influence the company to do the right thing.
Graham, on the other hand, did not visit managements, much less try to influence them. He called this
“self-help” and thought it was “cheating” to get the inside dope, even though it was legal. He felt that by
definition being an investor meant being an outsider, someone who confronted managements rather than
rubbing shoulders with them. Graham wanted to be on a level playing field with the little guy, using only
information that was available to everyone.14

Following his own instincts, however, Warren decided to visit the Union Street Railway on a weekend.
“I got up at about four a.m. and drove up to New Bedford. Mark Duff was very nice, polite. Just as I was
about ready to leave, he said, ‘By the way, we’ve been thinking of having a “return of capital” distribution
to shareholders.’” That meant they were going to give back the extra money. “And I said, ‘Oh, that’s nice.’
And then he said, ‘Yes, and there’s a provision you may not be aware of in the Massachusetts statutes on
public utilities that you have to do it in multiples of the par value of the stock.” The stock had a $25 par
value, so that meant it would be paying out at least $25 per share.*17 “And I said, ‘Well. That’s a good start.’
Then he said, ‘Bear in mind, we’re thinking of using two units.’ That meant they were going to declare a
fifty-dollar dividend on a stock that was selling at thirty-five or forty dollars at that time.” So if you bought
a share you got all your money back right away, and then some. And afterward, you still owned the slice of
the business represented by your share of stock.
“I got fifty bucks a share, and I still owned stock in the place. And there was still value in it. The bus
companies hid assets in these so-called special reserves and land and buildings and car barns where they
kept the old streetcars. And I’ll never know whether my trip up there precipitated that or not.” The
conflict-wary Buffett by now had honed to a fine edge the skill of getting his way without asking for it out
loud. Thus, while he thought he might have influenced Duff, he could not be certain what had prompted
Duff’s decision. What mattered to him was that he got the result he wanted without a fight. He had made
about $20,000 on this trade. Who knew there was so much money in buses?15
Nobody in the history of the Buffett family had ever made $20,000 on one idea. In 1955, that was several
times more than the average person earned for a whole year’s work. Doubling your money and then some for
a few weeks’ work was spectacular. And yet, what was more important to him was doing it without taking
any significant risk.
***
Susie and Warren did not talk about the details of cocoa-bean arbitrage and bus-company stocks. She wasn’t
interested in money, except as something to be spent. And what she knew was that even though waves of
money were rolling in to the little apartment in White Plains, Warren gave her only a small household
allowance. She hadn’t grown up keeping track of every tiny expense, so being married to a man who saved
money by making deals with newsstands to buy week-old magazines meant a whole new way of life. She did
her best to manage the household herself, but the disparity between what Warren was making and what he
gave his wife had become stunning. One day she telephoned her neighbor Madeline O’Sullivan in a panic.
“Madeline, something terrible has happened,” she said. “You’ve got to come down here!” Madeline rushed
down to the Buffett apartment and found Susie distraught. She had accidentally thrown a batch of dividend
checks that had been sitting on Warren’s desk into the apartment’s incinerator chute, which led straight down
to the building’s furnace.16
“Maybe the incinerator isn’t running,” Madeline said, so they called the building superintendent, who let
them into the basement. Sure enough, the incinerator was cold. They rooted through the garbage looking for
the checks, with Susie all the while wringing her hands and saying, “I can’t face Warren.” When they found
the checks, Madeline’s eyes grew wide. They were for as much as thousands of dollars, not $25 or $10 as she
had assumed.17 The Buffetts, living in the little apartment in White Plains, were getting truly rich.
As Howie screamed and their money grew, Warren became slightly more accommodating with the
checkbook. Despite his thriftiness, he was so enthralled with Susie that he ultimately gave her what she
wanted. That June, they returned to Omaha for his sister Bertie’s wedding to Charlie Snorf. By then, Warren
had agreed that Susie could have some help with homemaking. So while they were in Omaha they started
searching in a hurry for an au pair to return to White Plains with them.

By advertising in the newspaper, they hired a young woman from a small town who “seemed a very proper
type”—but wasn’t. Warren threw her on a bus back to Omaha; Susie looked for a replacement, because she
needed the help—raising Howie was more than a two-person job—and she knew they could afford it.
***
Warren’s brilliant performance at Graham-Newman had made him the golden boy of the firm. Ben Graham
took a personal interest in Warren, and in his warmly outgoing and beleaguered wife. Graham had given them
a movie camera and projector as a baby gift when Howie was born, and even showed up at their apartment
with a teddy bear for the little boy.18 On one or two occasions when he and his wife, Estey, had the Buffetts
over for dinner, he noticed that Warren gazed googly-eyed at Susie, and that the two of them held hands a
lot. But he could also see that Warren did not woo his wife, and that Susie might have liked the occasional
romantic gesture.19 When Susie mentioned with longing that Warren did not dance, Graham dropped by
Warren’s desk with a gift certificate to the Arthur Murray dance studio in White Plains, where Graham
clumped around the dance floor during his own lessons. Graham checked with the studio a little later and
found that his protégé had never used the gift certificate. He mentioned this to Warren and encouraged him
to go ahead. Now on the hook, Warren stumbled through three lessons with Susie, then dropped out. He
never did learn to dance.20
This didn’t get in the way of his rapid ascent at Graham-Newman. Within eighteen months of his starting
there, both Ben Graham and Jerry Newman seemed to be treating Warren as a potential partner, which meant
a certain amount of family socializing. In mid-1955, even the dyspeptic Jerry Newman extended an invitation
to the Buffetts to what they thought was to be a “picnic” at Meadowpond, the Newmans’ mansion in
Lewisboro, New York. Susie arrived wearing something suitable for a hayride, only to find the other women
in dresses and pearls. Though they felt like a couple of hillbillies, the faux pas did nothing to hurt Warren’s
golden boy status.
Walter Schloss was not invited to events like these. He had been pigeonholed as a journeyman employee who
would never rise to partnership. Jerry Newman, who rarely bothered to be kind to anyone, treated Schloss
with more than his usual contempt, so Schloss, married with two young children, decided to strike out on his
own. It took him a while to get up the nerve to tell Graham,21 but by the end of 1955 he had started his own
investment partnership, funded with $100,000 raised from a group of partners whose names, as Buffett later
put it, “were straight from a roll call at Ellis Island.”22
Buffett was certain that Schloss could apply Graham’s methods successfully and admired him for having the
guts to set up his own firm. Though he worried that “Big Walter” was starting out with so little capital that he
would not be able to feed his family,23 Buffett put not a dime of his own money into Schloss’s partnership,
just as he had not invested in Graham-Newman. It would be unthinkable for Warren Buffett to let someone
else invest his money.
He did find someone to replace Schloss, however. Buffett had met Tom Knapp at a luncheon at Blythe and
Company down on Wall Street.24 Ten years older than Warren, tall, handsome, dark-haired, blessed with a
wicked sense of humor, Knapp had taken one of David Dodd’s night courses and gotten hooked; he changed
his major from chemistry to business on the spot. Graham hired Knapp as the second gentile in the firm. “I
told Jerry Newman, ‘It’s the old story—you hire one gentile, they take over the place,’” Buffett says.
By the time Knapp was sitting at Walter Schloss’s old desk next to Buffett, Warren had begun to be aware of
the private side of Graham’s life. Knapp himself got initiated when Graham invited him to watch a speech at
the New School for Social Research, where, he says, he found himself seated at a table with six women. “As
Ben spoke,” Knapp says, “I became aware that each one of those women was in love with him. And they
didn’t seem to be jealous of each other, and they all seemed to know him very, very well.”25

Indeed, by early 1956, Graham was bored by investing: his outside interests—women, the classics, and fine
arts—tugged at him so strongly that he had a foot out the door. One day when Knapp was out, the
receptionist directed a gangly young man into the windowless lair where Warren was filling out forms.
Looming over him was Ed Anderson, who explained that he was a chemist, like Knapp, not a professional
investor. He worked at the Livermore Laboratory of the Atomic Energy Commission in California, but
followed the market in his spare time. He had read The Intelligent Investor, with its copious examples of
cheap stocks like Easy Washing Machine, and was wildly impressed. My God! he thought. That can’t be true.
How could you buy these companies for less money than they had cash in the bank?26
Intrigued, Anderson had been riding Graham’s coattails. After buying a single share of Graham-Newman, he
used its quarterly statements to figure out what Graham was doing, then bought those stocks. Graham never
discouraged this; he liked other people to learn from and emulate him.
Anderson had come in because he was thinking about buying another share of Graham-Newman, but he had
noticed an oddity and he wanted to ask about it. Graham had loaded up on shares of American Telephone &
Telegraph. It was the least Graham-like stock imaginable—owned, studied, and followed by all, valued fairly,
with as little potential as it had risk. Was something going on? he asked Warren.
Warren thought for a second. It was impressive that this man with no business background—a chemist—had
the perception to see that AT&T was out of pattern. Too many people thought that “business” was some sort
of priesthood practiced only by those with special training. He said to Anderson, “This might not be the best
time to buy another share.”27 They chatted a bit longer and then parted in a friendly way, intending to keep
up the acquaintance. Warren was very glad that his friend Schloss had gone out on his own. From watching
the firm’s trading patterns and keeping his ears open, he had already figured out that Graham was going to
shut down his partnership.
Ben Graham’s career was coming to an end. He was sixty-two years old, and the market had surpassed the
peak of 1929.28 Its priciness made him nervous. He had beaten the market by 2.5 percent for more than
twenty years.29 He wanted to retire and move out to California to enjoy life. Jerry Newman was also retiring,
but Jerry’s son, Mickey, would stay on. In the spring of 1956 Graham gave notice to his partners. But first he
offered Warren the opportunity to become a general partner in the firm. That he would choose someone of
Warren’s age and experience shows how valuable he had made himself in such a short time. Nevertheless:
“If I had stayed I would have been sort of the Ben Graham of it, and Mickey would have been the Jerry
Newman of it—but Mickey would have been the senior partner by miles. It would have been called
Newman-Buffett.”
Even though Warren was flattered, he had gone to Graham-Newman to work for Ben. It wasn’t worth it to
him to stay, not even to be thought of as Graham’s intellectual heir. Moreover, all the while that he was
carrying out the bus bell-ringer and the cocoa-bean caper he was thinking, “I don’t like living in New York.
I’m on the train back and forth all the time.” Above all, he was not cut out to work with a partner—least of
all as someone’s junior partner. He turned the offer down.

22
Hidden Splendor
Omaha • 1956–1958

I had about $174,000, and I was going to retire. I rented a house at 5202 Underwood in Omaha for $175 a
month. We’d live on $12,000 a year. My capital would grow.”

In retrospect, it would strike people as odd that at the age of twenty-six, Warren used the term “retire.”
Maybe it was a way to downplay expectations. Or maybe it referred to his notion of capital as money that
worked as a sort of servant to make you rich. The overseer of capital was not an employee.
Mathematically speaking, Warren could theoretically “retire” on his own money and still reach his goal of
being a millionaire by age thirty-five.*18 Since entering Columbia with $9,800, he had grown his money by
more than sixty-one percent a year. But he was in a hurry, and it would require a very aggressive
compounding rate to meet his goal.1 Therefore he had decided to start a partnership like Graham-Newman’s
sister hedge fund, Newman & Graham.2 It was possible that he did not think of this as having a “job.” In fact
it was a near-perfect way of not having a job. He would have no boss, could invest from his house, and could
put friends and relatives into the same stocks that he would have bought for himself. If he took a quarter of
every dollar he earned for these partners as a fee and then reinvested that in the partnership, he could be a
millionaire much faster. Armed with Ben Graham’s method of buying stocks and a Graham-like hedge fund,
he had every reason to think of himself as a rich man.
There was only one problem with his idea. He couldn’t tolerate it if his partners criticized him because the
stocks went down. But Warren had figured out a solution. He planned to invite only his family and friends
—people he was sure trusted him—into the partnership. On May 1, 1956, he started Buffett Associates, Ltd.,
a partnership based on the Newman & Graham model,3 with seven partners.
Doc Thompson invested $25,000. “Doc Thompson was the kind of guy, he gave me every penny he had,
basically. I was his boy.” Warren’s sister Doris, with her husband, Truman Wood, put in $10,000. His aunt
Alice Buffett put in $35,000. “I had sold securities to other people before that, but now I became a
fiduciary, and for people who were enormously important to me. These were the people who believed in me.
There’s no way in the world I would have taken my aunt Alice’s or my sister’s or my father-in-law’s money
if I had thought that I’d lose it. At that point I didn’t think I could lose money over time.”
He already had a separate partnership with his father, and his sister Bertie and her husband had no money
they could part with. So his Wharton roommate Chuck Peterson, who put in $5,000, became his fourth
partner. Al Jolson aside, he knew all about Warren’s brains and financial maturity from having been his
roommate. Chuck had been one of the first to let Warren dispense him scrips as a prescriptionist, buying
stocks from him before he went to New York City. “I learned real fast how bright he is and how honest he is
and how capable,” he says. “I would trust him until proven otherwise.”4 Warren’s fifth partner was
Peterson’s mother, Elizabeth, who invested $25,000 of the money she had inherited when her husband died
the year before.
The sixth partner, Dan Monen, was a quiet, stocky, dark-haired young man who used to play with Warren as
a child, digging up dandelions in Ernest Buffett’s backyard. Now Warren’s lawyer, he didn’t have much
money but put in what he could: $5,000.
Warren was the seventh. He put in only $100. The rest of his share would come from future fees he earned
by managing the partnership. “In effect, I got my leverage from managing the partnership. I was brimming
with ideas, but I was not brimming with capital.” Actually, by most of the country’s standards, Warren was
brimming with capital. But he viewed the partnership as a compounding machine—once money went into it,
he did not intend to make withdrawals. So he needed to earn the $12,000 a year his family would live on
from the rest of his funds. He invested that money separately.
He devised a formula to charge his new partners. “I got half the upside above a four percent threshold, and
I took a quarter of the downside myself. So if I broke even, I lost money. And my obligation to pay back
losses was not limited to my capital. It was unlimited.”5
At the time, Warren was already managing money for Anne Gottschaldt and Catherine Elberfeld, the mother
and aunt of Fred Kuhlken, a friend from Columbia. When Fred left for Europe the year before, he had asked
