
The Psychology of Successful Trading

145

your emotional state of mind when you are trading. The idea is to take an
emotional snapshot of yourself each day. Are you feeling cool, calm, and
collected? Then you are far more likely to make money that day. Are you
feeling anxious? Then you are far more likely to lose money that day.
One of my primary reasons for buying Commodity Trading Consumer
Research (CTCR) from Bruce Babcock was that it gave me the opportunity
to interview and learn from some of the best traders in the world and it also
allowed me access to books, systems, and other products so that I could
learn more.
If I do not constantly strive to learn then I will be caught when market
conditions change. I used mechanical trading systems extensively back in
the 1970s and 1980s. I got very nervous about the efficacy of them in the late
1980s when I saw Mint (a very large commodity money manager) acquire
$1 billion under management. They were the first to achieve that amount
of money. They used a standard trend-following method based roughly on
a 40-day moving average.
I felt that if there was a company with a billion dollars under management then that particular style would find it very difficult to make money
because it had so much buying and selling power that it was the market.
It would dominate the market so much that it would not be able to make
money. There would not be enough liquidity in most markets to allow it to
diversify.
Remember, Mint was only the tip of the iceberg. It had a billion dollars
but there were lots of other plain vanilla trend followers in the market at
the same time. After all, I was one of them. I wasn’t doing anything special
in my trend-following systems.
I felt that the returns to trend-following systems would degrade because there was too much money flowing into the market all at the same
time and that the profits from the systems would not be as high as they had
been in the past. I decided that I would have to change my method of entry
and exit. You see, I use fundamentals to determine the direction that I want
to trade in and used mechanical systems for the entry and exit. If mechanical systems were being overused then I would have to learn an entirely
different method of entry and exit. I ended up switching to a classic chart
analysis method.
It turns out that trend-following systems did, in fact, go through a period of poor performance. (I think that the amount of money under management of trend-following systems has been reduced, as a percentage of
the total amount under management, and that trend-following systems will
again produce good results.)
The point is that I had to be aware that what I had been doing may
not work in the future and that I had to learn a new skill or I was out of
business. I had to make sure that I had backup skills in case my current

146

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

skills were no longer being rewarded by the market. Conditions change:
Make sure that you are prepared for it.
A focus on constant learning is essential if you are going to be in this
game for a long time. Market conditions change; you must be alert to those
changes and have a depth of knowledge to draw from if you need to change
your trading strategies or tactics.
I believe that trading success is built on the excellent execution of a
few fundamentals. You don’t need to get fancy, just focus on the fundamentals. I think that you will find that most of your losing trades come
from breaking a few fundamental rules, such as not placing and sticking to
a preset stop loss level.
Switching the focus onto learning and away from profits and losses
helps to reduce the emotions associated with trading. You can look at
each trade much more objectively because you almost don’t care if you
made or lost money. In a curious way, you might even “enjoy” losing trades
more than winning trades because you can usually learn more from the
experience.
Notice that this point of view helps to promote good trading practices.
Remember, you should be noting everything you did right in the trade as
well as what you did wrong. This will reinforce behavior that produces
profitable trades. In a way, the definition of a good trade changes. A trade
becomes a good trade when you learn something new, not only when it
makes money.
Notice how powerful a different mind-set can be. Making or losing
money on a given trade becomes no big deal. Instead, you try to analyze
your trading dispassionately to see how to improve. You are almost forced
to be objective.
The flip side is that a tremendous pressure will be taken off of you.
You are no longer judged (by yourself) by the success or failure of your
last trade. The pressure of success is replaced by the pressure to improve
as a trader. That is a much better pressure to feel and will lead to better
trading and more profits. It is much better to kick yourself for not learning
as much as you could than to kick yourself for losing more money. You will
be motivated to study your trading rather than feeling sorry for yourself or
angry with yourself.
Focusing on your own trading will also keep you from relying on others for your profits. It is possible to use systems and ideas from others
profitably, but you will never learn anything. In the final analysis that is
okay, but few people have the self-discipline to simply follow a system.
Most people want to have some input into the trading decision. This ties
back to the ego problem.
You don’t need to get fancy in your trading. Just execute a few basics
well. Your education-based feedback mechanism will show you what you

The Psychology of Successful Trading

147

are doing well. I have a friend who only trades reversal days. I keep trying
to get him to try another method but he says to me that he is making a
living doing this so why screw up a good thing?
The bottom line is that changing your focus from making money to
constantly learning will sharply reduce your stress level, keep you focused
on learning how to make more money, and increase your self-discipline.

STRESS-FREE TRADING
One of the keys to profitable trading is to reduce stress. Most of this chapter
is about techniques to reduce or eliminate stress. Stress is unhealthy and
gets in the way of profitable trading. One of the keys to reducing stress is
to think in terms of probabilities rather than in absolutes.
Think of the stress when you put on a trade and naturally think, “I’m
going to make money on this trade.” That is what we normally think when
we put on a trade. Actually, we should be thinking, “I’m probably going to
make money on this trade.”
The first statement will create a lot of stress if you have a losing
trade. You internally predicted something that didn’t come true. You were
wrong. You don’t want to be wrong. You feel stress. The second statement creates far less stress if you have a losing trade. You predicted
that you would make money but you also predicted that there was a fair
chance that you would lose money. You were sorta right and sorta wrong.
Big deal.
I turn a profit on less than 50 percent of my trades but I am still
a money-making trader. So my internal prediction is, “I’ll probably lose
money on this trade but I will make money on my trading.” How much
less stress is that? I’m actually predicting that I will lose money on this
particular trade so I feel like a smart guy when I do have that losing trade.
As traders, we must be both humble and bold at the same time. We
must be humble and realize that we will have many losing trades, hundreds
of them, thousands of them. Get used to it. It’s no big deal.
At the same time, we must be bold so that we have the courage and
discipline to get up tomorrow and put on a new trade. We must also be
consistent and persistent. We must be a machine. A money machine.
We have a winning trade. Then continue to execute flawlessly. We have
a losing trade. Then continue to execute flawlessly. We have five winning
trades in a row or five losing trades in a row. Then continue to execute
flawlessly.
Don’t get frustrated. Don’t get bored. Don’t even get excited. You are a
money machine. You are the casino. Execute. Execute. Execute.

148

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

BE THE CASINO
In my trading classes, I ask my students how many of them have been to
a casino and gambled. The majority will raise their hands. I then ask those
who consistently make money to leave their hands in the air.
All the hands go down.
It is always astounding to me to see that so many people go to a casino
and gamble basically knowing that they will lose. I ask them why they go.
They say that it is the thrill that they might win. Might! Of course I chide
them for this lack of discipline. But then I ask them if they think the casino
makes money every year. Of course, the answer is yes. Casinos rarely go
belly up. I can see the students’ eyes light up.
The reality is that we want to emulate casinos in our trading business.
They only play games that they have an edge in. We want to do the same.
We want to only use trading methods that make money. The casino is never
foolish enough to let you play a game that you could win over the long run.
We must do the same.
Just because the casino has an edge still doesn’t mean that it is guaranteed to make money. It still must execute flawlessly to ensure profits.
Imagine the owner of a casino getting up one day and deciding that he
didn’t like the blackjack dealers and appointed me and you to do the dealing this week. Well, I imagine that you are like me and don’t know how to
deal blackjack professionally. Further imagine that he decides that he is
bored with sweeping the floors and decides to stop it. And then he notices
that he has had a losing trade for three straight months by having to pay
for electricity to light the casino. He flinches on the fourth month because
he doesn’t want another losing trade and doesn’t pay the bill.
This casino is clearly going out of business soon. Yet the casino
has to deal with many of the same issues that we do as professional
traders. It must only play games in which it has an edge and it must
execute flawlessly. In my example, the casino owner was not executing
flawlessly.
My examples may seem absurd but they are not so absurd when we
individual traders examine our own behavior. We do the same kinds of
dumb behavior all the time. When you sit down at a roulette table, does
the casino owner get fearful? Does he flinch and stop you from gambling?
More important, does he get upset when he loses a spin? Or two? Or three?
No! The bottom line is that the casino owner doesn’t care what happens on the next spin or the next or the next. What he cares about is the
next 1,000 spins or the next million spins. He knows that the next spin is
not relevant to his profitability at the end of the month. He could not care
less what happens. He knows that he has an edge and he wants to work it
as much as possible.

The Psychology of Successful Trading

149

Does he knows that he will often lose three hands of blackjack in a
row? Of course. He also knows that he will lose 10 in a row every so often.
And he even knows that once in a very long time he will lose 100 hands
in a row.
But he also knows that the inverse will happen. Even more often. He
knows that losing streaks will happen. That is the price of getting the suckers in to play the game. The casino owners don’t freak out when streaks
happen. They don’t fret about telling the wife or think that it reflects badly
on themselves as a person. They simply deal the cards again. They know
they will win in the end and their job is to execute flawlessly so that their
edge will come to them and they will make money for the casino.
I urge you to mentally think of yourself as the casino. If you are in a
quandary over what to do or if you are feeling some emotion related to
trading, ask yourself what a casino owner would do or feel.

DEVELOPING YOUR TRADING PLAN
Perhaps the most powerful technique for increasing self-discipline is the
use of a trading plan and the attendant postmortem technique. I am going
to go into detail about this technique and will show real examples of trading
plans.
Traders lose money mostly from making stupid mistakes. They forget
to put in the stop because they will do it tomorrow. They don’t know the
right contract size. They like the way the stochastics are acting but completely ignore the breakdown on the chart. And so on. In other words,
they simply forget to take a look at something that they know they should
look at.
I think that the two main reasons for not looking at something that you
should are:
1. Not paying attention due to a busy schedule or not caring
2. Not wanting to confuse your opinion with facts

I firmly believe that the consistent use of a trading plan will overcome
these two problems. I further believe that the trading plan is the second
most important part of a trade, after money management. The actual entry
and exit techniques are secondary. Most traders will find this statement
hard to accept but most profitable traders, even if they do not use a trading
plan, will agree with me. There are several reasons why.
Without proper monitoring of information, you will drown in a flood
of information. With a trading plan, all the relevant fundamental and

150

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

