
Combining Moving Averages and BullishTrending Candlestick Patterns
The moving average is a technical indicator that is reliable and easy to understand, at least as far as technical indicators go. See Chapter 11 for more info
on moving averages.
In basic terms, a moving average is the average of the closing prices of a
security over a certain period of time. Moving averages can be helpful when
you’re looking to confirm a trend, so you can rely on them to boost your
confidence in the trading decisions you make based on bullish-trending
candlestick patterns.

Using moving averages with bullishtrending candlestick patterns to
confirm trends
If you haven’t yet made your way through my discussion of technical indicators in Chapter 11 or you need a refresher, the first rule of thumb with using
moving averages as trend indicators is if a security’s price is above the
moving average, an uptrend is in place. With that in mind, take a gander
at my first example of combining moving averages with bullish-trending
candlestick patterns.

Charting the moving average and a bullish-trending pattern
Figure 14-5 is a chart of the stock for Yum! Brands (YUM). When you realize
that Yum! Brands operates various fast food restaurants, including KFC,
Taco Bell, and Pizza Hut, you can understand where it got its company’s
name and stock symbol.

297

21_178089 ch14.qxp

2/27/08

9:50 PM

Page 298

298 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
Figure 14-5:
A chart
of YUM
featuring a
couple of
bullishtrending
candlestick
patterns and
ten-day
moving
average that
confirm an
uptrend.

In Figure 14-5, YUM is trading over its ten-day moving average for several
weeks. In the middle of that sustained uptrend, two bullish thrusting line patterns appear. The patterns appear about two weeks apart, and after both
occurrences, the stock continues to trade higher. These patterns and the tenday moving average certainly confirm each other on this chart. The moving
average is tested several times, but the price holds for quite awhile until it
starts to top out on the right side of the chart. If you monitor this situation
on a chart, you’d initiate a long position after spotting one of the two patterns, and ride it until you stopped out or noticed a trend reversal signal of
some sort.
The trend reversal signal shows up rather quickly, and before I move on to
the next example, I want to point out just where the uptrend in Figure 14-5
starts reversing. I didn’t highlight it on the chart, but if you look closely, you
can spy a bearish reversal candlestick pattern at the top of the uptrend. It’s a
three outside down pattern, and it’s another case of how getting very familiar
with the appearance of candlestick patterns can pay off when trading.
The example in Figure 14-5 uses only one moving average, but don’t feel like
you have to stick to using just one. You may very well want to add more
moving averages to your charts, and using two or more can be revealing if
you can keep up with them all.

21_178089 ch14.qxp

2/27/08

9:50 PM

Page 299

Chapter 14: Using Technical Indicators
Using a couple of moving averages and a bullish-trending pattern
When you use two moving averages on a candlestick chart, the trend is
defined by the location of one moving average relative to the other moving
average. When the moving average with the lower number of days is trading
higher than the one with more days, the trend is positive. For the examples in
this chapter that include two moving averages, I use 10- and 20-day moving
averages. So when the 10-day moving average is higher than the 20-day
moving average, the trend is positive. Sound simple enough? I’ll dive right in
with an example.
Sticking with the fast food theme, Figure 14-6 is a chart of McDonald’s (MCD).
It’s an Illinois-based chain of hamburger restaurants that often uses a clown
in its ads — maybe you’ve heard of it? This chart includes both a 10-day and
a 20-day moving average, and for much of the chart the former is higher than
the latter, which means that an uptrend is in place, and after looking at the
chart it’s hard to argue.

Figure 14-6:
A chart of
MCD with a
10- and 20day moving
average and
a bullishtrending
candlestick
pattern that
confirm an
uptrend.

As if the evidence provided by the moving averages weren’t enough, further
assurance of the bullish trend comes in the form of a bullish thrusting line
pattern. It turns up just a few days after the 10-day moving average has
cleared the 20-day moving average. Looks like an uptrend is on the way! And
nothing makes traders hungrier than a strong bullish candlestick pattern
appearing early in an uptrend.

299

21_178089 ch14.qxp

2/27/08

9:50 PM

Page 300

300 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
Using the moving average and bullishtrending candlestick patterns to pick
long exits and determine stop levels
Making a wise decision when it comes time to pick an exit point or stop level
for a long trade can be the difference between booking a tidy profit and
suffering a frustrating loss.
In the preceding section, I explain how you can use moving averages when
you’re deciding when to get in on a long trade, but you can just as easily use
them when you’re trying to figure out when to exit a trade. If you’re in a long
position and a moving average reading tells you that the trend is headed for a
reversal, be prepared to sell and get out. Allow me to elaborate with a couple
of examples.

An entry and exit with a single moving average and bullish pattern
Figure 14-7 is a chart of the oil giant Exxon Mobil (XOM). Over the course of
several days, the stock on this chart establishes an uptrend and it’s solidly
over the ten-day moving average. Although quite a bit of ground has been
covered, the bullish thrusting line pattern shows up, and the conditions are
ripe for a buy signal.

Figure 14-7:
A chart of
XOM where
a bullish
thrusting
line pattern
and a 10day moving
average
provide an
exit signal.

21_178089 ch14.qxp

2/27/08

9:50 PM

Page 301

Chapter 14: Using Technical Indicators
After the buy signal, the stock continues to work its way higher until there’s a
break of the ten-day moving average. That break signals the potential end of
the uptrend, and it means that if you entered a long position after spotting
the bullish thrusting line pattern, you need to exit. The price at the exit is
high above the level of the pattern, so you walk away with a tidy profit.
Not bad!
Setting stops is trickier with moving averages than it is with trendlines. You
can anticipate the level of a trendline because it’s simply the slope of the line
moving forward by a day (or other time period). However, the moving average level changes more erratically, depending on the price action.
If you can’t constantly monitor your trading positions, use the previous day’s
moving average as a stop. If a security dips below the prior day’s moving
average, initiate a sell.
In the case of the XOM trade in Figure 14-7, a stop should’ve been in place
because the price continued to fall and settled well under the moving average
on the day it broke this support level.

An entry and exit with two moving averages and a bullish pattern
Another example of how to combine moving averages with bullish candlestick patterns comes in the form of Figure 14-8, a chart of the futures contract
that trades based on the level of the United States ten-year Treasury notes.
This chart has a great uptrend that can lead to a very appealing entry and
exit if a trader makes the right moves.

Figure 14-8:
An entry
and exit
with two
moving
averages
and a bullish
pattern.

301

21_178089 ch14.qxp

2/27/08

9:50 PM

Page 302

302 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
The bullish thrusting line pattern appears several days into the uptrend,
but it’s so close to the ten-day moving average that it’s hard to think that the
contracts have gotten too far ahead of themselves. Looks like a pretty reasonable level to enter a long trending trade.
After the entry has been executed, things continue to go swimmingly with the
10-day moving average staying above the 20-day moving average. The 10-day
and even the 20-day moving averages are violated by the absolute price of
the contracts, but that’s not an exit signal because the trend changes when
the 10-day moving average moves under the 20-day. In this case, keeping that
in mind keeps you from getting out of the trade too early and missing profits
or even taking a loss.
The added check offered by the combination of two moving averages is one
of the primary reasons I use more than one moving average with my candlestick charts whenever possible.
The downside to using two moving averages is that you have a tougher time
figuring out just where to set your stop orders. If you want to use a moving
average crossover as an exit signal, you may find it very hard to do so if you
have a job or another reason that you can’t check in on your trades throughout the course of the day. Some commercial software packages send you an
e-mail when a crossover is imminent, but if you can’t access your e-mail all
day, that’s not much help.
My advice is that if you want to use a moving average crossover as your stop
level, don’t worry about a crossover that may occur during the day until the
moving averages get close to each other. After you see that happen, you can
start to estimate where an appropriate stop should be placed. And you can
always just wait until the crossover has occurred and exit on the following
day, if you can deal with the occasional slight erosion of your profits on a
trade.

22_178089 ch15.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 303

Chapter 15

Combining Technical
Indicators and Bearish-Trending
Candlestick Patterns
In This Chapter
 Using trendlines in tandem with bearish-trending candlestick patterns
 Trading with a combination of moving averages and bearish-trending candlestick

patterns

I

n this chapter, I explore the ways you can use trendlines and moving averages with bearish-trending candlestick patterns to uncover promising
trading opportunities. Those two versatile types of technical analysis methods are great for detecting downtrends, and when you pair them with
bearish-trending candlestick patterns, it can be much easier for you to pick
the best spots for entering short selling trades. And as if that weren’t enough,
you can also use that potent combination to determine when it’s time to
cover your short position and (hopefully) pocket a profit.

Putting Trendlines Together with
Bearish-Trending Candlestick Patterns
for Selling and Confirmation
Trendlines are one of the most straightforward technical indicators. If an
uptrend is in place, a trendline has a positive slope. If a downtrend is the
order of the day (or week or month), a trendline has a negative slope. This
concept sounds simplistic, but it can be hugely helpful when you’re trying to
determine a market’s trend. If that trend turns out to be down, you can use a
downward-sloping trendline alongside bearish-trending candlestick patterns
to inform your short trading decisions.

22_178089 ch15.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 304

304 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
If you’re blanking on trendlines, make a quick flip to Chapter 11, where I
discuss them in detail.

Short trades and trend confirmation
with trendlines and bearish patterns
Selecting the most appropriate time to get into a short trade can be a trying
task. Timing is critical, and any decision-making help can be a real blessing.
Luckily for you, considering trendlines and bearish-trending candlestick patterns together can provide just that type of help. I show you what I mean in
this section with a couple of real-world examples.

A short trade example with a bearish
trendline and candlestick pattern
You can find the first example in Figure 15-1, which features a chart of Altera
Corp. (ALTR), a maker of semiconductors that go into a variety of electronic
and industrial products.

Figure 15-1:
An ALTR
chart where
a few
bearishtrending
candlestick
patterns and
a very long
bearish
trendline
reveal a
short trade
entry.

The downtrend in the chart in Figure 15-1 is about as convincing as you can
find. The stock just keeps grinding lower. Short sellers would be pinching
themselves with each passing day! The downtrend is so pronounced, in fact,
that I run out of room for it on the right side of the chart.

22_178089 ch15.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 305

Chapter 15: Combining Technical Indicators and Bearish-Trending Patterns
The first bearish pattern that pops up on the chart is the bearish-thrusting
line pattern (see Chapter 8 for details), and its bearish prediction should be
just what you need to initiate a short position. This pattern’s appearance
helps to establish a bearish trendline, which just keeps on extending until the
chart runs out of room.
The second pattern is another bearish-thrusting line pattern, and it signals
that the price will continue to drop. It also makes for a nice second chance
for any traders who didn’t get on board with a short position after the first
pattern, because the downtrend looks to still be in its early stages.
This trend stays in place for a fairly long time, and then a new bearishtrending pattern appears. This time it’s a bearish neck line pattern (also
described in Chapter 8), which predicts a continuation of the downtrend; at
this point, however, the downtrend has been in place for quite a while, and
it’s probably too long to initiate a new short position. However, if you’re
already in a short, it’s very comforting to see some assurance that even lower
prices may be on the horizon in the immediate future. If that’s the case, hang
on and ride the downtrend just a bit lower to maximize your profit!

Another bearish trendline and bearish pattern leading to a short trade
One more example of how you can combine a bearish trendline and a bearishtrending candlestick pattern is on display in Figure 15-2. This diagram is a
chart of Motorola Inc. (MOT). Originally a maker of radios and an innovator
in the creation of the car radio, it’s now known mostly for its cell phones.

Figure 15-2:
A chart of
MOT where
a bearishtrending
candlestick
pattern and
a bearish
trendline
signal a
short trade
entry point.

305

22_178089 ch15.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 306

306 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
As you can see, a downtrend is in place when the bearish-thrusting line pattern appears not once but twice. (The bearish-thrusting line pattern appears
many times in Chapter 8, where I discuss it extensively.) When the first pattern appears, the stock has moved so much in such a short period of time
that it’s tough to place a trendline based on recent activity. More aggressive
traders initiate a short sell after seeing this first pattern, even though a definable downtrend isn’t really in place. Then after the appearance of the second
pattern, you have a good opportunity to draw a downtrend line by using the
high of the rally between the two patterns.
The second pattern presents another possible entry point, and some may
think it’s more reassuring than the first pattern because of the downtrend
line. The trend points down and the pattern pops up, but there’s a lot of room
between the end of the pattern and the trendline, so the risk level is relatively
high. It’s a pretty perilous short trade to enter at this point.

Bearish trendlines and candlestick
patterns leading to short entries
and exits
Trendlines are useful not only for determining the ideal time to get into a
short trade but also for figuring out when to exit. This section focuses on the
ways you can evaluate trendlines alongside bearish-trending candlestick patterns to pick the best time to cover a short.

Shorting and covering using a trendline
combined with a candlestick pattern
Figure 15-3 features a chart of the stock for one of The Big Three — Ford
Motor Company (F).
The candlestick pattern highlighted on the chart in Figure 15-3 is the bearishthrusting line pattern, and it pops up in the midst of a pretty significant
downtrend. The trendline is established based on the peak of the last bullish
trend and the high a few days later. If you’re looking for an illustration of the
nature of the downtrend, this trendline fits the bill, and the stock price stays
under this trendline for some time.
You can see that midway between the pattern and where the trendline is
broken, the high comes perilously close to pushing above the trendline at
one point. That event offers a trendline validation of sorts. Then a few weeks
later, the trend flattens out, and the trendline is broken. If you short this
stock, that’s when you want to get out of the trade.

22_178089 ch15.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 307

Chapter 15: Combining Technical Indicators and Bearish-Trending Patterns

Determining trading levels with trendlines
Trendlines are great indicators for a lot of reasons, but one slightly tricky feature of trendlines
is figuring out how to use them as exit stop
levels. This judgment is difficult because they
move every day. How can you deal with that?
You have a couple of choices:

 The other option is to set up a stop that gets
you out of the trade only if the close for a
day is above your trendline. That strategy
eliminates the need for a daily trendline
change, but it does require that you check
your chart toward the close of each day.

 First, you can draw a new trendline every
day, to keep up with the changing price
action. This method works because your
line moves consistently with the trend, and
you can place corresponding stop orders
that are good for that day only. But that
method can also be taxing, because you
have to commit to changing the trendline
every single day.

Some traders also like the second option
because it keeps them from getting stopped out
of a trade if the price makes a little run above
the trendline, but other traders contend that the
price can rise dramatically (and close quite a bit
higher) and erase profits or even cause losses
before the stop took effect. It’s up to you to
decide which method works best with your
trading strategy and style.

Figure 15-3:
A chart of
F with a
downtrend
line and
bearishthrusting
line pattern
revealing a
short exit.

One final note on the chart in Figure 15-3 before I move on. Astute chart
observers will notice a bullish reversal pattern at the bottom of the downtrend; did you catch it? It’s the bullish three outside up pattern, and it signals
that the downtrend is about to change directions and head up. You can always
use a reversal pattern as an exit when it shows up on a chart, and in this case
it helps you lock in just a little more profit on the short trade. Also, if you’re so
inclined, you may use this bullish pattern to establish a long position.

307

22_178089 ch15.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 308

308 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
Exiting one trade doesn’t mean that you have to stop working with a particular security for any period of time. If you’re in a trade and riding a prevailing
trend, and you spot a trend reversal candlestick pattern, don’t rule out the
possibility of exiting the current trade and jumping right back in with another
trade that rides the trend in the opposite direction!

Shorting and covering with a downtrend line and bearish pattern
I’ll offer one more example before I wrap up this explanation. Figure 15-4 is a
chart of the futures contracts that trade based on the Swiss franc level versus
the U.S. dollar.

Figure 15-4:
A bearishtrending
candlestick
pattern
and a
downtrend
line reveal a
short exit on
a chart of
the Swiss
franc
futures.

The contracts are in a downtrend when the bearish-thrusting line pattern
shows up. The trendline I drew on this chart leaves a lot of room for retracing
to a stop, but if you see this signal and decide to take the risk, your reward
can be pretty amazing.
Soon after the exit, this chart becomes a little heartbreaking for the shorts
because the stock moves even lower and it’s clear the shorts could’ve made
additional profits. It’s frustrating, but you have to make sure that you don’t
let situations like this get you down. As I say time and time again, it’s better
to stick with trading rules and exit when it’s prudent than to break rules, take
risks, and lose your shirt in the long run.

22_178089 ch15.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 309

Chapter 15: Combining Technical Indicators and Bearish-Trending Patterns

Combining Moving Averages and
Bearish-Trending Patterns
for Short Situations
The moving average is another technical indicator you can combine with
bearish-trending candlestick patterns to help figure out when to enter and
exit your short trades. You can read all about moving averages (and several
other technical indicators) in Chapter 11, but, broadly speaking, a moving
average is the average of the closing prices of a security over a certain period
of time.
Moving averages are very useful in confirming trends, and that functionality
makes them good bearish-trending candlestick pattern partners. Read on to
find out more.

Pinning down short entry points
and confirming trends
You can use one or multiple moving averages to determine trends on a chart,
and in this section I work with real-world examples of both.

A short trade using a signal moving average and bearish pattern
Figure 15-5 is a chart of Merck & Co, Inc. (MRK) — one of the world’s largest
pharmaceutical companies. I like this example because you can clearly see
how the moving average defines the trend and how that trend is enthusiastically confirmed by a bearish-trending candlestick pattern (or two).
It’s hard to argue that the stock is in a downtrend when the first bearishtrending candlestick pattern appears. That pattern is followed quickly by a
bearish-thrusting line pattern. All this bearish signaling occurs over the
course of just four trading days and with the stock well under the ten-day
moving average.
This chart makes a very good case for the use of moving averages over trendlines because when the first candlestick pattern appears, it’s very difficult to
draw a line that corresponds with the recent price action. But moving averages avoid this problem by relying on mathematically defined levels that
don’t have to be shaped to fit recent prices, and in this case a ten-day moving
average is appropriate.

309

22_178089 ch15.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 310

310 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
Figure 15-5:
A chart of
MRK with
two bearishtrending
candlestick
patterns
and a tenday moving
average that
signal a
short trade
entry.

If one moving average is good, are two moving averages great? That’s often
the case, because you can compare the two moving averages to glean even
more information about the nature of the price action and the prevailing
trend.
When using two moving averages on a chart, you can detect a bearish trend
when the moving average with fewer days looking back, or the one that uses
a fewer number of days in the calculation (the fast one), is below the moving
average with more days looking back (the slow one).
