
with the Wave Principle and how they are used will contribute

few different methods used in this chapter to develop a wave count.

Therefore, the technical indicators one uses i n conjunction

move instead of from its origin or extreme high or low. You will see a

Reuters, Telerate/Bridge, and D T N quote systems.

I can see how that last sentence may be used out of context. But
Wave Principle is of little value, let me point out the flaw in that

ish on the U.S. stock market. I will show you why later. While

before you jump to the conclusion that I have implied the Elliott

During the time I worked for Bob Prechter, I was extremely bull-

256

• C A L C U L A T I N G M A R K E T PRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle

• 257

lead only to an even stronger leg down in these markets? So the
Elliott Wave Principle becomes the much-needed tool we can use
to obtain information about the size of the reaction we can expect
from any given indicator signal. Elliott is hard to live with, much
harder to live without. Just don't live with it alone!
Another common objection is that there are "too many alternative
market scenarios that can be suggested by the same analyst." We can
also fold into this same argument: "Different analysts can interpret
the exact same pattern in different ways." An intellectually honest
Elliott wave practitioner will admit that there are times when there
are no discernible wave structures firom which to build a highly probFigure 10.1 Aerodynamic Investments Inc., ® 1996-2011,
www.aerolnvest.com

able interpretation. It is better to openly admit that sometimes the
Elliott Wave Principle has little more to offer than the development
of a slew of scenarios. Every analytic method will have periods when
better off keeping the ideas being considered to ourselves until the

that cannot be corrected by just adding another indicator or devel-

it is not decisive. Sometimes we just have to wait, and we would be

hasty assumption. Indicators have a very serious inherent weakness
oping a new formula.
Figure 10.1 displays similar sell signals when the Composite
Index and RSI diverge in four different markets. How do you know
just how large a correction will unfold from these identical signals?
Oh sure, we have calculated targets, lots of targets, but which one
will be the likely bottom? The monthly Hang Seng signal preceded
a 56 percent decline. A daily S&P signal has so far produced a 6

market becomes more defined. Elliott takes numerous hard knocks
in this regard. In an effort to pick up a lost trial, we may openly
discuss all that we might think or hypothesize fi-om little more than
muddled, congested price bars that form wandering data tracks on
our screens. Guilty as accused. But recognize that one who "sees"
waves in market data will lose his or her own center of inner balance
when he or she has lost the pattern of the primary markets.

incentive to dig deeper into the markets to see what is being missed,

that a countermove up can be expected, but will the next sell signal

So the inner struggle that goes on when you "lose i t " is the needed

will this market go?" You can see that the markets are oversold and

small world when the market's footprints have again been identified.

sell signals leave us with the same question: "Just how far down

position within a larger framework of the Universe. All is right in my

cent, and it had not bottomed. These identical bearish diverging

its quiet knowing that "my" S&Ps are tracking and are at a certain

found its first pivot. The weekly DMark futures chart fell 20 per-

My whole day goes out of whack just because my world has lost

percent decline. Gold fell 29 percent before the Composite Index

258

• C A L C U L A T I N G M A R K E T PRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle

• 259

as you do to calculating where you believe the market might go i f

peace. Sounds odd, but is very true.

as much effort to defining the levels where you might be wrong

if for no other reason than to restore a sence or balance and inner

the better view has been proven wrong.

market scenario. It can be strongly stated that there is no doubt in

battle, it is hard to be objective about a new market direction once

those who do not understand why there should be an alternative

simply shows we are trying to think ahead, knowing that when in

alternative at all. If you fall into this group, you might be among

not a hedge to a favored opinion. Preparing an alternative scenario

before we move on: Some people will not tolerate seeing the word

you are right. Within this framework the alternative game plan is

Just one last addition to the too-many-alternatives argument

different problem. Far too often analytic services read " I f not this,

had first considered to be a much lower probability.

But i f there is no favored outlook to begin with, that is an entirely

prepared in advance to explain what might be developing that you

Just step back. Reassess your position. Then move forward again.

that you have stepped off track, then there should be a scenario

you or themselves as their higher-probability scenario was wrong.

market exceed or penetrate the marker you have defined as proof

would do xyz," then they are not being intellectually honest with

level that identifies where you believe you are wrong. Should the

"You see, I was right all along because we said the market might

target level. That outlook should always be stated with a market

If analysts ever use their alternative market scenario to state

your mind that the market will move in a certain way to a certain

applied.

will be wrong. The analyst who does not have an obligation to state

It warns me that something is lacking in the methodology being

do-or-die level to show where the analyst believes his favored outlook

then that," and they use this sentence construction all the time.

The problem with the alternative view is when you are not given a

whole. However, the shorter the time horizon, the faster you can

be more or less, but risk exposure to capital must be very precise.

are just the smallest building blocks of the whole and must fit the

made an error on the risk portion of the equation. The reward might

will go through how larger patterns subdivide. Short time horizons

prefer to be wrong on the reward aspect of the ratio than to have

wave count is usually expressed by traders who are wave deaf We

should be and further defines our risk-to-reward ratio. I would much

This objection about picking the best time horizon to support your

Knowing where we are wrong will dictate where our stop placement

can find any pattern you want to prove your market opinion." Sigh.

to her longevity than will be the accuracy of her market forecasts.

was, " I f you scan different time horizons for the same market, you

trader must have about where she may be wrong is more important

The last common objection mentioned at the start of the chapter

where he is wrong is not trading that market. The accuracy that a

focus only on the larger pattern. The latter group often gets caught

slippage exposure will be horrendous. Therefore, you must devote

within a larger pattern will be able to react faster than traders who

stop below the third swing in a triangle that we call "wave c." The

larger game plan. Traders who focus on the smallest building blocks

pretation is poor money management. As an example, never place a

see when a market is beginning to develop a move not within your

Placing stops near market levels that negate a favored wave inter-

260

• CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 2 6 1

wave patterns w h e n the chapter concludes.

we can address this topic fairly, we need to discuss the basic patterns

w i t h m u c h more i n f o r m a t i o n than a cataloged listing of 13 E l l i o t t

focused on the long-term pattern w i l l be caught more often. Before

the new count up for a trade. So, right or w r o n g , we should end up

h o r i z o n to fit their longer h o r i z o n o p i n i o n . Traders and analysts

to reassess your o r i g i n a l game p l a n and understand w h e n to pick

i n an u p d r a f t or d o w n d r a f t because they tend to force the short

of the E l l i o t t Wave Principle.

Chapter 1, Figure 1.4 showed H o n g Kong's H a n g Seng Index
on June 3, 1998, and the c o m m e n t was made at that t i m e w h e n

Impulsive Waves

the chapter was w r i t t e n that the H a n g Seng market d i d not have a
b o t t o m i n the daily chart. L o o k i n g back n o w o n July 24, the mar-

G a n n confluence zone.

a straight-line illustration into a H i g h - L o w - C l o s e ( H L C ) bar chart

declined to 7,351, w h i c h is a major Fibonacci support cluster and

or line-on-close charts because many people find it hard to translate

ket low i n that chart was 8,351 o n June 2. T h e market has since

Let's try something different. W e w i l l not be discussing stick charts

over to start this t r a d i n g example, it gave the analysis and t i m e tar-

a trader! So no line charts this t i m e .

edition, I w i l l have to transfer one paragraph f r o m the first edition

that it is the market action above and below the close that can k i l l

As the G a n n chapter has been entirely replaced f r o m the first

i n a real market environment. It is also more i m p o r t a n t to realize

I n a d d i t i o n , it is really b o r i n g for the reader to have to wade

gets for the market interval that follows.

t h r o u g h pattern after pattern w h e n there is no real context i n w h i c h

that warn the current correction may not be over."

have used every single m e t h o d o u t l i n e d i n this book i n order to try

and price confluence point, and we will soon turn to other methods

transmitted live around the world? N o t really. But be assured that I

agree that this is still a fairly respectable reaction to a Gann time

have global distribution. Is that any different f r o m a market report

DJIA from the high is only a 5.5 percent decline. But you might

I have a chance of being dead w r o n g i n a book that is expected to

current low as this is written to 8,855.7 A 512.1 point decline in the

not want to spend the t i m e w r i t i n g one. So let's do this in real-time.

objective, and there has been a decline from a high of 9,367.8 to a

to read a descriptive list about E l l i o t t patterns, and I certainly do

"A market top occurred July 20, 1998, near a time confluence

to see h o w all these patterns may flow together. You do not want

and find the starting p o i n t for a real-time scenario that w i l l give me
the best chance possible to start o f f on the right side of the market.

So that is the market we w i l l track.

E l l i o t t Wave Principle w o u l d become completely lost i f they were

I f I step o f f track, it w i l l be extremely informative to show you how

the DIJA because I a m concerned that traders u n f a m i l i a r w i t h the

real market environment that w i l l become a time-sequenced event.

track a real-time scenario rather t h a n our futures market. I chose

needed. T h i s w i l l help you understand how they can be used i n a

T h e S & P traders m i g h t be frustrated that I w i l l use the D J I A to

W e w i l l apply all the techniques previously described as they are

262

• CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 263

the real-time journal.

time on the S&P itself at some point within this chapter. But the

Elliott Wave Principle: a five-wave pattern. Then we can begin

always be used for the 24hr period.) I promise to spend extensive

First, we need to discuss the most basic building block within the

Edition note: This is no longer a concern or factor. The data must

S&P Globex problem that will distort even the simplest pattern.

more complex than it should be for someone less experienced. (2nd

to use as a start. However, I'll stay with the DJIA and avoid the

now in the S&P 500 futures market. It would make a difficult topic

is much closer with a high at 1,199.40 and shows a better pattern

to see the Globex night session data that we have to contend with

five-wave pattern. Figure 10.2 is a one-minute bar chart of the Cash

wave structure against the SP500.)

waves for ever more (at least I warned you!), begins with a simple

the Toronto TSE is a good alternative Index to track for cleaner

The world of R.N. Elliott, and your lifetime sentence to count

DJIA always creates a cleaner wave pattern. (2nd edition note: Now

patterns, then you should not apply them to technical indicators

excerpt is from that live interview:

tern purposes. In my opinion if you cannot use tick charts for wave

KWHY-TV being interviewed by Richard Saxton. The following

bar chart. As mentioned earlier, don't use tick charts for wave pat-

Friday, April 17, 1998, I was in the Los Angeles television studio

S&P 500 Index so it cannot be subdivided any further into a smaller

I had created a problem for myself in a public broadcast. On

either. Tick charts are bars where a fixed number of trades define a
Richard: Are you looking toward Dow 10,000, as most analysts are,

bar. As an example, a 25-tick bar chart will have no time axis. While

now that the 9,000 level is behind us?
Connie: No, 9,000 is of no particular significance in the methods I
use. What will be far more important is how the DJIA reacts to
9,339. Both Gann and Fibonacci work suggest this is a critical

Aerodynamic Investments Inc.
IMPULSIVE- Simple 5 Wave Pattern

area. If we can pass through 9,339 without a hitch, we will reach

Find

1. Wave 2 cannot retrace
the start or origin
of wave 1

10,000 fairly easily. But I do not think the market will be able to
break through 9,339 without some sort of [a] reaction.

2. Wave 3 cannot be the
shortest impulse wave
(Does not mean wave 3
has to be the longest.)

So, unwittingly on my part, DJIA 9,339 became public record

3. Wave 4 cannot overlap
the termination of
wave 1

and was given much more attention by some than was ever
intended. I am now in a bind as the DJIA closed four days ago
at 9,337.9. I did not even know that was the close until e-mail
messages flooded my inbox. In truth, I think the target was
missed as the high in place is 9,367.8. The September S&P target

Aero Home Page

Services

Learn More About Gann/Elliott

E-Mail

Figure 10.2

264 • CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 265

action forms the second correction that becomes the fourth wave:

recommended for use as diagnostic tools. We will have to come back

Then you have traders who want to take some profits, and this

using tick charts is not recommended, Point-and-Figure charts are
to this later so that we do not stray too far off our present discussion.

next move. So, sure enough, after some profit taking, they step into

this causes the first correction we call "wave 2":

sidelines of the market waiting for a chance to participate in the

assumes the prior trend is still the dominant market direction, and

that developed in the third wave position have been sitting on the

larger move. The first leg is called "wave 1." The rest of the crowd

is a guideline. Meanwhile the traders that missed the strong rally

ers who move the market in what will later be seen as the start of a

The Wave Principle only has three rules. Easy. Everything else

waves. A new trend begins with a few well-informed or lucky trad-

Rule 3: Wave 4 cannot overlap the end or termination of wave 1.

The expansion cycle of a market unfolds in a pattern of five

the market and buy in unison, forming a fifth wave up in the direc-

itself once again.

the normal character for a market in a very short horizon chart will

three-wave movement down. The five-wave cycle can then repeat

market after years of sitting before a computer screen. Whatever is

little more. Now the whole pattern is ready to be corrected with a

the first wave. That comes from knowing the personality of your

is happening in this market and their orders press the trend just a

kets, such as currency markets, characteristically retrace most of

left to buy? Right. The retail traders who just discovered something

In Figure 10.2, wave 2 down retraces part of wave 1. Some mar-

tion of the larger trend now in force. In a very short horizon, who is

Rule 1: Wave 2 may not break below the origin of wave 1.

someday be seen in that market s longer horizon charts.

Waves 1, 3, and 5 are called impulsive waves as they are clearly

struction of the different patterns. Some quote systems allow you

third wave is most often the strongest:

feel the rhythm unfolding in a market before diving into the con-

on the same side of the market for one reason or another so the

makes their head spin. It is far more important to understand and

they realize a new trend is unfolding. Everyone is entering orders

they are built upon blocks offivesand threes and threes andfivesit

same time as the majority are trying to establish a position when

fanatical about the internal construction of these waves and how

now squeezed out, and they have to unwind their positions at the

4 are the corrective phases of the five-wave cycle. People get so

sleepy traders who assumed the former trend was still in force are

dominant and define the direction of the larger trend. Waves 2 and

From the end of wave 2 a strong rally then develops because the

to compress the x axis. By compressing the scale, you force yourself

ing every little squiggle wiggle in the chart.

compared to waves 1 and 5.

do within any time horizon as it is too easy to get caught up count-

does not have to be the longest; it just cannot be the shortest when

you cannot see the finer details. This is something I will frequently

This rule actually leads to a common misunderstanding. Wave 3

to study the rhythm and proportions unfolding in the market because

Rule 2: Wave 3 cannot be the shortest.

266

• CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

Figure 10.3 Aerodynamic Investments Inc., © 1996-2011,
www.aeroinvest.com
Source: TradeStation. © TradeStation Technologies

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 267

Figure 10.4 Aerodynamic Investments Inc., © 1996-2011,
www.aeroinvest.com
Source: TradeStation. © TradeStation Technologies

the right side of the market.

a 40-minute DMK/$ chart on the far right. Your first task is

balance and proportions, but you didn't need them as you were on

the weekly Hang Seng Index, the weekly NASDAQ Index, and

another major sell signal. We have guidelines to help us determine

Figure 10.3 displays three markets with a compressed x axis:

to please mark each chart so that balanced five-wave patterns
emerge.

Next, review the weekly NASDAQ chart in the middle of Figure
10.4. I deliberately had to scroll this chart back so that you could

high is much more forceful than the first.

warned you that the rally into the 1,200 level in late March was

wave structures in this chart. The secondfive-wavepattern into the

then followed. You had the right rhythm. Your indicators would have

proportions within their relationships. There are two pairs of five-

you would be on the right side of the market because a large rally

as they have similar character. As a group, they also have balanced

you thought a five-wave structure ended at the low in early 1998,

be able to see that some of these waves should be grouped together

Guess what—it does not matter which one you prefer because if

NASDAQ chart in Figure 10.3, you have a problem. You need to

Or would you feel five waves down ended at the low in early 1998?

However, if you found afive-wavepattern from bottom to top in the

five waves down from the top of the chart data to the very bottom?

not see the present data. The real chart is a five-wave advance.

Look at the Hang Seng chart first on the left. Would you mark

268 • CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 269

interesting.

doing so. The data has been compressed precisely for this reason so

in a weekly DJIA chart, our real-time scenario could get pretty

immediately start to subdivide it as we cannot stop ourselves from

projections are correct and we now have afive-wavepattern visible

the fifth wave in the first five-wave pattern in this chart. You'll

coincides with the end of a five-wave pattern. If my Gann time

Textbook Elliott wave practitioners may become troubled with

ends. The novice will soon understand why.)

the range of the previous fourth wave. That is extremely helpful

be scrambling to again reverse or step aside where this chart data

a five-wave pattern will be to this zone, which is anywhere within

price low in this chart. (The more experienced wave counter would

ted line marking the start and end of wave 4. The target following

both would have been looking for a rally in the dollar from the

10.2. Where wave 3 topped and wave 4 bottomed, there is a dot-

Elliott wave practitioner will be on the right side of the market as

zone the vicinity of the previous fourth wave. Take a look at Figure

the end of this chapter. However, both the novice and the advanced

market corrects a completed five-wave cycle. We call this target

is part of another pattern that the novice will easily recognize by

know to anticipate where the next target will be located when the

advanced Elliott wave analyst will recognize that the last leg down

staring at these redundant patterns so often in all time frames, we

OK for the information you have been given so far. The more

in the opposite direction to correct the entirefive-wavecycle. After

data in this chart as afive-wavepattern from top to bottom. That's
