
***
Trees don’t grow to the sky, but Buffett felt he could help new saplings take root. He never lost his focus on
business, but as he contemplated the ideal way to spend the rest of his life, once again he was roused by the
urge to preach. For some time he had been giving talks to college students around the United States, traveling
to their schools, welcoming them to Omaha. He liked talking to students because they were not hardened in
their habits, still young enough to take full advantage of what he said.
“I packed my little snowball very early, and if I had packed it ten years later, it would have been way
different than where it stands on the hill right now. So I recommend to students that if you start out a little
ahead of the game—it doesn’t have to be a lot, but it’s so much better than starting out behind the game.
And credit cards really get you behind the game.”
As early as 2002, feeling a sense of urgency, he had begun to pick up speed with his talks to the students.
They came from MIT. Northwestern. The University of Iowa. The University of Nebraska. Wesleyan. The
University of Chicago. Wayne State. Dartmouth. The University of Indiana. The University of Michigan.
Notre Dame. Columbia. Yale. The University of Houston. Harvard/ Radcliffe. The University of Missouri.
The University of Tennessee. UC Berkeley. Rice. Stanford. Iowa State. The University of Utah. Texas A&M
University. Much of his message was that getting rich quick wasn’t the worthiest goal in life. Ironically, it was
his own competitiveness and the urge of humankind to worship the rich and famous that made his audience
seek him out to hear these words. Like everything else in his life, the visits from students started to snowball.
In 2008, he was crowned the richest man on earth for the first time. By then, the students were coming from
Asia, from Latin America, arriving in Omaha in groups of two or three schools at a time, in packs sometimes
of more than two hundred, sometimes on several days a month.
The students who made the pilgrimage to visit the Sage of Omaha got the full treatment (excepting only that
Buffett did not go to their hotels in person and leave bound volumes of his annual reports for them at the
front desk at four-thirty a.m. The Internet now did that job for him). They toured Rose Blumkin’s Nebraska
Furniture Mart and roamed the aisles of Borsheim’s. Buffett met them in the office. Some days now, he
abandoned his gray suits and tight collars, and looked relaxed in casual dress. Their questions often ventured
far afield from business. What is the purpose of life? some of them wanted to know. He answered this
question the same way he answered the business ones—in mathematical terms.
As he had told the students at Georgia Tech when Susie was in the hospital, recovering from her surgery:
“The purpose of life is to be loved by as many people as possible among those you want to have love you.”
How should society be ordered? He told them about the Ovarian Lottery. How do I find the right spouse?
Marry up, he said. (He wasn’t talking about money.) How do I know what is right? Follow your Inner
Scorecard. What should I do about a career? Find something you are passionate about. I only work with
people I like. If you go to work every morning with your stomach churning, you’re in the wrong business.
He told them about the genie. Treat your body like the only car you’ll ever own: Baby that car, garage it
every night, buff every dent, and change its oil every week. Then he took them out to lunch or dinner at
Gorat’s and everyone scarfed down salty T-bones and double hash browns at the scuffed linoleum tables as if
the genie had exempted them temporarily from his rules. As they ate, they would leap up, one after another,
and jockey to have a picture taken with Warren Buffett. Someday, maybe in forty years, their grandchildren
would believe them when they claimed to have talked and sat and dined with the Oracle of Omaha.
What he was teaching were the lessons that had emerged from the unfolding of his own life.
In that unfolding, he admits to ambition, but he denies that there was ever a plan. He finds it hard to
acknowledge his own powerful hand as the creator of the sweeping canvas that is his masterpiece. As he tells
the story, a series of happy accidents built Berkshire Hathaway; a moneymaking machine sprang up without
design. Its elegant structure of true partnership with like-minded shareholders built on what Munger called a

“seamless web of deserved trust,” with an investment portfolio buried inside an interlocked set of businesses
whose capital could be moved at will, all of them turbocharged with “float”—all this had come about, he
claims, simply as a reflection of his personality. The final product was a model that could be analyzed and
understood, yet few did and, for the most part, nobody coattailed it. What people paid attention to was
simply how rich he was. Indeed, as much as he wanted them to study his model, Buffett sometimes
inadvertently discouraged it; he also wanted people to believe that he just tap-danced into work every day
and had fun.
But that would be the less flattering version.
The truth is this.
When Warren was a little boy fingerprinting nuns and collecting bottle caps, he had no knowledge of what he
would someday become. Yet as he rode his bike through Spring Valley, flinging papers day after day, and
raced through the halls of The Westchester, pulse pounding, trying to make his deliveries on time, if you had
asked him if he wanted to be the richest man on earth—with his whole heart, he would have said, Yes.
That passion had led him to study a universe of thousands of stocks. It made him burrow into libraries and
basements for records nobody else troubled to get. He sat up nights studying hundreds of thousands of
numbers that would glaze anyone else’s eyes. He read every word of several newspapers each morning and
sucked down the Wall Street Journal like his morning Pepsi, then Coke. He dropped in on companies,
spending hours talking about barrels with the woman who ran an outpost of Greif Bros. Cooperage or auto
insurance with Lorimer Davidson. He read magazines like the Progressive Grocer to learn how to stock a
meat department. He stuffed the backseat of his car with Moody’s Manuals and ledgers on his honeymoon.
He spent months reading old newspapers dating back a century to learn the cycles of business, the history of
Wall Street, the history of capitalism, the history of the modern corporation. He followed the world of politics
intensely and recognized how it affected business. He analyzed economic statistics until he had a deep
understanding of what they signified. Since childhood, he had read every biography he could find of people
he admired, looking for the lessons he could learn from their lives. He attached himself to everyone who
could help him and coattailed anyone he could find who was smart. He ruled out paying attention to almost
anything but business—art, literature, science, travel, architecture—so that he could focus on his passion. He
defined a circle of competence to avoid making mistakes. To limit risk he never used any significant amount
of debt. He never stopped thinking about business: what made a good business, what made a bad business,
how they competed, what made customers loyal to one versus another. He had an unusual way of turning
problems around in his head, which gave him insights nobody else had. He developed a network of people
who—for the sake of his friendship as well as his sagacity—not only helped him but also stayed out of his
way when he wanted them to. In hard times or easy, he never stopped thinking about ways to make money.
And all of this energy and intensity became the motor that powered his innate intelligence, temperament, and
skills.
Warren Buffett was a man who loved money, a man for whom the game of collecting it ran in his veins as his
lifeblood. That love kept him going: buying little stocks like National American, selling GEICO to have the
money to buy something cheaper, pushing at the boards of companies like Sanborn Map to do the right thing
for shareholders. It had made him independent and competitive enough to want his own partnership and say
no to the chance to be a junior partner running Ben Graham’s old firm. It made him tough enough to shut
down Dempster’s distribution center and fire Lee Dimon; it gave him the determination to break Seabury
Stanton. It had tamed his impatience and made him listen when Charlie Munger insisted that they buy great
businesses, even though listening to other people went against his very grain. It stiffened his will to survive
the SEC investigation of Blue Chip and to break the strike at the Buffalo News. It made him an implacable
acquirer. It also led him to lower his standards from time to time when his turf dried up. Yet it saved him
from serious losses by keeping him from abandoning his margin of safety.
Warren Buffett was a timid man who shied from confrontation and needed people to cushion him from life’s
rougher edges. His fears were personal, not financial; he was never timid when it came to money. His
passionate yearning to be rich gave him the courage to ride his bicycle past the house with the awful dog and
throw those last few newspapers in Spring Valley. It sent him to Columbia, seeking Ben Graham, after

Harvard turned him down. It made him put one foot in front of the other, calling on people as a
prescriptionist, while they rejected him over and over. It gave him the strength to return to Dale Carnegie
after losing his courage the first time. It forced him through the decisions in the Salomon crisis to make his
great withdrawal from the Bank of Reputation. It lent him the dignity to face years of almost intolerable
criticism without counterattacking during the Internet bubble. He had spent his life contemplating, limiting,
and avoiding risk, but in the end he was braver than he realized himself.
Warren Buffett would never call himself courageous; he would cite his energy, focus, and rational
temperament. Above all, he would describe himself as a teacher. All his adult life he had sought to live up to
the values instilled in him by his father: He said that Howard taught him that the “how” mattered more than
the “how much.” To hold his ruthlessness in check wasn’t an easy lesson for him. It helped that he was
fundamentally honest—and that he was possessed by the urge to preach. “He deliberately limited his
money,” says Munger. “Warren would have made a lot more money if he hadn’t been carrying all those
shareholders and had maintained the partnership longer, taking an override.” Compounded over thirty-three
years, the extra money would have been worth many billions—tens of billions—to him.27 He could have
bought and sold the businesses inside Berkshire Hathaway with a cold calculation of their financial return
without considering how he felt about the people involved. He could have become a buyout king. He could
have promoted and lent his name to all sorts of ventures. “In the end,” says Munger, “he didn’t want to do it.
He was competitive, but he was never just rawly competitive with no ethics. He wanted to live life a certain
way, and it gave him a public record and a public platform. And I would argue that Warren’s life has worked
out better this way.”28
It was the will to share what he knew in an act of sheer generosity that made him spend months writing his
annual letter to the shareholders; his joy in showmanship that made him want a mobile home at his
shareholder meeting; his pixieish sense of fun that led him to endorse a mattress. It was his Inner Scorecard
that made him cling to his margin of safety. It was pure love that turned him into what Munger called “a
learning machine.” It was his handicapping skill that let him use that knowledge to figure out what the future
might bring. It was his urge to preach that made him want to warn the world of dangers to come.
***
When Warren reached his seventy-seventh birthday, he mused that he had lived one-third of the lifespan of
the United States. His age weighed on him; it was getting harder for him to read all day long the way he used
to, since one of his eyes was getting a little weak. So he read more efficiently. He had finally given in and
agreed to wear hearing aids. His voice turned gravelly faster than it once did. He tired more easily. But his
business judgment was still quick and sharp.
He wished he could have the next ten years’ worth of newspapers delivered to his doorstep right now. The
years ahead weren’t endless, but with luck they could be long. Trees don’t grow to the sky, but he wasn’t
scraping the horizon yet. Another new person, another investment, another idea always waited for him. The
things left to learn far exceeded what he already knew.
“The snowball just happens if you’re in the right kind of snow, and that’s what happened with me. I don’t
just mean compounding money either. It’s in terms of understanding the world and what kind of friends you
accumulate. You get to select over time, and you’ve got to be the kind of person that the snow wants to
attach itself to. You’ve got to be your own wet snow, in effect. You’d better be picking up snow as you go
along, because you’re not going to be getting back up to the top of the hill again. That’s the way life
works.”
The snowball he had created so carefully was enormous by now. Yet his attitude toward it remained the
same. However many birthdays lay ahead, he would always be astonished each time the calendar turned, and
as long as he lived, he would never stop feeling like a sprout. For he wasn’t looking backward to the top of
the hill. It was a big world, and he was just starting out.

Afterword

On October 23, 2006, Berkshire Hathaway became the first American stock to trade above $100,000 per
share. By the end of 2007, BRK traded above $140,000 per share, which valued Berkshire as a company at
more than $200 billion. Berkshire was the world’s most respected company, according to a Barron’s survey.1
Buffett’s personal fortune exceeded $60 billion.
For a decade, BRK stock had compounded at slightly over twelve percent—a rate that some might compare
unfavorably to Buffett’s early years, when he achieved an average twenty-seven percent return. Trees don’t
grow to the sky, he always said; as Berkshire’s capital grew, the climb would get steeper. But investors in
Berkshire had only gratitude for the “lower” returns. Those who bought an index of the market had just
suffered through what the Wall Street Journal called a “lost decade” in which the S&P 500 index had gone
exactly nowhere, falling below its level of April 1999.2 Buffett’s talk at Sun Valley was unfolding along the
lines he had discussed; the period after the 1999 stock market bubble had burst was now the third-longest
stretch in the past hundred years when the market made no progress. Buffett still said that stocks are the best
long-time investment—as long as they were bought at the right price, and for a low fee. As of early 2008, he
was buying stocks, but not with great enthusiasm. Sooner or later the market’s weighing machine would catch
up with its voting machine. In the meantime, he continued to mostly buy businesses.
Buffett had added several new directors to the Berkshire board since Bill Gates and Charlotte Guyman. In
the 2002 chairman’s letter he had invited shareholders to nominate themselves for the director position. The
letters had come pouring in, and Buffett—of course—collected them; he was amused, entertained, and in a
few instances impressed by the people who’d nominated themselves. Still, in the end, he had added Don
Keough and Tom Murphy that year instead of a self-nominated candidate. The process had revealed,
however, the highly personal—to say the least—corporate governance at Berkshire. Berkshire had agreed, in
response to an SEC request, to adopt a formalized process for shareholders to nominate directors. In 2007,
Berkshire added another woman, Yahoo! chief financial officer Susan Decker, to his board, again tilting the
board demographic to a younger age.
Along the way, Buffett had found that he liked the idea of advertising for people to nominate themselves for
jobs. He had always preferred that people ask him for things, rather than the other way around. In his 2006
letter to shareholders, prodded by Bill Gates, he had pointed out that Lou Simpson’s “top-notch” record was
at risk if anything happened to both Simpson and himself, and advertised for a successor to Simpson. Send in
your résumé, Buffett said. The number one thing he and Munger were looking for was somebody who
understood risk. Seven hundred proposals arrived from all over the world. One person explained, “I am said
to be selfish and also ruthless” various people went on at length—great length—about why they felt they
were cut from the same cloth as Buffett—without giving any real qualifications for the job; and many, many
people wrote saying they had no requisite experience, but wanted to be Buffett’s apprentice, understudy, or
protégé. He collected all these letters in huge boxes in the boardroom before eventually filing them away. In
the end he chose four candidates who were already successful and managing money; they now waited in the
wings.
***
After the awkward 2004 shareholder meeting, Buffett moved the business section of the meeting to late in
the afternoon in 2005. That year, and in 2006, no activists had shown up. But just before the 2007 meeting, a
billboard appeared hovering over a major freeway in Omaha that said “Will your conscience let you off on a
technicality?” The question referred to a proposed resolution to force Berkshire to sell its PetroChina
investment; PetroChina’s parent company, Chinese National Petroleum Company (CNPC), was implicated in
funding Chinese sponsorship of genocide in Darfur. While not required to put the resolution on the ballot,

Buffett did so, and allowed a vigorous airing of the Darfur issue at the shareholder meeting.
The supervoting provisions of the A shares meant that the resolution could never pass, but Buffett cared
deeply what his shareholders thought of him and the company. The question was mooted when, by the end of
2007, for reasons that he said were unrelated to the Darfur question, Buffett sold the PetroChina investment.
It had cost Berkshire just under $500 million; the company netted a profit of $3.5 billion. Energy prices
continued to soar afterward, and he was accused of selling too soon. Meanwhile, the shareholder meetings
remained a model of decorum; more protestors had begun to arrive at the microphone, where they were
greeted respectfully. Then the festival went on.
***
Berkshire had bought a number of other new businesses. The most significant included Iscar, a highly
automated Israeli maker of metal cutting tools, in 2006, Berkshire’s first acquisition of a non-U.S. company.
For Fruit of the Loom, he bought Russell Athletics. He took control of Equitas, assuming the old claims of
Lloyd’s of London in exchange for $7 billion worth of insurance float. Berkshire also bought electronics
distributor TTI. In 2007, Buffett invested in the stock of BNSF (Burlington Northern Santa Fe) railroad,
setting off a minor frenzy for railroad stocks. One investment that Buffett did not make was in the Wall
Street Journal. He had never owned stock in his favorite newspaper by 2007 when press lord Rupert
Murdoch offered to buy it. Some Journal editors and staffers hoped that Buffett would save the paper in the
cause of quality journalism. But he would not pay a premium price for a rich man’s trophy, even to become
the savior of quality journalism. Long ago, in the days of the Washington Monthly, the unsentimental side of
Buffett had divorced his fondness for journalism from his wallet. Nothing had changed that.
In 2008, candymaker Mars, Inc. announced that it was buying Wm. Wrigley Jr. Company for $23 billion.
Buffett had agreed, through Berkshire, to lend $6.5 billion as part of the deal, in an arrangement facilitated by
Byron Trott, his investment banker at Goldman Sachs. Trott had been responsible for several of Berkshire’s
acquisitions. He understood how Buffett thought, and Buffett said that he had Berkshire’s interests at heart.
“I’ve been conducting a seventy-year taste test,” Buffett said about Wrigley’s. The Wrigley deal harkened
back to the old days when he had refused to sell a single stick of gum to Virginia Macoubrie.
Buffett’s first thought after agreeing to make the loan—of course—had been to call Kelly Muchemore Broz
and ask her to set aside a little space at the Berkshire meeting, in case Mars and Wrigley wanted to sell some
products to his shareholders. The shareholder meeting turned into a mini-festival of candy and chewing gum.
Attendance set a new record; 31,000 people came.
Also in 2008, Berkshire had acquired Marmon, a small industrial conglomerate that made electrical
components, railroad tank cars and containers, truck flatbeds, industrial equipment and materials, and the
like, with revenues of $7 billion. The seller was the Pritzker family, which had decided to break up its
conglomerate to settle family squabbling that had broken out after the death of Buffett’s old coattailing hero
Jay Pritzker in 1999.
***
Buffett had seen many examples of family squabbles among the rich when the patriarch died; he was
comfortable that his own arrangements would prevent that. Little squabbling was going on within the Buffett
family in the wake of Susie’s will and the gift to the Gates Foundation. Howie and Susie Jr. were doing what
they loved: farming and giving money away. Peter was in discussions with Robert Redford to bring Spirit:
The Seventh Fire to Redford’s Sundance resort as an annual summer event. He was also in talks with
sponsors in Germany and in China about overseas tours of the show, and was about to release his latest CD,
Imaginary Kingdom.
The one exception to the harmony was Buffett’s adopted granddaughter Nicole Buffett. In 2006 Nicole had

participated in Jamie Johnson and Nick Kurzon’s documentary The One Percent, a story about the children
of the rich. In the documentary, Nicole unwisely positioned herself as a spokesman for the unspoiled Buffett
way of life. The documentary, which appeared shortly before Buffett’s donation to the Gates Foundation,
resulted in follow-up appearances on CNN, National Public Radio, and an invitation to appear on an Oprah
episode about social class in America. Buffett’s reaction was harsh; he had sent word to Nicole that he didn’t
consider her his granddaughter, and if asked, would say so. Nicole told Oprah, “It’s a weird thing to be
working for a very wealthy family considering I do come from one of the wealthiest families in America.”
She said she was “at peace with” not having inherited wealth—apparently a reference to the small amounts
that Susie had left her grandchildren—but added, “I do feel that it would be nice to be involved with creating
things for others with that money and to be involved in it. I feel completely excluded from it.” The “poor
little me” aspect of her interview was her second mistake.
Afterward, she sent Buffett a letter asking why he had disavowed her. In August 2006, he wrote back3
offering her good wishes, told her that she had reason to be proud of her accomplishments, and gave her
some worthwhile advice. Positioning herself with people as a member of the Buffett family was a mistake, he
wrote. “If you do so, it will become your primary identity with them. People will react to you based on that
‘fact’ rather than to who you are or what you have accomplished.” He also wrote, “I have not legally or
emotionally adopted you as a grandchild, nor have the rest of my family adopted you as a niece or
cousin…. It is simply a fact that just as [your mother] is in no respect my daughter-in-law, her children are
not my grandchildren.”
Despite the controlled tone of the letter, Nicole had wounded him in his most tender spot—his identity and
that of his family. Otherwise, he might have thought twice about sending the letter, which backfired badly on
him. Nicole may have been wrong, but she seemed sincere. Instead of reining her in, the rejection letter set
her off on another round of interviews that made Buffett look like Ebenezer Scrooge; one result was a Page
Six story in the New York Post (“Buffett to Kin: You’re Fired!”)4 portraying him as taking vengeance on her
for participating in the documentary. To the man who had worked so hard for a lifetime never to alienate
anyone, it was a painful irony—but perhaps the story would have a happier ending someday. Buffett had
been able to make up with Mrs. B; he could make up with anybody who wanted to make up with him, given
enough time.
***
By 2008, Coca-Cola’s stock was up forty-five percent from its low, to $58. Profits had risen steadily under
CEO Neville Isdell. He had settled the Department of Justice investigation and closed a $200 million
discrimination lawsuit over racial bias. Buffett left the board in February 2006. His last Coca-Cola
shareholder meeting had been another carnival of activists, but nobody had to be wrestled to the floor, and
the tension was set to a lower thermostat. In 2007, Isdell had announced that he was retiring. The new CEO,
Muhtar Kent, was responsible for the company’s successful push into non-cola drinks, where Coca-Cola had
been lagging and was strategically off course.
“I always used to tell Gates that a ham sandwich could run Coca-Cola. And it was a damn good thing, too,
because we had a period there a couple of years ago where, if it hadn’t been that great of a business, it
might not have survived.”
***
General Re, Berkshire’s other problem-child investment, had benefited from favorable insurance markets
after September 11. It reported the most profitable results in its history in 2007, with $2.2 billion of pretax
operating earnings.5 By then Gen Re had earned back the losses and restored its balance sheet to a better
condition than when Buffett bought it. From $14 billion of float at the end of 1998, a decade later General Re
had $23 billion of float and $12.5 billion of capital. It was operating with nearly one-third fewer employees
