 Fama (1998) suggested that behavioral biases could be subject to “model dredging,” where one tries to find biases to fit the facts. He speculated that there might be an increasing number of behavioral models attempting to explain momentum profits. This never happened. In fact, the half dozen or so behavioral explanations for momentum that existed at that time are the same ones that have continued up to the present. Instead, as we just saw, it was the supporters of efficient markets who kept trying to find additional risk factors they hoped would explain momentum on a rational basis. These attempts were similar to the way researchers continued to look for additional risk factors to shore up the problem-prone linear factor models described in Chapter 3 . 
 EARLY BEHAVIORAL MODELING 
 Social psychology has always had a strong connection with stock market investing. In 1912, Selden wrote Psychology of the Stock Market , based on “the belief that the movements of prices on the exchanges are dependent to a very considerable degree on the mental attitude of the investing and trading public.” According to Graham and Dodd (1951), “The prices of common stocks are not carefully thought out computations, but the resultants of a welter of human reactions.” 
 The most cited paper to ever appear in the prestigious economics journal Econometrica was “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk,” by two psychologists, Kahneman and Tversky (1979). Kahneman received the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences in 2002 and the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2013. (Tversky had passed away earlier.) These authors’ groundbreaking paper challenged conventional utility-maximizing behavior. Prospect theory showed that people value gains differently than they value losses. Investors being more sensitive to losses than they are to gains became known as “loss aversion.” Prospect theory helped explain why individuals make decisions that can deviate from rational decision making. 
 The work of Kahneman and Tversky formed the basis for identifying other systematic behavioral biases that express themselves in the following ways: 
          •    Anchoring, insufficient adjustment, underreaction 
          •    Confirmation bias 
          •    Herding, feedback trading, overreaction 
          •    Conservatism, representativeness 
          •    Overconfidence, self-attribution 
          •    Slow diffusion of information 
          •    Disposition effect 
 ANCHORING AND UNDERREACTION 
 Anchoring is the tendency to overweight the importance of the first information that we learn. Tversky and Kahneman (1974) demonstrated that people anchor their views to past data and are reluctant to adjust their views to new information. According to Meub and Proeger (2014), anchoring can occur on a social dimension as well on the individual level. Social anchoring can increase pressure toward conformity and acceptance of the status quo. 
 Anchoring of whatever kind leads to inertia. This can cause investors to underreact to news, which keeps prices below their fair value. Once price trends do finally develop, they remain strong for some time as prices catch up to their fair value. 
 CONFIRMATION BIAS 
 Closely related to anchoring is confirmation bias, which is the tendency to overemphasize the importance of information that confirms our views. Confirmation bias is perhaps the oldest known behavioral heuristic. The English philosopher Francis Bacon identified confirmation bias in 1620: 
           The human understanding when it once adopted an opinion (either as being the received opinion or as being agreeable to itself) draws all things else to support and agree with it. And though there be a greater number and weight of instances to be found on the other side, yet these it either neglects and despises or else by some distinction sets aside and rejects; in order that by this great and pernicious predetermination the authority of its former conclusions may remain inviolate. 
 George Orwell stated, “People can foresee the future only when it coincides with their own wishes, and the most grossly obvious facts can be ignored when they are unwelcome.” Wason (1960) and Tversky and Kahneman (1974) demonstrated a number of ways in which people look for information that confirms what they already believe while neglecting information that disagrees with their prior beliefs. 
 Investors subject to confirmation bias who look at recent price moves as representative of the future may invest more in securities that have recently done well and less in those that have not done as well. This can accentuate price trends and lead to their continuation. Friesen, Weller, and Dunham (2009) developed a confirmation bias model that explains the success of technical trading rules using past price patterns. 
 HERDING, FEEDBACK TRADING, AND OVERREACTION 
 DeLong et al., (1990) developed the first formal behavioral model to explain momentum profits. Their study identified traders who follow positive feedback strategies, which leads them to buy securities when prices rise and to sell securities when prices fall. This causes price overreaction and subsequent momentum profits. Adding to this effect, Gârleanu and Pedersen (2007) identified risk management schemes using past prices, such as stop-loss orders, which sell in downtrending markets and buy in uptrending markets. These also confirm and reinforce price trends. 
 Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch (1992) described informational cascades that cause traders to jump on the bandwagon where the herding effect feeds upon itself. Herding is also found in equity analysts’ recommendations and forecasts (Welch, 2000), in investment newsletters (Graham, 1999), and among institutional investors (Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers, 1995). John Maynard Keynes identified herding when he said that the prime directive among investment managers is for them to keep their jobs. In order to do this, one should never be wrong on one’s own, which creates herding among professional investment managers. 
 Charles MacKay wrote in his classic book of 1841, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds , “Men, it has been well said, think in herds; it will be seen they go mad in herds, while they only recover their senses slowly, and one by one.” Herding has a strong physiological, as well as psychological, basis. It is associated with the release of oxytocin and positive feelings of trust and security. Isolation from herds, on the other hand, leads to stimulation of the amygdala neurons, which can trigger a fight-or-flight response and overwhelm the analytical brain. 1 
 Herding is primordial. It manifests itself when an animal stays with the crowd in order to reduce its risk of attack. Herding is deeply ingrained in our brain chemistry and DNA. 
 There is also evidence that market activity can itself stimulate changes in physiology and create additional behavioral changes. Kandasamy et al. (2014) showed that investors experience a sustained increase in the stress hormone cortisol when market volatility increases, which causes them to become more risk-averse. Physiology-induced shifts in risk preferences may be an underappreciated cause of market instability. It may help explain why many individual investors tend to sell in herds at or near market bottoms. It may also give us a better understanding of the basis for feedback-related behavior. We will see in later chapters how absolute and dual momentum can help by removing falling assets from our portfolios before our stress levels become high enough to cause us to behave in ways that are injurious to our financial well-being. 
 There are several other theories advanced as to why investors follow positive-feedback strategies that lead to herding behavior. Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) suggest that investors initially underreact to news due to conservatism. They then overreact over longer periods due to representativeness. In representativeness, as identified by Tversky and Kahneman (1974), you see things that look familiar and draw parallels between events that are not the same. In the case of investors, when they view recent price strength, they may assume it is the harbinger of favorable future economic conditions. 
 Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998) propose a feedback model that incorporates investor overconfidence and biased self-attribution. Overconfidence is among the most robust empirical findings in experimental psychology. Kahneman (2011) said, “We are prone to overestimate how much we understand about the world and to underestimate the role of chance in events.” Overconfidence can lead to suboptimal outcomes. It is the strongest swimmers who often drown. 
 Overconfidence also triggers hindsight bias, where individuals believe past events are more predictable than they really, as well as self-attribution bias. Self-attribution occurs when investors attribute success to their own skills but failures to external factors or bad luck. Investors then buy overconfidently, which pushes up prices. They may afterward overreact to any confirmatory news, which accentuates price trends and sustains positive momentum. 
 The Barberis et al. (1998) and Daniel et al. (1998) explanations of momentum profits are based on market inefficiencies due to investor behavior. Hong and Stein (1999), on the other hand, attribute momentum profits to market imperfections. They argue that the market contains two types of traders. The first are news watchers who witness the gradual diffusion of news. This leads initially to short-term price underreaction in price movement, which is later reversed. The second type of traders use momentum to take advantage of the profits left behind by the news watchers. They jump on the momentum bandwagon once it gets going in order to profit from the continued diffusion of information. This is how initial underreaction is later followed by delayed overreaction, with investors chasing after returns. 
 Duffie (2010) attributes slow price movement to investor inattention rather than to the slow diffusion of news. Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lokonishok (2012) say that the reason relative strength momentum works best over 6 to 12 months is that it takes that long for analysts to adjust to new information. Mitchell, Pedersen, and Pulvino (2007) say that market frictions and slow-moving arbitrage capital impede price discovery, which leads to a drop and then a rebound in prices. 
 DISPOSITION EFFECT 
 The disposition effect, coined by Shefrin and Statman (1985) and confirmed by Grinblatt and Han (2005), is the tendency of investors to sell their winners too early in order to lock in gains, while holding on to losers too long in the hope of making back what they have lost. Shefrin and Statman attributed this effect to mental accounting (a paper loss is less painful than a realized loss), regret aversion (worrying about doing the wrong thing), lack of self-control (abandoning rules you set for yourself), and tax considerations. 
 Frazzini (2006) showed that the disposition effect leads to underreaction to news events among mutual fund managers. Asset prices do not immediately rise to their fair value with good news due to premature selling. Similarly, when there is bad news, prices fall less than they should because institutional investors are reluctant to sell. Both of these actions delay the price discovery process, which contributes to the momentum effect as stocks continue trending toward their fundamental value. 
 Odean (1998), looking at the trading records of 10,000 individual investors in the 1980s, found that investors sell stocks for a gain 50% more frequently than they sell stocks for a loss. He found that the disposition effect costs investors, on average, 4.4% in annual returns. 
 PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER 
 The behavioral explanations for momentum focus on human emotional biases that cause markets to display initial underreaction followed by delayed overreaction. The disposition effect impedes an asset’s rise to true value due to premature selling and to buying inertia. Anchoring and confirmation bias can also keep prices from reflecting their true values. 
 Longer term, there is a catch-up process that subsequently leads to overreaction through herding behavior and the bandwagon effect. Thus, herding/anchoring/confirmation bias and the disposition effect complement each other and can lead to a unified, behaviorally based concept of momentum-inducing behavior. 
 Now, if someone asks you why momentum works, you too might just stare blankly at him or her. You may be at a loss for words to explain it, but at least you now should know that momentum is not just a 212-year flash in the pan. There are logical reasons why momentum works—and, in fact, there are plenty of them. 
 Some of those reasons may, at this point, seem obscure and vague. There is a recommended reading list at the end of the book for those who would like to explore behavioral finance in more detail. 2 Keep in mind that when someone asked Richard Thaler about the choice between accepting the idea of efficient markets or behavioral finance, his response was, “It’s a choice between being precisely wrong or vaguely right.” 3 
 If you accept the behavioral basis for momentum, you should be glad that behavioral biases are firmly grounded in our psychological makeup and physiology. This makes it unlikely that they will change in the future. You might also take comfort in the idea that momentum lets us profit from human behavioral biases instead of being subject to them in adverse ways. 
 Now that we have these theoretical underpinnings out of the way, it is time to move on to matters that are more practical. We will next look at potential assets we might include in our momentum portfolio.

Dual Momentum Investing: An Innovative Strategy for Higher Returns with Lower Risk 

 CHAPTER 5 
 ASSET SELECTION: THE GOOD, THE BAD, AND THE UGLY 
          Diversification is protection against ignorance. Wide diversification is only required when investors do not understand what they are doing. 
 — Warren Buffett 
 W E ALL WANT AN INVESTMENT that will capture the highest possible risk premium while minimizing tail risk or drawdown. Risk premium is the reward we receive for the risks associated with a buy-and-hold strategy. In the preface to his classic book, Stocks for the Long Run , Jeremy Siegel (2014) writes, “over long periods of time, the returns on equities not only surpassed those on all other financial assets, but were far safer and more predictable than bond returns when inflation was taken into account.” 
 From 1900 through 2013, U.S. equities returned an average annualized 6.5% premium over the risk-free rate, while non-U.S. equities offered a 4.5% risk premium. 1 During the past 30-year bond bull market, bond returns have just about kept pace with equities. However, this has not always been the case. 
 BONDS? WE DON’T NEED NO STINKIN’ BONDS 
 The average annualized real return after inflation on U.S. long-term government bonds from 1900 through 2013 was just 1.9%, considerably less than the 6.5% average annualized real return from U.S. equities during this same period. 2 Bonds had negative real returns from 1940 all the way through 1981. Purchasers of long-term government bonds in 1941 had to wait until 1991 before breaking even. 
 As for what we can reasonably expect now, current bond yield is a good indicator of what you can expect to earn in the future. John Bogle, founder and former chairperson of The Vanguard Group, pointed out that since 1926, the yield on 10-year U.S. Treasury notes explains 92% of the annualized return an investor would have earned had one held the notes to maturity and reinvested the interest payments at prevailing rates. The current annual yield on 10-year Treasury notes is 2.7%. This is the best guess of what holders of intermediate-term Treasury bonds can expect as a reasonable annual return now. 
 Historically, investors have used bonds to diversify their stock portfolios and to reduce portfolio volatility. Investors typically set aside enough in lower-volatility assets, such as bonds, to enable them to weather periodic stock market downturns. During the 2007–2008 financial crises, bonds held up relatively well with respect to stocks. However, that has not always been the case. Stocks and bonds have been positively correlated nearly 70% of the time since 1973. They share some common risk factors and move in opposite directions only under certain conditions. Figure 5.1 shows the five-year rolling correlation between the Ibbotson Long-Term U.S. Government Bond Index and the S&P 500 Stock Index since 1931. You can see that the correlation between stocks and government bonds has been greater than zero more than half the time. 3 

 Figure 5.1 Five-Year Correlations Between the S&P 500 Index and U.S. Government Bonds, 1931–2011 
 Bonds can also be less stable than stocks and just as vulnerable to extreme losses. Since 1900, the maximum drawdown in real terms of long-term U.S. government bonds was 68%. The maximum drawdown for U.S. stocks was 73%. For every five-year period since 1807, the worst performance of stocks (–11% per year) was only slightly worse than the worst five-year performance for bills and bonds. When looking at 10-year holding periods, the worst stock performance was actually better than the worst bond performance! 4 
 Looking at returns rather than losses over the past 200+ years, the real return from bonds has averaged 3.6% annually, while the real return from stocks has averaged 6.6% per year. 5 Figure 5.2 shows what this has meant for investors over the long run. I suggest staring at this chart until the message really sinks in. Your long-term financial condition may depend on it. When matched up with bonds, bills, and commodities (gold), stocks are by far the big winner in terms of long-run cumulative return. 

 Figure 5.2 Real Returns: Stocks, Bonds, Bills, Gold, and the U.S. Dollar, 1802–2012 
 (Source: Jeremy Siegel , Stocks for the Long Run) 
 Only about half of U.S. households hold equities, including what they have as retirement assets. In their paper “Myopic Loss Aversion and the Equity Premium Puzzle,” Bernartzi and Thaler (1995) make the case that investors do not hold more stocks relative to bonds because investors focus too much on short-term performance and volatility instead of long-term performance goals. This loss aversion leads to reduced stock holdings, lower stock prices, and increased equity risk premiums. By focusing more on the big picture and less on short-term volatility, one may be able to stay in the markets longer term and capture this high equity risk premium. As we will see in later chapters, the risk-reducing nature of absolute and dual momentum can help make this goal a reality. 
 Since bonds have performed well over the past 30 years, many investors may have forgotten that the last bond bear market lasted all the way from 1946 to 1981. It culminated in intermediate Treasury yields rising to over 15%. Figure 5.3 shows where we are now in relation to the long-term history of the bond market, as per the Robert Shiller website. 6 

 Figure 5.3 Ten-Year U.S. Treasury Yields, 1871–2013 
 Given the way that bond prices move inversely to interest rate changes, intermediate-term bonds could lose half their value if their annual yield rises to their long-run average rate of 6.75%. One should keep in mind that real Treasury bond returns were negative for the next 45 years following similar valuation levels as exist today. 
 Here is what Warren Buffett wrote about fixed-income investing in his 2012 annual letter to Berkshire Hathaway, Inc., shareholders: 
           They are among the most dangerous of assets. Over the past century these instruments have destroyed the purchasing power of investors in many countries, even as these holders continued to receive timely payments of interest and principal … . Right now, bonds should come with a warning label. 
 The question then is should one ever have a permanent allocation to bonds when absolute (and dual) momentum can reduce the downside exposure of a stock portfolio? Absolute momentum uses bonds, but only when stocks are weak and bonds are strong. Bonds were valuable in 2008, for example, when stocks were down sharply. A dynamic asset allocation methodology like absolute momentum will utilize either stocks or bonds, but only at the most appropriate times. It can give the best of both worlds while reducing the performance drag that comes from a permanent allocation to bonds. 
 Later I will show how conservative investors, such as those past or nearing retirement age or with a strong aversion to risk, can use a modest allocation to bonds in order to dampen the short-run volatility of a dual momentum portfolio. I will also show how to apply dual momentum to the bond market itself in order to enhance bond returns and reduce their downside exposure. Due to cognitive dissonance and anchoring bias, it may take the next serious bear market in bonds for investors to give up the notion that permanently holding a substantial amount of bonds in their long-term portfolios is the prudent thing to do. 
 RISK PARITY, REALLY? 
 In recent years, some investors have been looking in the opposite direction by greatly increasing their fixed-income exposure. There are a number of “risk parity” programs that hold more than 75% of their portfolios in bonds in order to equalize stock and bond volatility. 7 Because bonds return less than stocks, these programs often use leverage to boost their expected returns back up to acceptable levels. This may not be such a good idea, given that interest rates are now near historic lows. Risk in leveraged portfolios has many facets, such as kurtosis (fat tails), illiquidity, counterparty, and contagion risk. Negative skewness (negative returns being larger in magnitude than positive returns) can be especially harmful when combined with leverage. Risk parity investors may just be exchanging equities-based risk for other forms of risk that can be equally as problematic. 
 In the second quarter of 2013, Invesco’s $23.5 billion Balanced-Risk Allocation strategy fell 5.5%. The largest risk parity program, Bridgewater’s $79 billion All Weather Fund, had a loss of 8.4% on $56 billion of inflation-linked debt, forcing it to reevaluate its heavy reliance on fixed income. In contrast to this, when using dual momentum “we don’t need no stinkin’ bonds,” except when dual momentum tells us that we do. We utilize bonds when they are in the best position to add value to our portfolio instead of being a likely drag on portfolio performance. 
 FIFTY-SEVEN VARIETIES OF DIVERSIFICATION 
