
Figure 9.3

ALVR showing coiled spring setup.

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

169

in less than two weeks, the stock continued higher and is
currently trading ⫹55 percent higher than the entry price.
FORD (Figure 9.4) shows another coiled spring
example. Note that the 20 MA is rising and is nicely above
a rising 50 MA, showing the stock to be in a strong
uptrend. Also note that candlestick tails can poke out of the
coil as long as the open and close of each candle stays
within it. Again, a buy signal is triggered once price trades
above the upper trendline. In this case the trade yielded
over ⫹50 percent in about one month.
Figure 9.5 is an example of another stock, CME, that
shows two coiled springs. Note the sideways to slightly
downtrending movement that marks the coiled spring, and
how many of the candles are getting smaller relative to previous candles seen in the uptrend. Note also the buy signals as they print just above the resistance lines.

Figure 9.4

FORD showing coiled spring setup.

170

Figure 9.5

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

CME showing two coiled spring setups.

THE BULLISH DIVERGENCE
Market Type

This setup is best used in:

• Range-bound markets
• Bullish: weakly trending markets
• Bearish: weakly trending markets

Characteristics This setup is really a workhorse for us.
We can use it in all sorts of markets, even bearish ones. The
markets spend most of their time in range-bound or weakly
trending conditions, and this setup works in those conditions very well. As swing traders, we use the bullish divergence setup to pinpoint the bottoms of deep pullbacks
(beyond the 50 MA) within long-range uptrends (see
following deﬁnition). We will also use a version of it in
another setup discussed later. Truly, the divergence tool

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

171

is a very handy one indeed. The bullish divergence setup
looks at a stock that is trading within a long-range uptrend,
but which is currently in a substantial sell-off and has just
put in a series of lower lows. This downtrending series
needs to be at least two lows long so that there is a basis for
comparison. Of course, too many lower lows will eventually negate the long-range uptrend, and thus nullify this
setup.
Key Indicators This setup relies on both price patterns
and a variety of technical indicators. Here are the speciﬁcs:
• First, we need to identify the stock as being in a

long-range uptrend (see deﬁnition). This supports
the idea that the deep pullback we enter on is
only a temporary aberration.
Deﬁnition: The easiest way to identify a longrange uptrend is to note on the daily chart that the
50 MA (either rising or falling) is trading above
a rising 200 MA. Note: It is key that the 200 MA
is rising; this signals the uptrend. Once the 50
MA crosses under the 200 MA, even if the 200
MA is rising, the long-range uptrend is negated.
• Next, the bullish divergence setup is valid when

price does three things:
1. It trades below the 50 MA.
2. It puts in at least two clear price lows during
that pullback, with at least ﬁve trading days
between the lows.

172

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

3. The last price low corresponds with a higher

low in two or more of the following technical
indicators: MACD, MACD histogram, stochastics, RSI, OBV, and CCI (at the settings we
speciﬁed earlier).
• Note that if the last (lower) price low corresponds
with the 200 MA, trendline support, or prior
price support, so much the better.
• Buy signal: When the aforementioned conditions
have been met, a buy signal is triggered when
a bullish candle of some kind (doji, hammer,
engulﬁng, morning star, etc.) is printed on the
daily chart.
The Screening Tool The following screen inputted into
Stockcharts.com’s stock screener will identify potential
bullish divergence candidates:
• For the last market close:
• All stocks with . . .
• 60-day simple moving average of volume for to-

day is greater than 500,000.
• 60-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 10.
• Daily low for yesterday is less than daily low for
20 days ago.
• Daily low for yesterday is less than daily low for
three days ago.
• Daily MACD histogram (12,26,9) for today is
greater than daily MACD histogram (12,26,9)
for 15 days ago.

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

173

• Daily CCI (20) for today is greater than daily

CCI (20) for 15 days ago.
• Daily RSI (5) for today is greater than daily RSI
(5) for 15 days ago.
• 50-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 200-day simple moving average of
close for today.
• Daily open for today is less than daily close for
today.
In Figure 9.6, FWLT registers a nice bullish divergence setup following a blow-off double bottom with a
lower price low coupled with three cases of bullish
divergence in the indicators: MACD, RSI, and CCI.
Note that on the day of entry the 50 MA (dotted line),
though falling, is still above a rising 200 MA (solid line),
and that on the day prior to entry we have a bullish candlestick marking the second low (hammer candle). The
shares went on to gain ⫹25 percent in only 20 trading
days.
In Figure 9.7, see BRCM, which gave two nice bullish divergence buy signals in the course of this choppy
runup. The trigger candle for the ﬁrst setup was a doji and
for the second a hammer. Note that you need divergence
on only two indicators to validate the play. It is also interesting to note that the buy-and-holder with shares held
from the left side to the right side of this chart would have
seen her position increase by ⫹24 percent, a nice run. But
consider what you would have gotten on two trend trades:
⫹40 percent with a lot less time exposed to the risks of the
market.

174

Figure 9.6

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

FWLT showing a bullish divergence setup.

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

Figure 9.7

175

BRCM showing bullish divergence setups.

176

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

THE BLUE SKY BREAKOUT
Market Type

This setup is best used in:

• Bullish: strongly trending markets

Characteristics Also called a cup-and-handle formation,
this setup is sometimes your only play during prolonged
bull markets when there just doesn’t seem to be any pullback. Some swing traders are forced by a strong bull market to sit on the sidelines day after day, waiting for a pullback
or price consolidation to give them setups. How frustrating
is that when all those buy-and-holders are gloating over
their gains! But trend traders have a key weapon in their
arsenal during such times: the blue sky breakout setup. Blue
sky here refers to the new high territory the stock trades up
into as it clears at least three months of prior price highs.
We conﬁrm the breakout by looking at an indicator that
gives us a visual reference of recent trends in volume.
Key Indicators This setup relies on ﬁve price parameters combined with one technical indicator: on balance volume (OBV). Here are the rules:
• First, the closing price of the stock (not just the

intraday move) must register a new high
following a previous new pivot high set within
the past 20 trading days. A pivot high is a new
price high followed by a sell-off or sideways
consolidation of at least ﬁve bars (but not more
than 20) in length. We set these limits because it
is important that the new high be the result of a

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

177

recent and short-lived move in price rather than a
prolonged runup.
• Second, the current new closing price high must
be a signiﬁcant high; no higher closing price high
should be recorded in at least the past three
months of trading.
• Third, the new closing price high cannot have
run too far above the 52-week low for the stock.
We don’t want stocks that are too overextended.
To prevent this, we calculate a multiple by taking
the new high closing price and dividing it by the
52-week low price. This multiple should not be
more than 3.0. In other words, if a stock’s 52week low is 10.00, we want to buy a blue sky
breakout only if the new closing high is less than
30.00.
• Fourth, the current breakout into blue sky
territory (no price resistance within the previous
three months) should be accompanied by the
highest OBV reading seen in at least the past
three months (see deﬁnition).
Deﬁnition: OBV stands for on balance volume.
It measures the accumulation or distribution of
shares: share volume is either added to (on up
days) or subtracted from (on down days) a running balance of volume. OBV conﬁrms price
moves when it runs with price, and shows divergence when it runs against price. It tends to be a
leading rather than a lagging indicator and as
such is useful in predicting future price moves.

178

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

• Fifth, the candle on the day of the breakout to a

new high must be a green or white candle (close
higher than the open).
• Buy signal: When all ﬁve of these parameters have
been met on the same day, we have a buy signal.
The Screening Tool In a bull market, the following scan
should turn up several possible blue sky candidates—but
since that ﬁrst price parameter cannot be screened for, a
further eyeballing of the charts is usually required to weed
out invalid setups:
• For the last market close:
• U.S. stocks with . . .
• New 52-week high.
• 20-day simple moving average of volume for to-

day is greater than 500,000.
• 60-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 10.
• Daily close for today is less than or equal to
minimum low over 260 days starting today
times 3.
• Daily OBV for today is greater than daily OBV
for 60 days ago.
In Figure 9.8, AAPL shows three blue sky breakout
signals. This kind of stair-stepping or repetitive cup-andhandle pattern is common in strong, healthy uptrends and
often precedes a lengthy and extended bullish run. Note
that the new price highs were set within 20 days of a previous new high with at least three down days in between.

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

Figure 9.8

179

AAPL showing blue sky breakout setups.

Also note the new high seen in OBV in each case. Further
note that by new high we mean on a closing basis rather than
an intraday basis. Thus when drawing your lines on the
price chart, put them over the tops of the closing prices
rather than the upper “tails” of the candles. So healthy was
this trend, in fact, that AAPL made it all the way to 86.40
before succumbing to proﬁt taking.
Our second example, CREE, (Figure 9.9) shows a
very proﬁtable blue sky breakout. In late April, CREE set
a new ﬁve-month pivot high at the 20.00 price level. After
16 days of consolidation, the bulls stepped up again to drive
price higher. On April 22 we got our price breakout coupled with a new high in OBV. We actually called this one

180

Figure 9.9

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

CREE showing a blue sky breakout setup.

in our Trend Trade Newsletter, netting subscribers a quick
⫹22 percent gain in 12 days. A longer hold could have
banked something closer to ⫹50 percent.
The blue sky breakout is truly a befriend-the-trend
kind of setup, and certainly one of the most exciting setups
to trade. But many traders are afraid to play this kind of
breakout because they worry the shares are too overbought
and extended. They needn’t be. In a strongly uptrending
market, your best bet is to “buy high and sell higher”.
Trends once begun tend to keep trending: this is the
essence of trend trading. But to keep the odds in your favor,
stick closely to the ﬁve rules we outlined above.

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

181

THE BULLISH BASE BREAKOUT
Market Type

This setup is best used in:

• Bullish: weakly trending markets
• Bearish: strongly trending markets
• Bearish: weakly trending markets
• Range-bound markets

Characteristics This is another very useful setup that
can be traded in a variety of markets. It nicely rounds out
our series of bullish setups since it is not strictly a befriendthe-trend kind of setup. Rather, in this setup we are going
to be contrarian, bucking the trend. Here we are looking
for a stock that is in a downtrend but has put in an extended
sideways base of some kind. The fact that the stock is now
moving sideways instead of down makes this base a bullish
one. To render the setup valid, we need the indicators to
tell us two things about price behavior within the base: it
has to be gaining in momentum, and there must be evidence
that shares are under accumulation. While longer holds of
this setup can return spectacular gains, there is often a quick
burst of buying activity at the point of breakout that can
bring gains of ⫹10 percent or more within a few days, making this an ideal short-term, trend trade setup. Moreover,
this setup is most often seen in lower-priced stocks, so it is
an ideal setup for smaller account traders.
Key Indicators This setup relies on a price pattern (bullish base) combined with two technical indicators: MACD
and on balance volume (OBV). Here are the speciﬁcs:

182

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

• First, the stock must be clearly seen to be in a

downtrend of some kind, strong or weak (see
deﬁnition).
Deﬁnition: A downtrending stock is a stock that is
making lower highs (and preferably lower lows,
but, strictly speaking, this is not necessary) over
at least the past three months. A strongly downtrending stock is a downtrending stock whose 20
MA is consistently falling and below a consistently falling 50 MA. A weakly downtrending stock
is a downtrending stock whose 20 MA may be
rising and falling, but it is at least mostly below a
consistently falling 50 MA.
• Second, for at least the past 30 trading days (six

weeks), price must be moving within a
consolidation base of some kind. There are two
types of consolidation bases: triangles and
rectangles. These bases can occur in uptrends as
well as downtrends. In this setup, we want to see
these at the bottom of a downtrend.
• Figures 9.10 and 9.11 are two types of rectan-

Figure 9.10
base.

Flat rectangle

Figure 9.11 Falling
rectangle base.

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

Figure 9.12 Symmetrical
triangle base.

183

Figure 9.13 Ascending
triangle base.

Figure 9.14 Descending
triangle base.

gle bases seen in downtrending markets (ﬂat and
falling).
• Figures 9.12 through 9.14 are three types of
triangle bases seen in downtrending markets
(symmetrical, ascending, and descending.)
• The one type of consolidation pattern we want to
avoid is the rising wedge, a type of triangle
consolidation that occurs in downtrending stocks,
but which usually precedes a continuation of
the downtrend. A rising wedge does not form a
valid base for this setup. Rising wedges look like
Figure 9.15, where both trendlines slope upward.

Figure 9.15

Rising wedge: invalid base.

184

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

• Once we have identiﬁed a consolidation base in a

downtrending stock, we need to conﬁrm that it is
a bullish base. We do this by referring to two
technical indicators: MACD and OBV.
• MACD must be making a series of higher lows
while price is within the base may or may not be
making higher lows.
• OBV must rise above a trendline placed over
the tops of the indicator.
• Buy signal: A buy signal is triggered in a bullish
base at the ﬁrst green or white candle (close
higher than the open) after the candlestick on
which the OBV trendline broke to the upside.
You can also enter on the day of an OBV break if
that candle is green or white.
The Screening Tool It is not possible to screen for
triangular or rectangular bases using what is commonly
available. Most of your trades in this setup will have to
come from your watch lists as you eyeball the charts. But
the following screen will turn up a few decent candidates
among many false hits that can be short-listed for further
research. Readers who are more adept at this sort of thing
than I am might want to ﬁddle around with these parameters to make them more robust.
• For the last market close:
• U.S. stocks with . . .
• 20-day simple moving average of volume for to-

day is greater than 500,000.

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

185

• 60-day simple moving average of close for today

is greater than 10.
• 50-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 20-day simple moving average of
close for today.
• 50-day simple moving average of close for today
is less than 50-day simple moving average of
close for 40 days ago.
• Maximum range over 30 days starting today is
greater than maximum range over 15 days starting today.
• Maximum range over 15 days starting today is
greater than maximum range over 5 days starting today.
• Daily OBV for today is greater than daily OBV
for 40 days ago.
• Daily MACD line (12,26,9) for today is greater
than daily MACD line (12,26,9) for 40 days
ago.
• 50-day simple moving average of close for today
is less than 200-day simple moving average of
close for today.
In the absence of a reliable screen, you will have to
check the charts on your watch list on a regular basis. In
fact, this is a better way to go because it allows you to watch
a base develop over several days and weeks. That OBV trigger signal is really the key to this setup: if you can get in
on the day that happens, you often will be in at the start of
a signiﬁcant rally. But the stocks that show up on the pre-

186

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

ceding screen most often have already triggered their OBV
signal.
In Figure 9.16, AKS shows a weak downtrend coiling
up within a bullish triangular (symmetrical) base. We can
see that MACD shows higher lows (bullish conﬁrmation)
and that OBV triggered a buy signal after price broke up
out of the base. From there the stock quickly climbed
nearly 20 percent over seven trading days.

Figure 9.16

AKS showing a bullish base breakout setup.

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

187

In Figure 9.17, KLAC consolidates a strong downtrend capped by a nasty gap down within a bullish rectangular base. We know it is bullish because MACD, which
measures price momentum, is rising throughout the base.
OBV then gives a buy signal just prior to the base breakout. An entry around 42.00 would have returned a healthy
⫹19 percent with the trade still open on a trailing stop.
Note here how the upper trendline of bullish base (at a

Figure 9.17

KLAC shows a bullish base breakout setup.

188

Figure 9.18

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

JNPR showing a bullish base breakout setup.

price of 42.00), which acted as resistance while price
remained within the base, now acts as support for the new
uptrend.
Figure 9.18 shows a bullish base beakout setup that
we offered subscribers to our Cheap Stocks Newsletter.
JNPR’s shares nicely formed a falling rectangular base
within a clear downtrend (weak, becoming strong). The
base shows bullish divergence in the MACD indicator, con-

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

189

ﬁrming that the base is a bullish one. When OBV triggered
a breakout of its trendline, we had conﬁrmation that shares
of JNPR were being accumulated. Price often follows an
OBV breakout, and, sure enough, shares of JNPR did just
that. Shortly after the falling rectangle gave way, JNPR
shares rocketed quickly upward for a return of nearly ⫹30
percent in just six weeks.

This page intentionally left blank

selecting
bearish stocks
to trend-trade

CHAPTER
10

SHORT SELLING
Short selling, or shorting, is an essential skill for trend traders. Technically, it is not much different from buying shares
of a stock to open a position and then selling those shares
back to the market to close the position. Only in short selling, you reverse that order: ﬁrst you sell shares to the market, then to close the position you buy them back. If your
open position trades down below your entry price, money
will be credited to your account on the purchase of stock.
If your open position trades up above your entry price,
money will be taken out of your account to cover the loss.
Since you can only sell shares to the market that you
already own, you must ﬁrst borrow from your broker the
shares needed to open a short position. Thus, whether your
broker has the shares to borrow in the ﬁrst place is an
essential part of the short-selling equation: if your broker
has no shares to lend, you have no shares to borrow in order
to sell short. Generally, most good online brokers keep a
healthy supply of shares to lend on all major, liquid stocks.
The stocks we normally trade at Befriendthetrend.com are
almost always available to short. Occasionally, however, you
191

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

192

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

will ﬁnd yourself in the frustrating predicament of having
done a lot of research on a chart only to discover that you
cannot open the position because your broker doesn’t have
shares to borrow. Even more frustrating is seeing that stock
tank hard for days on end—without you on board. An
alternative to selling the stock short, then, is buying put
options on the stock. As explained in Part Four, buying
puts on a stock is a way to proﬁt from a selloff in the stock;
and it is sometimes your only alternative when your broker
is out of shares to borrow.
Some say that short selling is un-American or that it
somehow hurts the general economy. Others say that it is
beneﬁcial to the overall health of the market in that it supplies much-needed liquidity to the buyers of stock, especially during prolonged bull markets. But I don’t think you
can make a strong case either way. For every buyer there
must be a seller, and it makes little difference whether you
sell your own shares or your broker’s shares. In fact, when
you sell your own shares, that terminates your relationship
with the company and its public offerings. When you short
using borrowed shares, you have, in fact, entered into a
promissory agreement with that company to make a purchase of its shares at some point in the future (on behalf of
your broker, of course, not your own account).
There is also the perception that short selling is a
higher-risk activity than simply buying stock. The rationale behind this is that, while your long positions can go to
zero and wipe out your entire investment, a short position
can rally to inﬁnity (in theory), thus wiping out not only
your investment but all your cash reserves as well, not to
mention every other asset you own. And then there is the

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

193

numbers game: a stock that goes from $50 to $25 takes a
50 percent haircut off your investment; however, if that
same stock sold short were to rally from $25 to $50, you
are out 100 percent of your original investment.
Several things need to be said here in defense of short
selling. First, there are easy ways of managing your short
positions in order to play them defensively, which we will
discuss later. These keep your losses to a minimum when
a trade goes against you. Second, long before your entire
account is wiped out, your broker is going to give you a
margin call in the event that your short positions get to the
point that they jeopardize your ability to trade (it is in your
broker’s best interests to keep you trading). In most margin calls, your broker will simply exit your positions for you
if you don’t do it yourself within a given time period.
Third, far more companies go bankrupt and trade to penny
stock status than soar to inﬁnity, so the overall trend is on
the side of relative safety. Fourth, the short-selling systems
described here have at least a 70 percent success rate. They
are oriented toward making money, not losing it. In short
(pardon the pun), with the right trading and position management systems in place, the risks of short selling are far
outweighed by the rewards.
