
if the business conditions prevailing during the period were to continue
unchanged” (Security Analysis, 1934 ed., p. 354). Some of his lectures
make it clear that Graham intended the term to cover periods of five years or
more. You can crudely but conveniently approximate a company’s earning
power per share by taking the inverse of its price/earnings ratio; a stock with
a P/E ratio of 11 can be said to have earning power of 9% (or 1 divided by
11). Today “earning power” is often called “earnings yield.”
* This problem is discussed extensively in the commentary on Chapter 19.

“Margin of Safety” as the Central Concept of Investment

515

between the growth of corporate surpluses through reinvested
earnings and the growth of corporate values.
Over a ten-year period the typical excess of stock earning
power over bond interest may aggregate 50% of the price paid.
This figure is sufficient to provide a very real margin of safety—
which, under favorable conditions, will prevent or minimize a
loss. If such a margin is present in each of a diversified list of
twenty or more stocks, the probability of a favorable result under
“fairly normal conditions” becomes very large. That is why the
policy of investing in representative common stocks does not
require high qualities of insight and foresight to work out successfully. If the purchases are made at the average level of the market
over a span of years, the prices paid should carry with them assurance of an adequate margin of safety. The danger to investors lies
in concentrating their purchases in the upper levels of the market,
or in buying nonrepresentative common stocks that carry more
than average risk of diminished earning power.

As we see it, the whole problem of common-stock investment
under 1972 conditions lies in the fact that “in a typical case” the
earning power is now much less than 9% on the price paid.* Let us
assume that by concentrating somewhat on the low-multiplier
issues among the large companies a defensive investor may now

* Graham elegantly summarized the discussion that follows in a lecture he
gave in 1972: “The margin of safety is the difference between the percentage rate of the earnings on the stock at the price you pay for it and the rate
of interest on bonds, and that margin of safety is the difference which would
absorb unsatisfactory developments. At the time the 1965 edition of The
Intelligent Investor was written the typical stock was selling at 11 times
earnings, giving about 9% return as against 4% on bonds. In that case you
had a margin of safety of over 100 per cent. Now [in 1972] there is no difference between the earnings rate on stocks and the interest rate on stocks,
and I say there is no margin of safety . . . you have a negative margin of
safety on stocks . . .” See “Benjamin Graham: Thoughts on Security Analysis” [transcript of lecture at the Northeast Missouri State University business school, March, 1972], Financial History, no. 42, March, 1991, p. 9.

516

The Intelligent Investor

acquire equities at 12 times recent earnings—i.e., with an earnings
return of 8.33% on cost. He may obtain a dividend yield of about
4%, and he will have 4.33% of his cost reinvested in the business for
his account. On this basis, the excess of stock earning power over
bond interest over a ten-year basis would still be too small to constitute an adequate margin of safety. For that reason we feel that
there are real risks now even in a diversified list of sound common
stocks. The risks may be fully offset by the profit possibilities of
the list; and indeed the investor may have no choice but to incur
them—for otherwise he may run an even greater risk of holding
only fixed claims payable in steadily depreciating dollars. Nonetheless the investor would do well to recognize, and to accept
as philosophically as he can, that the old package of good profit
possibilities combined with small ultimate risk is no longer available
to him.*
However, the risk of paying too high a price for good-quality
stocks—while a real one—is not the chief hazard confronting the
average buyer of securities. Observation over many years has
taught us that the chief losses to investors come from the purchase
of low-quality securities at times of favorable business conditions.
The purchasers view the current good earnings as equivalent to
“earning power” and assume that prosperity is synonymous with
safety. It is in those years that bonds and preferred stocks of inferior grade can be sold to the public at a price around par, because
they carry a little higher income return or a deceptively attractive
conversion privilege. It is then, also, that common stocks of
obscure companies can be floated at prices far above the tangible
investment, on the strength of two or three years of excellent
growth.
These securities do not offer an adequate margin of safety in any
admissible sense of the term. Coverage of interest charges and preferred dividends must be tested over a number of years, including
preferably a period of subnormal business such as in 1970–71. The
same is ordinarily true of common-stock earnings if they are to

* This paragraph—which Graham wrote in early 1972—is an uncannily precise description of market conditions in early 2003. (For more detail, see the
commentary on Chapter 3.)

“Margin of Safety” as the Central Concept of Investment

517

qualify as indicators of earning power. Thus it follows that most of
the fair-weather investments, acquired at fair-weather prices, are
destined to suffer disturbing price declines when the horizon
clouds over—and often sooner than that. Nor can the investor
count with confidence on an eventual recovery—although this
does come about in some proportion of the cases—for he has never
had a real safety margin to tide him through adversity.
The philosophy of investment in growth stocks parallels in part
and in part contravenes the margin-of-safety principle. The
growth-stock buyer relies on an expected earning power that is
greater than the average shown in the past. Thus he may be said to
substitute these expected earnings for the past record in calculating
his margin of safety. In investment theory there is no reason why
carefully estimated future earnings should be a less reliable guide
than the bare record of the past; in fact, security analysis is coming
more and more to prefer a competently executed evaluation of the
future. Thus the growth-stock approach may supply as dependable
a margin of safety as is found in the ordinary investment—
provided the calculation of the future is conservatively made, and
provided it shows a satisfactory margin in relation to the price
paid.
The danger in a growth-stock program lies precisely here. For
such favored issues the market has a tendency to set prices that
will not be adequately protected by a conservative projection of
future earnings. (It is a basic rule of prudent investment that all
estimates, when they differ from past performance, must err at
least slightly on the side of understatement.) The margin of safety
is always dependent on the price paid. It will be large at one price,
small at some higher price, nonexistent at some still higher price. If,
as we suggest, the average market level of most growth stocks is
too high to provide an adequate margin of safety for the buyer,
then a simple technique of diversified buying in this field may not
work out satisfactorily. A special degree of foresight and judgment
will be needed, in order that wise individual selections may overcome the hazards inherent in the customary market level of such
issues as a whole.
The margin-of-safety idea becomes much more evident when
we apply it to the field of undervalued or bargain securities. We
have here, by definition, a favorable difference between price on

518

The Intelligent Investor

the one hand and indicated or appraised value on the other. That
difference is the safety margin. It is available for absorbing the
effect of miscalculations or worse than average luck. The buyer of
bargain issues places particular emphasis on the ability of the
investment to withstand adverse developments. For in most such
cases he has no real enthusiasm about the company’s prospects.
True, if the prospects are definitely bad the investor will prefer to
avoid the security no matter how low the price. But the field of
undervalued issues is drawn from the many concerns—perhaps a
majority of the total—for which the future appears neither distinctly promising nor distinctly unpromising. If these are bought
on a bargain basis, even a moderate decline in the earning power
need not prevent the investment from showing satisfactory results.
The margin of safety will then have served its proper purpose.

Theory of Diversification
There is a close logical connection between the concept of a
safety margin and the principle of diversification. One is correlative with the other. Even with a margin in the investor’s favor, an
individual security may work out badly. For the margin guarantees
only that he has a better chance for profit than for loss—not that
loss is impossible. But as the number of such commitments is
increased the more certain does it become that the aggregate of the
profits will exceed the aggregate of the losses. That is the simple
basis of the insurance-underwriting business.
Diversification is an established tenet of conservative investment. By accepting it so universally, investors are really demonstrating their acceptance of the margin-of-safety principle, to which
diversification is the companion. This point may be made more colorful by a reference to the arithmetic of roulette. If a man bets $1 on
a single number, he is paid $35 profit when he wins—but the
chances are 37 to 1 that he will lose. He has a “negative margin of
safety.” In his case diversification is foolish. The more numbers he
bets on, the smaller his chance of ending with a profit. If he regularly bets $1 on every number (including 0 and 00), he is certain to
lose $2 on each turn of the wheel. But suppose the winner received
$39 profit instead of $35. Then he would have a small but important margin of safety. Therefore, the more numbers he wagers on,

“Margin of Safety” as the Central Concept of Investment

519

the better his chance of gain. And he could be certain of winning $2
on every spin by simply betting $1 each on all the numbers. (Incidentally, the two examples given actually describe the respective
positions of the player and proprietor of a wheel with 0 and 00.)*

A Criterion of Investment versus Speculation
Since there is no single definition of investment in general
acceptance, authorities have the right to define it pretty much as
they please. Many of them deny that there is any useful or dependable difference between the concepts of investment and of speculation. We think this skepticism is unnecessary and harmful. It is
injurious because it lends encouragement to the innate leaning of
many people toward the excitement and hazards of stock-market
speculation. We suggest that the margin-of-safety concept may be
used to advantage as the touchstone to distinguish an investment
operation from a speculative one.
Probably most speculators believe they have the odds in their
favor when they take their chances, and therefore they may lay
claim to a safety margin in their proceedings. Each one has the feeling that the time is propitious for his purchase, or that his skill is
superior to the crowd’s, or that his adviser or system is trustworthy. But such claims are unconvincing. They rest on subjective
judgment, unsupported by any body of favorable evidence or any

* In “American” roulette, most wheels include 0 and 00 along with numbers
1 through 36, for a total of 38 slots. The casino offers a maximum payout
of 35 to 1. What if you bet $1 on every number? Since only one slot can
be the one into which the ball drops, you would win $35 on that slot, but
lose $1 on each of your other 37 slots, for a net loss of $2. That $2 difference (or a 5.26% spread on your total $38 bet) is the casino’s “house
advantage,” ensuring that, on average, roulette players will always lose more
than they win. Just as it is in the roulette player’s interest to bet as seldom as
possible, it is in the casino’s interest to keep the roulette wheel spinning.
Likewise, the intelligent investor should seek to maximize the number of
holdings that offer “a better chance for profit than for loss.” For most
investors, diversification is the simplest and cheapest way to widen your
margin of safety.

520

The Intelligent Investor

conclusive line of reasoning. We greatly doubt whether the man
who stakes money on his view that the market is heading up or
down can ever be said to be protected by a margin of safety in any
useful sense of the phrase.
By contrast, the investor’s concept of the margin of safety—as
developed earlier in this chapter—rests upon simple and definite
arithmetical reasoning from statistical data. We believe, also, that it
is well supported by practical investment experience. There is no
guarantee that this fundamental quantitative approach will continue to show favorable results under the unknown conditions of
the future. But, equally, there is no valid reason for pessimism on
this score.
Thus, in sum, we say that to have a true investment there must
be present a true margin of safety. And a true margin of safety is
one that can be demonstrated by figures, by persuasive reasoning,
and by reference to a body of actual experience.

Extension of the Concept of Investment
To complete our discussion of the margin-of-safety principle we
must now make a further distinction between conventional and
unconventional investments. Conventional investments are appropriate for the typical portfolio. Under this heading have always
come United States government issues and high-grade, dividendpaying common stocks. We have added state and municipal bonds
for those who will benefit sufficiently by their tax-exempt features.
Also included are first-quality corporate bonds when, as now, they
can be bought to yield sufficiently more than United States savings
bonds.
Unconventional investments are those that are suitable only for
the enterprising investor. They cover a wide range. The broadest
category is that of undervalued common stocks of secondary companies, which we recommend for purchase when they can be
bought at two-thirds or less of their indicated value. Besides these,
there is often a wide choice of medium-grade corporate bonds and
preferred stocks when they are selling at such depressed prices as
to be obtainable also at a considerable discount from their apparent
value. In these cases the average investor would be inclined to call
the securities speculative, because in his mind their lack of a firstquality rating is synonymous with a lack of investment merit.

“Margin of Safety” as the Central Concept of Investment

521

It is our argument that a sufficiently low price can turn a security of mediocre quality into a sound investment opportunity—
provided that the buyer is informed and experienced and that he
practices adequate diversification. For, if the price is low enough to
create a substantial margin of safety, the security thereby meets our
criterion of investment. Our favorite supporting illustration is
taken from the field of real-estate bonds. In the 1920s, billions of
dollars’ worth of these issues were sold at par and widely recommended as sound investments. A large proportion had so little
margin of value over debt as to be in fact highly speculative in
character. In the depression of the 1930s an enormous quantity of
these bonds defaulted their interest, and their price collapsed—in
some cases below 10 cents on the dollar. At that stage the same
advisers who had recommended them at par as safe investments
were rejecting them as paper of the most speculative and unattractive type. But as a matter of fact the price depreciation of about 90%
made many of these securities exceedingly attractive and reasonably safe—for the true values behind them were four or five times
the market quotation.*
The fact that the purchase of these bonds actually resulted in
what is generally called “a large speculative profit” did not prevent
them from having true investment qualities at their low prices. The
“speculative” profit was the purchaser’s reward for having made
an unusually shrewd investment. They could properly be called
investment opportunities, since a careful analysis would have
shown that the excess of value over price provided a large margin
of safety. Thus the very class of “fair-weather investments” which
we stated above is a chief source of serious loss to naïve security
buyers is likely to afford many sound profit opportunities to the
sophisticated operator who may buy them later at pretty much his
own price.†

* Graham is saying that there is no such thing as a good or bad stock; there
are only cheap stocks and expensive stocks. Even the best company
becomes a “sell” when its stock price goes too high, while the worst company is worth buying if its stock goes low enough.
† The very people who considered technology and telecommunications
stocks a “sure thing” in late 1999 and early 2000, when they were hellishly
overpriced, shunned them as “too risky” in 2002—even (cont’d on p. 522)

522

The Intelligent Investor

The whole field of “special situations” would come under our
definition of investment operations, because the purchase is
always predicated on a thoroughgoing analysis that promises a
larger realization than the price paid. Again there are risk factors in
each individual case, but these are allowed for in the calculations
and absorbed in the overall results of a diversified operation.
To carry this discussion to a logical extreme, we might suggest
that a defensible investment operation could be set up by buying
such intangible values as are represented by a group of “commonstock option warrants” selling at historically low prices. (This
example is intended as somewhat of a shocker.)* The entire value
of these warrants rests on the possibility that the related stocks
may some day advance above the option price. At the moment
they have no exercisable value. Yet, since all investment rests on
reasonable future expectations, it is proper to view these warrants
in terms of the mathematical chances that some future bull market
will create a large increase in their indicated value and in their
price. Such a study might well yield the conclusion that there is
much more to be gained in such an operation than to be lost and
that the chances of an ultimate profit are much better than those of
an ultimate loss. If that is so, there is a safety margin present even

(cont’d from p. 521) though, in Graham’s exact words from an earlier
period, “the price depreciation of about 90% made many of these securities
exceedingly attractive and reasonably safe.” Similarly, Wall Street’s analysts
have always tended to call a stock a “strong buy” when its price is high, and
to label it a “sell” after its price has fallen—the exact opposite of what Graham (and simple common sense) would dictate. As he does throughout the
book, Graham is distinguishing speculation—or buying on the hope that a
stock’s price will keep going up—from investing, or buying on the basis of
what the underlying business is worth.
* Graham uses “common-stock option warrant” as a synonym for “warrant,”
a security issued directly by a corporation giving the holder a right to purchase the company’s stock at a predetermined price. Warrants have been
almost entirely superseded by stock options. Graham quips that he intends
the example as a “shocker” because, even in his day, warrants were
regarded as one of the market’s seediest backwaters. (See the commentary
on Chapter 16.)

“Margin of Safety” as the Central Concept of Investment

523

in this unprepossessing security form. A sufficiently enterprising
investor could then include an option-warrant operation in his
miscellany of unconventional investments.1

To Sum Up
Investment is most intelligent when it is most businesslike. It is
amazing to see how many capable businessmen try to operate in
Wall Street with complete disregard of all the sound principles
through which they have gained success in their own undertakings. Yet every corporate security may best be viewed, in the first
instance, as an ownership interest in, or a claim against, a specific
business enterprise. And if a person sets out to make profits from
security purchases and sales, he is embarking on a business venture of his own, which must be run in accordance with accepted
business principles if it is to have a chance of success.
The first and most obvious of these principles is, “Know what
you are doing—know your business.” For the investor this means:
Do not try to make “business profits” out of securities—that is,
returns in excess of normal interest and dividend income—unless
you know as much about security values as you would need to
know about the value of merchandise that you proposed to manufacture or deal in.
A second business principle: “Do not let anyone else run your
business, unless (1) you can supervise his performance with adequate care and comprehension or (2) you have unusually strong reasons for placing implicit confidence in his integrity and ability.” For
the investor this rule should determine the conditions under which
he will permit someone else to decide what is done with his money.
A third business principle: “Do not enter upon an operation—
that is, manufacturing or trading in an item—unless a reliable calculation shows that it has a fair chance to yield a reasonable profit.
In particular, keep away from ventures in which you have little to
gain and much to lose.” For the enterprising investor this means
that his operations for profit should be based not on optimism but
on arithmetic. For every investor it means that when he limits his
return to a small figure—as formerly, at least, in a conventional
bond or preferred stock—he must demand convincing evidence
that he is not risking a substantial part of his principal.

524

The Intelligent Investor

A fourth business rule is more positive: “Have the courage of
your knowledge and experience. If you have formed a conclusion
from the facts and if you know your judgment is sound, act on it—
even though others may hesitate or differ.” (You are neither right
nor wrong because the crowd disagrees with you. You are right
because your data and reasoning are right.) Similarly, in the world
of securities, courage becomes the supreme virtue after adequate
knowledge and a tested judgment are at hand.
Fortunately for the typical investor, it is by no means necessary
for his success that he bring these qualities to bear upon his program—provided he limits his ambition to his capacity and confines
his activities within the safe and narrow path of standard, defensive investment. To achieve satisfactory investment results is easier
than most people realize; to achieve superior results is harder than it
looks.
