
- 312 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"The worst is over."
Lisa was back with Carrie, who wanted to return to the bouncing knee. Joel
held her for as long as he could.
Father and son entered Union Station together while Lisa and Carrie waited
in the car. The bustle of activity made Joel anxious again; old habits would
be hard to break. He pulled a small carry-on bag, loaded with all of his
possessions.
He bought a ticket to Philadelphia, and as they slowly made their way to the
platform area Neal said, "I really want to know where you're going."
Joel stopped and looked at him. "I'm going back to Bologna."
"There's a friend there, right?"
"Yes."
"Of the female variety?" Oh yes.
"Why am I not surprised?"
"Can't help it, son. It was always my weakness."
"She's Italian?"
"Very much so. She's really special."
"They were all special."
"This one saved my life."
"Does she know you're coming back?"
"I think so."
"Please be careful, Dad."
"I'll see you in a month or so."
They hugged and said goodbye.

- 313 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Author's Note
My background is law, certainly not satellites or espionage. I'm more
terrified of high-tech electronic gadgets today than a year ago. (These books
are still written on a thirteen-year-old word processor. When it stutters, as it
seems to do more and more, I literally hold my breath. When it finally quits,
I'm probably done too.)
It's all fiction, folks. I know very little about spies, electronic surveillance,
satellite phones, smartphones, bugs, wires, mikes, and the people who use
them. If something in this novel approaches accuracy, it's probably a
mistake.
Bologna, however, is very real. I had the great luxury of tossing a dart at a
map of the world to find a place to hide Mr. Backman. Almost anywhere
would work. But I adore Italy and all things Italian, and I have to confess
that I was not blindfolded when I threw the dart.
My research (too severe a word) led me to Bologna, a delightful old city that
I immediately came to adore. My friend Luca Patuelli showed me around.
He knows all the chefs in Bologna, no small feat, and in the course of our
tedious work I put on about ten pounds.
Thanks to Luca, to his friends, and to their warm and magical city. Thanks
also to Gene McDade, Mike Moody, and Bert Colley.

- 314 -

John Grisham

The Broker

- 315 -

