cannot be avoided.

57
HOW SUCCESSFUL TREND FOLLOWERS TRADE

FIGURE 4.4 Hypothetically, if you invested $100,000 in October 1991, today it would be

worth $5,718,955.18.
Source: Chart with permission from Iasg.com.

Howard Seidler
Saxon
Began November 1993
CAROR 21.65 percent

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

58

During the last Alphametrix trading conference in Miami Beach, I was fortunate to
sit and chat with Howard Seidler. I have been watching his program, Saxon, for years.
I was extremely impressed by Howard’s returns in 2005–2006 when most commodity trading advisors suffered big drawdowns, but he did not. From September 2007
till the present Howard has not experienced any large drawdowns. I only invest when
a manager who understands risk encounters a deep drawdown. I feel this lowers my
risks to some degree when I invest with a commodity trading advisor. I discussed this
with him at the Alphhmetrix convention, and he told me that he included a volatility
filter to reduce trades. In prior years Howard would have some big swings in capital. In
1994 he made 142 percent. However, there were periods in which he had drawdowns
of 65 percent in 1995–1996.
Howard graduated from Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1980 with a B.S.
in chemical engineering and management science. From June 1980 to July 1983 he
was employed first by Putman, Hayes & Bartlett, and then by Industrial Economics as
an associate. At about this same time in 1983 he began a full‐time intensive study of
the futures markets. In December 1983 he was hired and became one of the Turtles in
the experiment of Richard Dennis and Bill Eckhardt. Upon the closure of the Turtle
program in 1988 Howard opened his trading company, Saxon, in order to manage
other accounts for multiple clients as a registered commodity trading advisor. He has
a fund that is marketed by Gale Investments and his managed account size minimum is
$2,000,000. He is managing approximately $170 million.
Howard is solely responsible for the trading decisions and strategies of Saxon and
for directing its ongoing research and development of trading and money management
principles. While a large portion of Saxon’s trading program is based upon a mechanical application of Saxon’s multiple systems, Howard exercises discretion and judgment over certain trades. Depending on market conditions, certain nonsystem trades
may be taken and, conversely, certain system trades may not be taken.

59
HOW SUCCESSFUL TREND FOLLOWERS TRADE

FIGURE 4.5 Hypothetically, if you invested $100,000 in November 1993, today it would

be worth $4,141,237.63.
Source: Chart with permission from Iasg.com.

David Druz
Tactical Investment Management
Began April 1993
CAROR 19.85 percent

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

60

David Druz started out as an emergency room doctor. He told me he became interested in the futures markets when a friend of his, another medical student, ran $2,000
into $500,000 in the soybean markets in the 1970s. For the next 20 years Dave worked in
medicine while researching ideas for trading. Dave learned under Ed Seykota. He actually
stayed in Ed’s house and studied with him for an extended period of time, which was an
intense learning process. This learning process was more self‐introspection to learn trading indicators or systems. In 1981, he set up his first futures fund,Tactical, while practicing
as an emergency doctor in Fairbanks, Alaska. He later gave up medicine and moved from
Alaska to the Hawaiian island of Oahu. Tactical Investment Management manages one of
the longest running commodity futures trading programs in the world. Since 1981 they
have systematically traded futures and currencies for a small number of institutional and
individual clients. One can consider Tactical a boutique commodity trading advisor. Dave
runs the trading and has an assistant, Colleen Ann Haviland, who runs the back office. Both
are a pleasure and I feel honored to be one of their clients.
Dave maintains a robust trading methodology. There is no second‐guessing or optimization. More so the parameters are not changed or altered. All markets are traded
under the same variables. This is the basis of a robust system. It works over many types
of market conditions and over many time frames.The key to success is money management and risk controls. These, however, do not negate drawdowns.
Tactical has three different products and in total approximately $100 million under
management. The returns range both on the upside as well as on the downside. Dave
defines exactly what his system does: “My trading system captures the capital that
hedgers use to defend positions.” He has back‐tested and quantified it, and so he knows
and expects that his system will generate 30 percent drawdowns. But over time, he
has achieved excellent results because he is focused, he understands his markets, he
has good money management rules, and he has a realistic time horizon within which
he plans his trading. In one particular fund, his Tactical Institutional Commodity Program, he has returned a CAR of 18.87 percent since 1993. I recently bought into his
current drawdown, which is his worst. He is down as of this writing –32.94 percent.
This drawdown started in May 2011 and is still continuing as of February 2012. I entered in February 2012. I have money with Dave in another of his products and used
this point as an additional entry. I have no idea if the drawdown will worsen. I strongly
doubt that I am buying in at the bottom. The only investors that do that are ones that
have numerous drinks in them whom I have met at trading conferences. I am not
recommending Tactical, rather demonstrating how I allocate to trend followers in my
personal trading. Every trend follower is going to have drawdowns and ugly periods.
These are the times to enter. Unfortunately, many feel much more comfortable buying
when times are good. It is easier emotionally; however, I believe it enhances the inherent risks when allocating to trend followers. I am not recommending Dave and would
suggest you conduct your own due diligence.

61

worth $3,119,771.09.
Source: Chart with permission from Iasg.com.

HOW SUCCESSFUL TREND FOLLOWERS TRADE

FIGURE 4.6 Hypothetically, if you invested $100,000 in April 1993, today it would be

Jerry Parker
Chesapeake Capital
Began February 1988
CAROR 12.73 percent

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

62

Jerry Parker has been considered by some as the most successful of the Turtles. Jerry
is a Turtle who trained under Dennis and founded Chesapeake Capital Management in
1988 after almost five years of trading his own proprietary capital. Jerry’s approach is
not as aggressive in seeking returns as some of his Turtle colleagues. This approach has
made his trading more palatable for institutional investors as well as high net worth
investors. At his peak Chesapeake in 2008 had a little under $2 billion of assets under
management. Chesapeake encountered a rough patch in the markets in 2011 and so
far in 2012. Assets plummeted to $766 million. Again, the institutional investors have
done the wrong thing. After one has done due diligence, now could be considered a
great time to invest with Chesapeake. I am not recommending; however, Jerry has
been around with Chesapeake since 1988 and has returned a CAR of 12.62 percent.
Considering how the stock market has done and at what volatilities, it is an interesting comparison. Chesapeake’s investment portfolios are not biased toward long
or short positions and, therefore, can profit in both rising and falling market environments. Chesapeake actively monitors, and has the potential to invest in, over 90
markets worldwide. Jerry, like most trend followers, patiently seeks trend breakouts.
His Chesapeake system is a technical, trend following system. The system on average
generates 200 trades per year, of which some six will pay for losses and generate returns, Jerry has stated. Quoting him, “One would not want to invest too much negative emotion in the 194 losers; you likely won’t be around for the six big winners.”
This exemplifies what trend following really is. In a later section in my diary of trades,
Jerry’s statement is proven in my actual trades in my proprietary account.
Michael Covel is considered by many as well as myself as one of the best writers
on trend following. He has a very select group of trend followers whom he considers
his influencers and his mentors. Jerry Parker from Chesapeake is on the short list. This
is a strong statement of support. It is ironic to me that some investors left Jerry after
such a long and illustrious trading run. Probably a big mistake.

63
HOW SUCCESSFUL TREND FOLLOWERS TRADE

FIGURE 4.7 Hypothetically, if you invested $100,000 in February 1988, today it would be

worth $1,642,892.48.
Source: Chart with permission from Iasg.com.

Michael Clarke
Clarke Capital Management Worldwide
Began January 1996
CAROR 14.14 percent

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

64

Michael Clarke, the principal of Clarke Capital, has been trading futures for client accounts
since 1993. Michael was successful in his trading in the beginning, focusing on arbitraging equity
options before he started trend following. His strategy was to be a disciplined buyer of volatility‐sensitive options when they were extremely cheap and hedge them with overvalued options
or stock. In the late 1980s the nature of the equity options business changed and it became less
attractive to Michael. Starting in 1989, Michael started researching and verifying whether he could
write computer algorithms that would be based on his knowledge and previous trading experiences
in the markets. He questioned if he could actually make a living trading futures. Michael started
developing a new career as a futures trader and eventually a CTA. He became a position trader using computer systematic algorithms to develop the entry and exit points. His earliest systems were
profitable, yet they overtraded the markets and required too much risk to achieve their results.This
would not have been attractive to clients. He developed techniques and various strategies over the
period of 1989 to 1993. Michael spent a considerable amount of energy on the development of the
software tools. Michael’s testing was beyond extensive. He wanted to confirm the robustness of the
systems. The systems had to be robust and were tested in over 100 markets with some containing
data that dated back to 1945. Michael uses multiple trading systems. The systems had a synergistic
and complementary effect by the fact that they were not all getting into or out of the same positions
at the same time or at the same exit price. Additionally, when using multiple systems there were
significant reductions in the length of drawdown periods as well as a smoothing of the equity curve.
Remember our goal of building an equity curve. This is the way we compound money over time.
In order to diversify Michael has seven different programs: Worldwide with a minimum
investment of $250,000, Orion with a minimum investment of $200,000, Millennium with
a minimum investment of $1,000,000, Jupiter with a minimum investment of $3,000,000,
Global Basic with a minimum investment of $50,000, Global Magnum with a minimum investment of $100,000, and FX Basic with a minimum investment of $1,000,000.
It was very smart on Michael’s part to make all of these types of programs for investors. In this
fashion he has made himself available to both institutional investors and smaller futures brokerage
clients. Michael’s programs are not immune to the inevitable drawdowns that trend followers face.
His worst drawdown was in the Millennium program at 60.87 percent drawdown. He is currently
in the drawdown from December 2008 till the month of this writing, February 2012.
Over the years Michael’s hard work and efforts paid off. Michael has been awarded many
accolades including:
■

1993 Futures magazine “Top Trader.”

■

2000 Futures magazine “Top Trader.”

■

2007 Futures magazine “Top Trader.”

65

worth $829,862.02.
Source: Chart with permission from Iasg.com.

HOW SUCCESSFUL TREND FOLLOWERS TRADE

FIGURE 4.8 Hypothetically, if you invested $100,000 in February 1988, today it would be

Paul Mulvaney
Mulvaney Capital Management
Began May 1999
CAROR 15.19 percent

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

66

Paul Mulvaney is the principle of Mulvaney Capital Management and is responsible for the
Global Diversified Program. The Global Diversified Program is a long‐term, systematic trend
following program, covering all the major financial and commodity futures markets worldwide.
Usually programs that are diversified provide returns that have historically exhibited low correlation to traditional stock and bond markets. The trading program is systematic and trend‐based.
Mulvaney Capital is operated out of London in conjunction with GNI Fund Management. GNI
Fund Management seeded Mulvaney with a $5 million managed account in May 1999. Mulvaney’s
program is continually on the lookout for a market price breakout from a trading‐range channel.
Mulvaney says his approach is totally systematic; he states, “The essence of trading comes
down to psychological factors. What’s really difficult is keeping emotions out of the equation.
A completely systematic approach does that automatically.” Mulvaney completely believes in
mechanical trading systems that can be designed to exploit trends and produce acceptable risk‐
weighted returns. A fully computerized mechanical system can trade in many more markets
than a discretionary trader could handle. He is a very big believer of reducing the risks inherent
in the markets to remove the human element in trading process.
Mulvaney’s program exploits price changes that occur over long periods. This is both a positive and a detriment. It has enabled large outsized returns as in 2008 when Mulvaney generated
returns in excess of 100 percent. Yet there were periods of time such as in 2006 through 2007
when Mulvaney encountered 40 percent drawdowns plus. Mulvaney, like Dunn Capital, swings
for the fences. He is looking to maximize his returns over time. Depending on the markets, it is
not unrealistic to believe Mulvaney will achieve more 100 percent years in the future. However,
with those types of returns, would I anticipate some steep drawdowns on the horizon?
Mulvaney is diversified across approximately 50 futures markets, many of which have no or
low correlation with one another. Mulvaney’s program attempts to capture long‐term trends in
all the major sectors of the global financial and commodity markets, and it invests 51 percent in
financials and 49 percent in commodities. The rules of Mulvaney’s trading strategy are simple:
buy on strength and sell on weakness; run profits and cut losses short. “If you take our initial
position and it starts to generate positive returns, then we’ll increase it. If it starts to hurt the
portfolio, then we’ll reduce it and ultimately exit.”
Mulvaney’s initial commitment to any market is very small, on average 0.5 percent or less
of account equity. His trading strategy is based on a piecemeal basis; if the trade seems to be
working, he will scale in to a greater extent.
The program holds positions for 180 days on average, which is much longer than most. Mulvaney believes the way to beat the market and to garnish outsized returns is to have a longer time
frame because psychologically participants seem to be too focused on the short term. Different
from other commodity trading programs, it doesn’t have to rush to market. Rather, the program
can wait for a bigger breakout from a wider channel before taking a position. This is different
from many other programs and the benefit is avoiding being caught by false breakouts. More so,
the program, unlike many others, does not use a profit target. Mulvaney will hold a position until
a trend reverses. There is never a free lunch when trading. There are always trade‐offs.

67

worth $628,625.68.
Source: Chart with permission from Iasg.com.

HOW SUCCESSFUL TREND FOLLOWERS TRADE

FIGURE 4.9 Hypothetically, if you invested $100,000 in May 1999, today it would be

Bernard Drury
Drury Capital
Began May 1997

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

68

Bernard Drury is the principle of Drury Capital. Drury Capital was founded in Illinois in
1992 as initially a fundamentally oriented grain trading program. Bernard focused on the grain
markets from 1978 before shifting his focus to mechanical and algorithmic system development. While earning his M.B.A. from the University of Chicago, Bernard became interested in
quantitative, systematic approaches to the futures markets. He was fascinated with the benefits
that systematic trading could offer. This was a huge difference coming from a discretionary
trading background. A computerized system offered consistency as well as diversification of
different synergized models. This was the beginning for him to develop and refine his own trend
following system. Bernard gained further trading experience at Louis Dreyfus Corporation,
Commodities Corporation, and Goldman Sachs Princeton. His extensive research and development, along with his grain trading skills, served as a foundation for his trading career. In 1994,
he joined Commodities Corporation in Princeton, New Jersey, where he further developed his
systematic trend following trading system, operating as an independent entity within the firm.
Through system testing Bernard became a firm believer that a systemic, rule‐based approach to
trading could give greater potential than discretionary trading in a single sector.
His systematic approach was thoroughly tested, researched, and applied robustly to a broadly diversified portfolio. He began trading client funds in the Drury Diversified Trend‐Following
Program in May 1997. Bernard’s Diversified Trend‐Following Program’s trading methodology
approach is built on elements of trend following and diversification.
The thoroughness of research and precision in execution was paramount to his models.
The trading system has evolved over time to include additional systems and markets. Initially
it only traded 30 markets and was only one system. By May 2008 he had increased the number
of markets to 70 and included three other systems, making a total of four distinct systems.
These enhancements on the methodology have reduced expected volatility from 25 percent to
18 percent. As far as risk per trade, there are a large number of small trades; the risk allocation
to any given trade is very small. This is a common theme among successful trend followers.
The model is broadly diversified across six sectors, which are equally weighted, approximately. He maintains an exposure to 50 percent commodities and 50 percent financials. The
portfolio emphasizes diversification by trading metals, agricultural products, foreign exchange,
stock index futures, energy products, financial instruments, and softs such as cocoa and coffee.
The speed of trading is slower than that of longer‐term trend followers. As in most successful
trend followers, the risk management system emphasizes the protection of equity. His unique
methods of risk and money management result in different entry and exit points from other
trend followers. His average hold period is four months and when trades are working, this can
be up to eight months. Like most other trend followers, he exits losing trades quickly. Over
a five‐year time period, even with all of the inherent drawdowns, he has been profitable. His
models do suffer as would most trend followers when there is a long period of broad nondirectional, high‐volatility price behavior. Drury’s minimum for managed accounts is $10,000,000.
In addition to the managed accounts he maintains a fund in which an investor can gain access
with a minimum of $100,000. He is currently managing approximately $400 million. He went
through his worst drawdown in 2004 through 2006. He declined from his peak –32.52 percent.
His second worst drawdown was in 2011 from February to October, –26.45 percent.

69
HOW SUCCESSFUL TREND FOLLOWERS TRADE

Hypothetically, if you invested $100,000 in May 1997, today it would be
worth $553,991.42.
Source: Chart with permission from Iasg.com.

FIGURE 4.10

Jeff Austin and Andy Silowitz
Blackwater Capital Management
Began July 2005

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

70

Blackwater Capital Management is managed by Jeff Austin and Andy Silowitz. Jeff
started his career working on the floor of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange in 1994
taking care of the CTA business for Dean Witter. Andy traded spot forex and forex
options. Jeff left the floor and gained further experience at Rotella Capital, a large
commodity trading advisor. After that he started working at Eagle Trading Systems
in Princeton, NJ, another large and successful commodity trading advisor. His focus of work at Eagle was research and system development. While at Eagle he met
Andy. The two worked on system development at Eagle. The two partners got their
pedigree while at Eagle and honed their skills. They decided to go out on their own
and co‐founded Blackwater Capital Management. The learning curve was passed from
mentor to student. Eagle Trading’s principal is Menachem Sternberg. Sternberg was
the head trader for the Bruce Kovner fund, Caxton. Bruce Kovner was featured in
the Market Wizards book by Jack Schwager. This is a common thread with successful
traders.
The system that is run by Blackwater is a medium‐ to long‐term pattern recognition program that trades 45 markets with strict profit targets. The model uses price
and volatility patterns as well as some breakout elements. As do many other commodity trading advisors, they use multiple models. After launching the program in 2005
they added a second model that is longer term. Quoting Jeff, “It is two models and
two signals. The second model is based on the same structure; the patterns that we are
looking for are a bit bigger. … Once we hit these profit objectives we are switching
to a proprietary momentum indicator that tells us when we view the markets as stalling. If the markets are screaming we will stay with the trade until we see any kind of
weakness.” What is ironic to me is that they do not use trailing stops. They have profit
targets and utilize wide stops.
The worst drawdown so far that Blackwater has experienced was in 2005–2006 of
approximately 15 percent. I would believe that over time they will experience a much
greater drawdown as your biggest drawdown is always ahead of you, not behind.
Blackwater Capital Management is currently managing approximately $500 million. Their minimum managed account size is $5,000,000.
