
The Basics of Foreign Exchange Trading

9

The quantity changes with each order. As mentioned earlier, the market
always has a bid price and an ask, or offer, price. A market order to buy
is always filled at the ask and a market order to sell is always filled at the
bid. The only exception is when the quantity to buy or sell is larger than the
quantity on the bid or ask. For example, you want to sell eight contracts at
the market. The bid is 79 but there are only five bids at that price. There
are three bids just below that at 78. So you would sell five at 79 and three
at 78. A market order must be filled by the broker at the best bid or ask
immediately.
A limit order is an order to buy when the market goes lower or to sell
the market when it rallies. Let’s assume that the market is 38 bid and 39
ask. A limit order would be to buy the pair when it dips to a level below
the current market. So, for example, you would put in an order to buy two
contracts at 33 limit. Your order will be filled when the market trades or is
offered at 33. You will use the limit order whenever you want to buy a dip
in the market or sell a rally.
The stop order is the order I use more than any other. A stop order is
used when you want to buy something at a price higher than the current
market or wish to sell a pair at a price below the current market price.
Consider this: The market is 38 bid and 39 ask. A stop order would be used
to buy the pair when it rallies up to 45. So, for example, an order to buy two
contracts at 45 stop would be placed. It becomes a market order when the
market trades or is bid at 45. The order will be filled at whatever the best
offer is at that time.
Use a stop order when you want to buy a pair at a price higher than
the current price. A stop order is often called a stop loss order because the
most common use of a stop order is to exit a position. For example, a limit
order can be used to buy EUR/USD at 135.60. To exit the trade, you should
it trade down to 135.30. You would enter an order to sell at 125.30 stop.
This would become a market order to sell if the market trades or is offered
at 135.30. However, I use stop orders almost exclusively. A lot of people
think I’m crazy because they don’t understand why I would want to pay a
high price for something using a stop order instead of a lower price using
a limit price. Buy low, sell high, they say to me.
The first problem with limit orders is that you almost always have a
losing trade immediately. For example, you have an order to buy a pair at
85 limit. You can only be filled if the market trades at 85 or is offered at 85.
In the real world, the price will drop below the 85 limit price in order to get
filled. The next pip after you have been filled will be 84 and, most likely, the
price will move even lower before finding support. That means that you will
be sitting on a losing trade right away. The more important problem with
limit orders is that they break one of the basic tenets of profitable forex
trading: Don’t fight the market. Buying using a limit order is buying when

10

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

the market is dropping. You don’t want to buy when the market is dropping.
The market is telling you that the situation is bearish because it is dropping
in price. I never want to go against the market. It is bigger, faster, smarter,
and better looking than I am. We will always lose the battle if we fight the
market.
Entering on a stop order creates a very different dynamic. You are
nearly always in a profit position immediately. After all, you can be filled
on a stop order until the market is trading at or higher than your stop order. The short-term momentum of the market will nearly always push the
price beyond your entry price by at least a little bit. I’ll take that profit edge
any day. More important, using entry stop orders ensures that we are in
tune with the market. We are only buying when the market is bullish and
only selling when the market is bearish. This means that we have the wind
to our back, not to our face. We are in sync with the market and, therefore, have the power of the market behind us. It may not stay there long
but it is always better to at least be in tune with the market for at least the
beginning of any trade.
The only time to use limit orders is when there is a liquidity problem
with buying on a stop. I would have to use limit orders to buy when I traded
for institutions because the size of my stop order would cause the market
to go sky high. I need to be buying when others are selling, or else selling
when others are buying so that I wouldn’t affect the market. Fortunately,
we retail traders don’t have to worry about this.
I was heading up a derivatives trading desk in the late 1980s. One of
the derivatives we dealt and traded was options on forex. We had a book of
derivatives and then used a large quantity of forex to hedge the risk. There
was a big economic release coming up that day. I was using forex futures
to hedge my position. In particular, I was short the Swiss franc in large
quantity and other currencies in lesser quantities. I was short hundreds of
contracts. Bingo! The number was released and the market skyrocketed.
I ended up having my protective stop filled about 150 ticks or pips above
where my stop had been placed! There was a complete vacuum of orders
above the market. The brokers couldn’t fill my orders until 150 pips above
my stop.
The other interesting thing is that the cash market peaked about
100 pips under the futures market. In other words, there was much more
liquidity in the cash market than in the futures market. I got hammered.
I lost about $450,000 in less than 10 seconds. I should have lost about
$150,000 because I had the wrong trade but the incredibly bad fill cost me
another $300,000. It seemed like the longest walk in my life as I trudged
through the trading room to report my loss to my boss, the treasurer of the
bank. In this case, the price jumped over the stop order leaving me with a
fill 100 pips beyond the stop order. That can happen with stop orders. That

The Basics of Foreign Exchange Trading

11

was a rare circumstance, but it can happen. It is fairly common to have a
stop order filled a pip or two away from the stop level in your order. Just
get used to it. I actually don’t mind getting filled a little off my price because
it shows that the market is moving so powerfully that there is a shortage
of orders on the other side of my trade. I like that imbalance. I don’t like
it when I get a bad fill on a protective stop order. I want to get out at my
price when I use a stop to protect an open position. On the other hand, I
feel fortunate to get out, even with a bad fill, when the market gaps down
beyond my stop because that means that there is so much pressure that
there is no buying in the market. I definitely don’t want to be long in that
kind of a market!
Note that this kind of situation never occurs with a limit order. You will
always be filled at your limit price. Of course, you may be in deep trouble
if that happens. Let’s say you want to buy at 50 when the market is at 60. A
big news item comes out and the market drops precipitously. You will be
filled at 50 but the next print of the price may not be until 30. Basically, you
were filled at a price that was way above the market. A market order will
always be filled when the market is moving dramatically. However, it may
be far away from the price on the screen when you entered the order and
you may be left chasing the market to get filled.

THE BOTTOM LINE
Knowing the nitty-gritty of forex trading is important when you want to
make money in the market (which is always!). Learn how to enter orders
correctly and enhance your profits through understanding which orders
will optimize your order.

CHAPTER 2

Trend Analysis
The Basis for All
Technical Analysis

n the late 1980s, I used to trade a lot of mechanical technical systems.
I had fundamental regression models of just about every market you
could think of. I worked all day just feeding my computer with data and
then putting in orders based on the output.
But I had an epiphany.
Why was I working so hard? I went through all my systems and realized that many of them were so highly correlated that there was no point
to them.
I also applied the Pareto Principle, which states that 80 percent of the
profits will come from 20 percent of the methods. And, in fact, that was
basically the truth. I could cut out 80 percent of my work but still make
80 percent of the profits.
In the mid-1990s I had the opportunity to interview Peter Brandt. Peter
was running a futures newsletter called The Factor, which was using strict
Magee/Edwards chart analysis. He was a purist in using classical chart analysis. One of the things he said to me was that there are only about eight
to twelve mega markets in the futures world each year. By mega market,
he meant a market that created at least $5,000 in profit and usually much
more. That $5,000 in profit was the amount of money that would be made
by holding a position for the length of the total move. I looked at futures
charts going back many years and he was basically right.
He then went on to say that his job as a position trader was to capture
only those mega moves. His ideal trading year was if he caught only those
trades. He felt the ideal year would only have eight to twelve trades. Every
other trade was not worth the risk.

I

13

14

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

That might be an extreme view but there is some truth to his concept.
So I decided to strip my trading down to the bare essentials. I wanted to
really get to the heart of trading. No BS, just rock-bottom truth. In fact, I
wanted to strip things down so low that what I would come up with would
sound like child’s play.
The basic truth of trading is that we must be long when the market
is bullish, be short when it is bearish, and stand aside when it is neutral.
Simple, yes?
Let me say it again. Be long when bullish, be short when bearish, and
stand aside the rest of the time.
Easy to say, but is it easy to do? Yes!

WHAT IS A TREND?
Turns out that there is a classic definition of a bull or bear market. A
bull market is any market that is making higher highs and higher lows.
A bear market is any market that is making lower highs and lower lows. A
neutral market is any other condition. Once again, this is very simple.
However, it is simple only if we agree on what a high or low is. And that
has traditionally been a subjective decision. First, let’s make a definition.
The highs and lows that we are looking for will be called swing highs and
swing lows. That will clear up some confusion with the highs and lows on
each daily bar. Let’s take a look at a chart and see where the swing highs
and swing lows are (see Figure 2.1).
I’ve circled a number of swing highs and lows on this chart during the
period August through November. In this chart, you and I likely agreed on
where the swing highs and lows were. We intuitively agreed. We didn’t have
a rule that said what constituted a high or low because, as humans, we can
intuitively agree.
But what if we disagree? What if you pick one high and I don’t agree?
What about the high five bars before the end of August? We skipped over
those because we agreed that they were not important or significant. So the
real key is to understand which swing highs are significant. We intuitively
skipped over the insignificant highs and lows. But there may come a time
when we may disagree on the significance of a given high or low. It would
be better to have an objective way to determine the significance.
My friend Tom DeMark is perhaps the most innovative technical analyst in history. He has probably added more and better technical indicators
than anyone in history. One of his innovations is the idea of creating objective standards for what was traditionally considered subjective. For example, how do you label Elliott Waves? More germane to this discussion:

15

FIGURE 2.1 Japanese Yen with Highs and Lows Circled

16

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

What highs should be used to create a downward sloping trendline? His objective criteria eliminates the subjectivity that is often found in such types
of technical analysis as Elliott Wave and classical chart analysis. No longer
will you and I disagree about the proper slope of a trendline or the Wave
count.
First, let me clarify some terms. The words high and low have two
meanings. They can refer to the high or low of a given day’s bar (or candle)
or the high or low point of a move over several or more days. Let’s call this
last meaning swing high and swing low. So the highs and lows on the chart
that I circled are swing high and swing lows.
Basically, DeMark showed that certain swing highs and swing lows are
significant and other swing highs and swing lows are insignificant. The way
he did it was ingenious.
I think we can agree that the high in the middle of April is more important than the highs in the middle of October. We can see that very clearly
on the chart. DeMark created a method for determining how significant a
swing high or swing low is. (The following is my interpretation of what I
learned from him. Give him the credit for the initial genius and I’ll take the
blame for screwing it up!)
The basic idea is to identify every swing high with an objective rating
system. The high in mid-August is the most important high on the chart
because it is the highest high on the chart. The lows made in December
and January are the two most important lows because they are the lowest
lows on the chart. Major highs and lows show up as major highs and lows
because they are the most extreme.
DeMark’s rating system is simple. Choose a swing high or swing low
in Figure 2.1. For example, let’s look at the first circled high on the chart
from August. Now, look at the bar after this one and all the bars to the left
of it. To be defined as a swing high there must be one bar to the right that
has a lower high than the day we are looking at and at least one bar to the
left of it with a high lower than the high on the day we are looking at. That
simple test defines a swing high (reverse everything for a swing low). We
have objectively defined every swing high. The circled bar at the high in
August is a swing high but the bar to the left is not. Note that it has a bar
to the left with a lower high but the bar to the right, the circled bar, has a
high that is higher than the bar’s high. So it is not a swing high. The bar to
the right of the circled bar is also not a swing high because it has a lower
bar to the right but the circled bar has a higher high than the bar that we
are looking at.
The next step in the analysis is to rank the swing highs and lows. We do
this by simply counting the number of bars to the left of the bar in question.
Let’s do this with the highest bar in August. We know that it is a swing
high because it has at least one bar on either side of it with a lower high.

Trend Analysis

17

However, there are 41 bars to the left of it with a high on the bar that is
lower than the high on the circled bar. I would call that a 41-bar swing high
because there are 41 lower highs to the left of it. There might be even more
than that but we got to the edge of the chart.
Let’s now look at the next circled bar to the right of the one we just
looked at in Figure 2.1. That would be a low four days after that major
41-bar high. Once again, let’s count bars. We know that there is one to the
right and 10 bars to the left before we run into a bar that has a lower low.
I’d call that a 10-bar low.
You can go through all the highs and lows on the whole chart rating
them by how many bars they have to the left. It is clear that we intuitively
rank bars with higher numbers as being more significant than bars with
fewer numbers. This then leads to the concept that we can now use objectivity when describing chart patterns. For example, we can now agree
that we will only draw up trendlines that connect five bar or higher lows.
Looking at the chart, identify all the five-bar lows and draw a trendline connecting the two most recent five-bar lows. We will never disagree about
where to draw the trendline because we have agreed that five-bar lows are
significant.
Which leads to the next step in our journey. What bar level is significant? What bar level should we be focusing on to eliminate little random
blip movements and keep us focused on what is really important?
My experience is that three-bar highs and lows are significant and that
two- and one-bar highs and lows are not. Of course, there can be exceptions
but that is a strong general rule. Markets can often retrace against the trend
for a day or two but rarely will they move three days without it meaning
something.
To check this, look back at Figure 2.1 and look for three-bar highs and
lows for trend analysis. I find that this bar level keeps me in the trend and
avoids getting stopped out on random little blips.
Let me digress for one moment. Every technique I teach has a stop loss
attached to it. Most techniques taught in other books have stops attached
to them. For me, I want every stop loss technique to have two attributes.
First, the stop should only be triggered when something significant
happens. I don’t want to be stopped out on some little squirrelly move in
the market. Or perhaps just one big trade moves the market. I only want to
exit a trade on a significant move.
Second, I only want to be stopped out when I know that I am wrong.
As long as there is no evidence that my original thesis is wrong, I must stay
with the trade. I’ll let a trade go against me a little when that movement is
insignificant and does not invalidate my original trade idea.
The ranking of swing highs and lows allows us to measure how significant a move is, thereby satisfying condition number one. We will not

18

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

be stopped out on trivial moves but only moves that have some power behind them. Later in the chapter, I’ll show you how this ranking allows us to
satisfy condition number two.
From now on, I’m going to focus only on significant swing highs and
lows, previously defined as three-bar highs or lows. We’re going to ignore
all swing highs and lows that are two-bar highs or lows.
Let’s take a look at Figure 2.2. This chart shows the same currency
pair over basically the same time frame but I have changed the circles
from what I intuitively identified as significant swing highs and lows to
what I have now objectively defined as three-bar high and lows. Note
that there are not too many changes. The chart is roughly the same.
However, now the significant highs and lows are objectively defined.
Using our agreed-upon definitions, our significant highs and lows would be
the same.

HOW TO PROFITABLY TRADE BULL
AND BEAR MARKETS
Now that we agree on what the trend is in the market, we can go to the
next step. Remember that a bull market is defined as a market that is making higher highs and higher lows. A bear market is a market that is making lower highs and lower lows. A neutral market is defined as any other
condition.
The highs and lows can come in any order. So, we could make two
highs followed by two lows. Generally, however, we oscillate between
highs and lows such that we make a high, a low, a high, and then a final
low. But remember, it doesn’t matter in what order the highs and lows
occur.
At the top of the chart in Figure 2.3, look at the high in August. I’ve
labeled the first four highs and lows. Note that in this case, the second high
is lower than the first high; we can say that we are making lower highs.
Also note that the second swing low is lower than the first low. Thus, we
can say that we are making lower lows. This is the definition of a bear
market.
My concept is very simple but powerful. We must always be long in
bull markets, be short in bear markets, and stand aside in all other markets.
This is the basis for the most profitable technical analysis.
We only need to look at the two most recent highs and two most
recent lows to determine if it is a bull, bear, or neutral market. The analysis
is updated every time a market makes a new significant swing high or low.
That new swing high or low is added to our analysis. Usually, that new

19

FIGURE 2.2 Japanese Yen with Highs and Lows Marked

20

FIGURE 2.3 Japanese Yen with Highs and Lows Marked and First Four Labeled

Trend Analysis

21

high or low simply confirms the current analysis but sometimes it changes
the trend.
The fifth circle on the chart is a lower low than the previous low, so it
merely confirms what is already a bear market. But look at the sixth circle.
It is a higher low. So, at that point in time, the market is making lower
highs but higher lows. So, it’s a neutral market, right? The market then
breaks lower and the next circle is a new lower low and the bear market
is back in place.

HOW TO TRADE THE TREND
Once you understand significant swing highs or lows, trading the markets
becomes easy. Go long when the market turns into a bull market, go short
when the market turns into a bear market, and stand aside when the market
is in any other condition. Let’s take a look at some examples.
In Figure 2.4, start at the top swing high in August. That is our first
swing high. It is then followed by a swing low and then a swing high. Note
that I have drawn a horizontal line at the low of the first swing low. Our
rule is to go short when the market breaks that horizontal line at the low
of the first swing low. I’ve put an arrow pointing down on the day that we
go short. We go short the moment the market drops below the low of the
first swing low. I don’t have to wait until the second swing low is in place
to go short. Note that I am getting short before the second swing low is in
place because I know that we will definitely be putting in a lower low in
the future. I don’t know when, but it will happen. There is no possible way
that we won’t put in a new lower swing low after we break that first low. In
this case, the lower low that confirms that we are in a bear market actually
occurs on the day the market breaks down through the first swing low.
In other words, I can put in a sell short order under the first swing
low as soon as I have a confirmed lower high. At the second high, I have
conformed half of the definition of a bear market: lower highs. Now all I
need to get short is to wait for a break of the first swing low to confirm
that we will be making a lower low, again confirming a bear market. Once
again, I don’t need to wait until the lower low occurs to get short. I just
need to know that it will be coming. And that knowledge comes as soon as
I break the first swing low.
The stop on short positions is the most recent three-bar high. The protective stop on long positions is always the most recent significant swing
low. I get to move the stop up whenever I am long and we make a new
higher low. I get to move the stop down whenever I am short and we make
a new lower high.
