
27

that people are drawn to play. It doesn’t matter to them that the
odds are so stacked against them that if they bought a million tickets (each with different numbers) they still would not be likely to
win. Your chance of winning a million dollars in a state-run lottery
is about 1 in 13 million (and the odds are much greater if you expect
to win more).
The big prize for such a small amount of money is also a
heuristic, but it’s not the lotto bias. The lotto bias is the illusion of
control that people get when they play the game. People think that
because they get to pick the numbers that their odds of success are somehow improued. Thus, some people might suspect that if thev picked
the numbers in their birthday and their anniversary, it might
improve their chances for winning. For example, about 10 years
ago a man won the jackpot in the Spanish national lottery, He won
it because of his interpretation of his dream. It seems that he dreamt
about the number 7 for 7 straight nights. Since he thought that 7
times 7 was 48, he selected a ticket with the numbers 4 and 8 on it.
Others, rather than using their dreams, consult with psychics
or astrologers. In fact, you can purchase all sorts of advice to help
you win the lotto. Some people, who have analyzed the numbers
thinking they can predict subsequent numbers, are quite willing to
Sell you their advice. Others have their own lotto machines and
believe that if they generate a random sequence of numbers, it
,might just correspond to what the state-controlled lotto machine
might select. They are also willing to sell you advice. And if some
guru or astrologer claims to have several jackpot winners (a dis,tinct possibility if the person has enough followers), then many
more people will be attracted to that person. People will do anytig to find the magic numbers.
If this seems a little familiar, it should be. This is exactly what
occurs in speculative markets. People believe they can make a
quick dollar by picking the right numbers. Picking the right numbers, in the case of speculators and investors, means that they simPly
want to know what to buy and when. The most important ques.
+on the average person wants to know is what should I buy right
‘f\oW that will make me a fortune. Most people would rather have
‘someone tell them what to do.
I
People do everything they possibly can to figure out what to
90 right now. They buy software that picks numbers and analyzes

28

PART

1

The Most important Factnr in Your Success: YOU!

tendencies. Brokers have found that if they help people pick numbers, by reading off entry points on radio and televisions shows,
thousands of people will want their advice. If you are known to
publicly give advice, no matter how accurate (or inaccurate) that
advice is, people will consider you an expert. In addition, there are
plenty of gurus who are good at promoting and are more than
happy to tell people in their newsletters what to buy and when.
And, of course, astrologers and fortune-tellers also play a role in
this process.
Some people get the notion that perhaps they would be better
off on thei; o&x. Consequently, they become fascinated by entry
signals that they perceive to be synonymous with a complete trading system. You get a sense of control with entry signals because the
point at which you choose to enter the market is the point at which
the market is doing exactly what you want it to do. As a result, you
feel like you have some control, not just over your entry, but over
the market. Unfortunately, once you are in a position in the market,
the market is going to do whatever it wants to do-you no longer
have any control over anything except your exits.
I’m amazed at what people consider a trading system! For
example, one gentleman visited me from Australia several years
ago. He’d been talking with various experts all over the United
States about what kind of trading systems work. At dinner one
night, he told me what he’d learned and showed me the “guts” of
the various systems he’d discovered so that I could give him my
blessing He had some great ideas. Yet all of his trading systems, as
he relayed them to me, had to do with entry techniques. In fact, the
only thing he described about each trading system was the entry.
My comment was that he was on the right track, but if he’d now
spend at least as much time working on his exits and position sizing, then he’d really have a good system.
Most people believe that they have a trading system if they
have some sort of entry point that makes them money. As you’ll
learn later in this book, there are as many as 10 components to a
professional trading system and the entry signal is probably the
least important. Nevertheless, most people just want to know
about entry.
I was a speaker at an international conference on technical
analysis of futures and stocks in Malaysia in 1995. There were

CHAPTER 2 Judgmental Biases

29

about 15 speakers from the United States, and we got rated on our
performance. The speakers with the highest ratings talked mostly
about entry signals. And the one speaker I heard who talked about
the various components of a trading system, and gave a very valuable talk, received much lower rankings.
I attended one of the more highly rated talks. The speaker was
a brilliant trader who was up about 76 percent in his account in
1994 with only a 10 percent drawdown. Yet what he talked about
were mostly signals for picking changes in a trend. He presented
six to eight such signals in his talk and mentioned something about
exits and money management when people asked him. Later, I
asked him if he traded all those signals. His response was, “Of
course not! I trade a trend-following signal. But this is what people
want to hear, so I give it to them.”
One of my clients, upon reading this, made the following
observation:
I have always felt that this “lotto” bias is a way of deaIing with the
anxiety of not feeling in control. Most people would rather pretend
to be in control (and be wrong) than fear the anxiety of having no
control over the environment in which they must exist. The big step
is in realizing that “I have control over my actions.” And that is
enough!
This bias is so powerful that people frequently do not get the
information they need to get to prosper in the market. Instead, they
get what they want to hear. After all, people typically make the
most money giving people what they want rather than giving them
what they need. This book is an exception to that rule. And, I hope,
there will be a number of such exceptions in the future.
Bias of the Law of Small Numbers
The pattern shown in Figure 2-2 could represent another bias for
,+me people. There are 4 days in which the market does nothing
@thin the first 5 days shown), followed by a big rise. If you peruse
.%me chart books, you might find four or five examples like that.
%e law of small numbers says that it doesn’t take many such cases
‘for you to jump to a conclusion. For example, let’s enter the market
,when we have 4 days in a narrow range followed by a big jump in
,prices.

CHAPTER 2 Judgmental Biases

31

Scientific research knows about this kind of bias. Even the
most careful researcher will tend to bias the result toward his or her
hypothesis. That’s why scientists have double-blind tests-tests in
which the experimenter does not know which group is the experimental group and which group is the control group until the experiment is over.
Conservatism Bias

Figure 2-2 Sample pattern that tends to attract people to the market and
to entry signals

In fact, my observation is that most people trade by following
the patterns they observe in a few well-chosen examples. If you see
a pattern like the one shown in Figure 2-2, followed by a large
move, then you assume that the pattern is a good entry signal.
Notice that all four biases discussed so far have entered into this
decision.
The following quote from William Eckhardt really describes
this bias well:
We don’t look at data neutrally-that is, when the human eye scans
a chart, it doesn’t give all data points equal weight. Instead, it will
focus on certain outstanding cases, and we tend to form our opinions on the basis of these special cases. It’s human nature to pick out
the stunning successes of a method and to overlook the day-in, dayout losses that grind you tom the bone. Thus, even a fairly careful
perusal of the charts is prone~ to leave the researcher with the idea
that the system is a lot better than it really is2

Once we have a trading concept in mind, the conservatism bias
takes over: We fail to recognize, or even see, contradictory evidence.
The human mind is quick to see the few outstanding examples of
moves that work while avoiding or ignoring examples that don’t
work. For example, if you looked at a lot of data, you might find that
the pattern in Figure 2-2 was followed by a large move 20 percent
of the time. The rest of the time nothing significant happened.
Most people totally ignore the contradictory evidence, despite
the fact that it is overwhelming. However, after seven or eight
losses in a row, they suddenly begin to be concerned about the
validity of their trading system without ever determining how
many losses could occur.
If the move that occurs 20 percent of the time is large enough,
then it i&till tradable, but only if you are careful to cut losses short
during the 80 percent of the moves when nothing happens. But, of
~course, that points out the importance of the lotto bias. If you just
concentrate on the pattern, you probably won’t make money.
The implication of this bias is that people search out what
they want, and expect, to see in the market. Most people, as a
.&ult, are not neutral with respect to the market, and they cannot
$0 with the flow. Instead, they are constantly searching for what
they expect to see.
Randomness Bias
:,ne next bias influences trading system development in two ways:
,@st, people tend to assume that the market is random-that prices
‘Fd to move according to random chance. Second, people make
,Proneous assumptions about what such randomness, if it exists,
fnight mean.

32

PART 1

The Most Important Factor in Your Success: YOU!

One reason people like to pick tops and bottoms is that they
assume the market can, and will, turn around at any time. Basically,
they assume that the market is random. Indeed, many academic
researchers still hold the belief that the market is random.’ But is
that assumption correct? And even if the assumption is correct,
could people trade such a market?
The market may have some characteristics of randomness, but
that does not mean it is random. For example, you can generate a
series of bar charts using a random number generator. When you
look at those bar charts, they look like bar charts. But this is an
example of the representativeness bias, and “looking like” random
is not “being” random. These kinds of data are unlike market data
because the distributim ofprices in the mnrket has extreme tnils that you
could neuer predict from normally distributed random prices. Why?
When you look at market data, the sample variability just gets
larger and larger as you add more data. The %)-point drop in the
S&P that occurred on October 19,1987, within a decade of the inauguration of the S&P contract, would be difficult to predict from a
randomnumber series. It might occur once in 10,000 years, but that
event occurred in our lifetime. Moreover, it could occur again
within a decade. On October 27,1997, the S&l’ had a drop of 70
points, and on the next day, it had a daily range of 87 points.
The fact that market price distributions tend to have an infinite variance, or nearly so, suggests that more extreme scenarios
than you might imagine are right around the corner. As a result,
any derived estimate of risk will be significantly underestimated.
And unfortunately, most people take way too much risk in the market. When market wizards like Ed Seykota and Tom Basso claim
that risking as much as 3 percent of your equity on a single position
is being a “gunslinger,” it suggests that most people are really crazy
in the amount of risk they take.
Even if the markets were random, people fail to understand
randomness. When a long trend does occur in a random sequence,
people assume that it is not random. They develop theories to suggest that it is something other than a long series in a random
sequence. This tendency comes from our natural inclination to treat
the world as if everything were predictable and understandable. As
a result, people seek patterns~where none exist and assume the
existence of unjustified causal relationships.

CHAPTER 2 Judgmental Biases

33

One consequence of the randomness bias (and the lotto bias)
is that people tend to want to pick tops and bottoms. We want to
be “right” and have control over the market, and we project our
ideas onto the market. The result tends to be a belief that we can
pick tops and bottom. This seldom occurs in the life of a trader or
an investor. Those who attempt to do it are doomed to many experiences of failure.
Need-to-Understand Bias
The “need-to-understand bias” enters into how most people
develop trading systems. They totally ignore the randomness element. In fact, they don’t even consider position sizing as part of
their system.
One of my clients, Joe, claimed that he had the most difficulty
with the market when he got into a position and didn’t understand
what was going on. As a result, I asked him a number of questions.
“How often are your positions winners?” His response was that he
was right about 60 percent of the time. “When you don’t under@and what’s going on, how often do you come out a winner?” This
time his response was that he almost never came out a winner
when he didn’t understand. I then said, “Since your system isn’t
much above chance, you probably don’t understand that much
about the markets anyway, But when you clearly are confused, you
should just get out.” He agreed it was probably a good idea.
When you think about Joe’s trading system, however, he
“lly didn’t have one. Why? Joe was so concerned about understanding that he didn’t have clearly defined exit signals that told
him (1) when he should get out to preserve his capital and (2) when
he should take his profits.
Most people still need to make up elaborate theories about what
,bi going on in the markets. The media are always trying to explain the
market even though they know nothing about the market. For exam&when the Dow Jones Industrials plunges over 100 points, the next
day the ne wspapers are filled with numerous explanations. For
Xample, here’s what you might read in your local paper:
A late Wednesday warning from federal reserve that it might raise
interest rates unnerved investors Thursday, Stocks plunged, especially
technology companies, on fears of an industry-wide earnings slow-

34

PART 1

The Most Important

Factor in Your Success: YOU!

down. Stocks are at historically high PE ratios and investors seem to be
particularly nervous whenever they think interest rates might rise.
Investors are also concerned about the impact of the Asian economic
crisis. Any sign that the Asian troubles might move over here makes
investors start to get very nervous.
The next day the Dow Jones Industrials might go up more
than 100 points. You’ll probably read something like the following:
Wall Street, which was getting nervous over a potential interest rate
hike, shook off the rumor and plunged into the market again as the
Dow Jones Industrials rose over 100 points. R. P. Jinner, of H. l?
Moranthal Securities commented that: “earnings have been so high
that investors seem to easily shrug off potentially damaging news.“’
The need-to-understand bias becomes even more elaborate
when it comes to trading system design. People manipulate daily
bars in any number of strange ways and then develop strange theories to explain the market based upon those manipulations. The
resulting theories then take on a life of their own but have little
basis in reality. For example, what is the rational basis for the Elliot
Wave Theory? Why should the market move in three legs one way
and two legs the other?
Are you beginning to understand why the task of trading system development is so full of psychological biases? My experience
is that most people will not be able to deal with the issues that come
up in trading system design until they’ve solved some of their personal psychological issues. In fact, if you are reading this section,
give yourself a pat on the back. The natural tendency of most people is to skip psychological sections like this one and go straight to
the qualitative aspects of system development. However, the psychological aspect is the foundation-of system development and
every other aspect of trading and investing.
BJASES THAT AFFECT HOW YOU TEST
TRADING SYSTEMS
Our next set of biases affect then testing of trading systems. Most
people never encounter these biases because they never get to the
point of testing systems. Actually, the conservatism bias (given

later in this chapter) would stop most people from ever testing a
system. And more importantly, most people never get to the point
where they even have a testable system. However, for those who do
get to this point, the result of these next biases can be insidious.
Degrees-of-Freedom

Bias

A degree of freedom is a parameter that yields a different system
for every value allowed. For example, a moving average based on
10 days will yield different results from a moving average based on
24 days. Thus, the length of a moving average represents one
degree of freedom. People tend to want as many degrees of freedom as possible in their systems. The more indicators you add, the
better you can describe historical market prices. The more degrees
of freedom you have in a system, the more likely that system will
fit itself to a series of prices. Unfortunately, the more a system fits
the data upon which it was developed, the less likely it will be to
produce profits in the future.
System development software (most of it, that is) encourages
$he degrees-of-freedom bias. Give a system developer enough leeway and that person will have a system that perfectly predicts the
moves in the market and makes thousands of dollars-on paper
with certain historical markets, that is. Most software allows people to optimize to their heart’s content. Eventually, they will end up
with a meaningless system that makes a fortune on the data from
,which it was obtained, but performs miserably in real trading.
Most system development software is designed because people
have this bias. They want to know the perfect answer to the markets.
‘They want to be able to predict the markets perfectly. As a result, you
‘fan buy software now for a few hundred dollars that will allow you
to overlay numerous studies over past market data. Within a few
minutes, you can begin to think that the markets are perfectly pre,tictable. And that belief will stay with you until you attempt to trade
~tiethereal market instead of the historically optimized market.
No matter how much I mention this bias, most of you will still
r@ve into it. You’ll still want to optimize your systems as much as
wble. As a result, let me give you several precautions in such
@timization. First, understand the concept you are using so well
@at YOU will not even feel that you need to optimize. The more you

CHAPTER 2 Judgmental Biases

understand the concept you are trading, the less need you have to
do historical testing.
I would strongly suggest that you think about various mental
scenarios that might happen in the market. For example, you might
imagine the next war, the advent of a nuclear terrorist attack, the
adoption of a common currency in Europe, the adoption of a common currency in Asia, China, and Japan joining together as a common power, an unemployment report that jumps 120 percent, etc.
Some of these ideas might seem wild, but if you can understand
how your system concept would handle these events if they actually happened, then you understand your concept very well.
No matter how much traders and investors learn about the
dangers of overoptimization, they still want to optimize. Thus, I
strongly recommend that you not use more than four or five
degrees of freedom in your system. So if you use two indicators
(one degree of freedom each) and two filters in your complete system, that’s probably all you can tolerate.
Postdictive Error Bias
People use postdictive errors when they use information in their
testing that would only be available after the fact. This kind of error
is very common in system testing. It is easy to make. For example,
in some software, unless you are careful, you can use today’s data
in your testing-which is always a postdictive error. For example,
imagine the value of being able to use today’s close to predict what
prices will do today. That’s a postdictive error.
Sometimes these errors are quite subtle. For instance, since the
highest prices in your data are nearly always followed by lower
prices, it’s quite possible to sneak high prices,into a trading rule SO
that the rule works great-but only postdictively.
When you are testing data, if your results seem too good to be
true, they probably are. You probably got those results through
postdictive errors.
Bias of Not Giving Yourself Enough Protection
When you design a system, your~goal should~ be to design one that
produces low-risk ideas. My definition of a low-risk idea is:

37

A methodology with a long-term positive expectancy and a reward
(overall return) to risk (maximum peak-to-trough drawdown) ratio
with which you can live. That methodology must be traded at a risk
level (usually based upon percentage of equity) that will protect you
from the worst possible conditions in the short run while still allowing you to achieve the long-term expectancy.
The bias that most people have is that they do not trade at a
risk level that is low enough to protect them from such worst-case
scenarios in the short run. Most people cannot, and do not, anticipate all possible situations that might happen to affect their systems. Consequently, in any worthwhile trading or investing
methodology, you must have all kinds of backups to protect you
when you’re in a bad trade.
If you ask the average person, “How will you get out of a bad
trade if it really goes against you?” he or she has no idea. Most people just don’t have the backup protection they should have. More
importantly, they trade at way too high a level. If you have $50,000
and are trading five or more different commodities simultaneously,
then you are probably trading at too high a risk level. That risk level
may get you high rates of return, but it will eventually bankrupt
your account. Think about the protection bias. Paying attention to
this bias alone could preserve much of the equity that you currently
&ve in your account.
&ASES THAT AFFECT HOW YOU TRADE
YOUR SYSTEM
