chartists to seasoned professionals. This is because candlestick charts
can be used alone or in combination with other technical analysis
techniques. A significant advantage attributed to candlestick charting
techniques is that these techniques can be used in addition to, not
instead of, other technical tools. I am not trying to convince veteran
technicians that this system is superior to whatever else they may be
using. That is not my claim. My claim is that candlestick charting
techniques provide an extra dimension of analysis.
2. Candlestick charting techniques are for the most part unused in the

United States. Yet, this technical approach enjoys a centuries-old tradition in the Far East, a tradition which has evolved from centuries of
trial and error.
3. Then there are the picturesque terms used to describe the patterns.
Would the expression "hanging-man line" spark your interest? This is
only one example of how Japanese terminology gives candlesticks a
flavor all their own and, once you get a taste, you will not be able to
do without them.

4. The Japanese probably know all the Western methods of technical
analysis, yet we know almost nothing about theirs. Now it is our turn
to benefit from their knowledge. The Japanese use a combination of
candlestick charting techniques along with Western technical tools.
Why shouldn't we do the same?

5. The primary reason for the widespread attention aroused by candlestick charts is that using them instead of, or in addition to, bar charts
is a win-win situation.

Introduction

As we will see in Chapter 3 on drawing candlestick lines, the same
data is required in order to draw the candlestick charts as that which is
needed for our bar charts (that is, the open, high, low, and close). This
is very significant since it means that any of the technical analysis used
with bar charting (such as moving averages, trendlines, Elliott Wave,
retracements, and so on) can be employed with candlestick charts. But,
and this is the key point, candlestick charts can send signals not available from bar charts. In addition, there are some patterns that may allow
you to get the jump on those who use traditional Western charting techniques. By employing candlestick charting instead of bar charting you
have the ability to use all the same analyses as you would with bar
charting. But candlestick charts provide a unique avenue of analysis not
available anywhere else.

WHAT IS IN THIS BOOK?
Part I of the book reveals the basics on constructing, reading, and interpreting over 50 candlestick chart lines and patterns. Part I1 explains how
to meld candlestick charts with Western technical analysis techniques.
This is where the true power of candlecharts is manifested. This is how
I use them.
I have drawn illustrations of candlestick patterns to assist in the educational process. These illustrations are representative examples only.
The drawn exhibits should be viewed in the context that they show certain guidelines and principles. The actual patterns do not have to look
exactly as they do in the exhibits in order to provide the reader with a
valid signal. This is emphasized throughout the book in the many chart
examples. You will see how variations of the patterns can still provide
'mportant clues about the state of the markets.
Thus, there is some subjectivity in deciding whether a certain candlestick formation meets the guidelines for that particular formation, but
this subjectivity is no different than that used with other charting techniques. For instance, is a $400 support area in gold considered broken if
prices go under $400 intra-day, or do prices have to close under $400?
Does a $.I0 penetration of $400 substantiate broken support or is a larger
penetration needed? You will have to decide these answers based on
your trading temperment, your risk adversity, and your market philosophy. Likewise, through text, illustrations and real examples I will provide the general principles and guidelines for recognizing the candlestick
formations. But you should not expect the real-world examples to always
match their ideal formations.

5

6

Introduction

I believe that the best way to explain how an indicator works is
through marketplace examples. Consequently, I have included many
such examples. These examples span the entire investment spectrum
from futures, fixed-income, equity, London metal markets and foreign
exchange markets. Since my background is in the futures markets, most
of my charts are from this arena. I also look at the entire time spectrumfrom intra-day to daily, weekly, and monthly candlestick charts. For this
book, when I describe the candlestick lines and patterns, I will often
refer to daily data. For instance, I may say that in order to complete a
candlestick pattern the market has to open above the prior day's high.
But the same principles will be valid for all time frames.
Two glossaries are at the end of the text. The first includes candlestick terms and the second Western technical terms used in the book.
The candlestick glossary includes a visual glossary of all the patterns.
As with any subjective form of technical analysis, there are, at times,
variable definitions which will be defined according to the users' experience and background. This is true of some candlestick patterns. Depending on my source of information, these were instances in which I came
across different, albeit usually minor, definitions of what constitutes a
certain pattern. For example, one Japanese author writes that the open
has to be above the prior close in order to complete a dark-cloud cover
pattern (see Chapter 4). Other written and oral sources say that, for this
pattern, the open should be above the prior high.
In cases where there were different definitions, I chose the rules that
increased the probability that the pattern's forecast would be correct. For
example, the pattern referred to in the prior paragraph is a reversal signal that appears at tops. Thus, I chose the definition that the market has
to open above the prior day's high. It is more bearish if the market opens
above the prior day's high and then fails, then it would be if the market
just opens above the prior day's close and then failed.
Much of the Japanese material I had translated is less than specific.
Part of this might be the result of the Japanese penchant for being vague.
The penchant may have its origins in the feudal ages when it was acceptable for a samurai to behead any commoner who did not treat him as
expected. The commoner did not always know how a samurai expected
him to act or to answer. By being vague, many heads were spared.
However, I think the more important reason for the somewhat ambigtlous explanations has to do with the fact that technical analysis is more
of an art than a science. You should not expect rigid rules with most
forms of technical analysis-just guideposts.
Yet, because of this uncertainty, some of the ideas in this book may
be swayed by the author's trading philosophy. For instance, if a Japanese author says that a candlestick line has to be "surpassed to signal

Introduction

the next bull move, I equate "surpassed" with "on a close above." That
is because, to me, a close is more important than an intra-day move
above a candlestick line. Another example of subjectivity: In the Japanese literature many candlestick patterns are described as important at a
high-price area or at a low-price area. Obviously what constitutes a
"high-price" or "low-price" area is open to interpretation.

SOME LIMITATIONS
As with all charting methods, candlestick chart patterns are subject to
the interpretation of the user. This could be viewed as a limitation.
Extended experience with candlestick charting in your market specialty
will show you which of the patterns, and variations of these patterns,
work best. In this sense, subjectivity may not be a liability. As you gain
experience in candlestick techniques, you will discover which candlestick
combinations work best in your market. This may give you an advantage
over those who have not devoted the time and energy in tracking your
markets as closely as you have.
As discussed later in the text, drawing the individual candlestick
chart lines requires a close. Therefore, you may have to wait for the close
to get a valid trading signal. This may mean a market on close order may
be needed or you may have to try and anticipate what the close will be
and place an order a few minutes prior to the close. You may also prefer
to wait for the next day's opening before placing an order.
This aspect may be a problem but there are many technical systems
(especially those based on moving averages of closing prices) which
require a closing price for a signal. This is why there is often a surge in
activity during the final few minutes of a trading session as computerized trading signals, based on closing prices, kick into play. Some technicians consider only a close above resistance a valid buy signal so they
have to wait until the close for confirmation. This aspect of waiting for a
close is not unique to candlestick charts.
On occasion, I can use the hourly candlestick charts to get a trade
signal rather than waiting for the close of that day. For instance, there
could be a potentially bullish candlestick pattern on the daily chart. Yet,
I would have to wait for the close before the candlestick pattern is completed. If the hourly charts also show a bullish candlestick indicator during that day, I may recommend buying (if the prevalent trend is up)
even before the close.
The opening price is also i.mportant in the candlestick lines. Equity
traders, who do not have access to on-line quote machines, may not be

7

8

Introduction

able to get opening prices on stocks in their newspapers. I hope that, as
candlestick charts become more common, more newspapers will include
openings on individual stocks.
Candlestick charts provide many useful trading signals. They do not,
however, provide price targets. There are other methods to forecast targets (such as prior support or resistance levels, retracements, swing
objectives, and so on). Some Japanese candlestick practitioners place a
trade based on a candlestick signal.and stay with that trade until another
candlestick pattern tells them to offset. Candlestick patterns should
always be viewed in the context as to what occurred before and in relation to other technical evidence.
With the hundreds of charts throughout this book, do not be surprised if you see patterns that I have missed within charts. There will
also be examples of patterns that, at times, did not work. Candlesticks
will not provide an infallible trading tool. They do, however, add a
vibrant color to your technical palette.
Candlestick charts allow you to use the same technical devices that
you use with bar charts. But the candlestick charts give you signals not
available with bar charts. So why use a bar chart? In the near future,
candlestick charts may become as standard as the bar chart. In fact, I am
going to make a bold prediction: A s more technicians become comfortable
with candlestick charts, they will no longer use bar charts. I have been a technical analyst for nearly 20 years. And now, after discovering all their
benefits, I only use candlestick charts. I still use all the traditional Western technical tools, but the candlesticks have given me a unique perspective into the markets.
Before I delve into the topic of candlestick charts, I will briefly discuss
the importance of technical analysis as a separate discipline. For those of
you who are new to this topic, the following section is meant to emphasize why technical analysis is so important. It is not an in-depth discussion. If you would like to learn more about the topic, I suggest you read
John Murphy's excellent book Technical Analysis of the Futures Markets
(The New York Institute of Finance).
If you are already familiar with the benefits of technical analysis, you
can skip this section. Do not worry, if you do not read the following section, it will not interfere with later candlestick chart analysis information.

THE IMPORTANCE OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
The importance of technical analysis is five-fold. First, while fundamental analysis may provide a gauge of the supplyidemand situations,

Introduction

pricelearnings ratios, economic statistics, and so forth, there is no psychological component involved in such analysis. Yet the markets are
influenced at times, to a major extent, by emotionalism. An ounce of
emotion can be worth a pound of facts. As John Manyard Keynes stated,
"there is nothing so disastrous as a rational investment policy in an irrational ~ o r l d . "Technical
~
analysis provides the only mechanism to measure the "irrational" (emotional) component present in all markets.
Here is an entertaining story about how strongly psychology can
affect a market. It is from the book The New G a t ~ b y sIt. ~takes place at the
Chicago Board of Trade.
Soybeans were sharply higher. There was a drought in the Illinois Soybean Belt. And unless it ended soon, there would be a severe shortage of
beans. . . . Suddenly a few drops of water slid down a window. "Look,"
someone shouted, "rain!". More than 500 pairs of eyes [the traderseditor's note] shifted to the big windows. . . . Then came a steady trickle
which turned into a steady downpour. It was raining in downtown Chicago.
Sell. Buy. Buy. Sell. The shouts cascaded from the traders' lips with a
roar that matched the thunder outside. And the price of soybeans began
to slowly move down. Then the price of soybeans broke like some tropic
fever.
It was pouring in Chicago all right, but no one grows soybeans in Chicago. In the heart of the Soybean Belt, some 300 miles south of Chicago
the sky was blue, sunny and very dry. But even if it wasn't raining on
the soybean fields it was in the heads of the traders, and that is all that counts
[emphasis added]. To the market nothing matters unless the market
reacts to it. The game is played with the mind and the emotions [emphasis
added].

In order to drive home the point about the importance of mass psychology, think about what happens when you exchange a piece of paper
called "money" for some item like food or clothing? Why is that paper,
with no intrinsic value, exchanged for something tangible? It is because
of a shared psychology. Everyone believes it will be accepted, so it is.
Once this shared psychology evaporates, when people stop believing in
money, it becomes worthless.
Second, technicals are also an important component of disciplined
trading. Discipline helps mitigate the nemesis of all traders, namely,
emotion. As soon as you have money in the market, emotionalism is in
the driver's seat and rationale and objectivity are merely passengers. If
you doubt this, try paper trading. Then try trading with your own
funds. You will soon discover how deeply the counterproductive aspects
of tension, anticipation, and anxiety alter the way you trade and view

9

10

Introduction

the markets-usually in proportion to the funds committed. Technicals
can put objectivity back into the drivers seat. They provide a mechanism
to set entry and exit points, to set riskheward ratios, or stoplout levels.
By using them, you foster a risk and money management approach to
trading.
As touched upon in the previous discussion, the technicals contribute to market objectivity. It is human nature, unfortunately, to see the
market as we want to see it, not as it really is. How often does the following occur? A trader buys. Immediately the market falls. Does he take
a loss. Usually no. Although there is no room for hope in the market, the
trader will glean all the fundamentally bullish news he can in order to
buoy his hope that the market will turn in his direction. Meanwhile
prices continue to descend. Perhaps the market is trying to tell him
something. The markets communicate with us. We can monitor these
messages by using the technicals. This trader is closing his eyes and ears
to the messages being sent by the market.
If this trader stepped back and objectively viewed price activity, he
might get a better feel of the market. What if a supposedly bullish story
is released and prices do not move up or even fall? That type of price
action is sending out volumes of information about the psychology of the
market and how one should trade in it.
I believe it was the famous trader Jesse Livermore who expressed the
idea that one can see the whole better when one sees it from a distance.
Technicals make us step back and get a different and, perhaps, better
perspective on the market.
Third, following the technicals is important even if you do not fully
believe in their use. This is because, at times, the technicals are the majon
reason for a market move. Since they are a market moving factor, they
should be watched.
Fourth, random walk proffers that the market price for one day has
no bearing on the price the following day. But this academic view leaves
out an important component-people. People remember prices from one
day to the next and act accordingly. To wit, peoples' reactions indeed
affect price, but price also affects peoples' reactions. Thus, price, itself,
is an important component in market analysis. Those who disparage
technical analysis forget this last point.
Fifth, and finally, the price action is the most direct and easily accessible method of seeing overall supplyldemand relationships. There may
be fu.ndamenta1 news not known to the general public but you can
expect it is already in the price. Those who have advance knowledge of
some market moving event will most likely buy or sell until current
prices reflect their information. This knowlehge, at times, consequently,

Introduction

may be discounted when the event occurs. Thus, current prices should
reflect all available information, whether known by the general public or
by a select few.

NOTES
'Hill, Julie Skur. "That's Not What I Said," Business Tokyo, August 1990, pp. 4 6 4 7
'Smith, Adam. The Money Game, New York, NY: Random House, 1986, p. 154.
3Tamarkin, Bob. The New Gatsbys, Chicago, IL:Bob Tamarkin, 1985, pp. 122-123.

11

CHAPTER

2

A HISTORICAL
BACKGROUND
"Through Inquiring of the Old We Learn the New"

T h i s chapter provides the framework through which Japanese technical
analysis evolved. For those who are in a rush to get to the "meat" of the
book (that is, the techniques and uses of candlesticks), you can skip this
chapter, or return to it after you have completed the rest of the book. It
is an intriguing history.
Among the first and the most famous people in Japan to use past
prices to predict future price movements was the legendary Munehisa
Homma.' He amassed a huge fortune trading in the rice market during
the 1700s. Before I discuss Homma, I want to provide an overview of the
economic background in which Homma was able to flourish. The time
span of this overview is from the late 1500s to the mid-1700s. During this
era Japan went from 60 provinces to a unified country where commerce
blossomed.
From 1500 to 1600, Japan was a country incessantly at war as each of
the daimyo (literally "big name" meaning "a feudal lord") sought to
wrestle control of neighboring territories. This 100-year span between
1500 and 1600 is referred to as "Sengoku Jidai" or, literally, "Age of
Country at War." It was a time of disorder. By the early 1600s, three
extraordinary generals-Nobunaga Oda, Hideyoshi Toyotomi, and
Ieyasu Tokugawa-had unified Japan over a 40-year period. Their prowess and achievements are celebrated in Japanese history and folklore.

14

A Historical Background

There is a Japanese saying: "Nobunaga piled the rice, Hideyoshi
kneaded the dough, and Tokugawa ate the cake." In other words, all
three generals contributed to Japan's unification but Tokugawa, the last
of these great generals, became the shogun whose family ruled Japan
from 1615 to 1867. This era is referred to as the Tokugawa Shogunate.
The military conditions that suffused Japan for centuries became an
integral part of candlestick terminology. And, if you think about it, trading requires many of the same skills needed to win a battle. Such skills
include strategy, psychology, competition, strategic withdrawals, and
yes, even luck. So it is not surprising that throughout this book you will
come across candlestick terms that are based on battlefield analogies.
There are "night and morning.attacks", the "advancing three soldiers
pattern", "counter attack lines", the "gravestone", and so on.
The relative stability engendered by the centralized Japanese feudal
system lead by Tokugawa offered new opportunities. The agrarian economy grew, but, more importantly, there was expansion and ease in
domestic trade. By the 17th century, a national market had evolved to
replace the system of local and isolated markets. This concept of a centralized marketplace was to indirectly lead to the development of technical analysis in Japan.
Hideyoshi Toyotomi regarded Osaka as Japan's capital and encouraged its growth as a commercial center. Osaka's easy access to the sea,
at a time where land travel was slow, dangerous, and costly, made it a
national depot for assembling and disbursing supplies. It evolved into
Japan's greatest city of commerce and finance. Its wealth and vast storehouses of supplies provided Osaka with the appellation the "Kitchen of
Japan." Osaka contributed much to price stability by smoothing out
regional differences in supply. In Osaka, life was permeated by the
desire for profit (as opposed to other cities in which money making was
despised). The social system at that time was composed of four classes.
In descending order they were the Soldier, the Farmer, the Artisan, and
the Merchant. It took until the 1701)s for merchants to break down the
social barrier. Even today the traditional greeting in Osaka is "Mokarimakka" which means, "are you making a profit?".
In Osaka, Yodoya Keian became a war merchant for Hideyoshi (one
of the three great military unifiers). Yodoya had extraordinary abilities in
transporting, distributing, and setting the price of rice. Yodoyals front
yard became so important that the first rice exchange developed there.
He became very wealthy-as it turned out, too wealthy. In 1705, the
Bakufu (the military government led by the Shogun) confiscated his
entire fortune on the charge that he was living in luxury not befitting his

A Historical Background

social rank. The Bakufu was apprehensive about the increasing amount
of power acquired by certain merchants. In 1642, certain officials and
merchants tried to corner the rice market. The punishment was severe:
their children were executed, the merchants were exiled, and their
wealth was confiscated.
The rice market that originally developed in Yodoya's yard was institutionalized when the Dojima Rice Exchange was set up in the late 1600s
in Osaka. The merchants at the Exchange graded the rice and bargained
to set its price. Up until 1710, the Exchange dealt in actual rice. After
1710, the Rice Exchange began to issue and accept rice warehouse
receipts. These warehouse receipts were called rice coupons. These rice
receipts became the first futures contracts ever traded.
Rice brokerage became the foundation of Osaka's prosperity. There
were more than 1,300 rice dealers. Since there was no currency standard
(the prior attempts at hard currency failed due to the debasing of the
coins), rice became the defacto medium of exchange. A daimyo needing
money would send his surplus rice to Osaka where it would be placed
in a warehouse in his name. He would be given a coupon as a receipt
for this rice. He could sell this rice coupon whenever he pleased. Given
the financial problems of many daimyos, they would also often sell rice
coupons against their next rice tax delivery (taxes to the daimyo were
paid in rice-usually 40% to 60% of the rice farmer's crop). Sometimes
the rice crop of several years hence was mortgaged.
These rice coupons were actively traded. The rice coupons sold
against future rice deliveries became the world's first futures contracts.
The Dojima Rice Exchange, where these coupons traded, became the
world's first futures exchange. Rice coupons were also called "empty
rice" coupons (that is, rice that was not in physical possession). To give
you an idea of the popularity of rice futures trading, consider this: In
1749, there were a total of 110,000 bales (rice used to trade in bales) of
empty-rice coupons traded in Osaka. Yet, throughout all of Japan there
were only 30,000 bales of ricea2
Into this background steps Homma, called "god of the markets."
"Munehisa Homma was born in 1724 into a wealthy family. The Homma
family was considered so wealthy that there was a saying at that time,
"I will never become a Homma, but I would settle to be a local lord."
When Homma was given control of his family business in 1750, he began
trading at his local rice exchange in the port city of Sakata. Sakata was a
collections and distribution area for rice. Since Homma came from
Sakata, you will frequently come across the expression "Sakata's Rules"
in Japanese candlestick literature. These refer to Homma.
