their ties, adjusted their fedoras, and headed for the mansion. Kane
and Blake also stood.
Monaghan picked up his ladder, which was leaning against a
tree. It was about 4 feet long and 2 feet wide. It was a metal ladder
that could be broken down into five 4-foot sections and easily
reassembled to its full length of 20 feet. The ladder had been
designed by Monaghan and custom built for him. He had used the
ladder on other second-story jobs. Boston Billy always left the ladder behind him after a job, as his signature.
They walked to the solarium, which they knew was just under
the master bedroom. Monaghan opened the metal ladder and
locked each section in place. Quietly they placed the ladder against
the building and made their ascent. Later, one of Blake’s footprints
would be discovered in the soft earth around the flowerbed.
Barry and Monaghan made the ascent onto the balcony. Monaghan took out a butcher knife and quietly popped the brass clasp,
and they entered the hallway that led to the anteroom of the Livermores’ master bedroom. The butcher knife would later be found
discarded among the shrubbery. Kane and Blake returned to the
hidden getaway car to wait for the pickup signal.
Dorothy Livermore lay in bed awake. She had heard a noise. She
poked her husband in the ribs. “J.L., did you hear something?”
“No, Mousie, now go back to sleep.”
“I’m sure I heard something. Listen.” They both listened and
both heard a noise.
“I’m getting up to see what’s happening,” she said.
“I’ll get the gun.”
Dorothy left the bed and slipped on her robe. She entered the
hall that led to their massive closets and to their individual bathrooms. A dark figure wearing a hat and carrying a gun stood in
black silhouette in the hallway.

8467_Smitten_09_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 179

BOSTON BILLY

• 179 •

“Can I help you?” she calmly asked Barry.
“Probably. Probably you can help me. Go back into your room
and tell your husband to stay in bed.”
Dorothy did as she was told.
Livermore sat on the edge of the bed. He gently lifted the telephone receiver from the hook and placed the open phone on the
table, hoping the operator would hear what was going on.
“I think you should just take what you want and leave,”
Dorothy said to the stickup men. “I have my two little sons asleep
in this house, and I don’t want them hurt.”
“They won’t be hurt, just sit yourselves down and remain
calm,” Barry said.
“Where are your guests sleeping?” Monaghan asked.
“Down the hall, fourth door on the left,” Dorothy said.
“I’m going down there. You keep these two here,” Monaghan
said.
He walked down the hall, entered the room, and woke the
Aronhsons. He placed the muzzle of his gun against Mrs.
Aronhson’s temple. “Now sir, give me that platinum wristwatch
you’re wearing, that star sapphire ring, and get up and go over to
the dresser and give me the pearl stickpin and the cash that’s laying
on the dresser.” Aronhson did as he was told. Monaghan counted
the money. There was $200. He stripped out two $1 bills. “Here,
use this to take a cab home,” he said, handing the cash to
Aronhson. “Now, if you value your life and Mr. and Mrs. Livermore’s life, you will lie here until they come to get you.”
Monaghan walked back to the master bedroom and joined
Barry.
“I hope you didn’t hurt our guests,” Dorothy said.
“No. Your guests are fine, just fine. I even left them two dollars
for a cab ride home.”

8467_Smitten_09_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 180

• 180 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

“Two dollars? They live in the city,” Dorothy said.
The men laughed, even Livermore. “Well they can take a cab to
the train station, can’t they?” Monaghan said, smiling. “Let’s see
your hand.”
Barry held the barrel of his pistol against her arm while Monaghan slipped a beautiful blue sapphire ring off her finger. Monaghan then went to Livermore, took a similar ring off his finger,
and said, “Hey, almost a matching pair, how sweet.”
“Oh, please, don’t take those, they were Christmas presents!”
Monaghan looked at the rings and sighed, then looked back at
Dorothy, who was crying. “I beg your pardon then, ma’am,” he
said, and handed back the two rings, worth more than $15,000.
Monaghan continued, “We’re more interested in what’s in the
safe. Open it, Mr. Livermore.”
“There’s nothing in it,” he said.
“We’ll just take a look anyway,” Barry added, still holding the
gun on Dorothy.
“I can’t see the combination without my glasses,” Livermore
said.
“Where are your glasses?” Monaghan said.
“In the dressing room.”
“Take me there,” Monaghan said, putting his gun against Livermore’s shoulder. He escorted Livermore into the dressing room,
and they emerged with the glasses.
The thief walked Livermore directly over to the portrait that
was hung in front of the hidden safe. He swung the portrait clear.
“Open it!”
Livermore slipped on his spectacles and attempted to open it,
but his hands trembled so badly that he was unable to work the
combination. “I can’t seem to work it,” he said.
“Step aside, sir,” Monaghan commanded. “I’ll fix it. Wait a
minute.” He left and vanished down the ladder for a bag of burglary

8467_Smitten_09_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 181

BOSTON BILLY

• 181 •

tools. In seconds he was back. With a hammer and chisel, he popped
the safe like it was a child’s toy. He took out a few papers and cast
them aside in disgust. “That’s it? Just these worthless papers?”
“That’s all there is!” Dorothy cried, “Now take what you have
and leave, please.”
The thieves quickly went through the bedroom and the dressing rooms. There were jewels scattered everywhere. They gathered up a pearl necklace worth $80,000 and a sapphire and
diamond ring of Dorothy’s worth $15,000. They already had the
$200 in cash taken from Aronhson, a pearl stickpin valued at
$2,000, and a square diamond ring worth $1,000. The Livermore
jewels were properly appraised and insured for 80 percent of their
value.
The thieves left behind over $20,000 in sapphires that were
lying on the dressing table. They also ignored Livermore’s gold
cuff links and diamond studs. They discussed the jewels as they
gathered them, describing them and estimating their value as they
dropped them into a bag.
In all, they were in the house for almost an hour, taking their
time chatting and examining the rooms. The police were later to
comment that in most such robberies, the thieves would be in and
out in less than 10 minutes.
The thieves exited down the steel ladder and trotted to the end
of the driveway, where Blake and Kane were waiting in the
Chrysler roadster. They jumped into the car and raced toward the
Manhasset railway station.
Mrs. John Gernan, who lived near the railway stop, observed
the men and the woman between 5:30 and 5:45 A.M. on Sunday.
She watched the group from her window. She told the New York
Daily News on May 31, 1927: “I was unable to sleep and was awake
early Sunday, and I heard an automobile and looked out. I saw a
canary colored Chrysler automobile with three men and a blonde

8467_Smitten_09_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 182

• 182 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

girl. Her hair was short. She wore a sport coat and no hat. She
appeared young, about 18. Because of the early hour I wondered
what the girl was doing out with three men. I watched them drive
toward the railroad station, stop the car, and get out. They walked
in the direction of the station, disappearing from my view.”
Mrs. Gernan had good powers of observation: “I didn’t hear a
train come through, but then I wasn’t listening particularly. In fact,
I went back to bed and to sleep. I knew it was the car that was
taken from Walter Roesler’s garage, the car that belonged to
George Owens, because later in the day, after the police found the
car, I saw the owner come and drive it away.”
What Mrs. Gernan could not see was the gang stealing a taxicab
and driving it into New York City, where they abandoned it.
On Monday, nerves shattered by the robbery, the Aronhsons
beat a hasty retreat to New York. They had planned to remain over
Memorial Day but changed their minds. Livermore provided his
Rolls to take them into the city.
Dorothy was not inclined to have her holiday spoiled. She called
some friends in New York, and by noon, six guests, plus the Livermore children and their nannies, boarded the Livermore’s palatial yacht. The yacht was fully provisioned. They left from the
private pier behind the estate, without leaving word when they
would return.
Meanwhile, Percy G. Rockefeller, who had been robbed of
$19,000 at dinner during a previous Boston Billy burglary, had
engaged the Burns detective agency to investigate independently
of the police. On the news of the Livermore robbery, Burns
immediately sent down a detective, Michael Rincones, who was
joined by Detectives Paul Crowley and Jesse Mayforth of the Nassau County Police Department. All three men were heavily armed
and on patrol at the Livermore estate.
Captain of Detectives Harold R. King of the Nassau County

8467_Smitten_09_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 183

BOSTON BILLY

• 183 •

Police Department was named the lead investigator in charge of the
case. There had been a string of other such robberies on Long Island
and in New York. The police suspected the Boston Billy gang of
having stolen over $1 million in jewels and cash over the prior three
years. The gang was suspected in the robberies of Percy G. Rockefeller of Greenwich, Connecticut; William Durant of Deal, New
Jersey, the largest shareholder of General Motors; Joshua E. Cosden
of Port Washington, Long Island, who was robbed during the Prince
of Wales’s visit; and several other wealthy and powerful people.
Livermore found out from the police why removing the telephone from the cradle did no good. The switch on the telephone
was set on intercom, so it would only connect to the other phones
in the house, and all the servants were asleep.
On Wednesday, June 1, Livermore read his mail. The postmark
was Brooklyn: “We are coming to see you again tonight, and we
are coming to see you on business.” Signed: The Gentlemen Robbers. The letter was written in pencil.
That evening, a servant answered the phone; a man’s voice was
on the other end.
“Is Mr. Livermore in?” the man asked.
“No,” the servant replied.
“Tell Mr. Livermore that it would be a serious matter if he
didn’t heed the warning we gave him.”
After reviewing the letter, Captain King sent four plainclothes
officers to the Livermore estate for security. Livermore also had his
own private detectives on the job.
On June 5, six days after the Livermore robbery, the police got
a break. The Nassau County Police Department got a phone tip
that a suspect in the Livermore robbery was on an eastbound train
due at Ronkonkoma at 7:13 P.M. Ronkonkoma was 50 miles from
Pennsylvania Station on the main line of the Long Island Railroad,
at the end of the Long Island Motor Parkway.

8467_Smitten_09_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 184

• 184 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

The train pulled into the station at Ronkonkoma on time.
Waiting were three Nassau County detectives, led by Captain
King, and one Suffolk County detective. They were waiting on
the platform for the passengers.
Arthur Barry and Anna Blake exited the train. The detectives
moved in, walking quickly up to the couple. When Barry spotted
the four detectives he reached for his hip, as if to draw his gun. He
then bolted and ran back on the train. Blake stayed on the platform. One of the detectives moved in on her. The three other
detectives drew their guns and followed after Barry, racing down
the aisles of the train, from car to car in a wild chase. They finally
boxed him into a corner. Guns drawn and pointed, Captain King
shouted, “Give up now, or you’re dead.”
Barry surrendered.
Meanwhile, on the platform, the detective moved in on Blake
as she tried to dispose of a small pasteboard box. The detective
ripped the box out of her hands and cuffed her. Inside the box was
stolen jewelry worth $15,000.
The detectives hurried the captured suspects into the car they
had driven from Mineola, Long Island, and sped off, headed for
Blake’s home.
The wild chase and gunplay had caused the passengers and the
station agent to believe that the detectives, who were in plain
clothes, were really robbers who had attacked and kidnapped a
couple of innocent passengers. The passengers alerted the station
agent, who immediately called the Suffolk and Nassau County
police and informed them that a robbery and kidnapping had
taken place on the train station platform at Ronkonkoma. He
described it as an old-time, wild-West-style train robbery and kidnapping. Believing the report, the Suffolk and Nassau County
police put out a general alarm for a Ford or a Chevy with New
York license plates 2Z33. The alarm was called off when the

8467_Smitten_09_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 185

BOSTON BILLY

• 185 •

license plate checked out to be issued to the Nassau County District Attorney’s Office.
Meanwhile, the detectives were quickly taken to Blake’s home,
where they also arrested Barry’s brother.
The next day, June 6, in a room on the top floor of the Nassau
County Courthouse at Mineola, Arthur Barry signed a confession
that he and his associate, whom he knew as Bill or Earl “Boston
Billy” Williams, committed the $100,000 robbery on the Livermore estate the previous week. Barry had cut a deal with Nassau
County District Attorney Elvin Edwards. Edwards had promised
that in return for making a clean breast of the whole story, he
would free Barry’s companion, Blake, and his brother William
Barry. And he would drop all charges against them, since Barry
insisted they had nothing to do with any crimes he was involved in.
After Barry signed his confession, a group of detectives headed
for New York. They raided a rooming house on the West Side of
Manhattan, near Central Park, just missing Boston Billy Monaghan by minutes. Barry had provided the address as part of his
plea agreement.
Jesse and Dorothy Livermore were brought into the district
attorney’s office in Mineola soon after the confession was signed.
They were unable to recognize Barry as one of the burglars since
it was dark at the time of the robbery. But the incidents that surrounded the robbery and the circumstances of Barry’s arrest convinced them that he was one of the robbers.
For instance, Barry reminded Dorothy that when she had asked
him for a cigarette, he gave her one and lit it for her; and that he
had returned her sapphire pinky ring when she asked him not to
steal it and had said “I hope it brings you luck.”
The police were also able to identify an $800 wristwatch that
had been stolen from a residence in Rumson, New Jersey. This was
the first tie-in with a string of reported burglaries.

8467_Smitten_09_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 186

• 186 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

In his confession, Barry said that he had met Monaghan at the
Pennsylvania Station and that Monaghan had shown him a newspaper article reporting that the Livermores would have guests at a
party that night. They rode to the Great Neck station and walked
to the Livermore estate. Barry explained, “I went into this scheme
with Billy to rob this place, and I knew it was contrary to law. I was
sincerely sorry after I found out that Mr. and Mrs. Livermore were
such good sports under the stress of the circumstances. But I still
went through with the job.”
Barry went on to explain that they had found the Chrysler
roadster at a neighbor’s house and stolen it. He explained that they
drove to the Great Neck train station and just missed the train, so
they commandeered an Overland taxicab that was standing empty
at the station and drove to the outskirts of New York City, where
they abandoned it.
The police checked Barry’s prints and came up with warrants
for his arrest in Massachusetts and Connecticut. They also discovered that he was charged in Scarsdale, New York, with the 1923
murder of Patrol Sergeant John Harrison, but Barry insisted that a
companion had done the actual shooting, and the charges were
dropped to assault. He was sentenced to three months, but
couldn’t stand it in jail. He escaped with only 15 days left to serve
in his sentence. A friend had smuggled a saw into the jail.
The press described Blake as an attractive blond about 35 years
old, a little over 5 feet tall, and dressed in a black silk coat over an
unusually long black dress, topped off by a close-fitting black hat
with gold embroidery. She and William Barry were not charged,
as agreed in the plea bargain.
The police got deep into the information given to them by
Barry and were astounded as the number of robberies he disclosed
kept increasing—from 8 to 15 to 22 homes. The list of people
robbed read like the social register: Percy G. Rockefeller; William

8467_Smitten_09_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 187

BOSTON BILLY

• 187 •

Durant of General Motors; F. W. Wheeler, head of the American
Can Company; Alfred Berolzheimer, head of the Eagle Pencil
Company; and Colonel John C. Stillwell (retired).
It also surfaced that the only one who could have provided
inside information about the Livermore estate was the former
chauffeur, Eddie Kane. A warrant was drawn for his arrest.
At this point, the police finally revealed how they had tracked
down Barry and Blake. They had received two anonymous telephone calls, which they traced to a pay phone in the Bronx, one on
Tuesday night and one on Wednesday night before the arrest on Sunday. The caller did not identify himself. He told the Nassau County
police of a split in the gang over the division of the spoils in the Livermore robbery, including the information that one of the gang
members had been hit over the head with an iron rod during a fight.
The caller gave Barry’s name and revealed the time and destination
of their train. He also provided descriptions of Barry and Blake.
Barry was questioned further on the murder of Sergeant Harrison. He claimed it was Monaghan who had committed the murder. This enraged Monaghan when he read about it in the papers,
and he actually sent a handwritten letter to the New York Times. He
described Barry as “a lying rat who would send his own brother to
the chair.” Monaghan also claimed that he had proof that Barry
had killed Sergeant Harrison.
The number of robberies continued to climb. Barry took the
police on a tour of 22 houses in Westchester County alone, where
he and Monaghan had looted over $500,000, mostly in jewelry. In
one of the houses in Rye, Mr. Murray, the victim, said to Barry, “I
want to thank you for the gentlemanly way in which you robbed
me. Do you remember what you did with the college pins that
were in the loot?”
Barry pointed to a place in the grass by some bushes, and said
“We threw them there. They were worthless to us.”

8467_Smitten_09_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 188

• 188 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

When the police left, Murray was on his hands and knees looking for the pins in the grass.
The cops took Barry up to Scarsdale, where he reenacted the
details of the murder of Officer Harrison. Monaghan was described
as a gunman, a hard drinker, and a great ladies’ man.
The final tally for all the burglaries grew to $2 million over a
three-year period. On July 6, Barry was sentenced to 25 years in
prison at hard labor. He looked down at his smooth, white hands
and smiled a grim, resolute smile when he was sentenced.
Blake ran up to him, threw her arms around him, and kissed
him hard on the mouth, slipping a roll of bills into his hands for his
prison expenses. As he was hauled off, she collapsed in tears. Barry
blamed Monaghan for ratting him out. He said he was just about
to sail to Europe and a new life with Blake when he was arrested.
On July 7, Detective Gordon Hurley of the Nassau County
police waited at the back door of a bungalow in Sound View, Connecticut. Detective Charles Sheraton of the Burns agency stood by
the front door. Sheraton had been retained by Percy G. Rockefeller after he had been robbed at gunpoint. Sheraton had been on
Monaghan’s trail for seven months now. He had just missed Monaghan on several occasions. He was not going to miss him again.
On a prearranged signal, they broke the front door open. Monaghan was inside. He sprang for his gun and ran through the house
for the back door. Detective Hurley stood in the rear doorway and
calmly shot Monaghan through the leg as he dodged from side to
side in the hallway. Monaghan collapsed in a heap and screamed in
pain. He was taken to Memorial Associated Hospital, where he
received treatment.
In the hospital, Monaghan admitted to several robberies, but
not the Livermore robbery. He also denied killing Scarsdale Patrol
Sergeant Harrison, as his former partner Barry had claimed. After
his arrest, Monaghan told the police that he was an avid reader of

8467_Smitten_09_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 189

BOSTON BILLY

• 189 •

the society news. This gave him his leads. He would find out what
families were giving dinners, when they were giving them, and
who the guests were going to be.
Eyewitnesses later confirmed that it was Monaghan who had
robbed their houses.
His mother, Mary Monaghan, came to visit him in jail. She
broke down and wept when they met. She said, “I hope you will
come out of it all right, my son.”
He replied, “Well, ma, we’ll wait and see. I’ve got a good lawyer.”
Later she told reporters, “He may be a criminal, but I still love
him.” She cried, “I trust in God to bring him through. I will stand
by him, and he can have my last dollar if he needs it.”
The next day, they brought Barry in from Sing Sing prison to
testify against Monaghan before a grand jury. Barry persisted in his
accusation that Monaghan had killed the Scarsdale police sergeant.
But Monaghan accused Barry of the killing, saying “Barry is only
trying to blame me so he can get himself into the clear.”
Nassau County District Attorney Edwards decided to ask the
Nassau County Grand Jury to indict James Monaghan, alias Boston
Billy, as a fourth offender under the Baumes laws, which would
mean life imprisonment without parole for Monaghan, if convicted. Monaghan had three prior felony convictions in Massachusetts and was wanted on a fugitive warrant for escaping from prison.
On July 21, a check of the spoons used by prisoners revealed
that one was missing. Monaghan’s cell was searched, and the
guards found a spoon filed down into a device that could be used
to pick a lock. The Nassau County sheriff immediately ordered
that Monaghan be placed in solitary confinement. Monaghan
resisted violently. He was finally subdued. He screamed, “I’ll go
crazy in solitary. Let me out of this dump.”
“If he gets any worse,” Sheriff Stronson said, “I’ll put him in a
straitjacket.”
