When to look
As a swing trader, you must know when a company is slated to release its
earnings. You can call the company directly to find out its earnings release
date, or you can review its historical earnings releases (which typically go out
three months apart) to know when to expect the next announcement. Typing
a company’s stock symbol into Yahoo! Finance shows you historical news
items, including earnings announcements.
If you’re considering trading shares of a company, wait until after it releases
its earnings report because earnings announcements can cause major movements in a stock price — up or down. Consequently, predicting whether a
company’s results will please Wall Street is difficult. Often a company may
report robust earnings with an unimpressive outlook that sends shares spiraling downward. (Don’t forget that stocks tend to fall much faster than they
appreciate. Commodities, on the other hand, tend to rise much faster than
they fall.)
Fundamental data, unlike technical data, doesn’t change on a day-to-day
basis. Financial statements are at least one month stale, meaning a lag exists
between when a company files its report and the date the financial data is
reported. So some financial statements may be three months old, depending
on when you view the data. Corporate press releases come out on a more
frequent basis but are often immaterial. The big fundamental news days are
when a company releases its quarterly earnings.
Quarterly earnings provide traders with an update on the company’s operations. Often they include selected information from financial statements
(full financial data often isn’t disclosed until the company files its 10Q with

145

146 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
the SEC; see the preceding section). Quarterly earnings reports also update
traders on whether management feels comfortable with its targets or
benchmarks (assuming the company set such benchmarks in the past).

Where to look
Many moons ago, getting a company’s financial statements was a hassle that
involved finding the number for the company’s investor relations department, calling to request an investor’s packet, and waiting for it to arrive via
snail mail. People often had to do a lot of legwork to get the information they
needed, so imagine how much work went into analyzing just ten potential
prospects! Back in those days, swing trading wasn’t really popular because of
steep commissions. Waiting days to receive financial information was yet
another barrier.
Fortunately, the Internet has changed all that. With the click of a mouse, you
have access to thousands of companies’ financial statements. The time it
takes to bring up a new firm’s financial statements depends only on how long
it takes you to type in that firm’s ticker symbol.
You can access a company’s financial statements by visiting the SEC Web
site (www.sec.gov), but it’s not especially user-friendly. A better option is to
visit Web sites that provide the information for free — and there are plenty
of them. The screen shots used in the financial statements throughout this
chapter come from Google Finance (finance.google.com), which provides
basic quote information, recent and historical news releases, charts, financial
statements, and corporate summaries. Yahoo! Finance also has excellent data
on a company, its industry, its expected growth rates, and more. Just point
your browser to finance.yahoo.com and type a symbol in the quote box.
You can get quotes, charts, corporate information, analyst coverage, ownership, and financials on most any publicly traded
company.

Assessing a Company’s
Financial Statements
So what should you be looking for when a company reports earnings? The
most common question to ask yourself is: “Did the company meet or beat
expectations?” This guideline applies to both sales and earnings. The larger
the percentage beat, the better.

Chapter 7: Understanding a Company, Inside and Out
Expectations drive Wall Street. A big surprise can be a signal that analysts
aren’t accurately projecting a company’s earnings. A company that shows a
trend of rising earnings surprises (for example, a 10 percent earnings surprise,
followed by a 15 percent earnings surprise and a 20 percent earnings surprise)
often has superior price performance relative to the market. Conversely,
companies with negative earnings surprises have poor price performance.
Look for a surprise in the direction you’re trading. Consider the case of
Southwestern Energy Company, which exhibited a positive earnings surprise
of 7.1 percent in September 2007, 16.7 percent in December 2007, and 24
percent in March 2008. Between December 31, 2007, and April 30, 2008, shares
of Southwestern Energy rose 51.87 percent. The earnings surprise momentum
wasn’t the sole reason for the rise, but it provided a clue that something
positive was brewing.
Read over the quarterly earnings reports for hints on future performance.
Management may hint at problematic times ahead with words such as
“challenging” and “competitive environment.” These are signals that earnings
may not meet consensus expectations, and therefore you should carefully
examine major changes in debt levels, cash levels, cash flows (if disclosed),
and inventory levels.
The first step in analyzing financial statements is to understand their components. Granted, financial statements may seem frightening, not to mention
boring. In my opinion, watching paint dry is more exciting than looking at a
financial statement. And that’s why this section isn’t an academic lesson in
accounting. Rather, I give you a basic understanding of what makes up financial statements and, even better, how you can view summaries on the
Internet. Wall Street analysts read through hundreds of pages of financial
statements before writing up reports on companies. Fortunately, you don’t
need to do anything close to that to be a profitable swing trader.
Public companies must issue four main financial statements each quarter. As
a swing trader, you need concern yourself with only three of them.

Balance sheet
A balance sheet is a snapshot of a firm’s financial health. Does the company
have a lot of debt? Does it have a lot of cash on hand? You can answer these
questions and more by viewing its balance sheet.

The balance sheet breakdown
The balance sheet is separated into assets (usually the first half of the
balance sheet) and liabilities and shareholders’ equity (usually the second
half). These two sides must equal each other. Academic textbooks often

147

148 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
present assets on the left-hand side of a page and liabilities and shareholders’ equity on the right-hand side. In real life, expect to see liabilities
and shareholders’ equity below the assets section.
Assets are items a company owns that provide some future benefits — like
cash, inventory, and plants or equipment. They’re further divided into current
and long-term assets.
 Current assets are those assets that are expected to be converted into
cash within one year. Items you’ll find in the current assets section of a
balance sheet include cash, inventory, and accounts receivable (credit
the company is expecting to convert into cash). You want to see that
a company has a good amount of current assets relative to its current
liabilities (which I get to shortly).
 Long-term assets refer to items that are expected to be used for more
than one year. Expect to see items such as land, plants and equipment,
and long-term investments. There’s no good absolute number you want
to see in this arena. Some industries are capital intensive and require
lots of long-term assets. Others, like software firms, have few long-term
assets. Within the same industry, a firm that achieves more profits per
total assets is often valued higher than a firm that achieves fewer profits
per total assets.
On the liabilities portion of the balance sheet, you find items the company
owes others. Like assets, liabilities are divided into two categories: current
and long-term.
 Current liabilities are expenses or accounts the company is expected
to pay over the next year (short-term debt, salaries, expenses, and the
like). You want a firm’s current assets to be at least 1.5 times its current
liabilities if you’re interested in buying stock in the company, and below
1.0 times current liabilities if you’re looking for a shorting opportunity.
 Long-term liabilities are those items the company is expected to pay
back but aren’t due for 12 months or longer. Long-term debt is usually
the most important long-term liability. Compare long-term debt to shareholders’ equity. Ideally, a company should have little long-term debt
relative to equity — say less than 30 percent. The more debt a company
has, the riskier the company is.
Finally, shareholders’ equity (sometimes presented as owners’ equity)
is the difference between total assets and total liabilities. This is what’s left
over for stock shareholders after meeting the obligations of debt holders.
Shareholders’ equity includes stock and the amount of earnings the company
has accumulated over time.

Chapter 7: Understanding a Company, Inside and Out
How to properly assess a balance sheet
You can develop a feel for a company’s financial health by looking at balance
sheets and surmising whether the company is in good, average, or poor
shape. Use these guidelines to help you:
 Cash is king. The more cash a company has relative to its debts, the
better. The less cash a company has relative to its debts, the worse
off it is.
 Compare current assets to current liabilities. A ratio of 1.5 or higher is
usually a sign that the company isn’t going bankrupt in the next 12
months. A ratio below 1 may signal real problems ahead.
 Compare long-term debt to shareholders’ equity. The higher the percentage, the more leveraged a company is. Stick to buying companies
with debt levels below 30 percent.
 Large increases in accounts receivable are a red flag. If a company’s
accounts receivable grow faster than sales, it may mean the company
is extending loose credit terms to increase sales. And that can spell
trouble if the company is unable to recover all amounts owed to it.
 Large increases in inventory levels are a red flag. If inventories rise
faster than sales, the company may be on the cusp of a slowdown as
it works to sell off inventory. This problem is more pronounced in
the technology sector where inventory values quickly decline due to
industry advancements.
Figure 7-1 brings these concepts to life with the balance sheet of a publicly
traded company, Marvel Entertainment (symbol: MVL). Marvel owns the
rights to such popular comic book characters as Spider-Man, X-Men, Ghost
Rider, and the Incredible Hulk. Identify the key parts of the balance sheet:
current assets, long-term assets, current liabilities, and long-term liabilities.
(You won’t know every line item that appears in this example. Further
research can help you understand those items that I don’t cover.)
Glancing quickly over the balance sheet, you should notice that Marvel has
more current liabilities than current assets for the period ending September
30, 2007: $117.91 million versus $218.88 million. This fact is an immediate red
flag. If you were looking at Marvel as a buying opportunity, you might stop
here. The company has significant short-term debt relative to its cash levels,
and the situation is deteriorating as evidenced by the current assets to current liabilities in the prior quarter: $165.89 million versus $195.50 million.
Something else that should jump out at you is the leverage Marvel employs.
Long-term debt ($218.56 million) relative to shareholders’ equity ($150.54
million) is an astounding 145 percent. This company is beyond leveraged!

149

150 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis

Figure 7-1:
The
balance
sheet of
MVL for the
quarters
ending
September
30, 2007, and
June 30,
2007.
Source: Google Finance

The amount of research you conduct beyond the cursory examination presented here depends on the type of swing trader you are. More work can help
you make better decisions, but there isn’t enough time in one day to closely
examine several companies. For example, further research into Marvel
Entertainment would’ve revealed that the company has become so highly
leveraged because of its push into making its own films rather than licensing

Chapter 7: Understanding a Company, Inside and Out
its characters. But you can’t pore over hundreds of pages of SEC filings to
learn details that may, or may not, influence your decision to swing trade
the stock.

Income statement
The income statement shows a company’s profit and losses over a period
of time. That time is usually reported as 3 months and 12 months. The main
parts of the income statement are the revenues, gross profit, operating
income, and net income.

The income statement breakdown
“Revenues” is a fancy way of saying “sales.” In Europe, revenues are often
called “turnover.” Whatever term you use, this financial statement represents
a company’s lifeline. Without sales, you can’t make profits. Growth-oriented
companies can grow sales at double (and even triple) digit rates in times of
economic expansion.
After revenues, an income statement lists a firm’s gross profit (the amount
of profit left over after a company subtracts all direct costs related to the
products it sells — called cost of goods sold). An example best illustrates
these terms: If Dummies Corporation reports sales of $10 million in 2008
(due, no doubt, to the success of Swing Trading For Dummies), the firm’s cost
of goods sold would include the cost of printing the book, hiring yours truly
to write it, paying editors to proofread it, and more. These are all direct
costs. You wouldn’t include any indirect costs, like the salary of the CEO, in
the calculation of the cost of goods sold because they aren’t directly attributable to the cost of the book.
Gross profit is often calculated as a percentage of sales. The higher the ratio,
the more profitable the firm. Often companies receive higher valuations
because of higher gross profit margins.
After gross profit, the next main heading in the income statement is the operating income. Operating income is what’s left over after taking out all indirect
costs from the gross profit figure. Indirect costs include selling, general, and
administrative costs. Marketing, for example, is considered an indirect cost.
The costs of electricity and office desks are also indirect. Subtracting these
items from gross profit yields operating income.
Finally, a few more subtractions are made from operating income to arrive
at net income — the bottom line. Subtract interest expense (like interest
payments on debt) and taxes and you get net income. Net income is usually
presented in dollars and as a per share figure. That is, companies divide
net profit by the number of shares the company has outstanding in order to
calculate income per share.

151

152 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
How to properly assess an income statement
Keep these suggestions in mind to stay on your game and spot strength and
weakness in income statements:
 Compare sales growth rates (year over year) to net income growth
rates (year over year). Ideally, you want to see net income rise at a
faster pace than sales.
 Keep an eye on the trend of gross profit as a percentage of sales.
A rising ratio is a healthy sign, whereas a declining ratio is a red flag.
 Keep an eye on the trend of operating income as a percentage of sales.
Again, a rising ratio is a healthy sign and a declining ratio is a red flag.
 Compare sales and earnings to year-ago periods. Comparing either
figure to prior quarters rather than the prior year may lead you to
incorrect conclusions regarding the company’s health.
 Watch for growth in outstanding shares. This growth can be a red
flag that the company is issuing more shares and thereby diluting
existing ones.
Figure 7-2 shows the income statement of Marvel Entertainment for the three
months ending September 30, 2007, and the three months ending June 30,
2007. Identify the key parts of the income statement: revenues, gross profit,
operating income, net profit, and net income per share (earnings per share,
or EPS).
Marvel posted revenues of $123.64 million in the quarter ending September 30,
2007. Now, you may be tempted to say that number represents impressive
growth over the previous quarter, when Marvel posted revenues of $101.47
million. However, you shouldn’t compare quarters to previous quarters
because seasonality can wreak havoc. For example, a toy manufacturer
will experience a steep drop in sales after the holiday shopping season. To
maintain consistency, compare quarterly results with the results from the
year-ago period.
Gross profit as a percentage of sales basically remained unchanged from
the June quarter (at 85.7 percent) to the September quarter (85.8 percent).
(Comparing items that are a percentage of sales across quarters isn’t as
problematic as comparing sales or earnings across quarters.) Gross profits
as a percentage of sales are rarely this high, but Marvel receives licensing
fees, which have little cost directly associated with them.
Operating income as a percentage of sales also remained largely unchanged
(going from 53 percent to 52.7 percent). Marvel reported net income of $29.09
million in the June quarter, equivalent to 34 cents per share, and $36.27
million in the September quarter, equivalent to 45 cents per share. Marvel
has 80.52 million shares outstanding.

Chapter 7: Understanding a Company, Inside and Out

Figure 7-2:
MVL’s
income
statement
for the quarters ending
September
30, 2007,
and June 30,
2007.
Source: Google Finance

Cash flow statement
The cash flow statement tells you how much cash the company generated
(cash flows from operating activities), what it did with its cash (cash flows
used in/generated from investing activities), and whether it borrowed money
or paid out cash (cash flows from financing activities).

153

154 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
The cash flow statement breakdown
The first section of this financial statement details cash flows used in or generated from operating activities. It starts with net income and makes various
adjustments to tally up how much cash was generated or used during the
period — ending with cash flow from operating activities. What kinds of
adjustments are made? An increase in inventories reflects a use of cash
and therefore should be subtracted from net income. On the other hand, a
company adds back non-cash expenses taken out of net income in the income
statement. Non-cash expenses are costs a company recognizes on its income
statement that aren’t actually paid out. For example, if a company owns a car
used for business, it may recognize a $5,000 non-cash expense in one year to
reflect the car’s loss of value.
As a swing trader, don’t get too caught up in the details. The most important
item of this section is cash flow from operating activities — the bottom line.
This shows whether the company actually generated cash from its business
during the period. A company can report strong net income and have negative
cash flow if a majority of sales are on credit, for example. Look for cash flow
from operations to be consistent with net income (that is, they should rise
together and fall together).
The second section of the cash flow statement is the cash flow from investing
section. The most important item here is usually capital expenditures, or the
costs incurred to maintain, upgrade, or acquire physical assets. Generally, the
smaller the level of capital expenditures relative to sales, the better.
The third and final section of the cash flow statement is the cash flow from
financing activities section. This part of the statement shows any dividends
paid and any issuance or payment of debt or stock. Ideally, a company can
sustain its operations from the cash it generates internally, but sometimes
a company looks outside itself to fund growth. It may issue debt or stock
for that reason. Issuing stock dilutes the value of other shareholders’ equity,
and issuing debt may saddle the company with a debt burden that’s difficult
to bear.

How to properly assess a cash flow statement
Always look at a cash flow statement with these points in mind so you can
more easily spot a company’s strengths and weaknesses:
 Compare cash flow from operations to net income. Net income rising
with cash flows declining is a negative sign. Falling net income with
rising cash flows may reflect a high level of non-cash expenses.
 Keep an eye on capital expenditures (in the cash flows from investing
activities) relative to sales. The higher the ratio, the worse off the
company.

Chapter 7: Understanding a Company, Inside and Out
 Look at the methods the company depends on for its cash. Does it generate its own cash from operations and not need to borrow money? Or is
the company issuing stock and heavily borrowing to make ends meet?
Answering “yes” to the first question is a good thing; “yes” to the second
question isn’t a good sign.
 Look for major changes in the cash flow from the financing activities
section. A large amount of debt issuance may be a red flag. Payment of
debt, on the other hand, is a good sign that a company is deleveraging
itself.
 Watch for large items or breaks in historical levels of cash flows.
Both can signal major events like an acquisition or payment of debt.
Paying down debt is generally a good thing, whereas acquisitions
can be good or bad. Unless acquisitions are a part of a firm’s strategy,
I’m often weary of them.
Check out Figure 7-3, the cash flow statement of Marvel Entertainment.
Notice that Marvel reported net income of $36.27 million in the quarter
ending September 30, 2007, but actually used cash in operations of –$8.68
million. Film production costs used up cash generated in the quarter. Marvel
is spending cash today in hopes of blockbuster films tomorrow.
Fortunately, capital expenditures were extremely low ($0.37 million) because
film companies don’t have a lot of physical assets that need to be upgraded,
maintained, or purchased.

Figure 7-3:
The cash
flow
statement
of MVL for
the quarters
ending
September
30, 2007,
and June 30,
2007.
Source: Google Finance

155

156 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
Low capex may mean higher profits
Capital expenditures (affectionately shortened
to capex) represent investments by firms into
their businesses. So you may think that the
more a company invests in itself, the better
the performance of its stock. In reality, high
capex isn’t correlated with strong stock price
performance. Jeremy Siegel, a professor of
finance at the Wharton School of Business (and
former teacher of mine) writes in his book The
Future for Investors (Crown Business, 2005):
