
- 96 -

John Grisham

The Broker

them. The Pentagon brilliantly neutralized Hubbard and Backman without
tipping its hand as to whether it actually owned and created the satellite
system. Gamma Net or Neptune, or whatever, was effectively shielded under
the impenetrable web of "military secrets."
Backman the lawyer wanted a trial, especially if the Pentagon documents
were questionable, but Backman the defendant wanted to avoid a fate similar
to Hubbard's.
If Luigi's mad dash out of Treviso was designed to frighten him, then the
plan suddenly began working. For the first time since his pardon, Joel
missed the safety of his little cell in maximum security.
The city of Padua was ahead, its lights and traffic growing by the mile.
"What's the population of Padua?" Marco asked, his first words in half an
hour.
"Two hundred thousand. Why do Americans always want to know the
population of every village and city?"
"Didn't realize it was a problem."
"Are you hungry?"
The dull throbbing in his stomach was from fear, not hunger, but he said
"Sure" anyway. They ate a pizza at a neighborhood bar just beyond the outer
ring of Padua, and were quickly back in the car and headed south.
They slept that night in a tiny country inn-eight closet-sized rooms-that had
been in the same family since Roman times. There was no sign advertising
the place; it was one of Luigi's stopovers. The nearest road was narrow,
neglected, and virtually free of any vehicle built after 1970. Bologna was not
far away.
Luigi was next door, through a thick stone wall that went back for centuries.
When Joel Backman/Marco Lazzeri crawled under the blankets and finally
got warm, he couldn't see a flicker of light anywhere. Total blackness. And
total quiet. It was so quiet he couldn't close his eyes for a long time.

- 97 -

John Grisham

The Broker

After the fifth report that Critz had called with questions
about Joel Backman, Teddy Maynard threw a rare tantrum. The fool was in
London, working the phones furiously, for some reason trying to find
someone, anyone, who might lead him to information about Backman.
"Someone's offered Critz money," Teddy barked at Wigline, an assistant
deputy director.
"But there's no way Critz can find out where Backman is," Wigline said.
"He shouldn't be trying. He'll only complicate matters. He must be
neutralized."
Wigline glanced at Hoby, who had suddenly stopped his note- taking. "What
are you saying, Teddy?"
"Neutralize him."
"He's a US. citizen."
"I know that! He's also compromising an operation. There is precedent.
We've done it before." He didn't bother to tell them what the precedent was,
but they assumed that since Teddy often created his own precedents, then it
would do no good to argue the matter.
Hoby nodded as if to say: Yes, we've done it before.

- 98 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Wigline clenched his jaw and said, "I assume you want it done now."
"As soon as possible," Teddy said. "Show me a plan in two hours."
They watched Critz as he left his borrowed apartment and began his long,
late-afternoon walk, one that usually ended with a few pints. After half an
hour at a languid pace he neared Leicester Square and entered the Dog and
Duck, the same pub as the day before.
He was on his second pint at the far end of the main bar, first floor, before
the stool next to him cleared and an agent named Green- law wedged in and
yelled for a beer.
"Mind if I smoke?" Greenlaw asked Critz, who shrugged and said, "This
ain't America."
'A Yank, huh?" Greenlaw said.
"Yep."
"Live here?"
"No, just visiting." Critz was concentrating on the bottles on the wall beyond
the bar, avoiding eye contact, wanting no part of the conversation. He had
quickly come to adore the solitude of a crowded pub. He loved to sit and
drink and listen to the rapid banter of the Brits and know that not a soul had
a clue as to who he was. He was, though, still wondering about the little guy
named Ben. If they were watching him, they were doing a great job of
staying in the shadows.
Greenlaw gulped his beer in an effort to catch up with Critz. It was crucial to
order the next two at the same time. He puffed a cigarette, then added his
smoke to the cloud above them. "I've been here for a year,1' he said.
Critz nodded without looking. Get lost.
"I don't mind driving on the wrong side, or the lousy weather, but what
really bugs me here are the sports. You ever watch a cricket match? Lasts for
four days."
Critz managed to grunt and offer a lame "Such a stupid sport."
"It's either soccer or cricket, and these people go nuts over both. I just
survived the winter here without the NFL. It was pure misery."
Critz was a loyal Redskins season-ticket holder and few things in life excited
him as much as his beloved team. Greenlaw was a casual fan but had spent
the day memorizing statistics in a CIA safe house north of London. If
football didn't work, then politics would be next.

- 99 -

John Grisham

The Broker

If that didn't work, there was a fine-looking lady waiting outside, though
Critz did not have a reputation as a philanderer.
Critz was suddenly homesick. Sitting in a pub, far from home, far from the
frenzy of the Super Bowl-two days away and virtually ignored by the British
press-he could hear the crowd and feel the excitement. If the Redskins had
survived the playoffs, he would not be drinking pints in London. He would
be at the Super Bowl, fifty-yard- line seats, furnished by one of the many
corporations he could lean on.
He looked at Greenlaw and said, "Patriots or Packers?"
"My team didn't make it, but I always pull for the NFC."
"Me too. Who's your team?"
And that was perhaps the most fatal question Robert Critz would ever ask.
When Greenlaw answered, "Redskins," Critz actually smiled and wanted to
talk. They spent a few minutes establishing pedigree-how long each had
been a Redskins fan, the great games they'd seen, the great players, the
Super Bowl championships. Greenlaw ordered another round and both
seemed ready to replay old games for hours. Critz had talked to so few
Yanks in London, and this guy was certainly an easy one to get on with.
Greenlaw excused himself and went to find the restroom. It was upstairs, the
size of a broom closet, a one-holer like so many Johns in London. He
latched the door for a few seconds of privacy and quickly whipped out a cell
phone to report his progress. The plan was in place. The team was just down
the street, waiting. Three men and the fine- looking lady.
Halfway through his fourth pint, and with a polite disagreement under way
over Sonny Jurgensen's touchdown-to-interception ratio, Critz finally needed
to pee. He asked directions and disappeared. Greenlaw deftly dropped into
Critz's glass one small white tablet of Rohypnol-a strong, tasteless, odorless
sedative. When Mr. Redskins returned he was refreshed and ready to drink.
They talked about John Riggins and Joe Gibbs and thoroughly enjoyed
themselves as poor Critz's chin began to drop.
"Wow," he said, his tongue already thick. "I'd better be going. Old lady is
waiting."
"Yeah, me too," Greenlaw said, raising his glass. "Drink up."
They drained their pints and stood to leave; Critz in front, Greenlaw waiting
to catch him. They made it through the crowd packed

- 100 -

John Grisham

The Broker

around the front door and onto the sidewalk where a cold wind revived
Critz, but only for a second. He forgot about his new pal, and in less than
twenty steps was wobbling on rubbery legs and grasping for a lamp pole.
Greenlaw grabbed him as he was falling, and for the benefit of a young
couple passing by said loudly, "Dammit, Fred, you're drunk again."
Fred was far beyond drunk. A car appeared from nowhere and slowed by the
sidewalk. A back door swung open, and Greenlaw shoveled a half-dead
Critz into the rear seat. The first stop was a warehouse eight blocks away.
There Critz, thoroughly unconscious now, was transferred to a small
unmarked panel truck with a double rear door. While Critz lay on the floor
of the van, an agent used a hypodermic needle and injected him with a
massive dose of very pure heroin. The presence of heroin always squelched
the autopsy results, at the family's insistence of course.
With Critz barely breathing, the van left the warehouse and drove to
Whitcomb Street, not far from his apartment. The killing required three
vehicles-the van, followed by a large and heavy Mercedes, and a trail car
driven by a real Brit who would hang around and chat with the police. The
trail car's primary purpose was to keep the traffic as far behind the Mercedes
as possible.
On the third pass, with all three drivers talking to each other, and with two
agents, including the fine-looking lady, hiding on the sidewalk and also
listening, the rear doors of the van were shoved open, Critz fell onto the
street, the Mercedes aimed for his head and got it with a sickening thump,
then everyone disappeared but the Brit in the trail car. He slammed on his
brakes, jumped out and ran to the poor drunk who'd just stumbled into the
street and been run over, and looked around quickly for other witnesses.
. There were none, but a taxi was approaching in the other lane. He flagged
it down, and soon other traffic stopped. Before long, a crowd was gathering
and the police arrived. The Brit in the trail car may have been the first on the
scene, but he saw very little. He saw the man stumble between those two
parked cars over there, into the street, and get hit by a large black car. Or
maybe it was dark green. Not sure of the make or model. Never thought
about looking at the license plates. No clue as to the description of the hitand-run driver. He was

- 101 -

John Grisham

The Broker

too shocked by the sight of the drunk suddenly appearing at the edge of the
street.
By the time the body of Bob Critz was loaded into an ambulance for the trip
to the morgue, Greenlaw, the fine-looking lady, and two other members of
the team were on a train leaving London and headed for Paris. They would
scatter for a few weeks, then return to England, their home base.
Marco wanted breakfast primarily because he could smell it- ham and
sausages on the grill somewhere deep in the main house- but Luigi was
anxious to move on. "There are other guests and everyone eats at the same
table," he explained as they hurriedly threw their bags in his car.
"Remember, you're leaving a trail, and the signora forgets nothing."
They sped down the country lane in search of wider roads.
"'Where are we going?" Marco asked.
"We'll see."
"Stop playing games with me!" he growled and Luigi actually flinched. "I'm
a perfectly free man who could get out of this car anytime I want!"
'Yes, but-"
"Stop threatening me! Ever}' time I ask a question you give me these vague
threats about how I won't last twenty-four hours on my own. I want to know
what's going on. Where are we headed? How long will we be there? How
long will you be around? Give me some answers, Luigi, or I'll disappear."
Luigi turned onto a four-lane and a sign said that Bologna was thirty
kilometers ahead. He waited for the tension to ease a bit, then said, "We're
going to Bologna for a few days. Ermanno will meet us there. You will
continue your lessons. You'll be placed in a safe house for several months.
Then I'll disappear and you'll be on your own."
"Thank you. Why was that so difficult?"
"The plan changes."
"I knew Ermanno wasn't a student."
"He is a student. He's also part of the plan."
"Do you realize how ridiculous the plan is? Think about it, Luigi. Someone
is spending all this time and money trying to teach me an

- 102 -

John Grisham

The Broker

other language and another culture. Why not just put me back on the cargo
plane and stash me in some place like New Zealand?"
"That's a great idea, Marco, but I'm not making those decisions."
"Marco my ass. Every time I look in the mirror and say Marco I want to
laugh."
"This is not funny. Do you know Robert Critz?"
Marco paused for a moment. "I met him a few times over the years. Never
had much use for him. Just another political hack, like me, I guess."
"Close friend of President Morgan, chief of staff, campaign director."
"So?"
"He was killed last night in London. That makes five people who've died
because of you-Jacy Hubbard, the three Pakistanis, now Critz. The killing
hasn't stopped, Marco, nor will it. Please be patient with me. I'm only trying
to protect you."
Marco slammed his head into the headrest and closed his eyes. He could not
begin to put the pieces together.
They made a quick exit and stopped for gas. Luigi returned to the car with
two small cups of strong coffee. "Coffee to go," Marco said pleasantly. "I
figured such evils would be banned in Italy."
"Fast food is creeping in. It's very sad."
"Just blame the Americans. Everybody else does."
Before long they were inching through the rush hour traffic on the outskirts
of Bologna. Luigi was saying, "Our best cars are made around here, you
know. Ferraris, Lamborghinis, Maseratis, all the great sports cars."
"Can I have one?"
"It's not in the budget, sorry.'
"What, exactly, is in the budget?"
"A very quiet, simple life."
"That his what I thought."
"Much better than your last one."
Marco sipped his coffee and watched the traffic. "Didn't you study here?"
"Yes. The university is a thousand years old. One of the finest in the world.
I'll show it to you later."
They exited the main thoroughfare and wound through a gritty

- 103 -

John Grisham

The Broker

suburb. The streets became shorter and narrower and Luigi seemed to know
the place well. They followed the signs pointing them toward the center of
the city, and the university. Luigi suddenly swerved, jumped a curb, and
wedged the Fiat into a slot barely wide enough for a motorcycle. "Lets eat
something," he said, and, once they managed to squeeze themselves out of
the car, they were on the sidewalk, walking quickly through the cool air.
Marco's next hiding place was a dingy hotel a few blocks from the outer
edge of the old city. "Budget cuts already," he mumbled as he followed
Luigi through the cramped lobby to the stairs.
"It's just for a few days," Luigi said.
"Then what?" Marco was struggling with his bags up the narrow stairway.
Luigi was carrying nothing. Thankfully the room was on the second floor, a
rather small space with a tiny bed and curtains that hadn't been opened in
days.
"I like Treviso better," Marco said, staring at the walls.
Luigi yanked open the curtains. The sunlight helped only slightly. "Not
bad," he said, without conviction.
"My prison cell was nicer."
"You complain a lot."
"With good reason."
"Unpack. I'll meet you downstairs in ten minutes. Ermanno is waiting."
Ermanno appeared as rattled as Marco by the sudden change in location. He
was harried and unsettled, as if he'd chased them all night from Treviso.
They walked with him a few blocks to a run-down apartment building. No
elevators were evident, so they climbed four flights of stairs and entered a
tiny, two-room flat that had even less furniture than the apartment in
Treviso. Ermanno had obviously packed in a hurry and unpacked even
faster.
"Your dump's worse than mine," Marco said, taking it in.
Spread on a narrow table and waiting for action were the study materials
they'd used the day before.
"I'll be back for lunch," Luigi said, and quickly disappeared.
"Andiamo a studiare," Ermanno announced. Let's study.
"I've already forgotten everything."

- 104 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"But we had a good session yesterday."
"Can't we just go to a bar and drink? I'm really not in the mood for this." But
Ermanno had assumed his position across the table and was turning pages in
his manual. Marco reluctantly settled into the seat across from him.
Lunch and dinner were forgettable. Both were quick snacks in fake
trattorias, the Italian version of fast food. Luigi was in a foul mood and
insisted, quite harshly at times, that they speak only Italian. Luigi spoke
slowly, clearly, and repeated everything four times until Marco figured it
out, then he moved along to the next phrase. It was impossible to enjoy food
under such pressure.
At midnight, Marco was in his bed, in his cold room, wrapped tightly with
the thin blanket, sipping orange juice he had ordered himself, and
memorizing list after list of verbs and adjectives.
What could Robert Critz have possibly done to get himself killed by people
who might also be looking for Joel Backman? The question itself was too
bizarre to ask. He couldn't begin to contemplate an answer. He assumed
Critz was present when the pardon was granted; ex-president Morgan was
incapable of making such a decision by himself. Beyond that, though, it was
impossible to see Critz involved at a higher level. He had proven for decades
that he was nothing more than a good hatchet man. Very few people trusted
him.
But if people were still dying, then it was urgent that he learn the verbs and
adjectives scattered on his bed. Language meant survival, and movement.
Luigi and Ermanno would soon disappear, and Marco Lazzeri would be left
to fend for himself.

- 105 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Marco escaped his claustrophobic room, or "apartment" as it
was called, and went for a long walk at daybreak. The sidewalks were
almost as damp as the frigid air. With a pocket map Luigi had given him, all
in Italian of course, he made his way into the old city, and once past the
ruins of the ancient walls at Porta San Donato, he headed west on Via Irnerio
along the north edge of the university section of Bologna. The sidewalks
were centuries old and covered with what appeared to be miles of arching
porticoes.
Evidently street life began late in the university section. An occasional car
passed, then a bike or two, but the foot traffic was still asleep. Luigi had
explained that Bologna had a history of left-wing, communist leanings. It
was a rich history, one that Luigi promised to explore with him.
Ahead Marco saw a small green neon sign that was indifferently advertising
the Bar Fontana, and as he walked toward it he soon picked up the scent of
strong coffee. The bar was wedged tightly into the corner of an ancient
building-but then they were all ancient. The door opened reluctantly, and
once inside Marco almost smiled at the aromas-coffee, cigarettes, pastries,
breakfast on a grill in the rear.

- 106 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Then the fear hit, the usual apprehension of trying to order in an unknown
language.
Bar Fontana was not for students, or for women. The crowd was his age,
fifty and up, somewhat oddly dressed, with enough pipes and beards to
identify it as a hangout for faculty. One or two glanced his way, but in the
center of a university with 100,000 students it was difficult for anyone to
draw attention.
Marco got the last small table near the back, and when he finally nestled into
his spot with his back to the wall he was practically shoulder to shoulder
with his new neighbors, both of whom were lost in their morning papers and
neither of whom appeared to notice him. In one of Luigi's lectures on Italian
culture he had explained the concept of space in Europe and how it differed
significantly from that in the States. Space is shared in Europe, not
protected. Tables are shared, the air evidently is shared because smoking
bothers no one. Cars, houses, buses, apartments, cafes-so many important
aspects of life are smaller, thus more cramped, thus more willingly shared.
Its not offensive to go nose to nose with an acquaintance during routine
conversation because no space is being violated. Talk with your hands, hug,
embrace, even kiss at times.
Even for a friendly people, such familiarity was difficult for Americans to
understand.
And Marco was not yet prepared to yield too much space. He picked up the
wrinkled menu on the table and quickly settled on the first thing he
recognized. Just as the waiter stopped and glanced down at him he said, with
all the ease he could possibly exude, "Espresso, e un panino al formaggio."
A small cheese sandwich.
The waiter nodded his approval. Not a single person glanced over to check
out his accented Italian. No newspapers dipped to see who he might be. No
one cared. They heard accents all the time. As he placed the menu back on
the table, Marco Lazzeri decided that he probably liked Bologna, even if it
turned out to be a nest for Communists. With so many students and faculty
coming and going, and from all over the world, foreigners were accepted as
part of the culture. Perhaps it was rather cool to have an accent and dress
differently. Perhaps it was okay to openly study the language.
One sign of a foreigner was that he noticed everything, his eyes darting
around as if he knew he was trespassing into a new culture and

- 107 -

John Grisham

The Broker

didn't want to get caught. Marco would not be caught taking in the sights in
the Bar Fontana. He removed a booklet of vocabulary sheets and tried
mightily to ignore the people and scenes he wanted to watch. Verbs, verbs,
verbs. Ermanno kept saying that to master Italian, or any Romance language
for that matter, you had to know the verbs. The booklet had one thousand of
the basic verbs, and Ermanno claimed that it was a good starting point.
As tedious as rote memorization was, Marco was finding an odd pleasure in
it. He found it quite satisfying to zip through four pages- one hundred verbs,
or nouns, or anything for that matter-and not miss a one. When he got one
wrong, or missed a pronunciation, he went back to the beginning and
punished himself by starting over. He had conquered three hundred verbs
when his coffee and sandwich arrived. He took a sip, went back to work as if
the food was much less important than the vocab, and was somewhere over
four hundred when Rudolph arrived.
The chair on the other side of Marco's small round table was vacant, and this
caught the attention of a short fat man, dressed entirely in faded black, with
wild bunches of gray frizzy hair protruding from all parts of his head, some
of it barely suppressed by a black beret that somehow managed to stay
aboard. "Buon giorno. E libera?" he asked politely, gesturing toward the
chair. Marco wasn't sure what he said but it was obvious what he wanted.
Then he caught the word "libera" and assumed it meant "free" or "vacant."
"Si," Marco managed with no accent, and the man removed a long black
cape, draped it over the chair, then maneuvered himself into position. When
he came to rest they were less than three feet apart. Space is different here,
Marco kept telling himself. The man placed a copy ofL'Unita on the table,
making it rock back and forth. For an instant Marco was worried about his
espresso. To avoid conversation, he buried himself even deeper into
Ermanno's verbs.
"American?" his new friend said, in English with no foreign accent.
Marco lowered the booklet and looked into the glowing eyes not far away.
"Close. Canadian. How'd you know?"
He nodded at the booklet and said, "English to Italian vocabulary. You don't
look British, so I figure you're American." Judging by his accent, he was
probably not from the upper Midwest. Not from
