 Everything he had done with his new exchange was aimed at making it more transparent, and forcing Wall Street to follow. The sixteen investors understood IEX’s basic commercial strategy: to open as a private stock market and convert to a public exchange once their trading volume justified incurring the millions of dollars in regulatory fees they would have to pay. Although technically a dark pool, IEX had done something no Wall Street dark pool had ever done: It had published its rules. Investors could see, for the first time, what order types were allowed on the exchange, and if any traders had been given special access. IEX, as a dark pool, would thus try to set a new standard of transparency—and perhaps shame others into following its example. Or perhaps not. “I would have thought one dark pool would have come forward after us and published their own rules,” Brad now told the investors. “ Someone must have nothing to hide. My prediction was six or seven out of the forty-four would have done it. None. Zero. There are now forty-five markets. On forty-four of them no one has any idea how they trade. Has it not dawned on anyone that it might actually be a good idea to tell people how the market works? People can look back on the financial crisis and say, ‘How can you give a mortgage loan with no documentation? It’s preposterous.’ But banks did it. And now trillions of dollars of trades are being executed on markets where no one has any idea of how it works, because there is no documentation. Does that sound familiar?” 
 Now he explained just how badly the market wanted to remain in the shadows—and just how badly the people at the heart of it wanted IEX to fail. Even before IEX opened, brokers from the big Wall Street banks went to work trying to undermine them. One investor called to inform Brad that a representative of Bank of America had just told him that IEX was owned by high-frequency trading firms. On the morning IEX opened, a manager at an investment firm called ING sent out a mass email that looked as if it had been written on her behalf by someone inside one of the big Wall Street banks: “With the pending launch of IEX, we request that all ING Equity Trading executions be excluded from executing on the IEX venue. . . . I am still challenged by the conflict of interest inherent in their business model. As a result I request to opt out of trading with the IEX venue.” 
 The employees of IEX had risked their careers to attack the conflicts of interest in the stock market. They had refused the easy capital from the big Wall Street banks—to avoid conflicts of interest. To avoid conflicts of interest, the investors who had backed IEX had structured their investments so that they themselves did not personally profit from sending trades onto the exchange: Profits from their investment flowed through to the people whose money they managed. These investors had further insisted on having a stake of less than 5 percent in the exchange, to avoid having even the appearance of control over it. Before IEX launched, Brad had rebuffed an overture from IntercontinentalExchange (known as ICE), the new owners of the New York Stock Exchange, to buy IEX for hundreds of millions of dollars—and walked away from the chance to get rich quick. To align their interests with the broader market’s, IEX planned to lower their fees as their volumes rose—for everyone who used the exchange. And on the day IEX opened for trading, this manager at ING—who had earlier refused to meet with them so that they might explain the exchange to her—was spreading a rumor that IEX had a conflict of interest. ** 
 But then all sorts of bizarre behavior had attended IEX’s arrival in the U.S. stock market. Ronan had gone to a private trade conference—no media, lots of Wall Street big shots. It was the first time he had been invited to the exclusive event, and he intended to lie low. He was outside in the hallway on his way to the bathroom when someone said, “You know, they’re in there talking about IEX.” Ronan returned to the conference room and listened to the heads of several big public U.S. stock exchanges on a panel. All agreed that IEX would only contribute to the biggest problem in the U.S. stock market: its fragmentation. The market already had thirteen public exchanges and forty-four private ones: Who needed another? When it came time for audience participation, Ronan found a microphone. “Hi, I’m Ronan, and I think I went to go take a piss at the wrong time,” he said, and then gave a little speech. “We’re not like you guys,” he concluded. “Or anyone else in the market. We’re an army of one.” He thought he was being calm and measured, but the crowd, by its standards, went wild—which is to say they actually clapped. “Jesus, I thought you were about to throw a punch,” some guy said afterward. 
 The stock exchanges didn’t like IEX for obvious reasons, the big Wall Street banks for less obvious ones. But the more the big banks sensed that Brad was being regarded by big investors as an arbiter of Wall Street behavior, the more carefully they confronted him. Instead of voicing their own objections to him directly, they would voice objections they claimed to have heard from other big banks. The guy from Deutsche Bank would say that the guy from Citigroup was upset that IEX was telling investors how to tell the banks to route to IEX—that sort of thing. “When I visited, they were all cordial,” said Brad. “It made me feel that the plan was to starve us out.” But without seeming to do so. The day before they’d opened for trading, a guy from Bank of America called Brad and said, Hey, buddy, what’s going on? I’d appreciate it if you’d say we’re being supportive. Bank of America had been the first to receive the documents they needed to connect to the exchange and, on opening day, were still dragging their feet in establishing a connection. Brad declined to help Bank of America out of its jam. “Shame is a huge tactic we have to deploy,” he said. 
 Nine weeks after IEX launched, it was already pretty clear that the banks were not following their customers’ instructions to send their orders to the new exchange. A few of the investors in the room knew this; the rest now learned. “When we told them we wanted to route to IEX,” one said, “they said, ‘Why would you want that? We can’t do that!’ The phrase ‘squealing pigs’ comes to mind.” After the first six weeks of IEX’s life, UBS, the big Swiss bank, inadvertently disclosed to one big investor that it hadn’t routed a single order onto IEX—despite explicit instructions from the investor to do so. Another big mutual fund manager estimated that, when he told the big banks to route to IEX, they had followed his instructions “at most ten percent of the time.” A fourth investor was told, by three different banks, that they didn’t want to connect to IEX because they didn’t want to pay the $300-a-month connection fee. 
 Of all the banks that dragged their feet after their customers asked them to send their stock market orders to IEX, Goldman Sachs had offered the best excuse: They were afraid to tell their computer system to do anything it hadn’t done before. In August 2013, the Goldman automated trading system generated a bunch of crazy and embarrassing trades that lost Goldman hundreds of millions of dollars (until the public exchanges agreed, amazingly, to cancel them). Goldman wanted to avoid giving new instructions to its trading machines until it figured out why they had ceased to follow the old ones. There was something about the way Goldman had treated Brad when he visited their offices—listening to what he had to say, bouncing him up the chain of command rather than out the door—that led him to believe their excuse. He sensed that they were taking him seriously. After his first meeting with their stock market people, for instance, Goldman’s analysts had told the firm’s clients that they should be more wary of investing in Nasdaq Inc. 
 The other banks—Morgan Stanley and J.P. Morgan were the exceptions—were mostly passive-aggressive, but there were occasions when they became simply aggressive. Employees of Credit Suisse spread rumors that IEX wasn’t actually independent but owned by the Royal Bank of Canada—and so just a tool of a big bank. One night, in a Manhattan bar, an IEX employee bumped into a senior manager at Credit Suisse. “After you guys fail, come to me and I’ll give you a job,” he said. “Wait, no, everyone hates your fucking guts, so I won’t.” In the middle of their first day of trading, one of IEX’s employees got a call from a senior executive of Bank of America, who said that one of his colleagues had “ties to the Irish Mafia,” and “you don’t want to piss those guys off.” The IEX employee went to Brad, who just said, “He’s full of shit.” The IEX employee was less sure, and followed the call with a text. 
 IEX employee: Should I be concerned? 
 Bank of America employee: Yes. 
 IEX employee: Are you serious? 
 Bank of America employee: Jk [Just kidding]. 
 IEX employee: Haven’t noticed any Irish guys following me. 
 Bank of America employee: Be careful next time you get in your car. 
 IEX employee: Good thing I don’t own a car. 
 Bank of America employee: Well, maybe your gf’s car. 
 Brad also heard what the big Wall Street banks were already saying to investors to dissuade them from sending orders to IEX: It’s too slow . For years, the banks had been selling the speed and aggression of their trading algos, along with the idea that, for an investor, slower always meant worse. They seemed to have persuaded themselves that the new speed of the markets actually helped their clients. They’d even dreamed up a technical-sounding name for an absence of speed: “duration risk.” (“If you make it sound official, people will believe that it’s something you really need to care about,” Brad explained.) The 350-microsecond delay IEX had introduced to foil the stock market predator was roughly one-thousandth of the blink of an eye. But investors for years had been led to believe that one-thousandth of the blink of an eye might matter to them, and that it was extremely important for their orders to move as fast and aggressively as possible. Guerrilla! Raider! This emphasis on speed was absurd: No matter how fast the investor moved, he would never outrun the high-frequency traders. Speeding up his stock market order merely reduced the time it took for him to arrive in HFT’s various traps. “But how do you prove that a millisecond is irrelevant?” Brad asked. 
 He threw the problem to the Puzzle Masters. The team had expanded to include Larry Yu, whom Brad thought of as the guy with the box of Rubik’s cubes under his desk. (The standard 3x3-inch cube he could solve in under thirty seconds, and so he kept it oiled with WD-40 to make it spin faster. His cube box held more challenging ones: a 4x4-incher, a 5x5-incher, a giant irregularly shaped one, and so on.) Yu generated two charts, which Brad projected onto the screen for the investors. 
 To see anything in the stock market, you have to stop trying to see it with your eyes and instead attempt to imagine it as it might appear to a computer, if a computer had eyes. The first chart showed the investors how trading on all public U.S. stock exchanges in the most actively traded stock of a single company (Bank of America Corp) appeared to the human eye over a period of ten minutes, in one-second increments. The activity appears constant, even frantic. In virtually every second, something occurs: a trade or, more commonly, a new buy or sell order. The second chart illustrated the same activity on all public U.S. stock exchanges as it appeared to a computer, over the course of a single second , in millisecond increments. All the market activity within a single second was so concentrated—within a mere 1.78 milliseconds—that on the graph it resembled an obelisk rising from a desert. In 98.22 percent of all milliseconds, nothing at all happened in the U.S. stock market. To a computer, the market in even the world’s most actively traded stock was an uneventful, almost sleepy place. “Yes, your eyeballs think the markets are going fast,” Brad said. “They aren’t really going that fast.” The likelihood an investor would miss out on something important in a third of a millisecond was close to zero, even in the world’s most actively traded stock. “I knew it was bullshit to worry about milliseconds,” said Brad, “because if milliseconds were relevant, every investor would be in New Jersey.” 
 “What’s the spike represent?” asked one of the investors, pointing to the obelisk. 
 “That’s one of your orders touching down,” said Brad. 
 A few investors shifted in their seats. It was growing clear to them, if it wasn’t already so, that, if the stock market was the party, they were the punch bowl. They were unlikely to miss any action as the result of a delay of one-third of a millisecond. They were the reason for all the action! “Every time a trade happens at the exchange, it creates a signal,” said Brad. “In the fifty milliseconds running up to it—total silence. Then there is an event. Then there is this massive reaction. Then a reaction to that reaction. The HFT algos on the other side are predicting what you’ll do next based on what you just did.” The activity peaked roughly 350 microseconds after an investor’s order triggered the feeding frenzy, or the time it took for HFT to send its orders from the stock exchange on which the investor had touched down to all of the others. “Your eye will never pick up what is really happening,” said Brad. “You don’t see shit. Even if you’re a fucking cyborg you don’t see it. But if there was no value to reacting, why would anyone react at all?” The arrival of the prey awakened the predator, who deployed his strategies—rebate arbitrage, latency arbitrage, slow market arbitrage. Brad didn’t need to dwell on these; he’d already walked each of the investors through his earlier discoveries. It was his new findings that he wanted them to focus on. †† 
 On IEX’s opening day—when it had traded just half a million shares—the flow of orders through its computers had been too rapid for the human eye to make sense of it. Brad had spent the first week or so glued to his terminal, trying to see whatever he could see. Even that first week, he was trying to make sense of lines scrolling down his computer screen at a rate of fifty per second. It felt like speed-reading War and Peace in under a minute. All he could see was that a shocking number of the orders being sent by the Wall Street banks to IEX came in small 100-share lots. The HFT guys used 100-share lots as bait on the exchanges, to tease information out of the market while taking as little risk as possible. But these weren’t HFT orders; these were from the big banks. At the end of one day, he asked for a count of one bank’s orders: 87 percent of them were in these tiny 100-share lots. Why? 
 The week after Brad had quit his job at the Royal Bank of Canada, his doctor noted that his blood pressure had collapsed to virtually normal levels, and he’d cut his medication in half. Now, in response to this new situation he couldn’t make sense of, Brad had migraines, and his blood pressure was again spiking. “I’m straining to see patterns,” he said. “The patterns are being shown to me, but my eyes can’t pick them up.” 
 One afternoon, an IEX employee named Josh Blackburn overheard Brad mention his problem. Josh was quiet—not just reserved, but intensely so—and didn’t say anything at first. But he thought he knew how to solve the problem. With pictures. 
 Josh, like Zoran, traced his career back to September 11, 2001. He’d just started college when a friend messaged him to turn on the TV, and he’d watched the Twin Towers collapse. “When that happened it was kind of a what can I do moment?” A couple of months later, he’d gone to the local air force recruiting center and attempted to enlist. They’d told him to wait until the end of his freshman year. At the end of the school year he’d returned. The air force sent him to Qatar, where a colonel figured out that he had a special talent for writing computer code; one thing led to another, and two years later he was in Baghdad. There he created a system for getting messages to all remote units, and another system for creating a Google-like map, before the existence of Google maps. From Baghdad he’d gone to Afghanistan, where he wound up being in charge of taking the data from all the branches of the U.S. military across all battlefields and turning it into a single picture the generals could use to make decisions. “It told them everything that was going on, real-time, on a twenty-foot wall map,” Josh said. “You could see trends. You could see origins of rocket attacks. You could see patterns in when they occurred—the attacks on [U.S. Army base] Camp Victory would come after afternoon prayer. You could see what the projections were [of where and when the attacks might occur] and how they compared to where attacks actually happened.” The trick was not simply to write the code that turned information into pictures but to find the best pictures to draw—shapes and colors that led the mind to meaning. “Once you got all that stuff together and showed it in the best way possible, you could find patterns,” Josh said. 
 The job was hard to do, but, as it turned out, harder to stop doing. When his first tour of duty was up, Josh reenlisted, and when that tour ended, he re-upped again. When his third tour was over, he saw the war winding down and his usefulness diminish. “You find it very difficult to come home from,” said Josh. “Because you see the impact of your work. After that, I couldn’t find any passion in anything I did, any meaning.” Coming home, he looked for a place to deploy his skill—and a friend in finance told him about an opening in a new high-frequency trading firm. “In the war, you’re trying to use the picture you create to take advantage of the enemy,” said Josh. “In this case, you’re trying to take advantage of the market.” He worked for the HFT firm for six weeks before it failed, but he found the job unsatisfying. 
 He’d come to IEX in the usual way: John Schwall had found him while trolling on LinkedIn and asked him to come for an interview. At that point, Josh was being inundated with offers from other high-frequency trading firms. “There was a lot of ‘we are elite,’ ” he said. “They kept hitting the elite thing.” He didn’t care all that much about being elite; he just wanted his work to mean something. “I came in for an interview on Friday. Saturday they made me an offer. Brad said, we’re going to change the way things work. But I didn’t really know what Brad was talking about.” Since joining, he’d been quiet and had put himself where he liked to be, in the background. “I just try to take in what people are saying, and listen to what everyone is complaining about,” he said. “ I wish this or I wish that , and then bring it together and find the solution.” 
 Brad knew little of Josh’s past—only that whatever Josh had done for the U.S. military sounded like the sort of thing he couldn’t talk about. “All I knew was that he was in a trailer in Afghanistan, working with generals,” said Brad. “When I tell him my problem—that I couldn’t see the data—he just says, ‘Hit Refresh.’ ” 
 Quietly, Josh had gone off and created for Brad pictures of the activity on IEX. Brad hit Refresh; the screen was now organized in different shapes and colors. The strange 100-lot trades were suddenly bunched together and highlighted in useful ways: He could see patterns. And in the patterns he could see predatory activity neither he nor the investors had yet imagined. 
 These new pictures showed him how the big Wall Street banks typically handled investors’ stock market orders. Here’s how it worked: Say you are a big investor—a mutual fund or a pension fund—and you have decided to make a big investment in Procter & Gamble. You are acting on behalf of a lot of ordinary Americans who have given you their savings to manage. You call some broker—Bank of America, say—and tell them you’d like to buy 100,000 shares of Procter & Gamble. P&G’s shares are trading at, say, 82.95–82.97, with 1,000 shares listed on each side. You tell the big Wall Street bank you are willing to pay up to, say, $82.97 a share. From that point on, you basically have no clue how your order—and the information it contains—is treated. Now Brad saw: The first thing the broker did was to ping IEX with an order to buy 100 shares, to see if IEX had a seller. This made total sense: You didn’t want to reveal you had a big buyer until you found a seller. What made a lot less sense was what many of the brokers did after they discovered the seller. They avoided him. 
 Say, for example, that IEX actually had a seller waiting on it—a seller of 100,000 shares at $82.96. Instead of coming in and trying to buy a much bigger chunk of P&G, the big bank just kept pinging IEX with tiny 100-share orders—or the bank vanished entirely. If the bank had simply sent IEX an order to buy 100,000 shares of P&G at $82.97, the investor would have purchased all the shares he wanted without driving up the price. Instead, the bank had pinged away and—by revealing its insistent, noisy demand—goosed up the price of P&G’s stock, at the expense of the investor whose interests the bank was meant to represent. Adding to the injury, the bank typically wound up with only a fraction of the stock its customer wanted to buy. “It opened up this whole new realm of activity that was crazy to me,” Brad told his audience. It was as if the big Wall Street banks were looking to see if IEX had a big seller to avoid trading with him. “I thought, Why the hell would anyone do this? All you do is increase the chances that an HFT will pick up your signal.” 
 They didn’t all behave this way: A couple of the big banks followed up their 100-share orders by forking over the meat of the buy order, and executed the trade their customer had asked them to execute. (The Royal Bank of Canada was by far the best behaved.) But, in general, the big Wall Street banks who had connected to IEX—a group that in the first week of trading excluded Bank of America and Goldman Sachs—connected disingenuously. It was as if they wished to appear to be interacting with the entire stock market, while actually they were trying to prevent any trades from happening outside their own dark pools. 
 Brad now explained to the investors, who were of course paying the price for this behavior, the reasons that the banks behaved as they did. The most obvious was to maximize the chance of executing the stock market orders given to them by investors in their own dark pools. The less honestly a bank looked for P&G stock outside of its own dark pool, the less likely it was to find it. This evasiveness explained the banks’ incredible ability to find, eventually, the other side of any trade inside their own dark pools. A bank that controlled less than 10 percent of all U.S. stock market orders was somehow able to satisfy more than half of its customers’ orders without ever leaving its own dark pool. Collectively, the banks had managed to move 38 percent of the entire U.S. stock market now traded inside their dark pools—and this is how they had done it. “It’s a façade that the market is interconnected,” said Brad. 
 The big Wall Street banks wanted to trade in their own dark pools not only because they made more money—on top of their commissions—by selling the right to HFT to exploit orders inside their dark pools. They wanted to trade their orders inside their dark pools to boost the volumes in those pools, for appearances’ sake. The statistics used to measure the performance of the dark pools, as well as the performance of the public stock exchanges, were more than a little screwy. A stock market was judged by the volume of trading that occurred on it, and the nature of that volume. It was widely believed, for example, that the bigger the average trade size on an exchange, the better the market was for an investor. (By requiring fewer trades to complete his purchase or sale, the exchange reduced the likelihood of revealing an investor’s intentions to high-frequency traders.) Every dark pool and every stock exchange found ways to cook its own flattering statistics; the art of torturing data may never have been so finely practiced. For example, to show that they were capable of hosting big trades, the exchanges published the number of “block” trades of more than 10,000 shares they facilitated. The New York Stock Exchange sent IEX a record of 26 small trades it had made after IEX had routed an order to it—and then published the result on the ticker tape as a single 15,000-share block. The dark pools were even worse, as no one but the banks that ran them had a clear view of what happened inside them. The banks all published their own self-generated stats on their own dark pools: Every bank ranked itself #1. “It’s an entire industry that overglorifies data, because data is so easy to game, and the true data is so hard to obtain,” said Brad. 
 The banks did not merely manipulate the relevant statistics in their own dark pools; they often sought to undermine the stats of their competitors. That was another reason the banks were sending IEX orders in tiny 100-share lots: to lower the average trade size in a market that competed with the banks’ dark pools. A lower average trade size made IEX’s stats look bad—as if IEX were heavily populated by high-frequency traders. “When the customer goes to his broker and says, ‘What the hell happened? Why am I getting all these hundred-share fills?,’ his broker could easily say, ‘Well, I put the order on IEX,’ ” said Brad. The strategy cost their customers money, and the opportunity to buy and sell shares, but the customers wouldn’t know about it: All they would see was IEX’s average trade size falling. 
 Soon after it opened for trading, IEX published its own statistics—to describe, in a general way, what was happening in its market. “Since everyone is behaving in a particular way, you can’t see if anyone is behaving particularly badly,” said Brad. Now you could see. Despite the best efforts of Wall Street banks, the average size of IEX’s trades was by far the biggest of any stock exchange, public or private. More importantly, the trading that occurred was more random, unlinked to activity elsewhere in the stock market: For instance, the percentage of trades on IEX that followed the change in the price of some stock was half that of the other exchanges. (Investors were being picked off—as West Chester, Pennsylvania, money manager Rich Gates had been picked off—on exchanges that failed to move their standing orders quickly enough to keep up when stock prices changed.) Trades on IEX were also four times more likely than those elsewhere to trade at the midpoint between the current market bid and offer—which is to say, the price that most would agree was fair. Despite the reluctance of the big Wall Street banks to send them orders, the new exchange was already making the dark pools and public exchanges look bad, even by their own screwed-up standards. ‡‡ 
 Brad’s biggest weakness, as a strategist, was his inability to imagine just how badly others might behave. He had expected that the big banks would resist sending orders to IEX. He hadn’t imagined they would use their customers’ stock market orders to actively try at their customers’ expense to sabotage an exchange created to help their customers. “You want to create a system where behaving correctly would be rewarded,” he concluded. “And the system has been doing the opposite. It’s rational for a broker to behave badly.” 
 The bad behavior played right into the hands of high-frequency traders in the most extraordinary ways. One day while watching the pictures Josh Blackburn had created for him, Brad saw a bank machine-gun IEX with 100-share lots and drive up a stock price 5 cents inside of 232 milliseconds. IEX’s delay—one-third of a millisecond—was of little use in disguising an investor’s stock market order if a broker insisted on broadcasting a big order he controlled over a far longer period: HFT picked up the signal and was getting out in front of it. Wondering if the broker was spreading news of his buy order elsewhere, Brad turned his attention to the consolidated tape of all the trades that occurred in the U.S. stock market. “I just wondered: Is this broker peppering the whole Street, or is it just us?” he told the room full of investors. “What we found blew our minds.” 
 For each trade on IEX, he’d spotted a nearly identical trade that had occurred at nearly the same time in some other market. “I noticed the odd trade sizes,” he said. He’d see a trade on IEX for 131 shares of, say, Procter & Gamble, and then he’d see, in some other market, exactly the same trade—131 shares of Procter & Gamble—within a few milliseconds, but at a slightly different price. It happened over and over again. He also noticed that, in each case, on one side of the trade was a broker who had rented out his pipes to a high-frequency trader. 
 Up till that point, most of the predation they had uncovered occurred when stock prices moved. A stock went up or down; the high-frequency guys found out before everyone else and took advantage of them. Roughly two-thirds of all stock market trades took place without moving the price of the stock—the trade happened at the seller’s offering price, or the buyer’s bidding price, or in between; afterwards, the bid and offering price remained the same as they had been before. What Brad now saw was how HFT, with the help of the banks, might exploit investors even when the stock price was stable. Say the market for Procter & Gamble’s shares was 80.50–80.52, and the quote was stable—the price wasn’t about to change. The National Best Bid was $80.50, and the National Best Offer was $80.52, and the stock was just sitting there. A seller of 10,000 Procter & Gamble shares appeared on IEX. IEX tried to price the orders that rested on it at the midpoint (the fair price), and so the 10,000 shares were being offered at $80.51. Some high-frequency trader would come into IEX—it was always a high-frequency trader—and chip away at the order: 131 shares here, 189 shares there. But elsewhere in the market, the same HFT was selling the shares—131 shares here, 189 shares there—at $80.52. On the surface, HFT was performing a useful function, building a bridge between buyer and seller. But the bridge was itself absurd. Why didn’t the broker who controlled the buy order simply come to IEX on behalf of his customer and buy, more cheaply, the shares offered? 
 Back when Rich Gates conducted his experiments, he had managed to get himself robbed inside Wall Street’s dark pools, but only after he had changed the price of the stock (because the dark pools were so slow to move the price of his order resting inside of them). These trades that Brad was now noticing had happened without the market moving at all. He knew exactly why they were happening: The Wall Street banks were failing to send their customers’ orders to the rest of the marketplace. An investor had given a Wall Street bank an order, say, to buy 10,000 shares of P&G. The bank had sent it to its dark pool with instructions for the order to stay there, aggressively priced, at $80.52. The bank was boosting its dark pool stats—and also charging some HFT a fee rather than paying a fee to another exchange—but it was also ignoring whatever else was happening in the market. In a functional market, the investors would simply have met in the middle and traded with each other at a price of $80.51. The price of the stock needn’t have moved a penny. The unnecessary price movement—caused by the screwed-up stock market—also played into HFT’s hands. Because high-frequency traders were always the first to detect any stock price movements, they were able to exploit, with other strategies, ordinary investors’ ignorance of the fact that the market price had changed. The original false note struck by the big Wall Street bank—the act of avoiding making trades outside of its own dark pool—became the prelude to a symphony of scalping. §§ “We’re calling this ‘dark pool arbitrage,’ ” said Brad. 
