
Within the rectangle formation, prices do not necessarily always reach the two zones but
may fall short (a “shortfall” or “partial”). Sometimes this is a warning as to the direction of the
eventual breakout. As an example, when well along the way of the formation of a rectangle,
prices begin to reverse before declining all the way to the underlying support zone; buyers are
getting a little more anxious and the odds increase for a breakout upward. Bulkowski reported
that such a shortfall within the latter stages of the pattern is accurate 60% to 90% of the time in

Download at www.wowebook.com

312

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

predicting the direction of eventual breakout depending on the breakout direction. More than half
the time, prices throw back or pull back to the breakout zone, providing another action point but
one with less profit potential. Edwards and Magee estimated that about 40% of the time, a pullback or throwback would occur. When the breakout occurs on a gap, the odds decrease that a
retracement will occur.
Volume is often an important factor in any formation. In the rectangle pattern, however, a
rising or declining volume trend within the pattern has little or no effect on the results after the
breakout, though declining volume is more common. Results increase, however, when volume
increases on the breakout itself.
Depending on the rectangle entry and exit (i.e., whether it is a reversal or continuation pattern), the failure to reach 5% was between 9% and 16%. The worst was the declining continuation pattern (entry from above, exit down). Bulkowski ranked the overall performance of
rectangles in the middle of the classical pattern pack.

BOX 15.5 TRADING RECTANGLES
Edwards and Magee claimed that rectangles are more often continuation patterns,
but as a reversal pattern, they occur more frequently at bottoms. This is likely why
Bulkowski mostly found upward breakout rectangle patterns. An upward breakout,
however, should never be assumed. Indeed, two out of three rectangles are continuation patterns, and the initial expected direction of the breakout should be in line with
the previous trend.
Rectangles have the bad habit of producing false breakouts. Indeed, over 75% of
early breakouts are false. This is a large enough figure to hint as to the eventual final
breakout direction, but it requires very close breakout and stop discipline. Once the
final breakout has occurred, the failure rate is very low. Thus, it pays to be sure that
the breakout is real. Another hint is the existence of shortfalls. Shortfalls occur later in
the formation and can anticipate the breakout. Use a method similar to that shown in
Chapter 13, “Breakouts, Stops, and Retracements,” on anticipating breakouts, and
keep a close protective stop. The volume trend during the formation of the pattern
gives no hint as to the breakout direction and has only a minor effect on performance.
Some traders will trade within a rectangle, buying at the support level and selling
at the resistance level. This is not recommended, however, unless the rectangle is
particularly wide from top to bottom. Trading has many costs inherent in acting on
the buys and sells. The obvious costs are commissions, slippage, and width of the
spread. Additionally, when trading within two bounds, the bounds are not exact nor
will a trade be executed exactly at the bound. Thus, sell orders must be placed a certain distance, a specified filter, below a resistance zone, and buy orders a certain distance above a support zone. To be able to absorb these costs and price filters, the
trader is limited to rectangles that are sufficiently high, from support to resistance.
One who attempts this kind of trading must be watching the price action incessantly
and be ready to scalp the few points in between the bounds and filters in an instant.
Most traders and investors are unable to do this.

Download at www.wowebook.com

313

Chapter 15 Bar Chart Patterns

A target can be calculated by adding the height of the rectangle formation to the
breakout price. According to Bulkowski, in rectangles, the upward target is reached
or exceeded 91%–93% of the time, and in downward breakouts, the target is reached
or exceeded 65%–77% of the time. The difference in percentages is based on the
entry, whether upward or downward, but in all cases, the target is a relatively accurate figure and can be used for risk/reward calculations.

Triple Top and Triple Bottom
The triple top and bottom formation is just a rectangle with the number of touches to the support
or resistance line being three. It is, thus, more specific than the rectangle and is less common.
Each peak in the top should be at the same level and have roughly the same shape. The middle
peak can be slightly lower than the other two. As in the double formations, confirmation only
comes with a price breakout below the two bottoms. Throwbacks are common and diminish the
breakout performance. Figure 15.3 shows a triple top with a breakout down, and Figure 15.4
shows a triple bottom with a breakout up. As you can see, they are the mirror image of each other.
Sometimes in a triple bottom the second peak is slightly higher than the first. This is favorable,
and the breakout is the line between the two peaks. The patterns are rare and usually depend on
the underlying market trend. They rank in the top third of classic patterns. Their failure rates are
very low (10% for bottoms, 4% for tops).

Resistance Line

Pullback

Support Line
Breakout
Entry

Price

FIGURE 15.3 Triple top with breakout down

Download at www.wowebook.com

314

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

Breakout
Entry
Resistance Line

Throwback

Support Line
Price

FIGURE 15.4 Triple bottom with breakout up

Standard Triangles
The rectangle pattern is bounded by parallel lines. If the same general pattern has nonparallel
boundary lines such that when extended into the future they cross each other, the formation is a
triangle pattern. Triangles can be the result of an upward-sloping lower bound or a downwardsloping upward bound. Thus, there are a number of possible combinations of the two lines.
In this section, we look only at the standard triangle patterns. In these triangles, the point at
which the two lines extend and cross over each other is called the apex or the cradle, and the distance between the first high reversal point and the first low reversal point within the triangle is
called the base.
When the lower bound is a horizontal support zone and the upper is a downward slanting
trend line, it is called a descending triangle. When the lower trend line is rising and the upper
bound is a horizontal resistance zone, it is called an ascending triangle. When the upper bound
is declining and the lower bound is rising, it is called a symmetrical triangle. When both the
upper bound and lower bound are slanting in the same direction and converging, it is called a
wedge, and when the two lines are diverging regardless of slope, a reverse triangle, it is called a
broadening pattern. When we combine a broadening pattern with a triangle, usually a symmetrical triangle, we get what is called a diamond pattern.

Download at www.wowebook.com

315

Chapter 15 Bar Chart Patterns

TABLE 15.1

Statistics on Triangles
Overall
Performance

Failure to
reach 5%

Average
Performance

Tendency
to Retrace

Reaches
Target Price

Descending, break up

5/23

7%

47%

37%

84%

Descending, break down
Ascending, break up

10/21
17/23

16%
13%

16%
35%

54%
57%

54%
75%

Ascending, break down

9/21

11%

19%

49%

68%

Symmetrical, break up
Symmetrical, break down

16/23
15/21

9%
13%

31%
17%

37%
59%

66%
48%

Rising Wedge, breakout up

18/23

8%

28%

73%

58%

Rising Wedge, breakout down

20/21

24%

14%

63%

46%

Declining Wedge, breakout up
Declining Wedge, breakout down
Broadening Pattern, breakout up
Broadening Pattern, breakout down
Diamond, breakout up
Diamond, breakout down

20/23
17/21
17–19/23
17–18/21
8–21/23
1–7/21

11%
15%
10%–15%
16%–18%
4%–10%
6%–10%

32%
15%
27%–29%
15%
27%–36%
21%

56%
69%
41%–54%
42%–48%
53%–59%
57%–71%

70%
30%
59%–62%
37%–44%
69%–81%
63%–76%

Source: Bulkowski (2010)

Descending Triangle
Figure 15.5 shows a descending triangle with a breakout down. Its bounds are a lower horizontal
support line and a declining upper trend line; price should touch each line at least twice and
should generally “fill” the triangle’s space. It can be entered from any direction. The breakout is
more common to the downside (64%), but the upward breakout is more reliable and profitable
(47% average gain). This formation can be stretched high and wide and is sometimes difficult to
recognize. The trend lines defining its boundaries are almost never exact and are loaded with
false intrabar breakouts. A strict breakout strategy is required, therefore, as we discussed in
Chapter 13. However, prices often explode out of it and produce sizable gains. It can also be wild
and guarantee an exciting ride. It will break out and run, break out and pull back to its trend line,
break out and pull back to its cradle, or break back through the cradle, create a sizable trap, and
then reverse back in its original breakout direction and run. In other words, when you enter on a
breakout from a descending triangle, the subsequent action must be watched carefully.
Upward breakouts on gaps add considerably to performance and are definitely something
to look for. On downward breaks, gaps seem to have little effect.

Download at www.wowebook.com

316

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

Resistance Line
Downtrend Line

Pullback

Support Line
Breakout
Entry

Price

FIGURE 15.5 Descending triangle with breakout down

Figure 15.6 pictures a descending triangle with a breakout up. The typical pattern shows
declining volume throughout its formation. However, increasing volume during the formation of
an upward breaking descending triangle, though less frequent, is more favorable than declining
volume. This contradicts the conventional opinion that advancing volume negates the pattern and
represents a reason for screening it out for consideration. In the downward breakouts, declining
volume during the pattern formation helps postbreakout performance only slightly. The amount
of volume traded on the actual upward breakouts has little effect on the postperformance, but in
downward breakouts, an increase on the breakout helps performance slightly.

Resistance Line
Downtrend Line

Throwback

Breakout
Support Line

Entry

Price

FIGURE 15.6 Descending triangle with breakout up

Download at www.wowebook.com

317

Chapter 15 Bar Chart Patterns

Ascending Triangle
A horizontal upper bound of resistance combined with an upward sloping lower bound of support defines an ascending triangle (shown in Figure 15.7 with a breakout down). The characteristics in this pattern are just as erratic as in descending triangles—lots of action up and down.
Breakout points must be chosen carefully because of the pattern’s nature to have many small
false breakouts, and declining volume is common but not necessary. Upward breakouts occur
77% of the time, and all breakouts usually happen roughly 61% of the distance (time) from the
base to the cradle. The overall performance rank is roughly in the middle of all patterns, a little
more favorable for downward breakouts. Failure rates are between 11% and 13% depending on
breakout direction. This is about average.

Resistance Line
Breakout

Uptrend Line
Support Line
Pullback
Entry

Price

FIGURE 15.7

Ascending triangle with breakout down

Symmetrical Triangle (Also “Coil” or “Isosceles Triangle”)
When the upper bound is downward sloping and the lower bound is upward sloping, a symmetrical triangle is formed (see Figure 15.8). The term symmetrical gives the impression that both
lines should have the same angle but in different directions. However, that the slope of the two
boundaries be formed at congruent angles is not a requirement. Thus, “symmetrical” is not an
accurate description but is the term most commonly in use for this pattern. The less-commonly
used term coil is often a more accurate description.

Download at www.wowebook.com

318

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

Throwback

Breakout

Entry
Cradle

Price

FIGURE 15.8

Symmetrical triangle with breakout up

Like the other standard triangles, the prices must touch each border trend line at least twice
and meanwhile cover the area of the triangle with price action. Volume usually trends downward
during the pattern formation (86% of the time), and the breakout is usually upward (54% of the
time). Symmetrical triangles have many false breakouts and must be watched carefully. A strict
breakout system must be used that allows for such false moves. The breakout commonly occurs
between 73% and 75% of the length of the triangle from base to cradle. This formation does not
occur as frequently as the descending or ascending triangle, but it is still very common relative to
other chart patterns. Throwbacks and pullbacks occur 37% and 59% of the time, respectively,
and, as in most patterns, when they occur, they detract from eventual performance. This implies
that for actual investment or trading, the initial breakout should be acted upon, and if a pullback
or throwback occurs, the protective stop should be tightened. It does not imply that a pullback or
throwback should be ignored, but that instead, performance expectations should be less than if
no pullback or throwback had occurred. Gap breakouts do not seem to affect the performance on
the upside but do give a few extra percentage points on the downside. Increasing volume trend
seems to be associated with better results once the breakout occurs. High volume on breakouts,
both upward and downward, adds considerably to the performance of the formation and is something to look for. Overall performance is slightly below the mean for classic patterns.

Download at www.wowebook.com

319

Chapter 15 Bar Chart Patterns

BOX 15.6 TRADING TRIANGLES
The ideal situation for trading triangles is a definite breakout, a high trading range
within the triangle, an upward-sloping volume trend during the formation of the triangle, and especially a gap on the breakout. These patterns seem to work better with
small-cap stocks in a rising market.
Triangles are plentiful. For example, the upward failure of a head-and-shoulders
top before any break through the neckline is a form of an upward breaking descending triangle. This is one likely reason that such head-and-shoulder top pattern failures are so profitable.
Although triangles are plentiful, their patterns suffer from many false and premature breakouts. This requires that a very strict breakout rule be used, either a wide filter or a number of closes outside the breakout zone. It also requires a close protective
stop at the breakout level in case the breakout is false. Once these defensive levels
have been exceeded, and price is on its way, the trader can relax for a little while
because the failure rate after a legitimate breakout is relatively low. Trailing stops
should then be placed at each preceding minor reversal.
There are many old rules about when a breakout should occur within a triangle.
Some, such as Murphy, say that one-half to two-thirds the distance from the base to
the apex is appropriate. Others, such as Edwards and Magee, use the one-half to
three-quarters rule. In fact, the breakout can occur at any time once the triangle has
been defined by legitimate upper and lower converging trend lines. Edwards and
Magee do point out that the longer the distance, the more likely the performance will
be less, but this also is not necessarily true. The highest percentage performance does
come from breakouts generally around 60%–70% of the distance from the base to
the cradle. However, in symmetrical triangles, the best performance comes from late
breakouts in the 73%–75% distance. Thus, the old rules are partially correct but not
strictly so.
Generally, the volume trend during the formation of a triangle declines, but in the
case of an upward breaking descending triangle, an ascending triangle, and a downward breaking symmetrical triangle, an upward-sloping volume trend gives better
results. Declining volume is not a reason to disregard the pattern, however. Volume
on the breakout seems more desirable in symmetrical triangles, but it cannot hurt in
others. Gaps are better predictors of performance in the upward breaking descending
triangle and the downward breaking symmetrical triangle, but they are not necessary.
An initial target for these patterns is calculated by adding the base distance—the
vertical distance between the initial upper and lower reversal point prices—to the
price where the breakout occurred. In an upward breaking descending triangle, for
example, this target is reached better than 67% of the time. Other triangles have relatively the same success rate—higher in upward trends than in downward trends.
This is why a wide trading range is preferred within the triangle—it suggests a
higher target price on the breakout.

Download at www.wowebook.com

320

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

Broadening Patterns
A broadening pattern exists when we take the standard rectangle pattern and draw the bound
lines diverging from each other into the future rather than converging as in a standard triangle. As
pictured in Figure 15.9, the price range is increasing during the broadening pattern, as opposed to
the narrowing price range that is associated with the standard triangle patterns. The terms megaphone, funnel, reverse triangle, and inverted triangle all refer to broadening patterns. The
broadening pattern also comes in many variations. One is similar to ascending and descending
triangles in that one of the bounds is horizontal. The other bound then slopes away from the horizontal line either above or below. A final variation is the broadening wedge. This pattern is similar to a wedge pattern (see Figure 15.9) only the bounds both trend in the same direction but
diverge instead of converge as in a wedge. None of these variations seems to have any aboveaverage performance statistics except the ascending broadening wedge, which has both bounds
rising and diverging. Upward breakouts in this pattern rank 6 out of 23 in Bulkowski’s scale and
have failure rates at 2%, almost negligible.
Broadening formations are the least-useful patterns for a number of reasons. First, they are
relatively rare in occurrence and are often difficult to identify. Second, and more important, they
are difficult to profit from. Because the boundary trend lines are separating over time, the breakout lines are constantly moving away from each other. In an upward breaking broadening pattern, this means the upper breakout level is getting higher and higher along the upper trend line
(see Figure 15.9). By getting higher and higher, not only is it using up much of any potential gain
after a breakout, but it is also moving farther from any realistic protective stop level, thus increasing the risk. Finally, the raw performance statistics show that performance of a broadening pattern is average at best, and its failure rate is above average. One of the most profitable patterns
utilizing a broadening pattern, however, is when it is combined with a symmetrical triangle into
a diamond top, which we discuss next.

Breakout

Throwback

Entry

Price

FIGURE 15.9 Broadening formation with breakout up

Download at www.wowebook.com

321

Chapter 15 Bar Chart Patterns

Diamond Top
One of the less-frequent but very profitable patterns is the diamond (see Figure 15.10). It consists
of a combination of a broadening pattern and a symmetrical triangle and usually occurs at the top
of a very sharp upward rise in prices. It is rare at price bottoms.

Pullback

Entry
Breakout

Price

FIGURE 15.10 Diamond pattern with breakout down

Because it combines two types of triangles, the diamond is the most difficult to observe.
Remember that to establish a trend line, two extreme points that a line can be drawn between
must be identified. In a standard broadening formation, the upper trend line slopes upward and
must, therefore, have two peaks—the latter higher than the former. Likewise, the lower trend line
must have two troughs—the latter lower than the former—and each line must be formed at the
same time as the other. The first reversal point depends on the entry direction, of course, and
because diamonds are mostly top formations, the entry direction is generally from below. This
means that the first reversal point will be a peak. After that, the first trough will appear, then the
next higher peak, and then the next lower trough. When trend lines have been drawn to connect
these reversal points, we have a broadening formation. Now we must observe a symmetrical triangle immediately after the broadening formation to establish a diamond pattern. The trend lines
in a symmetrical triangle converge, as in all standard triangles, and must also have at least two
peaks and troughs to establish each trend line. The first reversal peak and trough may be the last
reversal points in the broadening formation or the next reversal points following the broadening
formation. Often the trend lines in the symmetrical triangle will be parallel to the trend lines in
the broadening pattern, but this is not a requirement.
Bulkowski’s figures show that around 58% of the time, the preceding price action in a diamond top was a steeply rising trend. When this occurs, the odds increase that the breakout from
the diamond will be downward and will be equally as steep, and 82% of the time, it will retrace

Download at www.wowebook.com

322

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

the entire prior rise. These figures are only valid for downward breakouts from a top, which
occur 67% of the time. Upward breakouts from a diamond top have a very poor performance history and should be avoided. Thus, action should only be taken once the pattern has been identified and the downward breakout has occurred.
Diamond bottoms have the same configuration as diamond tops and are the best patterns
that Bulkowski ranks. They are number 1 in performance when they fail and break down (about
31% of the time). Even when they break upward, their ranking is 8 out of 23.
As in most patterns, volume usually declines (67% of the time) during its formation, but
declining volume is not necessary. Indeed, rising volume is a plus for performance after the
breakout.
Pullbacks are very common in diamond patterns, occurring more than 53% of the time.
These pullbacks tend to detract from performance when they occur but are not that significant.
The best combination is when downward breakout occurs on below-average breakout volume
and no pullback. The failure rate is relatively low at 4%–10%. These low numbers equate, to
some extent, with risk. Combined with the above-average median return, these numbers suggest
that though rare, when a diamond top is identified, it has an above-average chance of being profitable with minimum risk.
