
short-term moving average as 50-day, and the long-term moving average as 200-day. In a
bullish trend, the alignment of these three factors (from top to bottom) will be: price, 50-day,
and 200-day; the price will be above its 50-day line and the bottom line will be the 200-day. In a
bearish trend, the order is reversed, with the 200-day at the top and the price at the bottom.
When the price is between the 50-day and the 200-day, the interpretation becomes less
obvious. Under such conditions and subject to other supporting technical analysis, we may
want to stay on the sideline until the situation improves, unless an automated trading system is
being used.
What is being described so far refers to the application of 50-day and 200-day moving
averages in a daily chart. If it is a weekly chart, the time frames for the averages will have to be
changed to 10-week moving average (equivalent to 50-day moving average) and 40-week
moving average (equivalent to 200-day moving average), as shown in
Figure 6.8
. In a weekly chart, the Golden Cross refers to the crossing of 10-week average above the 40week average and the Dead Cross refers to the crossing of 10-week average below the 40-week
average.
FIGURE 6.8
Weekly chart of the Hang Seng Index showing the Dead Cross on March 7, 2008 and the
Golden Cross on May 22, 2009.

Figure 6.8
is a weekly chart. It shows the application of the Eight Rules of moving average crossovers
between the 10-week moving average (that is 50-day moving average in a daily chart) and the
40-week moving average (that is 200-day moving average in a daily chart). The right-hand side
of the chart shows the market entering a bracket condition as indicated by both of the averages
going horizontally. In such market conditions, we see whipsaws between the 10-week and 40week line.
Figure 6.9
shows a possible pattern of movements among the three factors, from a bullish condition to
a bearish condition and back again to a bullish condition.
FIGURE 6.9
Movement patterns of price and two moving average lines.

With three averages, there will be four factors. Using the preceding example, we add another
medium-term average of 90 days. The moving average system will now consist of price, 50-day,
90-day, and 200-day averages.
Figure 6.10
shows the Queuing Theory of directional movements of price and moving averages.
FIGURE 6.10
Movement patterns of price and three moving average lines.

There are various scenarios for the interplay of price and its three moving average lines.
Figure 6.10
is one of the scenarios showing the alignment order of the relationship of averages and
price. Subject to the volatility of prices, the various respective movements do not necessarily
move at an orderly pace as shown in the table. Prices could traverse the average lines at the
same time. (See
Figure 6.11
and
Figure 6.12
.)
FIGURE 6.11
Daily chart showing the interplay of three moving averages and price from a downward trend
to an upward trend, and then to a bracket market.

FIGURE 6.12
Daily chart showing the relationship of price and its three moving averages, the 50-day, 90day, and 200-day lines, are a guide to the longer-term outlook of the market. The crossings
between the 90-day and 200-day averages confirm the validity of the Dead Cross and Golden
Cross. The crossings between the 50-day and 90-day averages act as setup positions and will
alert a technician to a possible change of trend.

Based on the scenario shown in
Figure 6.11
and
Figure 6.12
, the setup for a bearish trend is when the price is below both the short-term (50-day) and
medium-term (90-day) averages, and the 50-day crosses below the 90-day. The setup for a
bullish trend is when the price is above the short-term (50-day) and the medium-term (90-day),
and the 50-day crosses above the 90-day. In a crossover of two averages, take note of the slope
direction of the longer line. In a bullish crossover, the longer average line should either be rising
or moving in a flat, while in a bearish crossover, the longer average line should be moving
downward or in a flat direction. The setup position is vulnerable to false breaks when prices go
into a consolidation phase. When the 50-day is below the 90-day, and the 90-day is above the
200-day, it confirms continuing downward trend of price; and, vice versa, when the 50-day is
above 90-day and 90-day is below 200-day, it confirms the continuing upward trend of price.
The advantage of using a three moving average system is that it provides a wider perspective of
market directional movements. For example, when the longer-term moving averages are not in
a queue of bullish alignment, any rally signals by the crossovers of shorter-term moving
averages will be short-lived.
The preceding are examples of how to read the probable trend of the market in the
relationship of movements in different moving averages. It is possible to add more averages to
the combination, which gives even more possibilities of movements, and these can be split up
into sets of long-term and short-term moving averages. The set of long-term averages will serve
as the indicator of the overall trend, and the set of short-term averages will serve as the entry
and exit signals of the overall direction of the main trend, as shown in
Figure 6.13
.
FIGURE 6.13

Two sets of moving averages at work. The pair of short-term averages acts as entry and exit
signals for the overall market, as indicated by the set of long-term averages.

There are many ways of using moving averages to trade. Using crossovers of averages to
trade may be the easiest mechanical system, but the method can baffle traders because the
effect from a set of moving averages crossovers does not apply consistently to price behavioral
patterns. This appears to be more discernible in the application of longer time frame
averages—for example, the crossovers of 50-day and 200-day moving averages.
Let’s examine a chart of the Shanghai A Share Index (
Figure 6.14
). The lower window of the chart is the index, with a set of three long-term moving averages:
the 50-day, 90-day, and 200-day averages. The upper window shows two oscillators: the line
plot of price to its 200-day moving average, and the histogram of the 50-day moving average to
the 200-day moving average. When price crosses above its 200-day moving average, the line
plot will be above the centerline. And when the 50-day average crosses above the 200-day
average, the histogram bar will be above the centerline. They are both momentum plots. The
oscillator plots could be construed as the comparative momentum between the shorter-term
line plot and the histogram, or the longer-term period.
FIGURE 6.14
Comparative crossing of a set of long-term moving averages.

There are three points, 1, 2, and 3 as marked in the chart, which are worth looking into. Point

2 is a common pattern of moving average crossovers inside a contracting triangle. The index
broke slightly below the 200-day on January 28, 2010, at about point “d” toward the end of a
contracting triangle (marked as a, b, c, d, and e), and managed to cling fast and vacillate around
its 200-day average. On March 23, 2010, the bearish sign appeared: the 50-day average dipped
below the 200-day average. But instead of declining, the index made further advances until
April 19, when support finally yielded to selling pressure. The advance by the index following
the bearish crossing of the 50-day and 200-day averages was a false move. The three longerterm averages, 50-day, 90-day, and 200-day, were not aligned in a sequential order.
Incidentally, the sharp drop on April 19 also saw the beginning of the destruction of the
consolidation pattern, a pattern formed by the contracting triangle when the index finally went
below the mirror trend line of TL1 toward the mirror line of TL2-1.
Point 1 and Point 3 are good examples of how price reactions can be contradictory when the
50-day average crosses above the 200-day average. In the first example, at Point 1, the index
went above the 200-day average on March 23, 2009, for the first time after a long decline of
approximately 14 months. And at X1 on April 9, 2009, the 50-day average pushed above the
200-day average, paving the way for the index to make a small bullish run to early August. In
the second example, at Point 3, the index crossed above the 200-day average on October 12,
2010 after a six-month decline. And at X2 on November 10, the 50-day average made a crossing
similar to the first example moving above the 200-day line. If a trade had been executed on the
assumption that a bullish run would follow as in the first example, the result would have been
disastrous because the index made a U-turn downward the next day and fell sharply. There was
no follow-up bullish run.
What exactly happened? At Point 1 on March 23, 2009, and at Point 3 on October 12, 2010,
the index crossed above the 200-day average, which was followed by the 50-day average
crossing above the 200-day average on April 9, 2009 (X1) and November 10, 2010 (X2),
respectively. In the first example, the 50-day crossover generated a small bullish trend, but in
the second example the 50-day crossover did not generate any bullish follow-up trend. The
difference in the effect of the two crossing is in the strength of the index’s trend at the time of
crossing. When the 50-day average crossed the 200-day at X1, the index broke out of a bullish
reversal pattern, but at X2, the index was entering into a bearish diagonal pattern. Thus, at X1,
the strength of the trend is stronger than at X2. At X2, the index is subject to heavy resistance
as it has reached the center of a saturated area of resistance, the contracting triangle (a-b-c-de). It has retraced over 61.8 percent of the decline from P to Q and 100 percent of the recent
decline from “e” to Q, and at X2 its strength has weakened. This is noticeable by the negative
divergence between the 200-day price oscillator and the index. Such divergence is often
overlooked by novice traders.
Rule 1 and Rule 5 of the Eight Rules on the Interpretation of Price to Moving Averages can be
applied to moving average crossovers between a shorter-term and a longer-term average. For
easy reference, we have repeated the two rules below and substitute the word “price” with
“50-day average” in the rules.
Rule 1: If the 200-day average line flattens out or advances following a decline, and the 50-day
average penetrates that 200-day average line on the upside, this constitutes a major buying
signal.
Rule 5: If the 200-day average line flattens out or declines following a rise, and the 50-day
average penetrates that 200-day average line on the downside, this constitutes a major selling
signal.
Another significant and finer reason for the difference in the resulting effects on the

crossover between the 50-day and 200-day averages at Point 1 and at Point 3 is stated in the
two rules. The rules refer to the slope and directional movement of the longer-term moving
average, the 200-day average. In other words, when the 50-day average crosses with the 200day average, it is important to note the direction and slope of the 200-day average also. In the
first example at Point 1, the 200-day average is rounder and flatter and subsequently moved in
the same direction of the 50-day average. In the second example at Point 3, the 200-day
average has a steeper and straighter decline, which reduces the strength of the crossing. Thus,
instead of trading at just any crossovers, trades can be implemented when the longer-term
average levels out and when the shorter-term average diverges and moves farther away from
the longer-term average. In this respect, perhaps a buffer could be added to avoid whipsaws.
A trend line is a straight line connecting a minimum of two points. In
Figure 6.14
, two trend lines, TL1 and TL2, are shown. The more points a trend line connects, the more
reliable it is. TL1 is the trend line connecting the low in late October/early November 2009 and
the low in early July 2010, which forms the major support line. The trend line above TL1, the
mirror line, is parallel to TL1. The two lines, TL1 and its parallel line, form the upward trend
channel. TL2 is the downward trend line connecting the various high points, and with its mirror
line, forms the downward trend channel. The market is deemed bullish if prices are above the
trend line and bearish if prices are below the trend line.

MACD
Moving average convergence/divergence, or MACD, was developed by Gerald Appel. It is a
popular momentum indicator that shows the relationship between moving averages of prices.
It has two plotted lines. The standard configuration for MACD, the first plotted line, is the
difference between 12-day and 26-day exponential moving average lines. The second line, also
known as the signal line, is a 9-day exponential moving average of the first line.
Figure 6.15
shows the plot of MACD.
FIGURE 6.15
The upper window shows the plot of MACD and its signal line. The plot of the difference of the
two lines is shown in histogram bars. Note the early signals shown by the divergence of
histogram bars, warning of a slowdown of price momentum as it approaches its top. The lower
window shows the plot of the 50-day, 90-day, and 200-day moving average lines. Note that
price trend turns positive upon the crossing of the 50-day and 90-day, holding off selling
pressure at the 90-day average line.

The buy and sell signals used in MACD are similar to those used in crossovers of moving
average lines. When the MACD line crosses above the signal line, a buy signal is triggered.
Conversely, when the MACD line crosses below the signal line, a sell signal is generated. When
MACD and its signal lines are above the zero line, it indicates bullishness in the market, and
when they are below the zero line, it indicates a bearish market. An indication that an end to
the current trend may be near occurs when the MACD diverges from the security. A bearish
divergence occurs when the MACD is making new lows while prices fail to reach new lows. A
bullish divergence occurs when the MACD is making new highs while prices fail to reach new
highs. This MACD divergence is different from an MACD Histogram divergence.
MACD Histogram is the difference between MACD and its signal line, and it is worthwhile to
spend more time in getting to know the indicator. Dr. Alexander Elder, in his book, Trading for
a Living, published in 1993, had this to say about MACD Histogram. “MACD Histogram offers a
deeper insight into the balance of power between bulls and bears than the original MACD. It
shows not only whether bulls or bears are in control, but also whether they are growing
stronger or weaker. It is one of the best tools available to a market technician.” Divergences
between MACD Histogram and prices give some of the most reliable messages in identifying

major turning points.
Positive MACD Histogram is plotted above the zero line and is formed when the MACD line is
above its signal line; negative MACD Histogram is plotted below the zero line and is formed
when the MACD line is below its signal line. MACD Histogram is plotted as vertical bars above
or below the zero line. When the two lines, MACD and the signal line, are moving away from
each other, the histogram bars will increase in length, above or below the zero line. MACD
Histogram is basically a fast momentum indicator displaying the difference between two
moving averages and can be used in conjunction with a slow momentum indicator to form a
hybrid oscillator. (See
Figure 6.16
.)
FIGURE 6.16
In the lower panel, the first oscillator is a fast momentum oscillator, the MACD Histogram, and
the second oscillator is a slow momentum oscillator. The two oscillators form a hybrid
indicator. MACD Histogram will generally signal an imminent reversal in advance of the slow
momentum by showing its divergence. The crossover of the two lines in the slow momentum
oscillator confirms the turn of the short-term trend. Notice the interplay of the various moving
average lines, shown in the upper panel, as discussed in this chapter.

AVERAGE DIRECTION INDEX
Average Direction Index (ADX) is a valuable indicator that is widely used by analysts to identify
whether a trend exists, and to quantify trend strength. ADX was developed by J. Welles Wilder
Jr., and published in his 1978 book, New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems. We shall not
get down to the nitty-gritty calculations of ADX; it is available in all technical analysis software
programs.
ADX was developed as part of a direction movement indicator, which is generally plotted
together as two related directional movement lines, the positive directional movement line and
the negative directional movement line.
ADX is an oscillator that fluctuates between 0 and 100. ADX’s value, with a standard 14-day
setting, seldom exceeds 60 or falls below 10. ADX is plotted as a single line and is not a
directional indicator. As a rule of thumb, when ADX crosses above 20 from below, it suggests
that the price trend is getting stronger. On the other hand, when ADX crosses from above to
below 20, price trend strength is getting weaker and is entering into a non-trending market.
Thus, a high ADX value can indicate a strong downtrend as well as a strong uptrend.
Higher ADX value represents a stronger price trend, while lower ADX value represents a
weaker price trend. Thus, a rising value of ADX reflects a strong trend is in progress, a declining
ADX value reflects a weakening trend, and a flat ADX reflects an absence of trend. As a result of
its behavioral patterns in revealing trending and non-trending conditions of the market, a
trader can use ADX to form a trading strategy. However, ADX has its limitations. It lags price
movements and should not be used as a buy or sell signal. It takes approximately 30 bars to
establish the value of the ADX with a 14-day period.
Having said that, the value of ADX is that it confirms the trend strength and not its directional
movement. We would like to add that the directional movement of ADX is also important and
should be carefully observed. When the ADX moves up, it reaches its high and makes a
subsequent downward turn. This pattern is very important. The turning of direction in the ADX
implies that there is going to be a change of trend strength. When there is a change in the trend
strength, it implies that there will probably also be a change in the price trend and direction
soon.
Thus, when prices have been trending downward and the ADX, moving in the opposite
direction to price, rises to reach its extreme high level and then makes a turn downward, we
should be on the lookout for a change in price trend shortly. On the other hand, when price is
falling rapidly, and the ADX rises to reach its high to make a downward turn, it indicates the
price trend will be improving soon. A steep slope of ADX movement shows strength while a
slope that is almost flat indicates weakness.
Directional movements often hide the true message of ADX and run contrary to price
movements, as shown in
Figure 6.17
. Take note of the uniqueness of the movements of ADX; ADX reaches a high value regardless
of whether the price is high or low. When ADX crosses above the alert line, it warns of a
probable change of price trend. At Point 3, price is meeting resistance at the 200-day average
line, and ADX is turning down and crosses below the alert line, which confirms weakening of
price. At Point 4, the 50-day average crosses above the 90-day line from below. This is a bullish
sign that is supported by the fact that price is holding well at the 90-day level and by the
subsequent change in ADX’s direction from its high as it crosses below the alert line.

FIGURE 6.17
The upper window of the chart shows the interplay of three moving averages, the 50-day, 90day, and 200-day. The bold line in the lower window shows movements of the three-day period
ADX. and the volume in a histogram.

The formula for the ADX used in
Figure 6.17
is as follows:
prd:=Input("Adx Period",1,89,3);
a1:=Input("LookBack 1",1,89,13);
a2:=Input("LookBack 2",1,89,8);
a3:=Input("LookBack 3",1,89,5);
adxm:=(ADX(prd)+Ref(ADX(prd),-a1)+ADX(prd)-Ref(ADX(prd),-a2)
+ADX(prd)-Ref(ADX(prd),-a3)+ADX(prd))/3;
adxm;

PROTECTIVE STOPS
Figure 6.18
shows a strong trending stock plotted with protective stops. Volume is plotted in the lower
window.
FIGURE 6.18
Plot of protective stops indicated by black dotted line.

Average true range is commonly used in the calculation of protective stops (or stop losses).
Average true range is a volatility indicator that measures the strength of price reactions. That is,
the price movements from low volatility to high volatility and from high volatility to low
volatility. The formula for average true range is included in all technical analysis program
packages. Protective stops may also be used as a guide for trade entries and exits. In a long
position, a trade exit is triggered when prices close below protective stops. And when prices
close above or remain above protective stops, a trade entry may be considered if other
indicators are also showing support of the probable positive trend.
There are many stop-loss or trailing stops systems available, but getting the right parameters
and settings of such stops can be difficult. When the market is choppy, trailing stops will always
be triggered too soon if the stops are set too close to the price bars. And on the other hand, if
the stops are set too far apart, traders will probably not be able to lock in their profits as their
stops will never be reached.
The following is a simple formula of the protective stops indicator for reference only. It is not
recommended to be used in trading.
{Protective Stops Long}
AtrX:=Input("ATR Multiple",1,89,1.3);
Period:=Input("ATR Period",2,89,13);
LookBack:=Input("Lookback",2,89,13);
Lng:=Close-AtrX*ATR(Period);
LngHi:=HHV(Lng,LookBack);

LngSignal:=If(Lng<LngHi,PREV,Lng);
LngSignal;

CONCLUSION
This chapter discusses five key indicators: momentum, moving averages, MACD, ADX, and
protective stops, which will help traders to understand the purpose and use of indicators in a
trading strategy. In planning a chart layout, traders should ensure that the layout covers
different aspects of the market. A good layout should not be cluttered with indicators but
should be neat and simple. Yet it should be meaningful and complete. Basically, the chart will
have a trend indicator to show the probable direction of the trend, a momentum indicator to
measure the speed at which price is changing, and a volume indicator to measure stock
activities. Traders should avoid using multiple indicators that show the same type of
information in the chart.
Momentum measures the speed of price change and is used in identifying price strength by
the variance of the change in speed of price. It is the basic concept applied in most indicators.
MACD is also a momentum indicator. It consists of three plots. The first MACD line is derived
from the difference of two different periods of exponential moving averages. Standard
parameters are a 12-day period and a 26-day period. The second line, the signal line, is a 9-day
exponential moving average of the first line. The third line is plotted as a histogram. The
histogram is the difference between the MACD line and the signal line. The slopes of the
histogram will often diverge with the price directional movement to alert traders to probable
turning points in trend. A trader must take note that, when using momentum oscillators, the
trend of the momentum does not always represent the price trend. Momentum oscillators are
useful in identifying overbought and oversold conditions of the market. Overbought conditions
reflect the underlying strength of the market, and oversold conditions reflect the weakening of
the market. As a timing tool for buying and selling, momentum provides more reliable signals
when traders use two different time frame momentums, daily momentum and weekly
momentum. The objective is to trade when the daily time frame is in the direction of the
weekly time frame, unless the momentum is overbought or oversold.
In the chapter, two methods of using moving averages have been described. The first is the
popular method of using the crossing of price and its moving average as trading signals for
trade entries and exits, which can also be applied to reading crossings of two different moving
averages. The second method is a new concept, the Queuing Theory of Moving Average
Crossovers. The theory is based on the assumption that when there is a trend, the price and its
relative moving averages should move in a sequential order of alignment. In a bullish trend,
price will lead and be above the shorter moving average, which will be followed by the longer
moving average. In a bearish market, price will also lead the declining trend, but it will be below
the shorter moving average, which will be below the longer moving average. Any change in
sequential order of alignment of the price and its moving averages will indicate a weakening of
the prevailing trend. A price rally or a price retracement that occurs when there is a disorderly
alignment can be expected to be short-lived. The application of the theory will help traders to
assess the probable risk and reward before making trade decisions, to determine trading time
frames, and to form a better perspective of the market.
Two optional indicators have also been included in the chapter, ADX and protective stops.
ADX is used to identify whether a trend exists and to quantify the strength of the trend. The
common practice is to determine a benchmark that serves to identify the trend; the higher the
value of ADX, the stronger the trend, irrespective of whether the trend is up or down. Traders
often get confused when applying this indicator. An easier application is to use a shorter period
for the ADX and just focus on the turning points of its peaks. This method will greatly help to
