 In the 1950s, George Chestnutt published a newsletter that ranked relative strength momentum of both stocks and industries. Here is some advice Chestnutt gave his newsletter readers: 
           Which is the best policy? To buy a strong stock that is leading the advance, or to shop around for a sleeper or behind-the-market stock in the hope that it will catch up? On the basis of statistics covering thousands of individual examples, the answer is very clear as to where the best probabilities lie. Many more times than not, it is better to buy the leaders and leave the laggards alone. In the market, as in many other phases of life, the strong get stronger, and the weak get weaker. 
 Chestnutt (1961) also wrote a book on relative strength investing and used this approach to manage successfully the American Investors Fund. From January 1958 through March 1964, this fund had a cumulative return of 160.5%, versus 82.6% for the Dow Jones Industrial Average. 
 Chestnutt never became well known, but another momentum investor and mutual fund manager at the time did. He was Jack Dreyfus, also known as the Lion of Wall Street. 
 Dreyfus began his career using a $20,000 loan, and he retired a billionaire. Here is how he described his investment philosophy: “If you’ve got an escalator that’s going up, you’re better off betting on an individual on that escalator than on an individual on an escalator that’s going down.” Dreyfus bought stocks only when they broke to new highs off sound chart patterns. His Dreyfus Fund was up 604% from 1953 to 1964, compared to 346% for the Dow Jones Industrial Average. 
 Two small funds at Fidelity started to emulate Dreyfus’s investment technique. They were managed by Edward “Ned” Johnson II, the founder of Fidelity Management & Research in 1946, and Gerald Tsai, manager of the Fidelity Capital Fund. Tsai, a colorful figure, championed momentum and increased the popularity of momentum investing to the point that he became the first mutual fund manager to gain celebrity treatment in the press. He founded the Manhattan Fund in 1965, expecting to raise $25 million in the fund’s first year. Instead, Tsai attracted $275 million during the fund’s first day. 
 Dreyfus also influenced William O’Neil, publisher of Investor’s Business Daily . O’Neil’s motto was “buy the strong, sell the weak.” One of the key features of O’Neil’s well-known CAN SLIM method was to buy stocks that outperformed other stocks and sell those that underperformed. This idea is right out the momentum playbook. O’Neil said, “What seems too high in price and risky to the majority goes higher eventually, and what seems low and cheap usually goes lower.” 1 O’Neil’s book How to Make Money in Stocks , featuring his CAN SLIM approach, has sold over two million copies since 1988. 
 Also in the 1960s, Nicolas Darvas (1960) wrote several inspiring and entertaining books, including the popular How I Made $2,000,000 in the Stock Market . The book describes his adventures as a professional dancer traveling the world while sending off buy and sell cables to his broker. Darvas would buy strong stocks making new highs, hold them until their momentum began to wane, and then replace them with new price leaders. 
 Gilbert Haller (1965) advocated a similar “strongest stocks” strategy in his book, The Haller Theory of Stock Market Trends . George Soros (2003) used a variation of momentum that he called positive feedback “reflexivity” in order to accumulate large profits with conglomerates and real estate investment trusts (REITs) in the 1960s and 1970s. According to Soros, buying begets further buying in a self-reinforcing process. We will see in Chapter 4 that positive feedback trading due to behavioral factors is one of the key characteristics of momentum. 
 Momentum has always been the engine behind speculative commodity trading. Richard Donchian launched the first managed futures fund in 1949. Donchian thought price movements in stocks and commodities were often too optimistic or pessimistic because they reflected the emotions of the people trading them. He believed that trend followers could profit from this overextension of prices. 
 In 1960, Donchian began a weekly commodities newsletter that featured his 5- and 20-day moving average trend-following system. His well-known 4-week channel breakout method inspired other great traders like Ed Seykota and Richard Dennis. Dennis taught his Turtle Traders a version of Donchian’s channel breakout system, and a number of them went on to become very successful commodity trading advisors. 2 Seykota also trained a number of highly successful traders, such as Michael Marcus and David Druz, and developed the first large-scale commercial computerized trading system. Jack Schwager said about Seykota in his first Market Wizards book, “the accounts Seykota managed have witnessed an absolutely astounding rate of return … . I know of no other trader who has his track record over the same length of time.” 3 Seykota later launched “Ed’s Six Step Program” to help other trend traders. 4 
 During the 1970s and 1980s, the torch of momentum investing passed to successful hedge fund managers who were often reticent to talk about their activities. One prominent momentum investor, however, was the outspoken philanthropist and mutual fund manager, Richard Driehaus. 
 Driehaus began his investment career in 1968. He manages over $10 billion following a momentum strategy similar to the ones used by Darvas, Chestnutt, and Haller—rotational, relative strength investing using top-performing stocks. In 1970, Barron’s named Driehaus to its “All Century” team of 25 persons who have been the most influential within the mutual fund industry over the past 100 years. Jack Schwager (2008) featured Driehaus in his book The New Market Wizards , as did Peter Tanous (1999) in his book Investment Gurus . Here are a few quotes from Driehaus describing his momentum-based approach: 
           Perhaps the best-known investment paradigm is buy low, sell high. I believe that more money can be made by buying high and selling at even higher prices … . I try to buy stocks that have already had good price moves, that are already making new highs, and that have positive relative strength … . I always look for the best potential performance at the current time. Even if I think that a stock I hold will go higher, if I believe another stock will do significantly better in the interim, I will switch. 
 Even before serious academic research on momentum began in earnest in the 1990s, it was hard to dismiss the practical value and impressive results of relative strength momentum investing. 
 MODERN MOMENTUM 
 The first computer-based study of momentum was by Robert A. Levy (1967). Levy coined the phrase “relative strength,” which is a good way to characterize this style of investing. Academics later renamed this systematic, quantitative approach “momentum,” which is a more generic term also used by practitioners to mean buying strong stocks. Discretionary dot-com traders (“gunslingers” who thought a horse is easiest to ride in the direction it is already going) during the 1990s were often called momentum players. This confusion between systematic, rules-based momentum and seat-of-the-pants discretionary momentum persists even today. Levy’s term “relative strength” is a much more accurate description of quantitative, rules-based momentum, but Levy presented his findings before momentum became respectable to the academic community. When academics caught on to momentum, they probably did not want to have their work associated with Levy. They preferred instead to engage in identity theft by changing the name from relative strength to momentum . They were either unaware that this term momentum was already being used by practitioners to mean something similar but different—or they just did not care. 
 Levy’s initial study covered five years of data using 625 NYSE stocks. Levy (1968) later expanded his study and wrote a book on the subject of relative strength investing. Levy said: 
           The stocks which historically were among the 10% strongest appreciated in price by an average of 9.6% over a 26-week future period. On the other hand, the stocks which historically were among the 10% weakest appreciated in price an average of only 2.9% over a 26-week future period. 
 Michael Jensen, a respected academic, criticized Levy for ignoring transaction costs and risk factors. 
 Later, Akemann and Keller (1977) demonstrated superior relative strength results after transaction costs when using S&P industry groups from 1967 through 1975. Bohan (1981) showed attractive results applying relative strength momentum to 11 years of S&P industry group data. Brush and Boles (1983) presented evidence of excess returns from relative strength momentum applied to 18 years of stock data, even after adjusting for transaction costs and risk. Despite the growing evidence of abnormal profits from momentum investing, even after accounting for costs and risk factors, there was still little interest in momentum among academics. 
 During this time, belief among academic researchers in efficient markets was still prevalent, which is a major reason why momentum never got the attention or respect that it deserved. Many academics still thought stock market returns followed a random walk process, similar to Brownian motion, where aggressive competition among market participants to exploit any predictable patterns made price changes random and unpredictable. As the saying goes, if your only tool is a hammer, everything looks like a nail. Academics pounded on momentum until it was barely noticeable. 
 This began to change in the 1980s. Nobel laureate Robert Shiller (1981) published “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to Be Justified by Subsequent Changes in Dividends?” This paper showed that historically stocks were more volatile than would be expected if investors were strictly rational. Keim and Stambaugh (1986) presented evidence that stock returns contain predictable components. In 1987, evidence that stock prices could seriously deviate from their fair values got a boost when the stock market fell over 20% in a single day. This one-day collapse strained the limits of rationality. Academics had also begun documenting persistence in stock prices due to positive serial correlation, which contradicts the random walk theory of stock price movement. 5 De Bondt and Thaler (1985) had identified a long-term reversal effect in stocks whereby investors correct excessive overvaluation or undervaluation. These all cast doubts on perfect market efficiency. 
 Behavioral finance also started gaining traction as a way of explaining the growing number of market anomalies, such as price momentum and mean reversion. The academic community had begun to wake up and take notice. Behavioral finance is the study of the influence of psychology on the behavior of investors and the effect this has on markets. Behavioral biases helped to resolve some of the growing disconnect between theory and reality in the world of finance. Chapter 4 will shed more light on the rational and behavioral aspects of momentum, including how they help explain why momentum works and why it is likely to continue to work in the years ahead. 
 SEMINAL MOMENTUM RESEARCH 
 With behavioral finance now as a way to explain momentum logically, momentum research took a giant leap forward with the publication of “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers: Implications for Stock Market Efficiency” by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). They found, using data from 1965 through 1989, that winning stocks on the NYSE and American Stock Exchange (AMEX) over the past 6 to 12 months continued to outperform losing stocks on average over the next 6 to 12 months by approximately 1% per month after adjusting for any return differences due to other risk factors. This outperformance was essentially the same thing that Cowles and Jones had discovered 30 years earlier. Eight years after their 1993 paper, Jegadeesh and Titman (2001) followed up with an out-of-sample validation of their work and found that 1990–1998 past winners outperformed past losers by approximately the same 1% per month. This, and considerable subsequent momentum research on additional data by others, did away with concerns that momentum profits could be attributable to data mining biases. 
 Quantitative research helped to transform momentum from a discretionary approach to a rules-based one. Jegadeesh and Titman’s research clearly showed that stocks strongest over a 3- to 12-month look-back (or formation) period are also the strongest ones over comparable future periods. This was especially true with respect to a 6- to 12-month look-back window. 
 According to rules-based momentum, you buy the strongest 10% to 30% stocks over the past 6 to 12 months, hold them 1 to 3 months, then reevaluate and rebalance the portfolio. As an added bonus, a rules-based approach such as this helps remove behavioral bias from the decision-making process and lessens the chance that investors will make poor decisions based on emotional responses to market conditions. 
 ADDITIONAL MOMENTUM RESEARCH 
 The rigorous and replicable research done by Jegadeesh and Titman inspired a great many additional momentum research papers. In fact, momentum has been become one of the most heavily researched finance topics over the past 20 years. Since Jegadeesh and Titman, there have been more than 300 academic papers on momentum, including over 150 in the last five years. Research has focused on four areas: 
          •    Determining the momentum effect across different assets 
          •    The statistical properties of momentum returns 
          •    Theoretical explanations for the momentum effect 
          •    Enhancements to momentum-based strategies 
 Continuing research has established momentum as an anomaly that works well within and across nearly all markets, including U.S. and foreign equities, industry groups, equity indexes, global government bonds, corporate bonds, commodities, currencies, and residential real estate. 6 Momentum works well across over a dozen asset classes and more than 40 countries. 7 
 Momentum is robust with respect to time, as well to different markets. Chabot, Ghysels, and Jagannathan (2009) showed that momentum worked well in U.K. equities all the way back to the Victorian age. Geczy and Samonov (2012) showed that momentum was effective through out-of-sample testing on U.S. equities all the way back to the year 1801! Over this 212-year history the equally weighted top one-third of stocks sorted on price momentum significantly outperformed the bottom one-third of stocks by 0.4% per month with a highly significant t-statistic of 5.7. 
 In the 1990s, Schwert (1993) did a study of market anomalies related to profit opportunities, such as value, size, calendar effects, and momentum. He found that all anomalies except momentum disappeared, reversed, or attenuated following their discovery. Momentum was the only one that persisted. 
 Momentum has continued to perform well out-of-sample during the two decades following the seminal studies by Jegadeesh and Titman. It is no wonder that Fama and French (2008) call momentum “the center stage anomaly of recent years.” They further explain: 
           The premier market anomaly is momentum. Stocks with low returns over the past year tend to have low returns for the next few months, and stocks with high past returns tend to have high future returns. 8 
 Readers can easily satisfy themselves as to the efficacy of momentum by reviewing some of the important academic research papers referenced in this book. You can download many of them from the Social Science Research Network (SSRN) website or by doing an Internet search on their titles or authors’ names. 9 You can also find additional information on my website and associated blog: http://optimalmomentum.com . 
 CURRENT APPLIED MOMENTUM 
 Dorsey, Wright & Associates (DWA) introduced the first publicly available systematic momentum-based program in 2007. DWA manages two mutual funds and four broad-based exchange-traded funds using a proprietary approach that selects 100 (200 for small cap) individual stocks using relative strength momentum. Its broad-based funds cover U.S. large-cap/mid-cap, U.S. small-cap, developed market, and emerging market stocks. DWA reassesses and rebalances its momentum-based portfolios quarterly. 
 In 2009, AQR Capital Management (AQR) established three momentum-based mutual funds covering U.S. large-cap/mid-cap, U.S. small-cap, and international stocks. AQR’s funds select the top one-third of stocks using momentum measured over a 12-month look-back period, excluding the last month. AQR usually rebalances positions quarterly. In Chapter 9 , I show how AQR’s U.S. large-cap/mid-cap relative momentum index has performed since its inception. 
 BlackRock’s iShares is the latest firm to offer a popular, publicly available momentum product. In 2013, iShares introduced an exchange-traded fund (ETF) based on the Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) USA Momentum Index that holds 100 to 150 stocks using a combination of 6- and 12-month look-back periods. The fund weights its positions based on volatility and rebalances them semiannually. 
 All of these publicly available products apply relative strength momentum to individual stocks. They therefore miss the potential risk-reducing benefits of cross-asset diversification. Using momentum with individual stocks also results in substantially higher transaction costs than applying momentum to broad asset classes and indexes. AQR, for example, estimates transaction costs of its U.S. momentum index to be 70 basis points per year. 
 Also important is the fact that while relative strength momentum can enhance returns, it does little to reduce volatility or maximum drawdown. These risks may even increase compared to similar portfolios using nonmomentum, buy-and-hold strategies. 
 In Chapter 7 , we will discuss absolute momentum, which can enhance expected returns like relative momentum does. However, unlike relative momentum, absolute momentum can also reduce extreme downside exposure that is associated with long-only investing. Absolute momentum aims to beat the market by avoiding the beatings. In Chapter 8 , we will construct a simple and practical investment model using dual momentum, which is the amalgamation of both relative and absolute momentum.

Dual Momentum Investing: An Innovative Strategy for Higher Returns with Lower Risk 

 CHAPTER 3 
 MODERN PORTFOLIO THEORY PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES 
          A physicist, a chemist, and an economist are stranded on an island with nothing to eat. A can of soup washes ashore. The physicist says, “Let’s smash the can open with a rock.” The chemist says, “Let’s build a fire and heat the can first.” The economist says, “Let’s assume we have a can opener.… ” 
 — George Goodwin (“Adam Smith”) 
 I N THIS CHAPTER, * I GIVE an overview of modern finance and its relationship to dual momentum. 1 I also show why we should sometimes be skeptical of the “experts.” In the words of the well-regarded economist Joan Robinson, “The purpose of studying economics is not to acquire a set of ready-made answers to economic questions, but to learn to avoid being deceived by economists.” We will see in later chapters how a healthy dose of skepticism toward those with initials behind their names might keep us from being sold a bill of goods for investments we may not really need or want. 
 MARKOWITZ MEAN-VARIANCE OPTIMIZATION 
 In 1952, a young economics student at the University of Chicago, Harry Markowitz, developed an ingenious way to construct efficient portfolios, which he defined as those offering the highest expected return at any given level of risk (volatility), or, conversely, the lowest amount of risk at any specified level of expected return. Markowitz had taken an idea out of the realm of operations research (quadratic programming) to create an optimization algorithm that he used to map out the “frontier” of these efficient portfolios. Prior to this, there had been no quantitative way of simultaneously using expected return, volatility, and correlation to determine optimal portfolio combinations. Markowitz called his methodology mean-variance optimization (MVO). 
 During the oral exam defending his Ph.D. thesis, Markowitz was challenged by Milton Friedman for over an hour. Friedman argued that Markowitz’s research was not economics, business administration, or even mathematics. Markowitz received his PhD anyway and went on to become the father of modern portfolio theory. He received the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences mainly for his PhD thesis work. 
 On the practical side of things, there are problems, however, in implementing MVO. As is common with many economic models, the assumptions underlying MVO do not fit the real world very well. 2 MVO results are unstable when the covariance (the combination of correlation and volatility) matrix is ill conditioned, which is brought about by having very similar assets. MVO results are also highly sensitive to the inputs used. These can give unreliable results, since MVO maximizes the estimation errors of these inputs. Small input differences can lead to large output differences. This has led to MVO creating error maximizing portfolios. 
 Users of MVO often have to adjust the inputs, constrain them to reduce sampling error, or incorporate prior information to shrink the estimates back to values that are more reasonable. Return inputs are particularly unreliable, and some MVO users ignore them entirely by opting to use instead a minimum variance portfolio. DeMiguel, Garlappi, and Uppal (2009) showed that any gains from optimal diversification were more than offset by estimation errors. MVO produces extreme weights that fluctuate substantially over time and performs poorly out of sample. 3 Equal portfolio weighting is usually superior to MVO as a practical matter. 4 While MVO theory was elegant and impressive, like many other modern financial models, it did not hold up well in the real world. However, researchers did not realize this during the early years of MVO. 
 What they did realize is that computers had limited power back in the 1950s, and MVO was computationally demanding. MVO could require matrix inversions involving covariances and returns of thousands of assets. A 1,000-asset portfolio, for example, would require 550,000 covariances. 
 Therefore, in the early to mid-1960s, a number of academic researchers working independently developed a simplified alternative to MVO called the capital asset pricing model (CAPM). 5 
 CAPITAL ASSET PRICING MODEL 
