
N

149

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c07

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

150

19:20

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

“A trending market will stay trending until it is acted upon by an unbalanced net force.”
I imagine when Newton first explained the First Law to his fellow scientists, they collectively said “That makes sense. We know that. How dumb
do you think we are?” When I tell traders that nontrending markets transition into trending markets and trending markets transition into nontrending markets, I imagine many traders might say the same thing.
Yet so many traders break the law. They don’t recognize that nontrending transitions to trending. I hear things like “The market is range bound”
or “I think the market will stay contained,” or how about the old, “The summer doldrums will keep the market under wraps.”
For me, a nontrending market is like a spring coiling. That coil gets
tighter and tighter, and eventually it will explode. I imagine you can say a
net force puts the market into motion. It can be something obvious like an
economic release, a comment from a central banker, oil or gold going up
or down, a natural disaster, a banking crisis, the stock market rallying or
falling. Sometimes it is not so obvious. That is, it can simply be the price
breaking through a key technical level. I see it happen all the time, if not
daily. Of course, the newspapers will give a fundamental reason, but in my
mind, an unbalanced number of buyers overwhelmed the sellers.
When the market is nontrending I feel like dressing—figuratively, at
least—in my Sunday best. I want to look good because a big old-fashioned
profitable trending move either up or down is likely to happen. I may not
know which way the market price may trend; however, I do start to anticipate a move higher or lower. I also look for the clues from the tools I use.
This chapter will focus exclusively on the power of a simple trading
tool—moving averages (MAs)—and how it can be used to attack currency
trends. Moving averages, combined with the price, give a trader clues for
the directional bias for a potential trending market in motion.

WHAT IS A MOVING AVERAGE?
In Chapter 6, I outlined the process for calculating a moving average. The
calculation defines a moving average level. However, what exactly is a moving average? Let’s start by looking at the two words that make up the term.
A moving average is first and foremost moving, or in motion. The calculated values that make up a moving average line add a new value after
each incremental timed bar. That new value is either greater than, less than,
or equal to the previous calculated value.
The first possibility is that the new moving average value for the new
bar is greater than the previous bar’s value, thus the slope of the moving

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c07

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

Moving Averages

19:20

Printer: Yet to come

151

average line is positive. If the slope, movement, or motion is positive or
going up, this can give an idea of the trend. The trend may be bullish.
The second possibility is that the new moving average value for the
new bar is less than the previous bar’s value, thus the slope of the moving
average line is negative or going down. If the slope is negative or going
down, the trend may be bearish.
The third possibility is that the moving average line is going sideways.
That is, the calculated new value for the new bar remains the same. In this
case, the movement or motion suggests the market is neither bullish nor
bearish. It is more neutral or nontrending.
Whenever I can define a market as being nontrending, I get excited
because my law says that “nontrending markets transition into trending
markets.” In Newton’s terms, a nontrending market will remain nontrending until influenced by an outside net force. I will delve into this idea later
in the chapter.
The other word that defines what a moving average is average. An average takes a defined number of values and calculates a single value that
becomes a representative for that series.
If you had 100 bars on a chart and wanted to come up with one price
that is worthy enough to represent those 100 bars, many traders would
suggest the average of those 100 bars is that one price that is most worthy
of that distinction. However, when the 101st bar is printed, the first bar
drops out, the value of the 101st bar replaces it and the average changes.
The new value becomes the representative of the last 100 bars. The average
price moves.
Looking at each of the two words that make up the term “moving average” gives traders a firm understanding of what it represents. So what is
a moving average? A moving average is a value that is in motion and is a
representative of the market price over a specified time period.

HOW TO USE MOVING AVERAGES
We already learned in Chapter 6 that the price, when compared to the moving average, is really the most important relationship for traders to fully understand and follow. If the price is greater than the moving average—or the
most representative price over a specified time period—the bias or trend
is bullish. If the price is less than the moving average, the bias or trend is
bearish.
This is different than the slope of the moving average being positive
or negative. The slope of the moving average being upward or positive
simply implies the market may be bullish. Since moving averages are a
lagging indicator, the average can take a while to change course or

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c07

JWBT439-Michalowski

152

January 18, 2011

19:20

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

FIGURE 7.1 Price Moving below MA Line Is Most Important

direction. However, what is most important is if the current price is above
or below the moving average price. That condition makes the bias unambiguously bullish or bearish.
For example, in Figure 7.1, the 100 bar MA, or solid line in the chart, is
positively sloped. However, when the price moves below the moving average line at 1.2973, it turns the bias bearish. The market trends to the downside and bottoms at 1.2838.
The rules are in place for the moving average as a tool for our trading.
The question now becomes: What moving average time period or periods
should be used?

How Many and What Type
I use two different moving averages in my analysis and trading plan. The
reason I use two is because I want one to be what I call the “trigger” moving
average and the other to be what I call the “confirming” moving average:

r The trigger moving average determines the bullish or bearish bias. If
the price goes above the trigger, the bias is bullish. It triggers a buy.
If the price goes below the trigger, the bias is bearish. It triggers a sell.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c07

JWBT439-Michalowski

Moving Averages

January 18, 2011

19:20

Printer: Yet to come

153

r The confirming moving average, for lack of a better word, confirms the trading bias. If the price moves above the trigger, and subsequently the confirming MA, it confirms the bullish trend. If the price
moves below the trigger MA, and below the confirming MA, it confirms
the bearish trend.
Since the confirming moving average comes after the trigger, it makes
that moving average a target for a trend-type move. It becomes an exit
on the Bullish or Bearish Highway discussed in Chapter 5 that, if passed,
should give the trader added confidence in the trend.
What happens if the price moves above the trigger MA, but cannot get
through the confirming MA? That is, what if the price action cannot confirm the trend? If the price cannot get past the confirming MA, the market
price will either go back below the trigger MA or remain in between the
two moving averages, keeping the bullish bias intact, but the momentum
limited. Eventually, the price will breach one of the moving average lines.
Obviously, if the price moves back below the trigger MA, the bias
switches to bearish and the “If . . . Should” rule goes into effect. That is,
“If the price moves above the trigger MA, the price should go higher. If it
does not—that is, if the price moves lower and back below the trigger MA—
get out.” The trader should exit the bullish position.
If the price remains above the trigger MA but below the confirming MA,
the bias remains positive but the price action is in effect stalled. I like to say
the market is not ready to trend higher for the time being. To use a sports
analogy, this specific situation is like trading between the goal posts, with
the goal posts represented by the trigger (100 bar) MA and the confirming
(200 bar) MA. I will discuss this condition, and what it is a prelude to, later
in the chapter.
Using a trigger and confirming moving average provides me with the
clues I need to enter a trend and confirm a trend move. It is then up to the
market to keep that trend moving or in motion.
People often ask me, “Why not use three or four moving averages?
Each could be used to confirm the next target.” I only use two, because
using more adds an additional level of complexity and uncertainty for the
trader. Not only does it add more clutter to charts, but there is also the
problem of slopes of each line being different, causing confusion. In addition, the short time-period moving averages can be too fast. The longer time
periods can be too slow. The combination can make the averages more out
of synch with each other rather than making them work in tandem with
each other, like a two-period MA can do.
There are just too many filters to sift through from a visual and analysis
standpoint. I have tried it. It does not work. It does nothing but increase
uncertainty. With increased uncertainty fear is increased. The game plan is
to keep fear to a minimum—not add to it.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c07

154

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:20

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

Two moving averages are simple. They conform to Rule 1: Keep It Simple to be Successful, or the K.I.S.S. principle. Using two MAs allows for
one to be the trigger for a trade to be initiated. The other is the confidence
booster for the trend-type move. There are plenty of other targets from the
other tools I use (i.e., trend lines or remembered lines, and Fibonacci retracement levels). They all work together, and I will outline examples of
how that happens over the next few chapters.

Using 100 and 200 Bar Simple Moving Averages
The next question is what moving averages to use. The two that work for
me are the 100 and 200 bar simple moving averages.
As already mentioned, I have a tendency to take what is said on the
business news channels with a grain of salt. I have already outlined how
most commentary on television is focused on fundamentals. Fundamentals can be an ambiguous trading tool, and as a result, fundamentals can
increase uncertainty and that increases fear.
Moreover, when experts do talk about markets on television, it is more
often than not a blanket reference to unrealistic and shocking targets. This
applies to currencies, gold and oil, and even the stock market or individual
stock prices. The EURUSD going to parity, gold going to $2,000 or even
$3,000 an ounce, and Google going to $1,000 per share are some of the
shocking comments that have been bantered about in recent history. It is
often based on some fundamental belief. It is rarely a level based on technical analysis or a chart.
What I have found, however, is that if technicals or charts are talked
about on television, commentators will mention the 100 or 200 bar simple
moving average. Often, it is an afterthought. Some commentators will scoff
at the mention—they want to know the fundamental reason the market will
move, and a 100 bar MA is not good enough reason for them (it is for me!).
Nevertheless, if a technical level is cited on television, it will most
likely be because the 100 or 200 bar simple moving average is breached
or being approached.
Why do I recommend these two moving averages? The best I can answer is that a great number of traders from around the globe follow those
moving averages, and as a result, there tends to be a keen level of action at the levels. In addition, the smart or successful traders who tend to
have the most influence on the market also believe in these moving averages for market bias clues. That is, they will base trading decisions around
the levels.
Other reasons are that the two values are round numbers and easily
remembered. They also get their share of exposure in other trading books,

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c07

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

Moving Averages

19:20

Printer: Yet to come

155

and they may be simpler to understand versus say Fibonacci values like the
18 bar or 34 bar MAs.
I find that given the volatility of the currency market, a slower moving
average like the 100 or 200 bar MA keeps the trader involved without trading too often. Speed of a trigger is not sacrificed, however, since I will apply
the moving averages to shorter period charts, specifically a five-minute bar
chart. Finally, it is my belief that the market pays attention to simple concepts. The 100 and 200 bar simple moving averages are simple concepts for
most traders to understand. It is my strong belief that it is always best to
trade with the crowd—not against it.
For me, what is most important is not necessarily why the moving average time period makes sense, but what tends to happen around that moving
average value. Successful traders base trading decisions around a level that
they feel comfortable as a borderline. The 100 and 200 bar moving averages
are two of those levels. As we have learned, if a level is a borderline, the
market price tends to either hold that level or break through the level. This
allows traders to quantify their risk. They know the bias is bullish if the
price is above the 100 and/or 200 bar moving average, and bearish if the
price is below the 100 and/or 200 moving average.
As a result, if they buy and the price goes below the 100 bar moving
average, they take the loss and close the position. If the price rises, they
know they likely have good trade location.
Since traders are able to quantify their risk, their fear is dispersed.
Their risk is also limited. When risk is limited to a small amount, the potential exists to earn a multiple of the risk taken. As long as traders are
consistent with their risk parameters and risk to reward ratios (i.e., trading
near the borderline MA levels) when they lose, the loss will be limited and
should be constant. When they win and the market does trend even for a
modest move, the win is more likely to be a multiple of the loss.
I have found through my many years of trading experience in the currency market that the 100 and 200 bar MA attract activity. The market finds
buyers/sellers against the levels. I like to think of the moving average lines
as mirrors that either reflect the price back from whence it came or do the
opposite—blast through the MA line, smashing the mirror in the process.
Oftentimes, the price does not stay around the level. This further increases
the value and importance of the two moving averages as tools for trading
and anticipating trends.

Simple versus Exponential
The next question often asked is “Do I use the simple or exponential moving average?” As a review, or for those who do not know, the simple moving average will equally weight all values in the time period for the moving

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c07

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

156

19:20

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

average. So if it is a 100 bar moving average, the closing value for each bar
carries an equal weight of 1/100th.
Without getting into details on the calculation of an exponential moving average (EMA), this moving average will weight each value differently.
The bars that are further away from the current bar have the lowest weight
and influence on the EMA, while the more recent bars have the highest
weight and the largest influence.
As a result, the exponential moving average will be quicker to change
according to current market conditions. Sometimes that is a benefit. That
is, the price crosses the 100 bar EMA first and continues to trend, breaking
through the 100 bar SMA later in the trend. Sometimes it is not a benefit.
The price breaks through the 100 bar EMA and reverses back down before
reaching the 100 bar SMA.
What I have found is that the EMA is less known and perhaps less understood by the market. Saying it another way, “It is not simple.” I can
explain the math of a simple moving average to most people. I could not
explain the math of an exponential moving average to that same sample
of people. Some would not understand the calculations. They may understand the concept, but the math would not be simple. I want to trade with
the larger herd, not the smaller herd.
The second reason I prefer the simple moving average is with regard
to the speed of the EMA to the SMA. I like the pace of the 100 bar MA in the
currency market. The currency market tends to have a level of volatility
where having too fast a moving average will lead to more trades that get
whipped around. This can occur during times the market is nontrending as
well as in trending markets. Often, there will be healthy corrections in a
trending market that fall below the 100 bar EMA, but don’t make it through
the 100 bar MA. Although it may be subjective, I “simply” prefer the moving
average to be slower and feel most traders feel the same way.
Simple or exponential? Simple gets my vote.

TIME FRAMES FOR ANALYSIS
There are three different time frames that I look at when finding levels to
initiate trades: the five-minute, the daily chart, and the hourly chart.
When I speak at seminars, the audience often wrongly assumes that
the three periods represent short-term trading, medium-term trading, and
longer-term trading time frames. That is, the five-minute chart is used for
intraday trading, the hourly is for medium-term trades, and the daily is for
long-term position trading. That may be true for some, but not for me. I look
at the three for the same reason: to find the best low-risk trading levels or

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c07

JWBT439-Michalowski

Moving Averages

January 18, 2011

19:20

Printer: Yet to come

157

targets that have to be breached (or reached) to either start or maintain a
trend-type move.
Nevertheless, I know traders who are strictly focused on the longerterm trends, and they focus solely on the daily or even weekly chart. They
do not want to pay attention to the swings in the shorter-term intraday
moves. They consider themselves longer-term investors and tend to hold
positions for weeks at a time. So they act on those longer-term charts only.
There is another group of traders who will look solely at a more intermediate time period. Some like the four-hour chart. Others like the onehour time period. This group of traders focuses purely on the hourly charts
and might consider themselves a cross between an investor and a trader. A
“trader” would be someone who does not plan to hold positions for an extended period of time—over intraday to three days. An “investor” typically
holds positions for a week or so, but rarely longer.
Finally, there are the strictly shorter-term traders who focus on charts
like the five-minute or even the minute charts. These traders look to trade
solely intra-day with durations lasting for minutes to hours and positions
exited by the end of the trading day.
I do not focus on any one chart, but rather on all three. If I do not have
a position, then my goal is find the borderlines that are most dominant for
the day from any one of the charts. I want to find the price levels where I
can enter a trade with a defined risk that I am comfortable with and have
the realistic potential for a two to three times return on the position as a
minimum. If it goes further, that’s even better.
If I am already in a trade, I am looking for those price targets or exits
on the Bullish or Bearish Highway that will keep me on the trend. In order
to keep the car moving on a trending highway, the exits need to be reached
and passed. If the exits cannot be passed, a consolidation period or a reversal of the trend may occur. Finally, if already in a trade, I am also looking
for those points where the bias may be shifting from being bullish to being
bearish or vice versa. These levels become my stop-loss levels. I am always
concerned about my risk.
All these three levels (the entries, the targets on the trending highway,
the trade exit levels) are borderlines. I am indifferent to which chart (the
five-minute, the hourly, or the daily) the impetus for trade locations come
from. However, what I do want to know is what price levels the traders in
each respective bucket (short, medium, and long term) are focusing on.
If the five-minute traders are the ones who have a key borderline level
to trade against that may exert the force to push the market up or down,
then I want to know that level. If the traders who look at the hourly chart
have a key borderline level to trade against today, I want to know that level.
Finally, if the daily longer-term traders have a key borderline level to trade
against, then I want to know that level too.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c07

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

158

19:20

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

FIGURE 7.2 EURUSD on a Daily Chart

I am indifferent to which bucket of traders is going to control the action. However, I want to know what levels each are following—what simple things all are focusing on—and filter in my mind the most important
borderline levels from the tools I and they are using.

The Daily Chart
As an example, in Figure 7.2, the daily chart would be the key chart to
follow when the price was trading around the 100 day MA (solid line) or the
200 day MA (dashed line) as it was in June and July 2008. Even if I do not
plan to hold positions for weeks on end like a longer-term trader would,
I want to be aware when the price is trading around the 100 day moving
average. That level (which is at 1.5664) is the most significant borderline
level on that day.
NONTRENDING CLUE
A break and close below the key MA level is signiﬁcant and likely to lead to a
continuation of the downward trend—if broken.

If I were to focus solely on the daily chart, a realistic target on a break
of the 100 day MA would be the 200 day confirming MA (the dashed line
in Figure 7.2). That level is all the way down at 1.5224 or 440 pips away.
