
simple,” he was told. “Feed him hamburgers.” Bell was one of many people over the decades who thought
this advice surely could not be literal. When lunchtime arrived, the chef sent out a plainly prepared fish
course. Buffett didn’t touch it. Then came a pretty salad with a nice imported cheese. Buffett ignored it. Veal
or something similar arrived as the third course. Buffett took a bite or two and pushed the food around on his
plate. “Mr. Buffett,” Bell said, looking worried, “I’ve noticed you haven’t been eating your food. What’s
wrong? Is there something else we can get for you?”
“I follow a very simple rule when it comes to food,” said Buffett. “If a three-year-old doesn’t eat it, I don’t
eat it.”21
The following day, Buffett, Deryck Maughan, and Bob Denham went to the Rayburn House Office Building
to testify before Congress. Katharine Graham showed up to lend moral support, sitting with Maughan and
Denham in the first row. Buffett made a striking impression, seated alone at the subcommittee table and
pledging extraordinary cooperation with Congress and the regulators.22 “I want to find out exactly what
happened in the past so that this stain is borne by the guilty few,” he said, “and removed from the
innocent.”
The Congressmen excoriated Salomon, postured as saviors of investors, and demanded a total break with the
past. Nonetheless, they appeared slightly awed by Buffett. When he spoke, “The Red Sea parted, and the
Oracle appeared,” says Maughan.23 Buffett laid the problems on Wall Street. “Huge markets attract people
who measure themselves by money,” he said. “If someone goes through life and measures themselves solely
by how much they have, or how much money they earned last year, sooner or later they’re going to end up
in trouble.” Salomon, he said, was going to have different priorities from now on.
“Lose money for the firm, and I will be understanding. Lose a shred of reputation for the firm, and I will be
ruthless.”
Those words have since been parsed and dissected in classrooms and case studies as the model of corporate
nobility. Buffett’s unflinching display of principle summed up much about the man. In this statement, many
of his personal proclivities—rectitude, the urge to preach, his love of crisp, simple rules of behavior—had
merged. Openness, integrity, extreme honesty, all the things that he meant to stand for: Buffett meant for
Salomon to stand for them too. If Berkshire Hathaway was his editorial page, Salomon would be the church
of finance.
Buffett headed back to 7 World Trade Center and put out a one-page letter to employees, insisting they
report all legal violations and moral failures to him. He exempted petty moral failures like minor expenseaccount abuses, but, “when in doubt, call me,” he told them. He put his home phone number on the letter.
We are going to do “first-class business in a first-class way,” he wrote.24
He wanted to run things by what he called the “front-page test.” Don’t just obey the rules, he said.
I want employees to ask themselves whether they are willing to have any contemplated act appear the next
day on the front page of their local paper, to be read by their spouses, children, and friends, with the
reporting done by an informed and critical reporter.25
Employees at the time were frantically trying to keep from losing the firm. They called customers and begged
them not to desert Salomon and ditched assets as fast as they could sell them because the debt that financed
them was disappearing. John Macfarlane and the repo desk, which sold and bought batches of bonds,
managed an intricate runoff of assets while negotiating tensely with numerous lenders, some of whom were
refusing to advance money to the firm.26
The balance sheet dwindled at the rate of about a billion dollars a day. Macfarlane and the traders met with
lenders several times to make sure they were informed, and concentrated on stabilizing Salomon’s balance
sheet and customer relationships, gradually raising the firm’s interest allocation charge and letting economics

do the rest.27 They paid off all the firm’s commercial paper and restructured the debt toward medium-term
notes and longer-term capital. Using futures markets and swaps (derivative trades), the firm’s traders tiptoed
through the market to disguise the giant fire sale they were putting on. If other brokers recognized the pattern
of their sales, it could set off a raid.28
Under threat of indictment, it was far from certain that Salomon would survive. The employees understood
the message of Buffett’s letter. Absolutely nothing else could go wrong in this atmosphere, with regulators
and Congress in full cry. “I want every employee to be his or her own compliance officer,” Buffett said. This
meant that to save the firm, they had to spy on each other. Meanwhile, everyone knew that MTO was
crawling through the government desk like a minesweeper, looking for anything that could be wrong. As the
customers fled, the trades shrank, and the fear spread, the firm’s long-standing culture of swashbuckling
risk-taking began to fade.
Within days, Buffett was called back, this time to testify before the Senate. Corrigan, Breeden, and the
federal prosecutors remained disgusted with Salomon. As he waited to be called, seated a couple of rows
behind Corrigan in the Senate chamber, Buffett heard Senator Chris Dodd question Corrigan about whether
the Federal Reserve had been asleep at the switch.29 Corrigan said no, and that the Sternlight letter delivered
on August 13 had been designed to produce a change in management but had been ignored—which, Buffett
saw, he interpreted as Salomon spitting in his face.
Buffett sat figuratively scratching his head. He knew there was some kind of major problem here, but he
didn’t know what Corrigan was talking about.30
When it came time for him to testify, he said, “The nation has a right to expect its rules and laws to be
obeyed, and Salomon did not live up to this obligation.” Congressmen complained about Salomon’s
excessive pay. How could one bond-arbitrage trader make $23 million? they asked. “That disturbed me
plenty,” Buffett replied. They wanted to know what bond arbitrage was, and whether it benefited the
economy. Buffett explained, then said, “If you asked me whether that compares to a good teacher in a
public school, I would not want you to press me on it.”
Why hadn’t a board filled with smart people been more aware and alert? a Congressman demanded. Without
betraying the fact that he was steaming inside about the Sternlight letter—whatever that might be—Buffett
said that management had withheld information.31 He acknowledged that Munger had been the only one
smart enough to ask the right questions when the first phone call came.
He was not about to defend Salomon as what it was: a great company with a wonderful culture that had a
single employee who did a terrible thing, overseen by a management who mishandled the situation
disastrously. Defending the firm of Liar’s Poker was not likely to win friends. No, Salomon was a financial
Gomorrah that must be investigated and purged of its ticket-forging, bonus-pimping, pizza-tossing ways.
This bold, arresting stance stopped a brewing witch hunt in its tracks. The pitchforks went back into the
barns. The employees went along accordingly. “It was a brilliant strategy,” said Eric Rosenfeld. “That was
our marching order, and we marched.”
When Buffett got back to Salomon, he went after the details of the Sternlight letter; “he was livid,” according
to board member Gedale Horowitz. “It compounded the felony. He was so angry because he hadn’t been told
and the letter hadn’t been responded to.” Other than the Glauber meeting, the Sternlight letter was the most
serious act of “information rationing.” Withholding it from the board had put them in the position of making a
number of decisions in a state of ignorance about Corrigan’s expectations. Buffett’s and Munger’s attitudes
toward prior management hardened. Now the real import of Munger’s term “thumb-sucking” became
absolutely clear. “Thumb-sucking” meant ignoring the obvious until your diaper was full. Over a couple of
weeks, said Munger, “We paid attention to our sovereign”—meaning the Treasury and the Federal
Reserve—“and our views changed as our cognition improved.” As far as Gutfreund was concerned, “we had
no option of forgiveness,”32 Buffett said.

Through these revelations, Buffett led Salomon with apparent equanimity and poise, while Maughan and a
few employees dressed in hazmat suits made up the cleanup crew. But beneath his eggshell-smooth
demeanor, he was roiling in turmoil. To keep himself from thinking about Salomon, he played an electronic
game called Monty for hours at a time. He hated being away from Omaha. Gladys Kaiser noticed the lift in
his step when he returned and the drag in his feet when he had to leave. She wanted to retire but stayed on
temporarily because her boss was having such a terrible year.33 New York did not suit him any more than it
had when he was young and working at Graham-Newman. He remained aloof, never appeared on the trading
floor, and, as one senior manager noted, even a glimpse of him in the hallways at Salomon was “a rare
sighting.” Susie came out to visit from San Francisco. Kay Graham arrived to play bridge and keep him
company. Before long, he had set up a regular game with Carol Loomis, George Gillespie, and Ace
Greenberg, the CEO of Bear Stearns. Bridge helped him relax because, when he played bridge, he couldn’t
think about anything else. A couple of miles uptown, in his enormous Park Avenue apartment filled with a
painstakingly assembled collection of art, his old friend Dan Cowin lay dying of cancer.
Buffett wasn’t sleeping. When in New York, he would call home at twelve-thirty a.m., since he had the
special deal to get the Wall Street Journal early in Omaha, and have tomorrow’s news read to him over the
phone.34 He listened on tenterhooks, fearing that something horrible would be published about Salomon.
Often there was, but at least he knew it before the rest of the employees, some of whom were seeing even
less of their own homes than he was of Omaha. They were working fourteen or more hours a day to hold the
firm together in the face of repeated obstacles and humiliations. Salomon’s stock and bond salesmen called
clients knowing their main task was to convince them that the firm was not going under. Investment-banking
clients were canceling previously committed deals as fast as they could run out the door. British Telecom
threw Salomon out of the landmark deal that Gutfreund had gone to London to save, a trip that had caused
him to miss the phone call with Buffett in Reno that revealed the emerging scandal. Bankers trying to sell
other business faced an almost impossible task, as competitors used the firm’s precarious status against it
when Salomon vied against them in banking “bake-offs.”35
Other employees got field promotions of daunting magnitude. Maughan elevated one of the arbs, Eric
Rosenfeld, to head trader, alongside Bill McIntosh, the head of sales. Rosenfeld, a former college professor
who had never worked with a team of more than five people, suddenly found himself managing six hundred.
Then the investigators threatened to fire some of his traders. And along with managing the six hundred,
Rosenfeld personally reviewed thousands of trades for the lawyers to reconstruct what had happened.36
He did not want this promotion; he and the other arbs wanted J.M. back. Meriwether’s office remained
exactly as he had left it. The golf clubs, his ceremonial instruments of power, leaned in the corner. The
cleaning crew kept the shrine well-dusted. The arbs gathered to consult the oracles of trading. They prayed
for J.M.’s return. Salomon’s stock continued to slump toward the low $20s.
As the investigation ticked along and the employees rowed like galley slaves, Buffett’s mind could not help
but wander toward his main preoccupations: Berkshire Hathaway and investing. He had just bought a shoe
company, H.H. Brown Shoes, and turned to his secretary at Salomon, Paula Orlowski, sending her to the
library to delve into computer files in search of SEC documents on Morse Shoe, another footwear maker that
had recently filed for bankruptcy.37
Nevertheless, Salomon demanded most of his attention. Piled on top of other, earlier scandals—Ivan Boesky,
Michael Milken at Drexel Burnham Lambert—the Salomon affair had fueled the perception that Wall Street
was utterly corrupt. In the wake of Buffett’s performance before Congress, a raft of other brokerage firms
rushed to the confessional and followed suit.38 By now, Salomon’s investigators had discovered that Mozer
had bid more than thirty-five percent on eight separate occasions, submitting false customer bids or jacking
up customer bids and taking the extra bonds into Salomon’s own account without informing the clients whose
names had been used. On four occasions he had managed to acquire more than three-quarters of all the debt
issued.39 As the witch-hunt atmosphere heightened, Buffett upped the ante. At the next board meeting, he
led a discussion. Why should Salomon be paying the attorneys of John Gutfreund to stonewall us? was the
thrust of his questioning.40 The directors voted, almost unanimously, to make two surprising moves. No

severance pay, they said. And the firm cut off payment of legal fees for the former executives.41
The drama now revolved around two things: the Federal Reserve’s deliberations over whether to keep
Salomon as a primary dealer, and the criminal case. The Federal Reserve lacked the expedient option of
temporarily suspending the firm: “It’s like executing somebody technically and then resuscitating them,” said
Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan. In October, the Fed was seriously considering letting Salomon
fail. Keeping it around was a decision that might be “jumped on by politicians right and left.”42
The U.S. Attorney’s prosecutors thought they had enough evidence to indict. The criminal law makes it very
difficult to defend corporations against the acts of their employees. Gary Naftalis, Salomon’s criminal lawyer,
advised the firm that “Salomon plainly could be convicted” if it was indicted. For obvious reasons, everyone
at the firm was desperate to get the criminal matter resolved. As long as it was hanging over the firm’s head,
Salomon operated under a death threat, and customers knew as much. But Naftalis was in no hurry. He
reasoned that a quick decision would probably mean indictment, whereas more time would let him lobby and
persuade that Salomon did not deserve indictment; more time would let Salomon demonstrate its
extraordinary willingness to cooperate; more time made it less likely that the prosecutors would indict.43
After some three months of work dedicated to reforming the firm, Denham led Buffett, Olson, Naftalis, and
Frank Barron to a secret location, chosen at U.S. Attorney Otto Obermaier’s insistence, half a mile from the
prosecutor’s office at St. Andrew’s Plaza near City Hall. It was a last-ditch attempt to persuade Obermaier
and his lawyers not to indict.44
A Teutonic old-school prosecutor with a love of the law and a deep respect for the history and traditions of
the U.S. Attorney’s office, Obermaier had been trying to figure out what to do with the fiasco that had landed
in his lap. He recognized its unique nature. “This is no assault case on the New York subways,” he said.
Indeed, he had been calling Jerry Corrigan “alarmingly often” to learn the ins and outs of the Treasury bond
market: the difference between two-year notes and thirty-year bonds, the frequency of auctions, and how
they were conducted.45
Sitting in a little conference room facing Obermaier, Buffett did most of the talking. He worked very hard to
convey what he had said so many times, that if the firm were indicted, it could not survive. Obermaier made
comparisons, however, to a case involving Chrysler, which had survived prosecution.46 The difference
between a firm that sold hard assets and a firm that bought and sold nothing more than promises on pieces of
paper was initially not clear. Buffett tried to get past the image of onion-burger-tossing slobs inspired by
Liar’s Poker and invoked the innocent rank-and-file who would lose their jobs if Salomon went down. He
promised that he would not sell his Salomon stock anytime soon and that his people would continue to run
the place. He conveyed the sweeping nature of the cultural changes taking place inside the firm. This made
an impression on Obermaier, but he kept a poker face. He had many other factors to consider.47 The
Salomon team went back across town with no idea whether they had succeeded or failed.
By midwinter, Salomon’s status as a primary dealer remained unresolved. The firm still lacked the right to
trade for clients, and the Treasury Department could undo the whole deal at any moment. Under threat of
corporate criminal indictment, Buffett and Maughan labored to prove the firm worthy of saving. Buffett had
run a full-page ad in the Wall Street Journal explaining the firm’s new standards.48
“I said that we would have people to match our principles, rather than the reverse. But I found out that
wasn’t so easy.”
Day after day, Buffett bore down, shocked by the lavish lifestyle that was taken for granted on Wall Street.
The executive dining room’s kitchen, as large as that of any restaurant in New York, was run by a head chef
trained at the Culinary Institute of America and staffed by a pastry chef, a sous-chef, and a number of underchefs. Employees could order “anything on earth they wanted” for lunch.49 In his first days in New York,
Buffett received a letter from the head of another bank, inviting him to lunch so their chefs could do battle.
Buffett’s idea of testing his chef’s skills was ordering a hamburger for lunch every single day.

The frustrated chef created batch after batch of handmade potato chips. He peeled the potatoes into cylinders
sized to the millimeter, sliced them gossamer-thin, and whisked them into fresh sizzling oil until crisped just
so. The perfect potato chips lay heaped in a pyramid alongside the daily hamburger on Buffett’s plate. He ate
them absentmindedly, daydreaming of McDonald’s french fries.
For Buffett, the dining room symbolized the culture of Wall Street, which he found abhorrent. He had been
born in an age where money was scarce and life was lived at a walking pace, and he’d arranged his own life
to keep things that way. On Wall Street, money was plentiful and life was lived at whatever speed bandwidth
could currently supply. People left their homes at five a.m. daily and returned at nine or ten at night. Their
employers showered them with money for doing that but in return wanted every waking second of their time
and supplied certain services to keep them working at a treadmill pace. Buffett as a child had been impressed
by the Stock Exchange employee who rolled custom-made cigars, but now found this astonishing.
“They had a barbershop downstairs, and they didn’t even tell me about it. They were afraid of what would
happen when I found out. And they had a guy who came around and shined your shoes, and you didn’t pay
him.”
The executives of Salomon had previously felt, as one underling put it, that “God forbid they should ever lift
anything but a fork.” Behavior by their new billionaire chairman that would seem normal on Main Street
shocked Salomon’s employees. On the way to play bridge one night, Buffett asked his Salomon driver to stop
the car. He climbed out and walked into a nearby store, then returned a few minutes later as the driver
watched, mouth agape. The chairman was carrying huge bags full of ham sandwiches and Coca-Cola.50 This
was the new Salomon.
But it was the battle over pay that became the watershed. Early in the fall, Buffett had told the staff that he
would be slashing $110 million from the year-end bonus pool. “Employees producing mediocre returns for
their owners should expect their pay to reflect this shortfall,” he wrote.51 That seemed simple and obvious to
him. Businesses and people that were producing should be paid. Those that weren’t should not. Maughan
agreed with Buffett that the culture of entitlement had to go. People were not entitled to millions just because
they owned three houses and were supporting two ex-wives.52 But for once Buffett had miscalculated the
limits of human nature. The formerly enriched employees, used to being showered with money on bonus day,
now knew that they were about to be gouged.
Buffett’s reasoning that employees should not take home all the spoils and the shareholders none was lost on
them. Indeed, they believed the opposite, since they had been taking home the spoils for years. A decrease
from last year was outrageous. They felt that Buffett was trying to transfer some of the guilt from Mozer’s
misdeeds to them by making an issue out of the bonuses. They had not caused Salomon’s woes. Rather, they
had stayed out of loyalty and were enduring humiliation and misery in its aftermath. They were sweeping up
behind the elephant. They felt that they deserved combat pay. It wasn’t their fault that their businesses
weren’t performing. How could they sell an investment-banking deal while the firm was under threat of
indictment? Didn’t Buffett understand that? They were up against the fact that everybody on Wall Street
knew that Buffett thought investment bankers were nothing but useless stuffed shirts with fancy cuff links.
Meanwhile, despite its problems, Salomon was actually having a decent year financially. They resented being
called greedy once again by an avaricious billionaire.
The deprived traders, sales force, and bankers had to hang around until year-end, the traditional time for
quitting, after individual bonuses were paid and the smaller but nevertheless multimillion-dollar deferred
bonus pool was scheduled to cash out.
When the bonus pool was divvied up around the holidays, the battle over pay reached epic scale. The top
thirteen executives saw their bonuses slashed by half. As soon as the numbers were announced, Salomon’s
hallways and trading floor erupted in open revolt. With budgets and bonuses gutted, traders and bankers fled.
Half the equity department—home of the investment bankers—ran out the door. The rest of the trading floor
went on a temporary strike.
