Praise for Cryptoassets and Chris Burniske and Jack Tatar
Anyone with a practical or theoretical interest in financial markets should
know about cryptoassets. Burniske and Tatar do an excellent job explaining
this brave new world to us.
—HARRY MAX MARKOWITZ, winner of the Nobel Prize
in Economics and founder of Modern Portfolio Theory

Cryptoassets is an outstanding overview of the state of digital currencies and
assets. Highly recommended for those who want to understand where finance
is going.
—BALAJI S. SRINIVASAN, CEO of 21.co
and board partner at Andreessen Horowitz

Burniske and Tatar have delivered a seminal guide to what may be the biggest investment opportunity since the Internet. Informative and actionable,
Cryptoassets is a must-read for crypto-enthusiasts and capital market investors
alike.
—ARTHUR B. LAFFER, chairman of Laffer Associates,
member of President Reagan’s Economic Policy Advisory Board,
and creator of the Laffer Curve

As we hurtle into a new, decentralized economy, Burniske and Tatar have laid
down something of immense importance: a coherent logic, a new science
even, for investing in the assets that will define that coming world.
—MICHAEL J. CASEY, senior advisor to the Digital Currency
Initiative at MIT Media Lab and coauthor of The Age of
Cryptocurrency

In this sweeping and lucid work, Burniske and Tatar make a compelling case
that cryptoassets are foundational to the second generation of the Internet
and represent a once-in-a-generation opportunity for the innovative investor. Required reading for anyone wanting to understand the future of finance,
business, and more.
—ALEX TAPSCOTT, CEO of NextBlock Global
and coauthor of Blockchain Revolution

Burniske 00.indd 1

9/11/17 11:29 AM

Poised to be one of the most profound inventions in history, blockchain technology may change everything—just as the wheel and the Internet did. Chris and
Jack will help you understand blockchains and the cryptoassets within them. If
you’re a financial advisor, this book will help you serve your clients better.
—RIC EDELMAN, three-time #1 Independent Financial Advisor
(Barron’s) and New York Times bestselling author of
The Truth About Your Future

Investors are always seeking new assets to diversify their portfolios, and the
emergence of cryptoassets provides such an opportunity. Burniske and Tatar
offer the first detailed analysis of cryptoassets from the perspective of a portfolio investment.
—CAMPBELL R. HARVEY, former president of the American
Finance Association and professor of finance at the Fuqua School
of Business at Duke University

Cryptoassets is the definitive guide that comes just in time to introduce you
to a radically new era of innovative investment. This book tells you all you
need to know to invest in this supreme opportunity of our time: replacing
the porous top-down “winner-take-all” Internet with a safe and cornucopian
cadastre of trust and opportunity that makes us all potential winners.
—GEORGE GILDER, cofounder of the Discovery Institute
and author of The Scandal of Money

The growth and importance of cryptocurrency and cryptocomputing rivals
the early growth of the commercial Internet and web, and the technical and
economic revolution that will result is perhaps even more significant than the
first phase of the Internet. Cryptoassets is an excellent introduction to this
breakthrough in technology and finance, and a tremendous resource for those
eager to get their heads around what can be a daunting and complex subject.
—JEREMY ALLAIRE, CEO and founder of Circle

This is an extremely well-researched and timely “state of the nation” treatise on
cryptoassets. I’m excited that the knowledge base of our industry is continuing
to expand with such high-quality thought leadership and insights.
—VINNY LINGHAM, cofounder and CEO of Civic.com,
Shark on Shark Tank South Africa, and board member
of the Bitcoin Foundation

Burniske 00.indd 2

9/11/17 11:29 AM

Since Bitcoin’s creation, people have been wondering why it and other crypto­
assets have any value. Chris Burniske and Jack Tatar give the most compelling
case for why, with sharp, detailed analysis that reflects their deep understanding of the technology and their strong finance background. Beginners as well
as more seasoned crypto investors will find new insights and sensible tips in
this practical guide.
—LAURA SHIN, senior editor at Forbes and host of Unchained

Cryptoassets is a fascinating introduction to this new space of the digital economy. The authors surface many historical examples to remind us that in times
of excitement, it is even more important to pay attention to the teams and talent behind each project.
—CHRISTIAN CATALINI, Theodore T. Miller Career
Development Professor at MIT and assistant professor of
technological innovation, entrepreneurship, and strategic
management at the Sloan School of Management at MIT

Cryptoassets is a must-read for all financial services executives and investors
who want to understand the fundamentals and future directions of this burgeoning new asset class. Delivered by two of the foremost authorities in the
nascent, multibillion-dollar space, this is the most extensive guide on crypto­
assets currently available.
—SANDRA RO, former head of digitization at CME Group

As renowned industry thought leaders, it’s no surprise that Chris and Jack
have delivered what is likely the most thoughtful and in-depth framework for
evaluating cryptoassets. Within this book, they’ve rolled up their sleeves to
provide helpful historical context and a valuation framework that readers will
find intellectually stimulating and illuminating for understanding this rapidly
emerging world of cryptoassets.
—SPENCER BOGART, managing director
and head of research at Blockchain Capital

Chris is at the forefront of the important work to better understand and analyze this emerging class of assets. In this book, he and Jack have encapsulated
years of their thinking in an easy-to-digest manner.
—DAVID KINITSKY, VP of research and innovation
at Fidelity Labs

Burniske 00.indd 3

9/11/17 11:29 AM

For the uninitiated, the world of cryptocurrencies is fraught with risks and pitfalls. No one should venture into this world without preparation. Cryptoassets
explains, in simple to understand terms, the full paradigm of Bitcoin and its
successor currencies, and it provides everything needed to explore this exciting world.
—JOHN MCAFEE, founder of McAfee Associates

A thorough, balanced, and easy read. I would recommend this to anyone who
considers building a portfolio of cryptoassets.
—RYAN SELKIS, former director of investments at Digital
Currency Group and managing director of CoinDesk

Serious investment professionals should read Cryptoassets if they want to
understand and value the first new asset class of the twenty-first century. Chris
and Jack explain this new-age investment opportunity comprehensively, artfully, and masterfully.
—CATHERINE WOOD, founder and CIO
of ARK Investment Management

A rare combination of quantitative analysis and first principles-based thinking—this is insightful, original content.
—ADAM WHITE, vice president of Coinbase
and general manager of GDAX

In an increasingly digital world, it is only a matter of time until enormous
amounts of value are transmitted and secured via blockchains, including the
value of music and creative works. Cryptoassets makes blockchains accessible
to the nontechnical by exploring their varied origin stories, use cases, and fundamental value. If you’re looking for a grounded, first-principles approach to
the next wave of Internet innovation, then this is a great book to read.
—JESSE WALDEN, founder of Mediachain Labs
and blockchain lead at Spotify

Chris and Jack show us the future of cryptoassets today. Their outlook is
pointed and perceptive. A must-read to understand the next era in wealth and
value creation.
—WILLIAM MOUGAYAR, general partner at Virtual Capital
Ventures and author of The Business Blockchain

Burniske 00.indd 4

9/11/17 11:29 AM

Young, Stanford-trained blockchain analyst and investor Chris Burniske has
teamed up with financial planning expert and author Jack Tatar to provide
the first comprehensive guide to understanding the fastest growing, most
exciting asset class under the sun. While many investors are still waking up
to the opportunity, these assets have already provided outsized returns, as the
overall market is now hovering around $100 billion, which is 10x from a year
ago and 100x from four years ago. Collectively referring to these investments
as “crypto­assets,” Burniske and Tatar provide a solid background on how the
technology arose, what problems it solves, and how, like the Internet itself, it’s
going to have a dramatic impact on not only the venture capital process but
on investing itself. Don’t think of rebalancing your portfolio without reading
this book.
—MICHAEL TERPIN, founder of Transform Group,
organizer of CoinAgenda, and cofounder of BitAngels

While the cryptoasset space has witnessed exponential growth, to achieve its
full potential, it has to be broadly integrated into the real world. With consistent objectivity and clarity, Chris and Jack’s book details cryptoassets as an
asset class, and will prove influential in driving institutional investor adoption
of this groundbreaking opportunity.
—JENNIFER ZHU SCOTT, founding partner of Radian Partners
and member of the Future of Blockchain Council of the World
Economic Forum

Cryptoassets provides a great introduction to and overview of the young yet
rapidly growing universe of all things blockchain. This industry, asset class,
and overall idea will make you ponder why abstract concepts like money,
identity, and business function like they do in the world today, and how the
innovation we’re seeing will completely reshape the economy of tomorrow.
From setting the stage to diving into specific protocols and projects to sharing
practical knowledge on how to invest in these emerging assets, Chris and Jack’s
combination of expertise and familiarity with the complex topics at hand are
testament to why I have considered them some of the best resources throughout my journey of falling deeper and deeper down the crypto rabbit hole.
—ALEX SUNNARBORG, research analyst at CoinDesk
and cofounder of Lawnmower.io

Burniske 00.indd 5

9/11/17 11:29 AM

From inception to the latest phase, Cryptoassets explores the past, present, and
future of this new asset class. It’s not a hard read yet delves into much of the
detail needed for a complete understanding of the benefits, and risks, of bitcoin, blockchain, and more. Chris and Jack have written a book I highly recommend to investors in this burgeoning field!
—PAT BOLLAND, former business editor at CNBC, CBC, BNN

Cryptoassets is the bible for all things crypto. Whether you’re a beginner or
expert, you will walk away with a deeper understanding of the entire eco­system
after reading this book.
—GREG ROSEN, principal at BoxGroup

Chris and Jack provide a holistic view of the origin, evolution, and analysis of
cryptoassets. It goes through their very short but intense history, talks about
methods for analyzing their value, and identifies the ones with potential. I’d
recommend it to anyone who wants to dive into investing and understanding
how cryptoassets will shape the future of society and the creation of value.
—LUIS CUENDE, cofounder of Aragon and Stampery

Those of us who work in the blockchain industry have long realized that the
rise of cryptocurrencies as a legitimate asset class was inevitable. But most
traditional investors have been slow on the uptick. Chris was the first buyside analyst to focus exclusively on this emerging asset class, and Jack was one
of the earliest financial journalists to stress its importance. For years, Chris
has been working hard to bring Wall Street’s rigorous analytical methodologies to cryptocurrencies, while Jack has been busy explaining the benefits of
cryptocurrencies to audiences around the world. Now, with Cryptoassets, they
describe, as nobody has before, why every investor should incorporate bitcoin,
ether, and new blockchain-based assets into their portfolios, and how to analyze these tokens in order to make the right investments.
—TRAVIS SCHER, investment associate at Digital Currency Group

Chris and Jack have written our generation’s A Random Walk Down Wall
Street. This book is required reading for anyone looking to get involved with
and profit from the cryptoassets boom.
—PATRICK ARCHAMBEAU, VP of engineering at CoinDesk
and cofounder of Lawnmower.io

Burniske 00.indd 6

9/11/17 11:29 AM

Chris and Jack have been fellow travelers in the blockchain space since way
before it was a polite cocktail party topic. Over the years, we’ve laughed and
marveled together at how the space has evolved. This book could not be more
timely in describing an emerging $100+ billion financial market and all of the
chaos and promise it brings. The authors capture not only the technical and
market analysis you need to know to invest in these projects but also the ethos
and excitement of the people pushing the envelope. Savor this book. It’s a timecapsule view of the birth of an amazing technology.
—PETER KIRBY, cofounder and CEO of Factom, Inc.

Burniske and Tatar thread the needle between an approachable guide for newcomers and thought-provoking insights for seasoned investors. I will surely be
assigning it to my graduate students as we cover cryptoassets.
—STEPHEN MCKEON, associate professor of finance at the
Lundquist College of Business at the University of Oregon

Token-based fund-raising is here to stay, and this book offers the best way
to value cryptoassets that I’ve seen. The book provides background and the
potential impacts of ICOs, offering insightful knowledge to both those entering the space and experienced investors like myself. I would recommend this
book for any crypto reading arsenal!
—PAUL VERADITTAKIT, partner at Pantera Capital

Burniske and Tatar have now given me an easy response when people ask how
to get started with cryptoassets—this book!
—ARI PAUL, CIO of BlockTower Capital

This is a seminal work in the evolution of the cryptosphere as digital money
moves mainstream. The book covers the full potential and array of what this
technology offers in piercing the veil to an Internet of value with all the new
innovations and crossovers from the traditional realm of finance. Chris and
Jack have brought a wealth of knowledge and cross-disciplinary methods to
bear from their respective fields and broken new ground in their analysis of
this exciting new space.
—CHARLIE HAYTER, cofounder and CEO of CryptoCompare

Burniske 00.indd 7

9/11/17 11:29 AM

Cryptoassets is a tour de force. Burniske and Tatar are able to leverage their
deep industry experience to condense a complex, continually evolving topic
into a concise and informative guide for investors looking to be on the cutting
edge of a new asset class. Cryptoassets will serve as the entry point to the space
for retail investors for years to come.
—PIETER GORSIRA, software engineer at CoinDesk
and cofounder of Lawnmower.io

In a world where issuing digital assets becomes as easy as creating a website,
Chris and Jack provide a comprehensive guide that will help you separate the
wheat from the chaff.
—DEMIAN BRENER, cofounder and CEO of Zeppelin Solutions

As we enter the next great evolution in global financial markets, Chris Burniske
and Jack Tatar have authored a unique and much-needed volume. It offers
not only a foundational understanding of cryptoassets and digital currencies
but also serves as a reference for evaluating and participating in a cryptoasset
future. A new asset class has emerged, and Cryptoassets is the definitive guide.
—RON QUARANTA, chairman of the Wall Street
Blockchain Alliance

This book is very accessible, comprehensive, and easy to read for any size
investor. One of its strengths is its ability to be valuable to the novice and the
experienced professional alike.
—JARED HARWAYNE-GIDANSKY, founding board member
of the Blockchain Association of Australia

Chris and Jack have created a book that not only explains the world of crypto­
assets but provides a framework for how to invest in it and become part of
what may be the greatest investment opportunity since the Internet.
—NED SCOTT, founder and CEO of Steemit

Cryptoassets is an intelligent and well-organized introduction to the world of
cryptoassets. The book adapts classic finance pricing models to the challenging task of valuing cryptoassets, offering the reader a solid head start to investing in this new exciting asset class.
—ALESSIO SARETTO, assistant professor of finance
at the University of Texas at Dallas

Burniske 00.indd 8

9/11/17 11:29 AM

If you want to know how cryptoassets work, get Mastering Bitcoin by Andreas
Antonopoulos, but if you want to know how and why you should be investing
in this new asset class, get yourself a copy of Cryptoassets.
—TRON BLACK, investor and principal developer
at Medici Ventures

Newcomers often try to wiggle their way into the world of accepted financial
tools. Most fail miserably. But cryptocurrency and its accompanying blockchain
technology have made their mark and will likely have an ongoing impact on
how we all do business. Burniske and Tatar have written an incredibly comprehensive book that explains what you need to know about this new asset class.
—DOUGLAS GOLDSTEIN, CFP, author of Rich as a King

By explaining the various crypto investments, from coins to tokens to commodities, and providing the tools to perform investment analysis, Cryptoassets is the
best crypto investment novices, professionals, and business leaders can make.
—RON KOCHMAN, former president and CEO of
Volt Information Sciences and cryptoasset angel investor

Cryptoassets provides a one-stop shop for learning about this new asset class.
You’ll learn about their colorful histories, how to apply fundamental valuation
techniques, and practical tips to navigate the at-times turbulent markets.
—MATTHEW GOETZ, CEO of BlockTower Capital

With investing, people always want to know about the next big thing. For curious minds who want to know about emerging technologies or even those who
already have an understanding of blockchains, Chris and Jack leave no stone
unturned. From the origins, to an explanation of how it works, to what’s next,
the reader will leave excited about the possibilities of investing money and
time in this exciting adventure.
—TOM SZAKY, founder and CEO of TerraCycle

This book is a must-read for any financial advisor who wants to stay on top
of the shifting asset and technological landscape. Advisors would be wise
to familiarize themselves with cryptoassets before their innovative clients
approach them for an intelligent cryptoasset discussion!
—FRED PYE, president and CEO of 3iQ Corp.

Burniske 00.indd 9

9/11/17 11:29 AM

What will a technology that validates the order of entries in an electronic ledger without a centralized administrator bring? Time will tell. If you can’t wait
until then, read Chris and Jack’s book. It will give you a great start.
—FRANCOIS GADENNE, chairman and executive director
of the Retirement Income Industry Association

The most complete and informational piece of literature on the subject today.
Chris Burniske and Jack Tatar steer the reader through a torrent of unknowns,
illuminating the complicated world of cryptoassets and their underlying technology, which will more than likely become our generation’s most important
innovation.
—RYAN LANCELOT, coauthor of What’s the Deal with Bitcoins?

A must-read to appreciate the Bitcoin network effect and the wave of innovation that it launched through the community of people who played critical
roles in creating all the distributed ecosystems that are transforming business
models.
—CRISTINA DOLAN, cofounder and COO of InsureX

Crypto trading and the FinTech innovations unlocked by blockchains will do
to Wall Street what personal Internet publishing and blogging did to media
empires. This power shift is inevitable. Capital allocation no longer needs to be
managed by powerful institutions which have proven to be corrupt and reckless. Regulation and regulatory capture is putting the U.S. at risk of losing out in
the transition. Chris Burniske and Jack Tatar give you, the individual, the tools
to evaluate these new cryptoassets and take advantage of what I believe will be
the greatest rebalancing of wealth and power that the world has ever seen.
— DR. PATRICK BYRNE, CEO of Overstock.com

Burniske 00.indd 10

9/11/17 11:29 AM

CRYPTOASSETS

Burniske 00.indd 1

9/11/17 11:29 AM

This page intentionally left blank

Burniske 00.indd 2

9/11/17 11:29 AM

CRYPTOASSETS
The Innovative Investor’s Guide
to Bitcoin and Beyond

CHRIS BURNISKE & JACK TATAR

Burniske 00.indd 3

New York

Chicago

San Francisco

London

Madrid

Mexico City

New Delhi

Singapore

Sydney

Athens
Milan
Toronto

9/11/17 11:29 AM

Copyright © 2018 by Chris Burniske and Jack Tatar. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under
the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed
in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written
permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-1-26-002668-9
MHID:
1-26-002668-X
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-1-26-002667-2,
MHID: 1-26-002667-1.
eBook conversion by codeMantra
Version 1.0
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after
every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit
of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations
appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and
sales promotions or for use in corporate training programs. To contact a representative, please visit
the Contact Us page at www.mhprofessional.com.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject
matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that neither the author nor the publisher is engaged
in rendering legal, accounting, securities trading, or other professional services. If legal advice or
other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought.
— From a Declaration of Principles Jointly Adopted
by a Committee of the American Bar Association
and a Committee of Publishers and Associations
TERMS OF USE
