as fast as everyone had hoped, and so the gap
between what the city’s employees are entitled to and what will exist is even greater
than previously imagined. The council then
votes to postpone, for six weeks, a vote on
whether to declare the city’s budget a “public
emergency,” and thus to give to the mayor,
Chuck Reed, new powers.
In between each motion an obese man not
so much dressed as enshrouded in blue jean
overalls maximizes his right to be heard for
five minutes on every subject: over and again
he rises from the front row of the audience,
waddles to the podium, and delivers
sophisticated-sounding but incomprehensible critiques of everything. “The absolute reduction in competence of government is predicated on what happened today . . . ”
The relationship between the people and
their money in California is such that you
can pluck almost any city at random and
enter a crisis. San Jose has the highest per

358/396

capita income of any city in the United
States, after New York. It has the highest
credit rating of any city in California with a
population over 250,000. It is one of the few
cities in America with a triple-A rating from
Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s, but only because its bondholders have the power to
compel the city to levy a tax on property
owners to pay off the bonds. The city itself is
not all that far from being bankrupt.
It’s late afternoon when I meet Mayor
Chuck Reed, in his office at the top of city
hall tower. The crowd below has just begun
to chant. The public employees, as usual, are
protesting him. Reed is so used to it that he
hardly notices. He’s a former air force fighter
pilot and Vietnam veteran with an intellectual bent and the clipped manner of a midwestern farmer. He has a master’s degree
from Princeton, a law degree from Stanford,
and a lifelong interest in public policy. Still,
he presents less as the mayor of a big city in

359/396

California than as a hard-bitten, upstanding
sheriff of a small town who doesn’t want any
trouble. Elected to the city council in 2000,
he became mayor six years later; in 2010, he
was reelected with 77 percent of the vote.
He’s a Democrat, but at this point it doesn’t
much matter which party he belongs to, or
what his ideological leanings are, or for that
matter how popular he is with the people of
San Jose. He’s got a problem so big that it
overwhelms ordinary politics: the city owes
so much more money than it can afford to
pay to its employees that it could cut its
debts in half and still wind up broke. “I did a
calculation of cost per public employee,” he
says, as we settle in. “We’re not as bad as
Greece, I don’t think.”
The problem, he explains, predates the
most recent financial crisis. “Hell, I was here.
I know how it started. It started in the 1990s
with the Internet boom. We live near rich
people, so we thought we were rich.” San

360/396

Jose’s budget, like the budget of any city,
turns on the pay of public safety workers: the
police and firefighters now eat 75 percent of
all discretionary spending. The Internet
boom created both great expectations for
public employees and tax revenues to meet
them. In its negotiations with unions the city
was required to submit to binding arbitration, which works for police officers and firefighters just as it does for Major League
Baseball players. Each side of any pay dispute makes its best offer, and a putatively
neutral judge picks one of them. There is no
meeting in the middle: the judge simply
rules for one side or the other. Each side thus
has an incentive to be reasonable, for the less
reasonable they are, the less likely it is that
the judge will favor their proposal. The problem with binding arbitration for police officers and firefighters, says Reed, is that the
judges are not neutral. “They tend to be labor
lawyers who favor the unions,” he says, “and

361/396

so the city does anything it can to avoid the
process.” And what politician wants to spat
publicly with police officers and firefighters?
Over the past decade the city of San Jose
had repeatedly caved to the demands of its
public safety unions. In practice this meant
that when the police or fire department of
any neighboring city struck a better deal for
itself, it became a fresh argument for improving the pay of San Jose police and fire.
The effect was to make the sweetest deal cut
by public safety workers with any city in
northern California the starting point for the
next round of negotiations for every other
city. The departments also used each other to
score debating points. For instance, back in
2002, the San Jose police union cut a threeyear deal that raised police officers’ pay by 10
percent over the contract. Soon afterward,
the San Jose firefighters cut a better deal for
themselves, including a pay raise of 23 percent. The police felt robbed and complained

362/396

mightily until the city council crafted a deal
that handed them 5 percent more pay in exchange for training to fight terrorists. “We
got famous for our antiterrorist training
pay,” explains one city official. Eventually
the antiterrorist training stopped; the police
just kept the extra pay, with benefits. “Our
police and firefighters will earn more in retirement than they did when they were working,” says Reed. “There used to be an argument that you have to give us money or we
can’t afford to live in the city. Now the more
you pay them the less likely they are to live in
the city, because they can afford to leave. It’s
staggering. When did we go from giving
people sick leave to letting them accumulate
it and cash it in for hundreds of thousands of
dollars when they are done working? There’s
a corruption here. It’s not just a financial
corruption. It’s a corruption of the attitude of
public service.”

363/396

When he was elected to the city council in
2000, Reed says, “I hadn’t even thought
about pensions. I can’t say I said, ‘Here is my
plan.’ I never thought about this stuff. It never came up.” It wasn’t until San Diego flirted
with bankruptcy, in 2002, that he wondered
about San Jose’s finances. He began to investigate the matter. “That’s when I realized
there were big problems,” he says. “That’s
when I started paying attention. That’s when
I started asking questions: could it happen
here? It’s like the housing bubble and the Internet bubble. There were people around
who were writing about it. It’s not that there
aren’t people telling us that this is crazy. It’s
that you refuse to believe that you are crazy.”
He hands me a chart. It shows that the
city’s pension costs when he first became interested in the subject were projected to run
$73 million a year. This year they would be
$245 million: pension and health costs of retired workers now are more than half the

364/396

budget. In three years’ time pension costs
alone would come to $400 million, though
“if you were to adjust for real-life expectancy
it is more like six hundred fifty million dollars.” Legally obliged to meet these costs, the
city can respond only by cutting elsewhere.
As a result, San Jose, once run by 7,450 city
workers, was now being run by 5,400 city
workers. The city was back to staffing levels
of 1988, when it had a quarter of a million
fewer residents to service. The remaining
workers had taken a 10 percent pay cut; yet
even that was not enough to offset the increase in the city’s pension liability. The city
had closed its libraries three days a week. It
had cut back servicing its parks. It had refrained from opening a brand-new community center built before the housing bust,
because it couldn’t pay to staff the place. For
the first time in history it had laid off police
officers and firefighters.

365/396

By 2014, Reed had calculated, a city of a
million people, the tenth largest city in the
United States, would be serviced by 1,600
public workers. “There is no way to run a city
with that level of staffing,” he said. “You start
to ask: What is a city? Why do we bother to
live together? But that’s just the start.” The
problem was going to grow worse until, as he
put it, “you get to one.” A single employee to
service the entire city, presumably with a focus on paying pensions. “I don’t know how
far out you have to go until you get to one,”
said Reed, “but it isn’t all that far.” At that
point, if not before, the city would be nothing
more than a vehicle to pay the retirement
costs of its former workers. The only clear
solution was if former city workers up and
died, soon. But former city workers were,
blessedly, living longer than ever.
This wasn’t a hypothetical scary situation,
said Reed. “It’s a mathematical inevitability.”
In spirit it reminded me of Bernard Madoff’s

366/396

investment business. Anyone who looked at
Madoff’s returns and understood them could
see he was running a Ponzi scheme; only one
person who had understood them bothered
to blow the whistle, and no one listened to
him. (See No One Would Listen: A True Financial Thriller, by Harry Markopolos.)
In his negotiations with the unions, the
mayor has gotten nowhere. “I understand
the police and firefighters,” he says. “They
think, We’re the most important, and everyone else goes [gets fired] first.” The police
union recently suggested to the mayor that
he close the libraries for the other four days.
“We looked into that,” Reed says. “If you
close the libraries an extra day you pay for
twenty or thirty cops.” Adding twenty more
police officers for a year wouldn’t solve anything. The cops who were spared this year
would be axed next, in response to the soaring costs of the pensions of city workers who
already had retired. On the other side of the

367/396

inequality is the taxpayer of San Jose, who
has no interest in paying more than he
already does. “It’s not that we’re insolvent
and can’t pay our bills,” says Reed. “It’s
about willingness.”
I ask him what the chances were that, in
this pinch, he could raise taxes. He holds up
a thumb and index finger: zero. He’s recently
coined a phrase, he says: “service-level
insolvency.” Service-level insolvency means
that the expensive community center that
has been built and named cannot be opened.
It means closing libraries three days a week.
It isn’t financial bankruptcy; it’s cultural
bankruptcy.
“How on earth did this happen?” I ask him.
“The only way I can explain it,” he says, “is
that they got the money because it was
there.” But he has another way to explain it,
and in a moment he offers it up.
“I think we’ve suffered from a series of
mass delusions,” he says.

368/396

I didn’t completely understand what he
meant, and said so.
“We’re all going to be rich,” he says. “We’re
all going to live forever. All the forces in the
state are lined up to preserve the status quo.
To preserve the delusion. And here—this
place—is where the reality hits.”
On the way back to the elevators I chatted
with two of Mayor Reed’s aides. He’d mentioned to me that as bad as they might think
they have it in San Jose, a lot of other American cities have it worse. “I count my blessings when I talk to the mayors of other cities,” he’d said.
“Which city do you pity most?” I asked, just
before the elevator doors closed.
The aides laughed and in unison said,
“Vallejo!”
WELCOME TO VALLEJO, CITY OF OPPORTUNITY,

reads the sign on the way in, but the shops
that remain open display signs that say, WE
ACCEPT
FOOD
STAMPS.
Weeds surround

369/396

abandoned businesses, and all traffic lights
are set to permanently blink, which is a
formality as there are no longer any cops to
police the streets. Vallejo is the one city in
the Bay Area where you can park anywhere
and not worry about getting a ticket, because
there are no meter maids, either. The windows of city hall are dark but its front porch
is a hive of activity. A young man in a backwards baseball cap, sunglasses, and a new
pair of Nike sneakers stands on a low wall
and calls out an address:
“Nine hundred Cambridge Drive,” he says.
“In Benicia.”
The people in the crowd below instantly
begin bidding. From 2006 to 2010 the value
of Vallejo real estate fell 66 percent. One in
sixteen homes in the city are in foreclosure.
This is apparently the fire sale, but the characters involved are so shady and furtive that
I can hardly believe it. I stop to ask what’s
going on, but the bidders don’t want to talk.

370/396

“Why would I tell you anything?” says a guy
sitting in a Coleman folding chair. He obviously thinks he’s shrewd, and perhaps he is.
The lobby of city hall is completely empty.
There’s a receptionist’s desk but no receptionist. Instead, there’s a sign: TO
FORECLOSURE AUCTIONEERS AND FORECLOSURE
BIDDERS: PLEASE DO NOT CONDUCT BUSINESS IN
THE CITY HALL LOBBY.

On the third floor I find the offices of the
new city manager, Phil Batchelor, but when I
walk in there is no one in sight. It’s just a collection of empty cubicles. At length a woman
appears and leads me to Batchelor himself.
He’s in his sixties and, oddly enough, a published author. He’s written one book on how
to raise children and another on how to face
death. Both deliver an overtly Christian message, but he doesn’t come across as evangelical; he comes across as sensible, and a little
weary. His day job, before he retired, was
running cities with financial difficulties. He

371/396

came out of retirement to take this job, but
only after the city council had asked him a
few times. “The more you say no, the more
determined they are to get you,” he says. His
chief demand was not financial but social:
he’d only take the job if the people on the city
council ceased being nasty to one another
and behaved civilly. He actually got that in
writing, and they’ve kept their end of the
bargain. “I’ve been in a lot of places that have
been in a lot of trouble but I’ve never seen
anything like this,” he says. He then lays out
what he finds unusual, beginning with the
staffing levels. He’s now running the city,
and he has a staff of one: I just met her.
“When she goes out to the bathroom she has
to lock the door,” he says, “because I’m in
meetings, and we have no one else.”
Back in 2008, unable to come to terms
with its many creditors, Vallejo had declared
bankruptcy. Eighty percent of the city’s
budget—and the lion’s share of the claims

372/396

that had thrown it into bankruptcy—were
wrapped up in the pay and benefits of public
safety workers. Relations between the police
and the firefighters, on the one hand, and the
citizens, on the other, were at historic lows.
The public safety workers thought that the
city was out to screw them on their contracts; the citizenry thought that the public
safety workers were using fear as a tool to extort money from them. The local joke was
that “P.D.” stands for “Pay or Die.” The city
council meetings had become exercises in
outrage: at one, a citizen arrived and tossed a
severed pig’s head onto the floor. “There’s no
good reason why Vallejo is as fucked up as it
is, says a longtime resident named Marc Garman, who created a website to catalogue the
civil war. “It’s a boat ride to San Francisco.
You throw a stone and you hit Napa.” Since
the bankruptcy, the police and fire departments had been cut in half; some number of
the citizens who came to Phil Batchelor’s

373/396

office did so to say they no longer felt safe in
their own homes. All other city services had
been reduced effectively to zero. “Do you
know that some cities actually pave their
streets?” says Batchelor. “That’s not here.”
I notice on his shelf a copy of Fortune
magazine, with Meredith Whitney on the
cover. And as he talked about the bankrupting of Vallejo I realized that I had heard this
story before, or a private-sector version of it.
The people who had power in the society,
and were charged with saving it from itself,
had instead bled the society to death. The
problem with police officers and firefighters
isn’t a public-sector problem; it isn’t a problem with government; it’s a problem with the
entire society. It’s what happened on Wall
Street in the run-up to the subprime crisis.
It’s a problem of people taking what they
can, just because they can, without regard to
the larger social consequences. It’s not just a
coincidence that the debts of cities and states

374/396

spun out of control at the same time as the
debts of individual Americans. Alone in a
dark room with a pile of money, Americans
knew exactly what they wanted to do, from
the top of the society to the bottom. They’d
been conditioned to grab as much as they
could, without thinking about the long-term
consequences. Afterward, the people on Wall
Street would privately bemoan the low morals of the American people who walked away
from their subprime loans, and the American
people would express outrage at the Wall
Street people who paid themselves a fortune
to design the bad loans.
Having failed to persuade its public safety
workers that it could not afford to make
them rich, the city of Vallejo, California, had
hit bottom: it could fall no lower. “My approach has been I don’t care who is to
blame,” Batchelor said. “We needed to
change.” When I met him, a few months
after he had taken the job, he was still trying

375/396

to resolve a narrow financial dispute: the city
had 1,013 claimants with half a billion dollars in claims but only $6 million to dole out
to them. They were survivors of a shipwreck
on a life raft with limited provisions. His job,
as he saw it, was to persuade them that the
only chance of survival was to work together.
He didn’t view the city’s main problem as
financial: the financial problems were the
symptom. The disease was the culture. Just a
few weeks earlier, he had sent a memo to the
remaining city staff—the city council, the
mayor, the public safety workers. The central
message was that if you want to fix this place
you need to change how you behave, each
and every one of you. “It’s got to be about the
people,” he said. “Teach them respect for
each other, integrity and how to strive for excellence. Cultures change. But people need to
want to change. People convinced against
their will are of the same opinion still.”

376/396

“How do you change the culture of an entire city?” I asked him.
“First of all we look internally,” he said.
of Vallejo passes directly
through the office of Dr. Peter Whybrow, a
British neuroscientist at UCLA with a theory
about American life. He thinks the dysfunction in America’s society is a by-product of
America’s success. In academic papers and a
popular book, American Mania, Whybrow
argues, in effect, that human beings are
neurologically ill-designed to be modern
Americans. The human brain evolved over
hundreds of thousands of years in an environment defined by scarcity. It was not designed, at least originally, for an environment of extreme abundance. “Human beings
are wandering around with brains that are
fabulously limited,” he says cheerfully.
“We’ve got the core of the average lizard.”
Wrapped around this reptilian core, he explains, is a mammalian layer (associated
THE ROAD OUT

377/396

with maternal concern and social interaction), and around that is wrapped a third layer, which enables feats of memory and the
capacity for abstract thought. “The only
problem,” he says, “is our passions are still
driven by the lizard core. We are set up to acquire as much as we can of things we perceive as scarce, particularly sex, safety, and
food.” Even a person on a diet who sensibly
avoids coming face-to-face with a piece of
chocolate cake will find it hard to control
himself if the chocolate cake somehow finds
him. Every pastry chef in America understands this, and now neuroscience does,
too. “When faced with abundance, the
brain’s ancient reward pathways are difficult
to suppress,” says Whybrow. “In that moment the value of eating the chocolate cake
exceeds the value of the diet. We cannot
think down the road when we are faced with
the chocolate cake.”

378/396

The richest society the world has ever seen
has grown rich by devising better and better
ways to give people what they want. The effect on the brain of lots of instant gratification is something like the effect on the right
hand of cutting off the left: the more the lizard core is used the more dominant it becomes. “What we’re doing is minimizing the
use of the part of the brain that lizards don’t
have,” says Whybrow. “We’ve created
physiological dysfunction. We have lost the
ability to self-regulate, at all levels of the society. The five million dollars you get paid at
Goldman Sachs if you do whatever they ask
you to do—that is the chocolate cake
upgraded.”
The succession of financial bubbles, and
the amassing of personal and public debt,
Whybrow views as simply an expression of
the lizard-brained way of life. A color-coded
map of American personal indebtedness
could be laid on top of the Centers for

379/396

Disease Control’s color-coded map that illustrates the fantastic rise in rates of obesity
across the United States since 1985 without
disturbing the general pattern. The boom in
trading activity in individual stock portfolios;
the spread of legalized gambling; the rise of
drug and alcohol addiction; it is all of a piece.
Everywhere you turn you see Americans sacrifice their long-term interests for a shortterm reward.
What happens when a society loses its ability to self-regulate, and insists on sacrificing
its long-term self-interest for short-term rewards? How does the story end? “We could
regulate ourselves if we chose to think about
it,” Whybrow says. “But it does not appear
that is what we are going to do.” Apart from
that remote possibility, Whybrow imagines
two possible outcomes. The first he illustrates with a true story, which might be
called the parable of the pheasant. Last
spring, on sabbatical at the University of

380/396

Oxford, he was surprised to discover that he
was able to rent an apartment inside Blenheim Palace, the Churchill family home. The
previous winter at Blenheim had been harsh,
and the pheasant hunters had been efficient;
as a result, just a single pheasant had survived in the palace gardens. This bird had
gained total control of a newly seeded field.
Its intake of food, normally regulated by its
environment, was now entirely unregulated:
it could eat all it wanted, and it did. The
pheasant grew so large that when other birds
challenged it for seed, it would simply frighten them away. The fat pheasant became a
tourist attraction and even acquired a name:
Henry. “Henry was the biggest pheasant anyone had ever seen,” says Whybrow. “Even
after he got fat, he just ate and ate.” It didn’t
take long before Henry was obese. He could
still eat as much as he wanted, but he could
no longer fly. Then one day he was gone: a
fox ate him.
