
260

APPENDIX

180
160
S&P/Case-Shiller
National Home Price Index, real

Real price index (1987 = 100)

140
120
100
80

U.S. Census price of new
single-family houses
sold based on kinds of
houses sold in 2005, real

60
40
20
0
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Figure A.4
Two Indices of U.S. Home Prices Divided by the Consumer Price Index
(CPI-U), 1987–2013
Both indices are scaled to 1987 = 100.

Quality Index. That boom was unprecedented in scope and magnitude in
over one hundred years of U.S. history (Shiller 2005). Why is the boom and
bust in home prices after 2000 so much more prominent in our repeat sales
index? New homes are built where it is possible and profitable to build them,
typically outside congested urban areas where price swings may be most pronounced, and so their level through time may be more nearly determined by
simple construction costs. Thus our data collection revealed not only market
inefficiencies, but much bigger price swings as well.
The inefficiency that we documented in single-­family home prices must be
related to market conditions, and so efficiency must be improvable with changes
in market institutions. The inefficiency of the market for single-­family homes
relative to that of the stock market must be partly traced to the relatively much
higher cost of trading in that market. It is much more costly for professional
traders to trade in and out of the market for single-family homes to profit
from predictable price movements. It is difficult to do short sales of overpriced
individual homes. Buying and selling individual homes may not work well for
professionals for additional reasons: high carrying costs; low rental income;

NO B E L P R I Z E L E C T URE : S P E CUL ATIVE AS S E T P RIC ES

261

moral hazard of the renters, who have relatively little incentive to care for the
property; and difficulty keeping up with all the local factors that might change
the demand for individual houses, so that remote institutional investors would
risk being picked off as ignorant losers. Some institutional investors are in the
news recently, thinking they can survive and make money in this market. We
will see whether they succeed.
We thought that the market efficiency could be improved if an index of
home prices could be made tradable (Case, Shiller, and Weiss 1993). Working
with Standard & Poor’s, and with the people in our company Macro­Markets
LLC, we helped the Chicago Mercantile Exchange with plans to set up futures
markets based on our indices for ten U.S. cities. These markets were launched
in 2006 and are still trading today, albeit with nothing close to the volume of
trade that we hoped to see in these markets.22 We hoped that the creation of
these new markets would change the nature of prices in real estate markets,
with price discovery that made the price of homes behave more like the random walk that efficient markets theory suggests.
Real estate markets remain wildly inefficient all over the world. We can
only look forward to the day when liquid markets support more trade that
might permit something rather closer to the efficient markets that theorists
have expected.
If we are to achieve such improvements in efficiency, in real estate markets,
in stock markets, or in any speculative markets, it is most helpful to understand
the causes of market inefficiency, and that requires serious study from the
broad perspective afforded by an array of other sciences outside economics.

Behavioral Finance and Behavioral Economics
The behavioral economics revolution, which brings psychology and other
social sciences into economics, saw its first beginnings in the 1980s but did not
attract public attention until the 1990s. Richard Thaler and I started our behavioral economics workshops at the National Bureau of Economic Research in
1991, and from that beginning behavioral finance played the dominant role.23
There are a number of surveys of the behavioral finance literature, notably
Shleifer (2000), Barberis and Thaler (2003), Shiller (2003), Shef­rin (2008), and
Baker and Wurgler (2011).
22See Fabozzi, Shiller, and Tunaru (2009). The market maker John Dolan has a website with

up-to-date information about this market, http://homepricefutures.com. Our firm
MacroMarkets LLC led by Allan Weiss and Sam Masucci also created paired long and short
securities, MacroShares, with ticker symbols UMM (for up major metro) and DMM (for down
major metro) based on the S&P/Case-Shiller Ten-City Index that traded on the New York
Stock Exchange from August to December 2010.
23 See http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/behfin/index.htm.

262

APPENDIX

The behavioral finance revolution seemed to take its beginnings from the
evidence of market inefficiency that was by then starting to look significant.
Once we acknowledge that the efficient markets theory has no special claim
to priority for price determination, we can look more sympathetically to other
factors to understand market fluctuations. The anomalies literature points
indeed to some oddball factors as playing a role. Benos and J­ochec (2013)
showed that patriotism affects stock prices, in that U.S. stocks with the words
“America(n)” or “USA” in their names earn an abnormal return of 6% a year
during wartime. Saunders (1993) found that the weather in New York affects
stock prices. If such irrelevant things as these affect stock prices, it should be
no surprise if more plausible but half-baked theories (about the central bank,
fiscal policy, energy prices, the future of capitalism, and on and on) would
also affect market prices.
Most stock market investors do not pay much attention to fundamental
indicators of value. We might argue that their inattention is in some sense
rational, since there is a cost to collecting information. Christopher Sims (2003)
has devised a model of rational inattention. But it is hard to believe that their
inattention is systematic and thoughtful.

Early History of Behavioral Finance
Behavioral finance until the 1980s was mostly relegated to the community
of investment analysts who did not generally attract notice in academia,
and who did not generally draw on research from the social sciences. There
were, however, some gems from this period. Notable among these analysts
were Benjamin Graham and David Dodd, who, in the 1940 edition of their
book Security Analysis, based their investing method on their observations of
“ignorance, of human greed, of mob psychology, of trading costs, of weighting
of the dice by insiders and manipulators.”24
Keynes gave a view of speculative markets that was ahead of its time. In
his 1936 book The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, Keynes
described speculative markets as akin to a competition he saw offered by a
local newspaper to its readers. His metaphor is widely referred to as Keynes’s
“beauty contest” theory of the stock market. Each reader was invited to
peruse one hundred photos of pretty faces and submit a list of the six he or
she thought prettiest. The winner would be the one whose list most closely
corresponded to the most popular faces among all the lists of six that readers
sent in. Of course, to win this contest a rational person would not choose to
be guided by personal preference. Instead one should pick the six faces that
one thinks others will think prettiest. Even better, one should pick the faces
24 Graham and Dodd (2002: 276).

NO B E L P R I Z E L E C T URE : S P E CUL ATIVE AS S E T P RIC ES

263

one thinks that others think that others think prettiest, or one should pick the
faces one thinks that others think that others think that others think prettiest.
The same is true with stock market investing. According to Keynes, “there are
some, I believe, who practice the fourth, fifth and higher degrees,”25 further
degrees of removal from reality than were embodied in equation (4) above.
That is how speculative markets function, Keynes said. Active participants
are trying to buy into their predictions of the conventional valuation of assets
in the near future, not the true value.
A key Keynesian idea is that the valuation of long-term assets is substantially a matter of convention, just as it is with judgments of facial beauty.
Whatever price people generally have come to accept as the conventional
value, and that is embedded in the collective consciousness, will stick as
the true value for a long time, even if the actual returns fail for some time
to live up to expectations. If an asset’s returns are carefully tabulated and
disappoint for long enough, people will eventually learn to change their
views, but it may take the better part of a lifetime. And many assets, such as
owner-occupied homes, do not have unambiguously measured returns, and
a mistaken “conventional valuation” based on a faulty popular theory can
persist indefinitely. The presumed investment advantages of, say, living in
an expensive, land-intensive single-family home near a big city, rather than
renting a cheaper and more convenient apartment in an urban high-rise, may
just not exist, and most people will never figure that out.
Conventional valuation can be a very subtle phenomenon at any point of time,
reflecting popular theories of the time that are perceived by many, who have
never studied the theories, to reflect professional wisdom. In a beauty contest,
people have even less incentive to consider the validity of this wisdom, since
they view it as substantially entrenched in others’ thinking. I am reminded, for
example, of Modigliani and Cohn’s (1979) study showing that inflation-induced
biases in conventional accounting practices caused a massive understatement
of earnings, a study that allowed them to call roughly, within a few years, the
historic bottom of the stock market in 1982. The absence of immediate reaction
to their study was just the kind of thing one might expect to see in a beauty
contest world, since no one expected anyone else to react much to their paper.

The Blossoming of Behavioral Finance after 1980
The idea that speculative prices are somehow uniquely authoritative, as
the best possible judgment of true value, still has its popular appeal even
today. But it has lost its unique claim on the attention of economic theorists.
Theoretical models of speculative markets that are analogous to Keynes’s
25 Keynes (1936: chap. 12, p. 156, Harbinger 1965 edition).

264

APPENDIX

beauty contest theory, and that stress the expectation of reselling to other
people who may have optimistic beliefs, have been offered by Harrison and
Kreps (1978), Morris (1996), Scheinkman and Xiong (2003), Wu and Guo (2004),
Allen, Morris, and Shin (2006), Hong, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2006), Hong
and Sraer (2011), Kubler and Schmedders (2012), and Barberis et al. (2013).
There are also models that represent bubbles as related to leverage cycles tied
in with heterogeneous beliefs: Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008), Geanakoplos
(2009), Cao (2010), and He and Xiong (2012). Noise trader models (Kyle 1985,
De Long et al. 1990, Campbell and Kyle 1993) have begun to replace models
with all rational agents.
Moreover, there are models of financial markets that replace the assumption of rational expected-utility-­maximizing agents with alternative models
of human behavior, such as prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky 1979,
2000). Prospect theory, which is a theory of human choice in the face of risk
that is based on experimental evidence in the psychology laboratory, is not
a theory of rationality in the traditional sense, for it recognizes violations of
the basic axioms of rational behavior (Savage 1954). The human behavior that
prospect theory describes is vulnerable to the arbitrariness of psychological
framing; insignificant changes in context or suggestion can produce profound
differences in human behavior.
Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001) showed that prospect theory with investors who derive direct utility from fluctuations in the value of their wealth can
help explain the excess volatility of stock market returns. A “house money
effect” can help make bubbles grow even bigger, in analogy to gamblers at
casinos, who, after they have won some money, become very risk tolerant
with that money because they frame it as somebody else’s money that they
can afford to lose (Thaler and Johnson 1990). Investors’ “narrow framing”
(Barberis, Huang, and Thaler 2006) and the disposition to sell winners and
hold losers (Shefrin and Statman 1985) can explain other evidence against
efficient markets.
The field of psychology offers many other principles of human behavior
that have been shown to be relevant for evaluating the efficient markets
theory. For example, there is evidence that a general human tendency toward
overconfidence causes investors to trade too much (Odean 2000) and CEOs
to squander internally generated funds on pet projects (Malmendier and
Tate 2005). There is a tendency for investors to be overly distracted by news
stories (Barber and Odean 2008) and to overreact to cash dividends (Shefrin
and Statman 1984).
Financial theory has also advanced to allow us a better understanding of the
effects of the ambiguity regarding probabilities, the fundamental difficulties
in placing numerical values for probabilities, that Keynes spoke of (Bew­ley
2002, Bracha and Brown 2013).

NO B E L P R I Z E L E C T URE : S P E CUL ATIVE AS S E T P RIC ES

265

Psychologists have documented a tendency for people to anchor their
opinions in ambiguous situations on arbitrary signals that are psychologically
salient even if they are obviously irrelevant (Tversky and Kahneman 1974).
Neuroscience has begun to understand how the human brain handles
ambiguity. Hsu et al. (2005) and Huettel et al. (2006) use functional magnetic
resonance imaging to study brain reactions to situations with clear versus
ambiguous probabilities. Huettel et al. concluded that “decision making under
ambiguity does not represent a special, more complex case of risky decision
making; instead, these two forms of uncertainty are supported by distinct
mechanisms.”26 The rapid progress we are now seeing in neuroscience will
likely yield new insights into the ambiguity, animal spirits, and caprice that
Keynes and others since him have stressed.

Implications for Financial Innovation
The financial institutions that we have today are the product of centuries
of experience with the volatility of speculative asset prices, with the important information discovery that these market prices can reveal, as well as
the potential for erratic behavior in these markets.27 The reliability of these
markets in revealing genuine information about fundamentals is not terrific,
but it is certainly not negligible either, and the reliability might be improved
through time with better financial institutions. Efficient markets should be
considered a goal, not an established fact. Our present financial institutions
are the results of experimentation that has helped people design around
this experience; the institutions we will have in the future depend on our
continuing experimentation and redesign.
Like mechanical engineering, financial engineering should pay attention
to human factors, to make devices that serve people well, with full consideration of human talents and foibles. As this experience accumulates, with each
successive financial crisis, and each improvement in information technology,
financial innovation can make these institutions work better for humankind.
For example, the very invention, centuries ago, of stock markets, has created
an atmosphere for investing that, while it regularly produces the excesses of
bubbles, creates an incentive for people to launch exciting new enterprises,
to keep up to date on relevant information, and to protect themselves, if they
wish, from the inevitable risks of those very bubbles.
As David Moss (2002) has chronicled, a general limited liability statute
covering all stock market investors was not such an obviously good idea when

26 Huettel et al. (2006: 765).
27 For the long history of financial innovation, see Goetzmann and Rouwenhorst (2005).

266

APPENDIX

the world’s first such law was passed in New York in 1811, but it turned out to
be of fundamental importance for investors’ psychology. By clearly forbidding
suits against shareholders for a company’s sins, it limited the downside risk
of investing to psychologically manageable proportions (no more worries that
any one of your investments could explode and land you in debtors’ prison),
and it permitted portfolio diversification to proceed without exhaustive
investigation of each company’s management.28 The stock market became an
exciting place, like a gambling casino, but tied to business reality rather than
mere amusement, and it was a place where investors could diversify and limit
their risks. It therefore was highly effective in attracting capital for enterprise.
More recently, people have been experimenting with other details of the
stock markets, such as insider trader rules, risk retention rules, capital requirements, and other factors. These interact with human psychology in ways that
can improve market functioning, but their effects cannot be accurately foretold
on the basis of any received theory.
Much of my work has been involved in considering how both financial
theory and human factors need to be considered in the design of new financial
structures. I have written a number of books devoted to this: Who’s Minding the
Store? (1992), Macro Markets (1993), The New Financial Order (2003), The Subprime
Solution (2008), and Finance and the Good Society (2012). Most of the ideas I have
expressed in those books are calls for experimentation, not finished ideas.
The ideas I discussed are mostly as yet untested, and their final forms, if and
when they ever do get implemented—perhaps in the distant future, and with
far better information technology—are hard to see in advance.
The ideas in these books, and associated articles, are diverse, go in many
directions, and have to be judged as beginnings of ideas. They may look
awkward, just as the earliest designs of aircraft did; their later incarnations
may look less so.
The overarching theme of this work of mine is that we need to democratize
and humanize finance in light of research on human behavior and the functioning of markets (Shiller 2011). Democratizing finance means making financial
institutions work better for real people, dealing with the risks that are most
important to them individually, and providing opportunities for inspiration
and personal development. Humanizing finance means making financial
institutions interact well with actual human behavior, taking account of how
people really think and act.
Lionel Robbins, with his 1932 book An Essay on the Nature and Significance of
Economic Science, has the honor of having invented the most common definition
28 Moss (2002) documents much discussion and experimentation with liability rules in the
early nineteenth century, as with “double liability” that limits shareholders’ liability to twice
their initial investment, or liability that ends when the shares are sold.

NO B E L P R I Z E L E C T URE : S P E CUL ATIVE AS S E T P RIC ES

267

today of economic science, articulating the unifying core idea that defines this
science. He wrote then:
The economist studies the disposal of scarce means. He is interested in the way
different degrees of scarcity of different goods give rise to different ratios of
valuation of them, and he is interested in the way in which changes in conditions
of scarcity, whether coming from changes in ends or changes in means—from
the demand side or the supply side—affect these ratios.29

The importance of prices in allocating scarce resources is an idea whose
beginnings go back at least to Adam Smith in the eighteenth century, with
his “invisible hand,” and there was a certain wisdom in Robbins’s framing
of the entire field of economics around this idea. Even today, this wisdom is
not yet fully apparent to the untrained public. Most people do not appreciate
that all of our economic activities and all of our pleasures and satisfactions,
and those of subsequent generations, are ultimately guided by prices of scarce
resources as formed in the markets.
There is a problem, however, with the interpretation of economics that
Robbins so persuasively gave. For his definition appeared to cast the economic problem as being exclusively about scarcity of production resources,
like energy and food, rather than also about scarcity of human intellectual
and psychological resources. He casts the problem as humans against nature,
when in fact much of the economic problem is dealing with humans against
themselves.30
Long-term asset prices as they are observed today, prices of stocks, bonds,
real estate, and commodities, and prices of derivative products such as futures,
swaps, and options, and of other institutions like long-term insurance, are especially significant for economics, and especially problematic, since the scarcity
that these prices represent is one that is never really objective and directly
revealed today. Their levels are influenced by expectations of the distant, and
generally nebulous, future. The market prices of speculative assets at any given
time reflect, as is commonly asserted, both tastes and technology of that time.
But they also reflect expected tastes and technology of the future, the likelihood of discovery of new wellsprings of resources or the technology to develop
them. They also reflect sociology and social psychology, and anticipated future
changes in these; in government policy such as taxation; and in other primary
forces, such as changes in the inequality of incomes and likely social and govern­
mental reactions to these; the potential threat of wars and other catastrophes;
and the likely use of, and policy toward, the assets in such times.

29 Robbins (1932: 15).
30 See, for example, Mullainathan and Shafir (2013).

268

APPENDIX

Fischer Black, in his 1984 presidential address before the American Finance
Association, offered a new definition of market efficiency. He redefined an
“efficient market” as “one in which price is within a factor of 2 of value, i.e.,
the price is more than half of value and less than twice value. . . . By this
definition, I think almost all markets are efficient almost all of the time.”31
And yet, even assuming he is somehow right, the existing efficient markets
theory remains the fundamental framework from which many economic
policy decisions, and decisions to innovate or not, are made. No one would
seriously propose the elimination of stock markets even if we all accepted
Fischer Black’s impression as fact. So why should we not consider other risk
markets, markets that have not come into being yet, merely through accidents
of history and timing of associated technological breakthroughs?
Institutions can be redesigned so that they reframe people’s thinking to the
longer term and to things that are better subjects for their attention, by making markets for risks that are better tied to fundamentals people should be
thinking about. Institutions that change framing might sometimes qualify as
institutions providing a “nudge,” as Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein (2009)
have put it, suggesting the right direction for people without being coercive.
These authors base their thinking on a philosophy they call “libertarian paternalism,” emphasizing the government’s providing incentives for appropriate
behavior without coercion. Though our groundings in behavioral economics
are similar, I wouldn’t stress that term, perhaps because it seems to suggest
a top-down structure for society, with government at the top. The development of financial capitalism seems to be, or can be, a matter of the voluntary
organization of most of society, integrating the activities of people in all walks
of life in fulfillment of their diverse purposes. A vision for a better financial
capitalism should not be top-down at all.
Some recent examples of financial innovation, examples of new experiments, can help clarify how innovation might help in an imperfect financial
world. Consider first the social policy bonds proposed by Ronnie Horesh
(2000), which have recently been realized in the social impact bonds first
issued with the help of the nonprofit Social Finance, Ltd., in 2010 in the United
Kingdom. These redirect speculative impulses into solving social problems
over a meaningful horizon that is chosen by the issuer to be neither too short
nor too long to allow effective solutions.
Consider also the new crowdfunding initiatives to create websites that allow
large numbers of dispersed people each to share information and each to invest
a small amount of money directly into new enterprises, without the usual
financial intermediaries. These have sprouted in many places around the world,
