
RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Intraday traders use first-hour breakout systems to beat the market. This early strategy sets up
support and resistance at short-term price extremes, especially in choppy markets. Breaks through
these important levels should induce profitable bar expansion in the direction of the penetration.
These known tendencies support classic setups such as buying momentum, fading resistance, and
buying pullback dips.

MIDDAY MARKETS
A new crowd emerges as the action of the first hour fades. While public participation dominates the
open, the balance of the day belongs to institutions and professional traders. The resolution of
opening orders, driven by overnight supply-demand imbalance, creates an upward, downward, or
sideways bias that will likely persist for the entire day. This initial market character fuels trade
strategies for those making their livelihood in the daily price swings.
Trend days appear less frequently than rangebound ones. Swing traders take their cues from
whatever the markets offer and choose long, short, or stand-aside strategies. This often requires
waiting for countertrend weakness after the first hour before they enter long positions or
countertrend strength to sell short.

TIME FOR THE PROS
Many low-risk opportunities appear throughout the middle of the day. Price swings tend to exhibit
more dependable movement so entries can be held through small pullbacks with less risk. Scalping
tactics also work very well within these very short-term cycles. But intraday participants understand
that market character changes sharply in the last hour. They must choose to terminate positions if
their active strategy cannot capitalize on that volatile environment. Fortunately, the last hour also
provides convenient opportunities for profitable exits.
Execute longer-term positions in the middle of the day to improve reward: risk significantly. Trade
fills during this quieter time benefit from compressed spreads, and speculators make better
decisions after observation of the bull-bear struggle that guides the opening gauntlet. But remember
that market timing cannot turn a bad trade into a good one. It can only make a good one better.
First-hour range, total volume, and the current bar’s relationship to short-term highs or lows offer
important feedback to determine reward:risk for potential trade entries. Break of the first hour range
or other significant high-low extremes sets up profitable bar expansion. Swing traders also initiate
fades at intraday S/R in anticipation of reversals. For example, when a stock thrusts through a firsthour high, pauses, and breaks back into the morning range, the odds for a successful short sale near
this high increase greatly.
The midday trader must face continued testing of the short-term trend. As the day progresses,
reversal of first-hour sentiment becomes more and more unlikely. While this early trend remains
dominant on most days, strong midday shocks can generate contrary forces that trigger powerful
reversals. Two classic zones for this unexpected shift lie near 11 a.m. and 1 p.m. These important
times correspond with trading that surrounds lunchtime on Wall Street.

FIGURE 6.2
JDS Uniphase sets up a well-marked first-hour range that finally yields to a strong mid-afternoon breakout. Price
then responds to the range with classic S/R behavior on pullbacks. Place a Fib grid across this early trend to
estimate swing levels and predict which way the market will finally break. Keep in mind that first-hour range
strategy only works well about 3 out of 5 market days.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Sharp, short countertrend activity often characterizes the late morning test. Tape readers will
notice that market movers and institutions press one final attempt here to gauge strength or
weakness of the primary trend. Directional price movement can quickly resume once they complete
these games. The period from shortly after 11:00 a.m. into the lunch hour can ignite very strong
trend development. Alternatively, if an expected price move does not materialize by 11:30 a.m., the
market often fades into undependable swing movement.
Countertrend movement may not emerge during early afternoon activity if the day exhibits strong
directional bias. A rally or selloff can begin right after lunch in these trending conditions. But
erratic activity becomes much more likely if direction is not clear. At times like these, one can
almost hear insiders plotting their manipulation over lunch and drinks at New York corner bars.
Trust nothing you see or hear during the lunch hour. As primary market players head out to fill their
stomachs, the second team arrives to play a variety of fake-out games that generate volume and test
the supply-demand waters. False breakouts and breakdowns occur with great frequency as clever
stop-gunning exercises push through well-established S/R. This negative feedback can work to the
swing trader’s advantage. The lunch hour provides a very attractive exit point if the push and pull of
false price movement benefits an existing position.

The midday quiet carries one final danger to the bottom line. Every short-term trade must show
sufficient price movement to generate gain or loss. Positions that don’t exhibit sufficient volatility
generate substantial risk as range narrows after the first hour. Trading is never a zero-sum game,
and these small losses can lead to significant transaction costs. Make sure that executions anticipate
an active market or leave them for the next participant.

FINDING MIDDAY WINNERS
The midday swing trader must locate issues that will generate predictable range movement. Expect
no more than 20% (10 or 12) of the stocks within a real-time quote screen of 50–60 issues to
display positive characteristics of trend and volatility on any given day. The setups for these trading
vehicles must reveal their intentions through prior analysis of momentum, key S/R, and prevailing
Pattern Cycles.
Supplement overnight study with classic intraday price analysis. Exercise strong discipline and keep
the Level II screen at some distance while an unbiased evaluation of all technical factors decides the
next execution. Always ask the right questions before making the trade:
Has the stock broken out of its first hour range?
First-hour breakouts signify trending markets. A breakout can lead to a series of strong price thrusts
in the direction of the break. Alternatively, when price remains stuck between early trading
extremes, it lacks sufficient crowd enthusiasm or fear to push it through these barriers. The longer
that markets sit in this early price range, the less likely that any significant movement will occur
until (at least) the end of the day.
Is it close to its high or low for the day?
Many eyes watch markets that trade close to their highs or lows. Important tests at these levels
invite the crowd to jump in or head for the exits. Don’t be fooled by one- or two-tick penetrations of
these extremes, especially on the first
test. Professionals know that stops build right at these points and will take them out, regardless of
their other intentions. Momentum players should concentrate on the third rise to a high or the third
descent to a low. This wave will more likely trigger a sharp price break than the first test.
Are profitable entry points easy to recognize?
The best entries always jump out to experienced eyes. Their location in the maze of 1-minute or 5minute price bars makes them obvious. No two patterns are alike, but all promising setups share a
common feature: they speak for themselves and require little interpretation. If you have to think
about it, move on to the next opportunity.
Is the market displaying positive feedback or negative feedback?
Dead markets rob profits as easily as losing positions. Study volume to decide whether anyone
really cares. How wide is the price range compared to recent days? Narrow-range days make
profitable intraday entries very difficult. Does enthusiasm build on the time and sales screen, or is
dull money controlling the action? When the markets just sit there, change the channel.
Execute the appropriate trade once an opportunity appears. Midday markets favor constricted
action, so the most effective tactics apply classic swing strategy. Experience suggests that the best

results will come from buying weakness on up-trend issues and selling strength on downtrend ones.
Expected holding period and price momentum determine which intraday trends provide the best
reward:risk. Even 1-minute and 5-minute trends offer profitable swing trades as long as midday
volatility induces wide range movement. Align entries with market clock impulses or reactions, and
always keep one eye on the TICK.
Odds favor an increase in selling right at 2:30 p.m. This time bias originates in the bond market. On
volatile days, their 3:00 p.m. closing forces many equity participants to the sidelines to avoid
reversals and shakeouts. Over time, this sell zone has established itself as a natural exit point and
now appears even during quiet credit markets. Insiders also use 2:30 p.m. to measure selling
pressure in anticipation of the last hour, and locals turn quick profits by reversing rallies into this
point. As with the 10:20 a.m. move, strong buying can ignite when selling doesn’t appear right at
2:30 p.m. But this late event always carries a negative bias regardless of the intraday trend.

LAST HOUR
Midday participants need well-defined strategies to deal with the closing hour. The last phase of the
market day displays unique characteristics that will enhance or undermine profits. Intraday traders
seek to exit all positions prior to the closing bell. Professionals know this and will do everything in
their power to pick those traders’ pockets. Longer-term swing traders can go flat into the close or
maintain positions as part of their broader strategy. When time permits, they should apply a quick
reward:risk analysis for open positions and evaluate the likely impact of an overnight hold on the
trading account.
U.S. stocks undergo a rapid change in character as trading in the credit markets closes. Market
participants realize that 4:00 p.m. concludes most financial transactions for the day. This simple fact
ignites a new market impulse that responds to the major intraday themes. Both retail and institutions
contribute to this last hour’s volatility through active trading. Classic buy-sell programs strike
throughout the last 60 minutes, while mutual fund activity surges during the last 20 minutes of the
day. This dramatic increase in institutional participation heightens price movement and stirs up an
emotional brew that leads into the close.

CHANGE OF CHARACTER
Swing traders plan final executions during this hour and remain sharply focused on the powerful
forces at work. This compressed period tries to discount all of the day’s news and emotions. Much
of the action depends on what precedes it. This daily event can pass with little excitement after quiet
or rangebound sessions. But if conflicting market forces need final resolution or a very strong trend
persists, wide bar expansion and whipsaws will develop.
The last hour frees stocks from the influence of credit-related arbitrage and allows index futures
arbitrage to drive price movement. This third market clock impulse also marks decision time for a
multitude of active strategies that began during the prior hours. Participants must use their time
wisely. Trends that develop through the first 20 minutes of the final hour tend to fade sharply at
3:30 p.m. and price action loses predictability as closing strategies take over the last 20 minutes of
the session.
FIGURE 6.3
The 2:30 p.m. sell reverses small rallies and generates painful whipsaws. Remain very defensive when strong TICK and
futures movement signal a new uptrend just 15–20 minutes before this critical period. Insiders often paint the tape here
so they can fade price through the reversal. Alternatively, this time zone allows low-risk entry in strongly trending
markets as a positive bias kicks in near 3:00 p.m.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Participants closely watch the 15 minutes that lead into 3:00 p.m., looking for evidence of strong
momentum that may predict the direction of a last-hour surge. Although this short period carries a
buy-side bias, it can also lead to major selloffs. Gauge demand through review of the TICK and
market breadth (advance/decline) data. Examine Level II as well as time and sales to identify bursts
of enthusiasm or fear. If the measurements flatline during this important phase, they signify a
market without immediate direction. This can offer a very useful signal that most of the crowd will
miss.
Swing traders who buy weakness and sell rallies all day must shift gears during the final hour and
become trend followers. Odds favor continuation of the intraday trend during the last hour and into
the next day’s open. Shorting stocks that sit at new highs or catching falling knives in selloffs both
trigger very bad outcomes. Alternatively, momentum strategies allow profitable trade exits as
positions follow this final impulse and break beyond their intraday ranges.
Major trends rarely reverse in the closing hour, but contrary price movement can escalate very
rapidly when they do. Late reversals trap the crowd that controlled most of the action up to that
point. Powerful moves erupt as they unwind large commitments with little time to trade. Don’t wait
for too much confirmation when the warning signs appear for this event. The lack of available time
speeds up the action and often fails to offer pullbacks or other low-risk execution.

Knowledge of daily range and key S/R levels improves results during last-hour trades. Congestion
sets up well in advance of closing near key highs and lows.
Stops build just above or below these extremes while the crowd watches very closely. Price pushes
into these levels during the last hour as invisible forces guide its movement. Insiders want to gauge
whether demand is great enough to support an expansion move. At the least, they benefit from stop
volume and ensure that orders don’t disappear overnight without execution. And with a little luck,
they generate enough momentum to keep things active well beyond the current session.

QUITTING TIME
The session’s last 15–20 minutes close the books for most traders, institutions, and market movers.
This generates unique but unpredictable price behavior. Spreads often set up to penalize one or both
sides of the market. These can rapidly shift in the final minutes to take advantage of MOC (market
on close) orders, intraday traders going flat and covering shorts. Avoid new positions during these
last minutes unless a specific overnight strategy manages them. Use this time instead to exit existing
plays at the best possible price. Also watch to see how institutions view the closing. Their
willingness to commit capital can predict how the next morning will open.
Insiders paint the price chart at closing so they can access demand from the fresh surge of retail
market orders the next morning. Overnight strategies must trust the daily trend here, although
whipsaws can occur just minutes before 4 p.m. Even thin issues get a paint job at this time to try to
fool technical indicators that rely on range closing information. Stocks with spreads that average
more than 1/2 point can produce a host of inaccurate signals if they just close on the ask or bid day
after day.
Multiday trends develop when a single session fails to discount the common pool of information.
The finality of the approaching close intensifies greed and fear. Many actions reflect ill-advised
decision making as loss and frustration creep into rational strategies. These emotions generate
additional supply-demand imbalance that can carry into the close. This peaking volatility makes the
last few minutes dangerous and unpredictable. The master swing trader has already concluded the
day’s transactions by this time and stands aside to the final bell.

TIME OF WEEK AND MONTH
Time bias does not end with daily cycles. Clearly defined time quirks appear through weekly and
monthly periods as well. Swing traders study these events to avoid being on the wrong side of the
market when they strike. Start with individual days of the week and look at their special
characteristics. These five trading sessions open new themes, test them, and work to resolve price
imbalance before Friday’s closing tick.
Monday morning greets market participants the same way that offices around the world receive
tired worker bees. The weekend break disorients the crowd and forces reevaluation of major
assumptions. The session often opens to confusion as players try to find their rhythm and the next
market direction. Light volume characterizes many Mondays, especially in the summertime. This
lack of commitment may continue well into midweek. The morning can trigger selling pressure that
lasts for many hours. Mild rallies often begin late in the day as this finally dissipates and the market
floats upward.
FIGURE 6.4
eBay breaks support just after 3:00 p.m. and descends into a major selloff. A restless crowd waits as congestion
and a rising trendline develop during the market day. Longs grow impatient and decide to exit if the line breaks.
Potential shorts set stops to enter new positions at the same time. Insiders and self-fulfilling mechanics keep the

line intact until the last hour draws substantial volume from the sidelines. A last push breaks the barrier and the
host of trading strategies strike at the same time.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Turnaround Tuesday describes a well-known time bias. Trends that begin on Friday and persist
through Monday frequently reverse during the first hour of this session. New trends that start at this
time may trigger sharp price expansion for the next two days. But choppy action can persist
throughout the week when a clear trend does not appear. Volume often spikes on Tuesday as large
players execute their first strategies of the week. Watch Instinet closely to see how the institutions
position themselves.
Wednesday and Thursday tend to reinforce themes initiated earlier in the week. Strong trends
should continue through these days unless external shock events intervene. Trading action starts to
hesitate on Thursday afternoon as awareness of the upcoming weekend enters the market psyche.
This wall grows stronger if the crowd fears government statistics that will be released the next
morning.
The government issues economic reports through a regular publication cycle. The major ones can
impact markets on any day of the week. But the monthly unemployment report, which always
appears on the first Friday of the month, wields the greatest hammer. The credit and futures markets
can respond violently to these important numbers. This ensures that arbitrage and crowd response
trigger broad equities movement. But placing bets in advance of fundamental reports can be very

dangerous. Earn consistent profits by reading the charting landscape rather than speculating on
external influences.
Fridays have other major forces to contend with. Options expire the middle Friday of each month.
That week often generates unusual volatility that peaks on expiration day. Market action during this
period can be highly unpredictable. Swing traders should consider an early weekend before the
climax and think twice about all executions during that week. Most participants also use the week’s
end to digest themes and imbalance from the prior 4 days. Many institutional strategies focus on
weekly price bars. As the week draws to a close, professional technicians determine the need for
portfolio adjustments and take appropriate action to protect large positions. Many players act
recklessly near the weekend if positions stand at a large profit or loss. The losers jump into volatile
stocks as they try to get even, while the winners dump profit vehicles that still have many points to
run.
Markets seek equilibrium as they head for the weekend. This can trigger strong trends in either
direction to accommodate current themes. But Fridays tend to end with a whimper rather than a
bang. Many players wind down and disappear by the afternoon, especially in the summertime. This
frequently leads to a choppy close on light volume. But when strong conflict or imbalance carries
into the final session of the week, everyone will stay at their desks until the last minutes.

SEASONS AND SEASONALITY
Well-defined seasonal variations can signal false opportunity. For example, options expiration
reflects high levels of manipulation. Classic breakout and breakdown rules must be closely
managed during these volatile times to avoid the risk of serious loss. Other times of month and year
generate special bias that can affect trade alignment. Learn these cyclical quirks before taking a
position that falls under their influence.
Holiday and preholiday trading sessions elicit a positive bias but carry increased risk. Martin Zweig
catalogued the mechanics of this interesting phenomenon in his classic Winning on Wall Street. He
noted that U.S. holiday markets finished up 83% of the time during the period from 1952 to 1985.
Holiday trading has grown choppier since he published his findings but this bullish tendency
continues. Unfortunately, participants can still lose substantial money on these rally days.
Light volume characterizes holiday sessions. This gives professionals a great opportunity to
manipulate the tape and induce wide price swings. Christmas week and the day after Thanksgiving
provide the perfect environment for this type of false volatility. Swing traders can get on the right
side of this action and turn excellent profits. But classic technical analysis often fails as S/R,
patterns, and price extremes violate without pullbacks or crowd participation. The best advice
during these holiday periods is to turn off the computer and go to the beach.
The end of each quarter triggers window dressing by mutual funds and other large institutions.
Intense fund buying tends to appear after a very strong market rally. Funds must report their profit
or loss on a quarterly basis. They have great motivation to publish excellent results—their managers
would like to keep their jobs. Even when they miss the original rally, funds buy certain issues near
the end of the quarter’s last month to boast that they own the stock in their public reports.
The January Effect provides a liquidity-driven seasonal event. Fresh cash pours into the stock
markets through 401(k) contributions at the start of each year. At the same time, tax selling pressure
eases and invites new value investors. These two forces combine to generate a very strong bullish
bias that often leads to powerful rallies. Most investors associate the January Effect with small cap
