
292
I

I

The Real-Time Experiment

Congress, some action is inevitable. Its severity will be greatly
influenced by the pace of economic activity. If the experience of
the last five years is any guide, protectionist pressures will be
accommodated short of allowing the system to disintegrate. The
administration has already indicated that it is willing to cooperate
with Congress to that end. Nineteen eighty-seven may well see
some measure of protectionism combined with some measure of
debt relief.
The ultimate challenge to the system is a worldwide recession,
and the first half of 1987 will be a severe test in that regard. Some
of the economic activity in the final quarter of 1986 will have
been borrowed from 1387 because of the Tax Reform Act of 1986.
Undoubtedly, tax reform will help to eliminate distortions from
the economy; but it is always when past excesses are corrected
that their negative effect is most severely felt. The much-awaited
retrenchment in consumer spending may finally be upon us.
Moreover, the Japanese economy is weak, and Germany's is weakening. A worldwide recession coupled with protectionist legislation could sweep us over the brink.
What are the chances of a recession? I find the argument that a
recession must be close at hand just because four years have
elapsed since the last one quite unconvincing. In an expansionary
phase, recessions are induced by the monetary authorities in their
attempt to cool off an overheated economy. But we are not in an
expansionary phase, and there is no overheating. A more convincing case can be made by arguing that we are in a phase of credit
contraction in which the economy would naturally slip into a
recession unless it is actively stimulated. It is difficult to see
where the stimulation could come from. Still, the monetary authorities have at least one more round of interest rate reductions
in their armory; the decline in the dollar may finally begin to
make its effect felt on the trade balance; and the prospect of higher
oil prices may encourage inventory accumulation. Instead of a
recession, we may just have a few more years of substandard
growth ahead of us.
My analysis is inconclusive, to say the least. What will happen
in the financial markets in 1987? That will be the subject of an
ongoing real-time experiment.

The Conclusion: November 1986

293

P.S., DECEMBER 29, 1986
Two major events have occurred since the conclusion of the experiment: the Boesky affair, and the OPEC agreement. Both have
bullish implications. The Boesky affair constitutes a dramatic
turning point in the speculative excesses of mergermania. In contrast to other turning pqints, it does not endanger the system; that
is why it will be allowed to be played out in full. It will not bring
corporate restructuring to a halt, but it will slow it down. The
flow of funds into junk bonds will be reversed, greatly increasing
the risk premiums they must carry. The effect will be to ease the
demand for credit and to nudge the Federa4 Reserere toward easing
the money supply. All these influences are positive for government bonds and, indirectly, for blue chips. It is noteworthy that
the bond markets have shrugged off the news of an OPEC agreement. Higher oil prices are likely to encourage inventory accumulation, moderating downward pressures on the economy,
especially in the first quarter of 1987.
I approach the year's end fairly fully invested in both bonds
and stocks and do not intend to take my leave until after a discount-rate cut. The major cloud on the horizon is a renewed
weakness of the dollar.
P.P.S., FEBRUARY 1987

-x$-

Obviously, I spoke too soon when I said that the "bull market of
our lifetime" came to a premature end. The stock market broke
out of its doldrums immediately after the turn of the year and
attained new high ground very soon thereafter. tAJE,atT considered
to be the end of the bull market turned out to be merely a temporary interruption that was due to selling pressures engendered by
the abolition of the preferential tax treatment of long-term capital
gains. As soon as the pressure lifted, the market took off.
The current advance qualifies as the third wave in the bull
market that began in August 1982. It has many of the same features as the second wave that began in October 1985 but in some
respects it is faster and wilder, as befits a more advanced stage.
For instance, the first buying climax came sooner than last time
and caused sharper price fluctuations (6% in the S&P futures,
versus only 4.8% in 1986). The parallel with the bull market that
led up to the crash of 1929 is widely recognized. The charts of the

The Real-Time Experiment

294

,

I

Dow Jones averages, when superimposed upon each other, show
an uncanny similarity (see chart). Robert Prechter, a technician
who bases his predictions on the Elliott wave theory, has become
the prophet of our time whose predictions can move the market
-indeed, he is largely responsible for the deviation from the
pattern of 1928 that occurred on January 23,1987.
Equally significant is the fact that the Japanese stock market has
also recovered from the nasty break it suffered in October 1986
and reached new highs recently. How do these developments affect the validity and relevance of my conclusions?
The revival of the bull market fits in well with the "brink"
model I developed at the end of the experiment. It is a distinguishing feature of the model that we may keep going to the same
brink instead of experiencing a decisive trend reversal.
The ease with which the model can accommodate the revival
of the bull market confirms my assertion that it has next to no
predictive value. It merely offers a conceptual framework for understanding the course of events. The specific predictions must

3200

THE DOW IN THE EIGHTIES AND TWENTIES

,

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

, 400

1990

1991

1932

1933

0
1825

1926

1927

Courtesy Tudor Investment Corp.

1928

1930

1931

The Conclusion: November 1986

295

be formulated by the user; the model provides only a general hypothesis about prevailing market expectations-namely, that they
are likely to prove self-defeating.
The user's own prediction may turn out to be false; if so, it is
u p to him to correct it. When he is a participant in financial
markets, he has a stronb financial incentive to do so. In the case
of financial advisers, academics, or politicians, it may be more
advantageous to obfuschte one's mistakes than to admit them. The
model can also be useful in that regard. Indeed, it could legitimately be asked whether I have tried to cover up my inability to
predict the course of events by creating the "brink" model. If so,
I shall pay a heavy price, because I intend to use the model in
dealing with the renewed bull market. That is to say, I operate on
the assumption that we are in a 1929-type bull market which will,
however, abort long before it reaches the lofty heights of 1929.
Clearly, there is a loag way to go before the internal dynamics
-or, more accurately, dialectics-of the market render it ripe for
a reversal. If anything, the correction in the second half of 1986,
coupled with the further decline of the dollar, has extended the
"natural" life span of the boom. If it is to be aborted again, the
causes will have to be external. What these external constraints
are has been amply discussed: a recession, coupled with protectionism, would be more dangerous than a buoyant economy.
Eventually, the monetary authorities are unlikely to tolerate a
runaway boom-but that point is a long way swab-at least as far
as the U.S. stock market is concerned.
Not so in Japan. The valuation of Japanese stocks has long
ceased to bear any relevance to the fundamentals. Pricelearnings
mu:tiples are excessive even h relation to the low and declining
interest rates that prevail in Japan. Moreover, the reported earnings of many companies are artificially inflated by profits from
stock transactions. The outlook for industrial profits is poor, and
companies use their surplus cash to speculate in the stock market.
Specialized funds have been set up to attract corporate investors,
and they have been illegally promising a guaranteed minimum
return. A governmental investigation of these so-called "tokkin
funds" received a lot of publicity at the time of the stock market
break of October 1986. Nevertheless, the market has recovered its
poise and reached new highs early in 1987. How far can the boom
go? Just as Italy was the market to watch for impending trouble in
1986, in 1987 it is Japan.

296

'

1

The Real-Time Experiment

The Japanese stock market is fueled by liquidity and the liquidity is generated by the combination of a weak economy and a
strong yen. When either Japanese or non-Japanese holders of dollars convert them into yen, some of those yen find their way into
the stock market. The tendency is particularly strong when the
yen are supplied by the central bank in an endeavor to keep the
exchange rate from rising. When the central bank is not involved,
there is at least a chance that the sellers of yen sell, or fail to buy,
Japanese stocks in order to acquire assets denominated in dollars.
The Japanese government has engaged in a campaign to encourage investment abroad and, on the whole, it has been very successh!: capitc;! outflows consistently exceed the trade surplus.
The yen continues to strengthen only because of an inflow of
foreign capital and hedging by Japanese investors. Once market
participants gain conviction that the trend is changing, they reduce their hedging, and the yen falls of its own accord. That is
what happened last October, although the break in the stock market preceded the decline of the yen. It is likely to happen again.
Since the end of the year, the upward pressure on the yen has
built up again and the stock market boom gained a new lease on
life. When the pressure abates, involuntary selling by the Bank of
Japan will be replaced by voluntary selling by holders of yen.
That is when the pool .of liquidity will spring a leak. Given the
inflated level of stocks prices, a decline could easily turn into a
rout.
There is a noteworthy similarity between the position of Japan
today and that of the United States in the 1920s: it is emerging as
the leading economic power and its stock market is less seasoned
than that of the mature economies. But that is where the simflarity
ends. The Japanese authorities have a tradition of intervention
and a firm grip on the participants in financial markets. Once
before, in 1965, when the stock market collapsed, the government
set up a corporation to buy, and hold, shares dumped on the
market by distressed holders. Nineteen twenty-nine is not likely
to repeat itself, even in Japan.
The initial impact of a decline in the Japanese stock market
could well be positive for other markets because it is likely to be
associated with a wholesale movement of funds from the Japanese
to other stock markets. But if the decline turns into a rout, it is
bound to send a shiver through the world.

PART FOUR

THE SCOPE FOR FINANCIAL ALCHEMY:
AN EVALUATION OF THE EXPERIMENT *

The real-time experiment has turned out quite differently from
what I had expected; moveover, the results of the second phase
are quite different from those of the first: the evaluation I wrote in
June 1986 had to be rewritten in light of what has happened since.
Phase 1 shows my approach at work when it is successful, Phase
2 when it is not. This makes the task of evaluation more complex;
but it will also render the judgment more complete.
In evaluating my approach we must distinguish between its
ability to produce profits in financial markets and its ability to
predict the future course of events. The fact that theYIistinction is
necessary has far-reaching implications, which will be explored
in the course of this chapter and the next one.
First, as to the financial results. Phase 1 coincided with the
most prosperous period of my Fund. In the eleven months between the inception of the experiment and the end of the control
period, Quantum Fund shares appreciated by 126°/0, as against
27% for the S&P index, 30% for Treasury bond futures, 23% for
the DM, and 34% for the yen. Admittedly, these were prosperous
times for most investors, even for those who were on the wrong
side of the currency trend; but few did as well as my Fund. Leverage is only part of the explanation, because leverage works in both
directions: one has to be on the right side of the market to benefit
from it.
Even if we make allowances for an element of coincidence,
* Written in June 1986; revised in December 1986.

300
I

4

Evaluation

there can be no doubt that the process of formulating and testing
hypotheses made a positive contribution to the results.
By contrast, Phase 2 shows a loss. Between July 21, 1986, and
the end of the year Quantum Fund shares declined by 2% as
against a 2% rise for the S&P index, a 2% fall for the Treasury
bond futures, a 1%rise for the Japanese government bond futures,
and a 5% rise for the Japanese stock index. The DM rose by lo0$,,
the yen fell by 2%, gold rose by 14%, and oil rose by 40%. Putting
both phases into the context of my entire performance, the results
can be considered satisfactory.
The record shows that my trading was far from flawless even in
Phase 1. I was tc~olsts in buying bonds and too early in selling
them-although I had the courage to reestablish the position at a
much higher price. I was also rather late in recognizing the "bull
market of our lifetime" in stocks. My trading in currencies was
the best: the insight that the level of risk had been reduced by the
Plaza meeting of the Group of Five was highly rewarding.
Phase 2 is dominated by one major mistake: my reluctance to
recognize that the "bull market of a lifetime" had run its course
before it had truly earned its name. The consequences were particularly painful in Japan where I was participating in a classic
boondbust sequence and failed to get out in time. Once committed, the mistake was difficult to rectify; but at least the analytical
framework made me aware of what I was up against. A method
that produces outstanding results during good periods and
helps to contain losses during bad ones must be declared a success.

Year Ended
Dec. 31,1984
Dec. 31,1985
Dec. 31,1986
Mar. 31,1987

Quantum Fund N.V.
Class A Shares
% Change
Net
from
Asset Value
Preceding
Per Share
Year

Size of Fund

$3,057.79
$6,760.59
$9,699.41
$12,554.16

$488,998,187
$1,003,502,000
$1,567,109,000*
$2,075,679,000*

+ 121.1%
+ 43.5%
+ 29.4%

Compounded annual appreciat'ion:
* Unaudited.

1969-1986:
1984-1986:

+ 35.4%
+ 78.1%

The Scope for Financial AIchemy

301

My financial success stands in stark contrast with my ability to
forecast events. In this context, we must distinguish between
events in financial markets and events in the real world. Events
in financial markets determine financial success; events in the
real world are relevant, only in evaluating the scientific merit of
my approach.
Even in predicting vancia1 markets my record is less than
impressive: the best that can be said for it is that my theoretical
framework enables me to understand the significance of events as
they unfold-although the record is less than spotless. One
would expect a successful method to yield firm predictions; but
all my forecasts are extremely tentative a;nd subject to constant
revision in the light of market developments. Occasionally I develop some conviction and, when I do, the payoff can be substantial; but even then, there is an ever-present danger that the course
of events fails to correspond to my expectations. The concept of
the "bull market of a liftime" is a case in point: it was highly
rewarding in Phase 1 but it became more of a hindrance than a
help in Phase 2. My aiproach works not by making valid predictions but by allowing me to correct false ones.
With regard to events in the real world, my record is downright
dismal. The outstanding feature of my predictions is that I keep
on expecting developments that do not materialize. During the
real-time experiment I often envisioned a recession that was just
around the corner, but it never occurred; at the i m p t i o n of the
experiment I was contemplating a reversal of the Imperial Circle
that was avoided only by the deus ex machina of the Plaza agreement of the Group of Five. Going further back, a collapse of the
banking system has never been far from my thoughts since 1982.
Similarly, I expected the collapse in oil prices to be followed by
a tax on imported oil, of which there is no sign. To be fair, there
were some developments that I anticipated correctly-the collapse in oil prices was one and the willingness of the Japanese to
finance our budget deficit was another. Although I did not anticipate the Group of Five meeting at the Plaza Hotel, it fitted my
framework perfectly and I responded to it correctly.
How can financial success and predictive failure be reconciled?
That is the question I shall address in this chapter. But before I
do so, I must remind the reader why it arises in the first place. If
this were a scientific experiment, my financial success would
serve as evidence of the validity of the hypotheses on which my
decisions were based. But the experiment does not qualify as a
I

302
4

t

Evaluation

scientific one. I need to raise only two considerations to make
this point: one personal and the other pertaining to the subject
matter.
My decision-making process was greatly influenced by personal
factors such as my presence or absence from the office, and the
real-time experiment itself was an important personal factor. The
fact that the monetary results served as a possible criterion of the
validity of my ideas made me try harder than I would have otherwise. This is borne out by the fact that my understanding was
much hazier and my moves in the market more tentative during
the control period than they were at the height of the experiment.
Such haziness is quite common; it is the sharp focus that I managed to attain in the course of the experiment that is rather exceptional. I was greatly helped by the discipline of having to write
down my thoughts. My arguments may not strike the reader as
particularly well organized, but they are certainly more consistent
than they would have been if I had not taken the trouble to formulate them in writing. I was also inspired by the fact that I was
able to combine the two great abiding interests in my life: philosophical speculation and speculation in financial markets. Both
seemed to benefit from the combination: together, they engaged
me more than either one on its own.
The other consideration has to do with external events. Phase 1
happened to coincide with a moment in history when the authorities tried to assert their leadership: they cooperated first in pushing down the dollar and then in pushing down interest rates. The
theoretical framework I was using was particularly well suited
for dealing with these developments. After all, the interplay between markets and regulators is one of the main themes in the
concept of a regulatory and credit cycle. My theoretical framework might have proven much less helpful at other moments in
history.
For instance, I recall the time, in 1981-82, when the Federal
Reserve sought to control the quantity of money and allowed
market forces to set interest rates. The market for government
bonds, and to a lesser extent for stocks and currencies, became
like a casino, and my approach of formulating hypotheses and
testing them against the market became worse than useless: by the
time I recognized a market trend and formulated a hypothesis to
explain it, the trend had already changed and I had to find a new
hypothesis. The result was that I was always lagging behind the

The Scope for Financial Alchemy

303

market and kept on getting whipsawed until I abandoned the
hopeless struggle and delegated the task of gambling in government bond futures to someone more qualified. I found a computer-based speculator, Victor Niederhofer, who had developed a
system using the assurn;ption that the market is a casino. He operated successfully until the international debt crisis of 1982
changed the nature of tqe game. He had the rare fortitude to close
the account before he had lost all the money he had made for me
previously. I could argue that an approach which allows me to
recognize when it does not work is a valid approach; still, it is
somehow more convincing to demonstrate it at a juncture when
it does work.
These two considerations go a long way toward explaining my
financial success during the experiment. They also serve to disqualify it as a scientific experiment. First, the fact that an experiment is conducted is not supposed to influence the outcome; in
my case it did. Second, scientific theories are supposed to be
universally valid, while mine seems to operate only intermittently. But the divergence from a sceintific experiment goes much
deeper. I have never claimed scientific status for my theoretical
framework. On the contrary, I have argued that reflexive processes
cannot be predicted by scientific method, and the real-time experiment was a deliberate attempt to explore an alternative method.
To bring the point home, I have described the alternative method
as alchemy. Scientific method seeks to understandittrings as they
are, while alchemy seeks to bring about a desired state of affairs.
To put it another way, the primary objective of science is the truth
-that of alchemy, operational success.
In the sphere of natural phenomena, there is no distinction
between the two objectives. Nature obeys laws that operate independently of whether they are understood or not; the only way
man can bend nature to his will is by understanding and applying
these laws. That is why alchemy has failed and natural science
reigns supreme.
But social phenomena are different: they have thinking participants. Events do not obey laws that operate independently of
what anybody thinks. On the contrary, the participants' thinking
is an integral part of the subject matter. This creates an opening
for alchemy that was absent in the sphere of natural science. Operational success can be achieved without attaining scientific
knowledge. By the same token, scientific method is rendered just

304
I

+

Evaluation

as ineffectual in dealing with social events as alchemy was in
altering the character of natural substances. I shall revert to the
predicament of the social sciences in the next chapter; here I want
to explore the scope for alchemy.
The real-time experiment shows that my approach is more successful in dealing with financial markets than with the real world.
The reason for it readily suggests itself: financial markets themselves function imperfectly as a mechanism for predicting events
in the real world. There is always a divergence between prevailing
expectations and the actual course of events. Financial success
depends on the ability to anticipate prevailing expectations and
not real-world developments. But, as we have seen, my approach
rarely produces firm predictions even about the future course of
financial markets; it is only a framework for understanding the
course of events as they unfold. If it has any validity it is because
the theoretical framework corresponds to the way that financial
markets operate. That means that the markets themselves can be
viewed as formulating hypotheses about the future and then submitting them to the test of the actual course of events. The hypotheses that survive the test are reinforced; those that fail are
discarded. The main difference between me and the markets is
that markets seem to engage in a process of trial and error without
the participants fully understanding what is going on, while I do
it consciously. Presumably that is why I can do better than the
market.
If this view is correct, financial markets 'bear a curious resemblance to scientific method: both involve the testing of hypotheses. But there is a fundamental difference: in science, testing
serves to establish the truth; in financial markets, the criierion is
operational success. In contradistinction with natural science, the
two criteria do not coincide. How could they? Market prices always express a prevailing bias, whereas natural science works
with an objective criterion. Scientific theories are judged by the
facts; financial decisions are judged by the distorted views of the
participants. Instead of scientific method, financial markets embody the method of alchemy.
This interpretation of financial markets as a mechanism for testing hypotheses by alchemy is both novel and challenging. The
fact that it is not generally accepted adds to the challenge. How
can markets be testing something when the participants don't
know what they are doing? The answer is to be found in the
