
persuade all his customers to sell widgets back to him, so that he could continue in business?
He pondered this problem for several days with no clear solution. Then, quite by chance, he met his neighbour
again in town. The man drew him to one side and inquired whether the rumour he had heard was true?
Inquiring into what that rumour might be, Uncle Joe learned that his neighbour had heard that another, much
bigger widget distribution company was setting up business in the area.
Being clever, Uncle Joe realised that providence had given him the answer on a plate. Appearing crestfallen,
he admitted that the rumour was true, and that his business would suffer badly. More importantly, widget values
were likely to drop dramatically in price.
As they parted company, Uncle Joe chuckled to himself at having such good fortune, and such a helpful gossip
for a neighbour.
Within days he had queues of customers outside his warehouse doors, begging him to buy back their widgets.
With so many people selling, he dropped his prices quickly, making people even more desperate to sell before
their widgets became worthless!
As the prices fell further, more and more people cracked under the pressure. Uncle Joe was now buying back
an enormous volume of widgets. After several weeks the panic selling was over, as few people had been brave
enough to hold out under the pressure.
Uncle Joe could now start to sell widgets again at their old levels from his warehouse full of stock. He didn't
mind if it was quiet for a few months, as he has made a great deal of money very quickly. He could afford to take
it easy. His overhead expenses were covered and he could even pay his staff a healthy bonus. Everyone soon
forgot how or where the rumours had started and life returned to normal.
Normal that is until Uncle Joe started thinking one day. I wonder if we could do that again?
Uncle Joe's story is of course fiction. It was written before I discovered the work of Richard Ney, but it is
interesting that we both use the same analogy to describe the insiders, the specialists, or what most people call
the market makers.
It is my view, (and of Richard Ney) that this is one of the great ironies of the financial markets. Whilst insider
dealing by individuals on the outside is punished with long prison sentences and heavy fines, those on the
inside are actively encouraged and licensed to do so. The problem for the exchanges and governments is that
without the market makers, who are the wholesalers of the market and provide a guarantee of execution of the
stock, the market would cease to function. When we buy or sell in the cash market, our order will always be
filled. This is the role of the market maker. They have no choice. It is their remit to fulfil all orders, both buying
and selling and managing their order books, or their inventory accordingly.
As Ney said himself, the market makers are wholesalers, nothing more, nothing less. They are professional
traders. They are licensed and regulated and have been approved to 'make a market' in the shares you wish to
buy and sell. They are usually large international banking organisations, generally with thousands or tens of
thousands of employees worldwide.
Some of them will be household names, others you will never have heard of, but they all have one thing in
common - they make vast amounts of money. What places the market maker in such a unique position, is their
ability to see both sides of the market. In other words, the supply and demand. The inventory position if you like.
Just like Uncle Joe, they also have another huge advantage which is to be able to set their prices accordingly.
Now, I don't want you to run away with the idea that the entire stock market is rigged. It isn't. No single market
maker could achieve this on their own
However, you do need to understand how they use windows of opportunity, and a variety of trading conditions
to manipulate prices. They will use any, and every piece of news to move the prices, whether relevant or not.
Have you ever wondered why markets move fast on world events which have no bearing. Why markets move
lower on good news, and higher on bad news?
The above explanation is a vast over simplification but the principle remains true. All the major exchanges such

as the NYSE, AMEX and the NASDAQ have specialists who act as market makers. These include firms such
as Barclays plc (BARC) and Getco LLC that oversee the trading in shares and what is often referred to as The
Big Board (shades of Jesse Livermore, perhaps). According to Bloomberg Business in 2012 ‘exchanges are
experimenting with ways of inducing market makers to quote more aggressively to attract volume’. In addition,
in the same article the US exchanges are very keen to increase the number of companies who can act as
market makers. But, other than this, not much has changed since the days of Richard Ney.
Do these companies then work together? Of course they do! It goes without saying. Do they work in an overt
way? No. What they will all see, is the balance of supply and demand in general across the markets and
specifically in their own stocks. If the specialists are all in a general state of over supply, and a news story
provides the opportunity to sell, then the market markers will all act pretty much in unison, as their warehouses
will all be in much the same state. It really is common sense once you start to think about the markets in this
way.
On the London Stock Exchange there are official market makers for many securities (but not for shares in the
largest and most heavily traded companies, which instead use an electronic automated system called SETS).
However, you might ask why I have spent so much time explaining what these companies do, when actually
you never see them at all. The answer is very simple. As the 'licensed insiders', they sit in the middle of the
market, looking at both sides of the market. They will know precisely the balance of supply and demand at any
one time. Naturally this information will never be available to you, and if you were in their position, you would
probably take advantage in the same way.
The only tool we have at our disposal to fight back, is volume. We can argue about the rights and wrongs of the
situation, but when you are trading and investing in stocks, market makers are a fact of life. Just accept it, and
move on.
Volume is far from perfect. The market makers have even learnt over the decades how to avoid reporting large
movements in stock, which are often reported in after hours trading. However, it is the best tool we have with
which to see ' inside the market'
Volume applies to all markets and is equally valuable, whether there is market manipulation or not. Volume in
the futures market, which is the purest form of buying and selling reveals when the market is running out of
steam. It reveals whether buying interest is rising or falling on a daily basis. It reveals all the subtleties of pull
backs and reversals on tick charts and time charts from minutes to hours. Volume is the fuel that drives the
market. Volume reveals when the major operators are moving in and out of the market. Without volume, nothing
moves, and if it does move and the volume is not in agreement, then there is something wrong, and an alarm
bell rings!
For example, if the market is bullish and the futures price is rising on strong and rising volume, then this is
instantly telling us that the price action is being validated by the associated volume. The major operators are
buying into the move. Equally, if the market is falling and the volume is rising, then once again volume is
validating price. It really is that simple. These principles apply whatever the market, whether it is bonds, interest
rates, indices, commodities or currencies. What you will discover in this book is that the analysis of price and
volume applies to every market, manipulated or otherwise. In the manipulated cash markets of stocks, it
provides you with the ultimate weapon to avoid being suckered in by the market makers.
In the futures markets, it gives you the ultimate weapon to validate price, and to reveal the true market sentiment
of buyers and sellers and to take action as the reversals in trend are signalled using volume. Here, we are
following the major operators who will have the inside view of the market.
In the spot forex market we have a different problem. There is no true volume reported. Even if there were,
would this be shown as trade size, or 'amounts of currency' being exchanged. Fortunately however, we do have
an answer to volume in the world's largest financial market, and it’s called tick volume.
However, tick volume is not perfect, nothing is in trading. First, the tick volumes on one platform will vary from
the tick volumes on another, since tick data will be provided through the platform of an online broker. Second,
the quality of the data will depend on several factors, not least whether the broker is subscribed directly to the
interbank liquidity pool directly using one of the expensive wholesale feeds. Nevertheless, a quality FX broker

will normally provide a quality feed.
But, is tick data valid as a proxy for volume?
The short answer is yes, and various studies over the years have shown that tick data as a proxy for 'volume' is
90% representative in terms of the true 'activity' in the market. After all, volume is really activity, and in this
sense can be reflected in price, since tick data is simply changes in price. So, if the price is changing fast, then
does this mean that we have significant activity in the market? In my opinion the answer is yes. To prove this
point, we only need to watch a tick chart prior to, and just after a significant news release.
Take the monthly Non Farm Payroll, which every forex trader knows and loves! Assume we are watching a 233
tick chart. Prior to the release each 233 tick bar may be taking a few minutes to form. During the release and
immediately after, each bar is forming in seconds, appearing as if being fired onto the screen using a machine
gun! A chart that has taken an hour to fill with bars, is now a full frame within minutes.
This is activity, pure and simple, which in turn we can assume is representative of volume. There will always be
market manipulation in the spot forex market. In many ways it is the most widely manipulated of all. We only
have to consider the currency wars as evidence of this, but as traders, tick volume is what we have, and tick
volume is what we use. Whilst it isn't perfect, I can guarantee you one thing. You will be considerably more
successful using it, than not, and you will see why, once we start to look at the charts themselves across all the
various markets.
If you are still not convinced? Let me give you an analogy, not perfect I accept, but which I hope will help.
Imagine that you are at auction, and suppose for argument’s sake that it’s an auction for furniture. It is a cold,
wet and miserable day in the middle of winter, and the auction room is in a small provincial town. The auction
room is almost empty, with few buyers in the room. The auctioneer details the next item, an antique piece of
furniture and starts the bidding with his opening price. After a short pause, a bid is made from the room, but
despite further efforts to raise the bidding, the auctioneer finally brings the hammer down, selling the item at the
opening bid.
Now imagine the same item being sold in a different scenario. This time, the same item is being sold, but the
auction house is in a large capital city, it is the middle of summer and the auction room is full. The auctioneer
details the next piece which is our antique furniture, and opens the bidding with a price. The price moves
quickly higher, with bidders signalling interest in the auction room, and phone bidders also joining in.
Eventually the bidding slows and the item is sold.
In the first example, the price changed only once, representing a lack of interest, and in our terms a lack of
bidders in the room, in other words volume. In the second example the price changed several times and quickly
with the price action reflecting interest, activity and bidders in the room. In other words volume.
In other words, the linkage between activity and price is perfectly valid. Therefore, as far as I’m concerned,
using tick data as a proxy for volume data in the forex market is equally valid. Activity and volume go hand in
hand, and I hope that the above analogy, simple and imperfect as it is, will convince you too.
The above simple analogy also highlights three other important points about volume.
The first is this. All volume is relative. Suppose for example this had been our first visit to this particular auction
room. Is the activity witnessed average, above average or below average. We would not be able to say, since
we have no yardstick by which to judge. If we were a regular visitor, then we could judge instantly whether there
were more or less attendees than usual, and make a judgement on likely bidding, as a result.
This is what makes volume such a powerful indicator. As humans we have the ability to judge relative sizes and
heights extremely quickly, and it is the relative aspect of volume which gives it such power. Unlike the tape
readers we have a chart, which gives us an instant picture of the relative volume bars, whether on an ultra fast
tick chart, an intra day time chart, or longer term investing chart. It is the relationship in relative terms which is
important.
The second point is that volume without price is meaningless. Imagine an auction room with no bidding.
Remove the price from the chart, and we simply have volume bars. Volume on its own simply reveals interest,

but that interest is just that, without the associated price action. It is only when volume and price combine that
we have the chemical reaction which creates the explosive power of Volume Price Analysis.
Third and last, time is a key component. Suppose in our auction room, instead of the bidding lasting a few
minutes, it had lasted a few hours ( if allowed!). What would this tell us then? That the interest in the item was
subdued to say the least. Hardly the frenetic interest of a bidding war.
To use a water analogy. Imagine that we have a hosepipe with a sprinkler attached. The water is the price
action and the sprinkler is our 'volume' control. If the sprinkler is left open, the water will continue to leave the
pipe with no great force, simply falling from the end of the pipe. However, as soon as we start to close our
sprinkler valve, pressure increases and the water travels further. We have the same amount of water leaving the
pipe, but through a reduced aperture. Time has now become a factor, as the same amount of water is
attempting to leave the pipe in the same amount of time, but pressure has increased.
It is the same with the market.
However, let me be provocative for a moment, and borrow a quote from Richard Wyckoff himself who famously
said :
“….trading and investing is like any other pursuit—the longer you stay at it the more technique you acquire, and
anybody who thinks he knows of a short cut that will not involve “sweat of the brow” is sadly mistaken”
Whilst this sentiment could be applied to almost any endeavour in life, it is particularly relevant in the study of
price and volume.
As you are probably aware, or will not doubt find out when you begin trading, there are several free 'volume'
indicators, and many proprietary systems you can buy. Whether free or paid, all have one thing in common.
They have neither the capacity nor intellect to analyse the price volume relationship correctly in my view, for the
simple reason, that trading is an art, not a science.
When I finished my two weeks with Albert, I then spent the next 6 months just studying charts, and learning to
interpret the price and volume relationship. I would sit with my live feed and my two monitors, one for the cash
market and the other for the equivalent futures market, watching every price bar and the associated volume and
using my knowledge to interpret future market behaviour. This may not be what you want to read. And some of
you may be horrified at how labour intensive this all sounds.
However, just like Wyckoff, I also believe there are no short cuts to success. Technical analysis, in all its
aspects is an art, and interpreting the volume price relationship is no different. It takes time to learn, and time to
be quick in your analysis. However, just like the tape readers of the past, once mastered is a powerful skill.
The technique is a subjective one, requiring discretionary decision making. It is not, and never will be, one that
lends itself to automation. If it were, then this book would simply be more fuel for the fire.
Finally, (and I hope you are still reading and have not been put off by the above statements), one further aspect
of volume is whose perspective are we using when we talk about buying and selling. Are we talking from a
wholesalers perspective or from the retail perspective. So, let me explain.
As investors or speculators the whole raison d'etre for studying volume is to see what the insiders, the
specialists are doing. For the simple reason that whatever they are doing, we want to follow and do as well! The
assumption being, implied or otherwise, is that they are likely to have a much better idea of where the market is
heading. This is not an unreasonable assumption to make.
So, when the market has moved sharply lower in a price waterfall and a bearish trend, supported by masses of
volume, this is a buying climax. It is the wholesalers who are buying and the retail traders who are panic selling.
A buying climax for us represents an opportunity.
Likewise, at the top of a bull trend, where we see sustained high volumes, then this is a selling climax. The
wholesalers are selling to the retail traders and investors who are buying on the expectation of the market going
to the moon!
So remember, when I write about volume throughout the remainder of this book, buying and selling is always

from a wholesalers perspective as this is the order flow that we ALWAYS want to follow.
Now in the next chapter we're going to move on to consider the other side of the equation, which is price.

Chapter Three
The Right Price
No price is too low for a bear or too high for a bull.
Unknown
Now we turn to the counter balance of volume which is price, and forgive me for a moment if we return to Jesse
Livermore and one of his many quotes which I mentioned at the start of this book:
“there is nothing new in Wall Street. There can't be because speculation is as old as the hills. Whatever
happens in the stock market today has happened before and will happen again”
Now to use and paraphrase this famous quote, I would say that there is nothing new in trading. As I said in
chapter one, Volume Price Analysis has been around for over 100 years. The same is true when we consider
the analysis of price, and the only representation of price which truly changed how traders studied and
analysed charts was in the introduction of candlestick charts in the early 1990's.
Fads come and go in trading. Something that was in 'vogue' a few years ago, is no longer considered valid, and
some 'new' approach is then promoted. One approach which is being marketed heavily at the moment is 'price
action trading' or PAT. This is as it sounds. Trading using an analysis of price, with no (or very few) indicators,
which I find strange. And my reasons are as follows.
Imagine suggesting to Jesse Livermore, Charles Dow, Richard Wyckoff, and Richard Ney, that we had devised
a new and exciting way to analyse the markets. The ticker tape print out would now ONLY show the price, but
NO volume. I'm sure Jesse and the others would have been struck dumb at such a suggestion. But don't worry.
In this book I explain price action trading, which is then validated with volume. So you get two approaches for
the price of one here! Now that's what I call value for money!!
However, I digress. Living close to London as I do, and just a stone's throw away from The President, is the old
LIFFE building, the London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange. As a frequent visitor to this
part of London, I would often drive past this exchange, and at any time during the day, would see the traders in
their different brightly coloured jackets, dashing out to grab coffees and sandwiches before rushing back to the
floor of the exchange. Without exception these were generally young men, loud and brash, and in fact on the
corner of Walbrook and Cannon Street there now stands a bronze statue of a floor trader, mobile phone in hand.
These were the days of fast cars, and aggressive trading, and it was ironic that this was the world where I
started my own trading career, with FTSE 100 futures orders filled on the floor of the exchange.
This was the world of adrenaline pumped traders, yelling and screaming using unintelligible hand signals,
buying and selling in a frenetic atmosphere of noise and sweat. It was positively primordial where the overriding
emotion emanating from the floor was fear, and obvious to anyone who cared to view it from the public gallery.
However, the advent of electronic trading changed all of this, and the LIFFE exchange was one of many
casualties. All the traders left trading and moved away from the pit, and onto electronic platforms. The irony is,
that most of the traders, and I have spoken to many over the years, failed to make the transition from pit trading,
to electronic trading, for one very simple reason.
A pit trader, could sense not only the fear and greed, but also judge the flow of the market from the buying and
selling in the pit. In other words, to a pit trader, this was volume or order flow. This is what a pit trader saw and
sensed every day of the week, the flow of money, the weight of market sentiment, and the trading opportunities
that followed as a result. In other words, they could 'see' the volume, they could see when the big buyers were
coming into the market and ride on their coat tails. This is the equivalent of volume on the screen.
However, without being able to see, judge, and feel the flow in the pit, most of these traders failed to make a
successful transition to screen trading. Some succeeded, but most were never able to make that move, from an
environment where price action was supported by something tangible. Whether they would call it activity, order
flow, sentiment, or just the 'smell of the market' this is what brought the price action to life for them, and why they
struggled to succeed with the advent of the electronic era.
