2. Par Value of Common Stock to be reduced to 1¢.
3. Payment of all wages and salaries in option warrants.
4. Inventories to be carried at $1.
5. Preferred Stock to be replaced by non-interest bearing
bonds redeemable at 50% discount.
6. A $1,000,000,000 Contingency Reserve to be established.
[Introductory paragraph, 1988.]
[1990 Appendix A.]
* An unpublished satire by Ben Graham, written in 1936 and given by the author to
Warren Buffett in 1954.
44
45

159

160

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

The official statement of this extraordinary Modernization
Plan follows in full:
The Board of Directors of U.S. Steel Corporation is pleased to
announce that after intensive study of the problems arising from
changed conditions in the industry, it has approved a comprehensive plan for remodeling the Corporation's accounting methods. A
survey by a Special Committee, aided and abetted by Messrs. Price,
Bacon, Guthrie & Colpitts, revealed that our company has lagged
somewhat behind other American business enterprises in utilizing
certain advanced bookkeeping methods, by means of which the
earning power may be phenomenally enhanced without requiring
any cash outlay or any changes in operating or sales conditions. It
has been decided not only to adopt these newer methods, but to
develop them to a still higher stage of perfection. The changes
adopted by the Board may be summarized under six heads, as
follows:
1.

Fixed Assets to be written down to Minus $1,000,000,000.

Many representative companies have relieved their income accounts of all charges for depreciation by writing down their plant
account to $1. The Special Committee points out that if their
plants are worth only $1, the fixed assets of U.S. Steel Corporation
are worth a good deal less than that sum. It is now a well-recognized fact that many plants are in reality a liability rather than an
asset, entailing not only depreciation charges, but taxes, maintenance, and other expenditures. Accordingly, the Board has decided to extend the write-down policy initiated in the 1935 report,
and to mark down the Fixed Assets from $1,338,522,858.96 to a
round Minus $1,000,000,000.
The advantages of this move should be evident. As the plant
wears out, the liability becomes correspondingly reduced. Hence,
instead of the present depreciation charge of some $47,000,000
yearly there will be an annual appreciation credit of 5%, or
$50,000,000. This will increase earnings by no less than $97,000,000
per annum.
2.

Reduction of Par Value of Common Stock to 1¢, and

3.

Payment of Salaries and Wages in Option Warrants.

Many corporations have been able to reduce their overhead
expenses substantially by paying a large part of their executive salaries in the form of options to buy stock, which carry no charge
against earnings. The full possibilities of this modem device have

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

161

apparently not been adequately realized. The Board of Directors
have adopted the following advanced form of this idea:
The entire personnel of the Corporation are to receive their
compensation in the form of rights to buy common stock at $50 per
share, at the rate of one purchase right for each $50 of salary and!
or wages in their present amounts. The par value of the common
stock is to be reduced to 1¢.
The almost incredible advantages of this new plan are evident
from the following:
A. The payroll of the Corporation will be entirely eliminated, a saving of $250,000,000 per annum, based on 1935
operations.
B. At the same time, the effective compensation of all our
employees will be increased severalfold. Because of the large earnings per share to be shown on our common stock under the new
methods, it is certain that the shares will command a price in the
market far above the option level of $50 per share, making the
readily realizable value of these option warrants greatly in excess
of the present cash wages that they will replace.
C. The Corporation will realize an additional large annual
profit through the exercise of these warrants. Since the par value
of the common stock will be fixed at 1¢, there will be a gain of
$49.99 on each share subscribed for. In the interest of conservative
accounting, however, this profit will not be included in the income
account, but will be shown separately as a credit to Capital Surplus.
D. The Corporation's cash position will be enormously
strengthened. In place of the present annual cash outgo of
$250,000,000 for wages (1935 basis), there will be annual cash inflow of $250,000,000 through exercise of the subscription warrants
for 5,000,000 shares of common stock. The Company's large earnings and strong cash position will permit the payment of a liberal
dividend which, in turn, will result in the exercise of these option
warrants immediately after issuance which, in turn, will further improve the cash position which, in turn, will permit a higher dividend rate-and so on, indefinitely.
4.

Inventories to be carried at $1.

Serious losses have been taken during the depression due to
the necessity of adjusting inventory value to market. Various enterprises-notably in the metal and cotton-textile fields-have successfully dealt with this problem by carrying all or part of their
inventories at extremely low unit prices. The U.S. Steel Corpora-

162

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

tion has decided to adopt a still more progressive policy~ and to
carry its entire inventory at $1. This will be effected by an appropriate write-down at the end of each year, the amount of ,said
write-down to be charged to the Contingency Reserve hereinafter
referred to.
The benefits to be derived from this new method are very
great. Not only will it obviate all possibility of inventory depreciation, but it will substantially enhance the annual earnings of the
Corporation. The inventory on hand at the beginning of the year,
valued at $1, will be sold during the year at an excellent profit. It is
estimated that our income will be increased by means of this
method to the extent of at least $150,000,000 per annum which, by
a coincidence, will about equal the amount of the write-down to be
made each year against Contingency Reserve.
A minority report of the Special Committee recommends that
Accounts Receivable and Cash also be written down to $1, in the
interest of consistency and to gain additional advantages similar to
those just discussed. This proposal has been rejected for the time
being because our auditors still require that any recoveries of receivables and cash so charged off be credited to surplus instead of
to the year's income. It is expected, however, that this auditing
rule-which is rather reminiscent of the horse-and-buggy dayswill soon be changed in line with modern tendencies. Should this
occur, the minority report will be given further and favorable
consideration.
5. Replacement of Preferred Stock by Non-Interest Bearing
Bonds Redeemable at 50% Discount.
During the recent depression many companies have been able
to offset their operating losses by including in income profits arising from repurchases of their own bonds at a substantial discount
from par. Unfortunately the credit of U.S. Steel Corporation has
always stood so high that this lucrative source of revenue has not
hitherto been available to it. The Modernization Scheme will remedy this condition.
It is proposed that each share of preferred stock be exchanged
for $300 face value of non-interest-bearing sinking-fund notes, redeemable by lot at 50% of face value in 10 equal annual installments. This will require the issuance of $1,080,000,000 of new
notes, of which $108,000,000 will be retired each year at a cost to
the Corporation of only $54,000,000, thus creating an annual profit
of the same amount.

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

163

, Like the wage-and/or-salary plan described under 3. above,
this' arrangement will benefit both the Corporation and its preferred stockholders. The latter are assured payment for their present shares at 150% of par value over an average period of five
years. Since short-term securities yield practically no return at
present, the non-interest-bearing feature is of no real importance.
The Corporation will convert its present annual charge of
$25,000,000 for preferred dividends into an annual bond-retirement
profit of $54,000,000-an aggregate yearly gain of $79,000,000.
6. Establishment of a Contingency Reserve of $1,000,000,000.
The Directors are confident that the improvements hereinbefore described will assure the Corporation of a satisfactory earning
power under all conditions in the future. Under modem accounting methods, however, it is unnecessary to incur the slightest risk of
loss through adverse business developments of any sort, since all
these may be provided for in advance by means of a Contingency
Reserve.
The Special Committee has recommended that the Corporation create such a Contingency Reserve in the fairly substantial
amount of $1,000,000,000. As previously set forth, the annual
write-down of inventory of $1 will be absorbed by this reserve. To
prevent eventual exhaustion of the Contingency Reserve, it has
been further decided that it be replenished each year by transfer of
an appropriate sum from Capital Surplus. Since the latter is expected to increase each year by not less than $250,000,000 through
the exercise of the Stock Option Warrants (see 3. above), it will
readily make good any drains on the Contingency Reserve.
In setting up this arrangement, the Board of Directors must
confess regretfully that they have been unable to improve upon the
devices already employed by important corporations in transferring large sums between Capital, Capital Surplus, Contingency
Reserves and other Balance Sheet Accounts. In fact, it must be
admitted that our entries will be somewhat too simple, and will
lack that element of extreme mystification that characterizes the
most advanced procedure in this field. The Board of Directors,
however, have insisted upon clarity and simplicity in framing their
Modernization Plan, even at the sacrifice of possible advantage to
the Corporation's earning power.
In order to show the combined effect for the new proposals
upon the Corporation's earning power, we submit herewith a condensed Income Account for 1935 on two bases, viz:

164

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

A. As Reported

Gross Receipts from all Sources
(Including Inter Company)
Salaries and Wages
Other Operating Expenses and Taxes
DepreciatIon
Interest
Discount on Bonds Retired
Preferred Dividends
Balance for Common
Average Shares Outstanding
Earned Per Share

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

$765,000,000
251,000,000
461,000,000
47,000,000
5,000,000
25,000,000
(24,000,000)
8,703,252
($2.76)

[Vol. 19:1
B. Pro-Forma
Giving Effect to
Changes Proposed
Herewith

$765,000,000
311,000,000
(50,000,000)
5,000,000
(54,000,000)
553,000,000
11,203,252
$49.80

In accordance with a somewhat antiquated custom there is appended herewith a condensed pro-forma Balance Sheet of the U.S.
Steel Corporation as of December 31, 1935, after giving effect to
proposed changes in asset and liability accounts.
ASSETS
Fixed Assets, net
Cash Assets
Receivables
Inventory
Miscellaneous Assets
Total

.
.
.
.
.
.

($1,000,000,000)
142,000,000
56,000,000
1
27,000,000
($774,999,999)

Common Stock Par 1¢
(Par Value $87,032.52)
Stated Value* .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Subsidiaries' Bonds and Stocks
New Sinking Fund Notes........................
Current Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Contingency Reserve. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Other Reserves. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Initial Surplus
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

($3,500,000,000)
113,000,000
1,080,000,000
69,000,000
1,000,000,000
74,000,000
389,000,001
($774,999,999)

LIABILITIES

*Given a Stated Value differing from Par Value, in accordance with the laws of the State of
Virginia, where the company will be re-incorporated.

It is perhaps unnecessary to point out to our stockholders that
modern accounting methods give rise to balance sheets differing
somewhat in appearance from those of a less advanced period. In
view of the very large earning power that will result from these

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

165

changes in the Corporation's Balance Sheet, it is not expected that
undue attention will be paid to the details of assets and liabilities.
In conclusion, the Board desires to point out that the combined procedure, whereby plant will be carried at a minus figure,
our wage bill will be eliminated, and inventory will stand on our
books at virtually nothing, will give U.S. Steel Corporation an
enormous competitive advantage in the industry. We shall be able
to sell our products at exceedingly low prices and still show a handsome margin of profit. It is the considered view of the Board of
Directors that under the Modernization Scheme we shall be able to
undersell all competitors to such a point that the anti-trust laws will
constitute the only barrier to 100% domination of the industry.
In making this statement, the Board is not unmindful of the
possibility that some of our competitors may seek to offset our new
advantages by adopting similar accounting improvements. We are
confident, however, that U.S. Steel will be able to retain the loyalty
of its customers, old and new, through the unique prestige that will
accrue to it as the originator and pioneer in these new fields of
service to the user of steel. Should necessity arise, moreover, we
believe we shall be able to maintain our deserved superiority by
introducing still more advanced bookkeeping methods, which are
even now under development in our Experimental Accounting
Laboratory.
B.

Look-Through Earnings46

When one company owns part of another company, appropriate accounting procedures pertaining to that ownership interest
must be selected from one of three major categories. The percentage of voting stock that is owned, in large part, determines which
category of accounting principles should be utilized.
Generally accepted accounting principles require (subject to
exceptions, naturally . . . ) full consolidation of sales, expenses,
taxes, and earnings of business holdings more than 50% owned.
Blue Chip Stamps, 60% owned by Berkshire Hathaway Inc., falls
into this category. Therefore, all Blue Chip income and expense
items are included in full in Berkshire's Consolidated Statement of
Earnings, with the 40% ownership interest of others in Blue Chip's
net earnings reflected in the Statement as a deduction for "minority interest".
46

[Divided by hash lines: 1980; 1990; 1982; 1991, 1979.]

166

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

Full inclusion of underlying earnings from another class of
holdings, companies owned 20% to 50% (usually called "investees"), also normally occurs. Earnings from such companies-.for
example, Wesco Financial, controlled by Berkshire but only 48%
owned-are included via a one-line entry in the owner's Statement
of Earnings. Unlike the over-50% category, all items of revenue
and expense are omitted; just the proportional share of net income
is included. Thus, if Corporation A owns one-third of Corporation
B, one-third of B's earnings, whether or not distributed by B, will
end up in A's earnings. There are some modifications, both in this
and the over-50% category, for intercorporate taxes and purchase
price adjustments, the explanation of which we will save for a later
day. (We know you can hardly wait.)
Finally come holdings representing less than 20% ownership
of another corporation's voting securities. In these cases, accounting rules dictate that the owning companies include in their earnings only dividends received from such holdings. Undistributed
earnings are ignored. Thus, should we own 10% of Corporation X
with earnings of $10 million in 1980, we would report in our earnings (ignoring relatively minor taxes on intercorporate dividends)
either (a) $1 million if X declared the full $10 million in dividends;
(b) $500,000 if X paid out 50%, or $5 million, in dividends; or (c)
zero if X reinvested all earnings.
We impose this short-and over-simplified-course in accounting upon you because Berkshire's concentration of resources
in the insurance field produces a corresponding concentration of its
assets in companies in that third (less than 20% owned) category.
Many of these companies payout relatively small proportions of
their earnings in dividends. This means that only a small proportion of their current earning power is recorded in our own current
operating earnings. But, while our reported operating earnings reflect only the dividends received from such companies, our economic well-being is determined by their earnings, not their
dividends.
Our holdings in this third category of companies have increased dramatically in recent years as our insurance business has
prospered and as securities markets have presented particularly attractive opportunities in the common stock area. The large increase in such holdings, plus the growth of earnings experienced by
those partially-owned companies, has produced an unusual result;
the part of "our" earnings that these companies retained last year
(the part not paid to us in dividends) exceeded the total reported

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

167

annual operating earnings of Berkshire Hathaway. Thus, conventional accounting only allows less than half of our earnings "iceberg" to appear above the surface, in plain view. Within the
corporate world such a result is quite rare; in our case it is likely to
be recurring.
Our own analysis of earnings reality differs somewhat from
generally accepted accounting principles, particularly when those
principles must be applied in a world of high and uncertain rates of
inflation. (But it's much easier to criticize than to improve such
accounting rules. The inherent problems are monumental.) We
have owned 100% of businesses whose reported earnings were not
worth close to 100 cents on the dollar to us even though, in an
accounting sense, we totally controlled their disposition. (The
"control" was theoretical. Unless we reinvested all earnings, massive deterioration in the value of assets already in place would occur. But those reinvested earnings had no prospect of earning
anything close to a market return on capital.) We have also owned
small fractions of businesses with extraordinary reinvestment possibilities whose retained earnings had an economic value to us far
in excess of 100 cents on the dollar.
The value to Berkshire Hathaway of retained earnings is not
determined by whether we own 100%, 50%, 20% or 1 % of the businesses in which they reside. Rather, the value of those retained earnings is determined by the use to which they are put and the
subsequent level of earnings produced by that usage. This is true
whether we determine the usage, or whether managers we did not
hire-but did elect to join-determine that usage. (It's the act that
counts, not the actors.) And the value is in no way affected by the
inclusion or non-inclusion of those retained earnings in our own
reported operating earnings. If a tree grows in a forest partially
owned by us, but we don't record the growth in our financial statements, we still own part of the tree.
Our view, we warn you, is non-conventional. But we would
rather have earnings for which we did not get accounting credit put
to good use in a 10%-owned company by a management we did
not personally hire, than have earnings for which we did get credit
put into projects of more dubious potential by another management-even if we are that management.
(We can't resist pausing here for a short commercial. One usage of retained earnings we often greet with special enthusiasm
when practiced by companies in which we have an investment interest is repurchase of their own shares. The reasoning is simple: if

168

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

a fine business is selling in the market place for far less than intrinsic value, what more certain or more profitable utilization of capital can there be than significant enlargement of the interests of all
owners at that bargain price? The competitive nature of corporate
acquisition activity almost guarantees the payment of a full-frequently more than full-price when a company buys the entire
ownership of another enterprise. But the auction nature of security markets often allows finely-run companies the opportunity to
purchase portions of their own businesses at a price under 50% of
that needed to acquire the same earning power through the negotiated acquisition of another enterprise.)
The term "earnings" has a precise ring to it. And when an
earnings figure is accompanied by an unqualified auditor's certificate, a naive reader might think it comparable in certitude to 1t,
calculated to dozens of decimal places.
In reality, however, earnings can be as pliable as putty when a
charlatan heads the company reporting them. Eventually truth will
surface, but in the meantime a lot of money can change hands. Indeed, some important American fortunes have been created by the
monetization of accounting mirages.
Funny business in accounting is not new. For connoisseurs of
chicanery, [consider the foregoing satire written by Ben Graham in
1936]. Alas, excesses similar to those he then lampooned have
many times since found their way into the financial statements of
major American corporations and been duly certified by big-name
auditors. Clearly, investors must always keep their guard up and
use accounting numbers as a beginning, not an end, in their attempts to calculate true "economic earnings" accruing to them.
Berkshire's own reported earnings are misleading in a different, but important, way: We have huge investments in companies
("investees") whose earnings far exceed their dividends and in
which we record our share of earnings only to the extent of the
dividends we receive. The extreme case is Capital CitieslABC, Inc.
Our 17% share of the company's earnings amounted to more than
$83 million last year. Yet only about $530,000 ($600,000 of dividends it paid us less some $70,000 of tax) is counted in Berkshire's
GAAP earnings. The residual $82 million-plus stayed with Cap
Cities as retained earnings, which work for our benefit but go unrecorded on our books.
Our perspective on such "forgotten-but-not-gone" earnings is
simple: The way they are accounted for is of no importance, but

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

169

their ownership and subsequent utilization is all-important. We
care not whether the auditors hear a tree fall in the forest; we do
care who owns the tree and what's next done with it.
When Coca-Cola uses retained earnings to repurchase its
shares, the company increases our percentage ownership in what I
regard to be the most valuable franchise in the world. (Coke also,
of course, uses retained earnings in many other value-enhancing
ways.) Instead of repurchasing stock, Coca-Cola could pay those
funds to us in dividends, which we could then use to purchase more
Coke shares. That would be a less efficient scenario: Because of
taxes we would pay on dividend income, we would not be able to
increase our proportionate ownership to the degree that Coke can,
acting for us. If this less efficient procedure were followed, however, Berkshire would report far greater "earnings."
I believe the best way to think about our earnings is in terms
of "look-through" results, calculated as follows: Take $250 million,
which is roughly our share of the 1990 operating earnings retained
by our investees; subtract $30 million, for the incremental taxes we
would have owed had that $250 million been paid to us in dividends; and add the remainder, $220 million, to our reported operating earnings of $371 million. Thus our 1990 "look-through
earnings" were about $590 million.
In our view, the value to all owners of the retained earnings of
a business enterprise is determined by the effectiveness with which
those earnings are used-and not by the size of one's ownership
percentage. If you have owned .01 of 1% of Berkshire during the
past decade, you have benefited economically in full measure from
your share of our retained earnings, no matter what your accounting system. Proportionately, you have done just as well as if you
had owned the magic 20%. But if you have owned 100% of a great
many capital-intensive businesses during the decade, retained earnings that were credited fully and with painstaking precision to you
under standard accounting methods have resulted in minor or zero
economic value. This is not a criticism of accounting procedures.
We would not like to have the job of designing a better system. It's
simply to say that managers and investors alike must understand
that accounting numbers are the beginning, not the end, of business valuation.
In most corporations, less-than-20% ownership positions are
unimportant (perhaps, in part, because they prevent maximization
of cherished reported earnings) and the distinction between ac-
