
The employment indicator that gets the most attention is the monthly U.S. non-farm payrolls
(NFP) report. The NFP report triggers loads of attention and speculation for a few days
before and after it’s released, but then the market seems to stop talking about jobs. Keep an
eye on the job-specific reports outlined in the “Other labor-market indicators” sidebar, later
in this chapter.
To illustrate the importance that markets place on jobs, Figure 7-1 shows changes in U.S. private
payrolls overlaid with the S&P 500 stock index. As you can see, major turning points in the stock
market (but not necessarily the economy) are closely associated with peaks and troughs in job
markets.

The consumer
If it weren’t for the overarching importance of jobs to long-run economic growth, the consumer
would certainly rank first in any model seeking to understand economic data. The economies of the
major currencies are driven overwhelmingly by personal consumption, accounting for 60 to 70
percent or more of overall economic activity in developed economies.

Personal consumption (also known as private consumption, personal spending, and
similar impersonal terms) refers to how people spend their money. In a nutshell, are they
spending more, or are they spending less? Also, what’s the outlook for their spending — to
increase, decrease, or stay the same? If you want to gauge the short-run outlook of an
economy, look no further than how the individual consumer is faring.

Figure 7-1:
Job market
trends
coincide very
closely with
stock market
performance,
which reflects
the economic
outlook (but
not
necessarily
the current
state of the
economy), as
seen in U.S.
private payroll
changes and
the S&P 500.

Source: Bloomberg, FOREX.com

The business sector
Businesses and firms make up the other third of overall economic activity after personal spending.
(I’m leaving government out of my model to simplify matters.) Firms contribute directly to
economic activity through capital expenditures (for example, building factories, stores, and
offices; buying software and telecommunications equipment) and indirectly through growth (by
hiring, meaning there’s jobs again), expanding production, and producing investment opportunities.
Look at the data reports coming from the corporate sector for what they suggest about overall
sentiment, capital spending, hiring, inventory management, and production going forward.

Keep in mind that the manufacturing and export sectors are more significant in many nonU.S. economies than they are in the United States. For instance, manufacturing activity in the
United States accounts for only about 10 to 15 percent of overall activity versus shares of 30

to 40 percent and higher in other major-currency economies, such as Japan or Germany. So
Japanese industrial production data tends to have a bigger impact on the yen than U.S.
industrial production has on the dollar.

The structural
Structural indicators are data reports that cover the overall economic environment. Structural
indicators frequently form the basis for currency trends and tend to be most important to mediumand long-term traders. The main structural reports focus on
Inflation: Whether prices are rising or falling, and how fast. Inflation readings can be an
important indicator for the direction of interest rates, which is a key determinant of
currency values.
Growth: Indicators of growth and overall economic activity, typically in the form of
gross domestic product (GDP) reports. Structural growth reports tell you whether the
economy is expanding or contracting, and how fast, which is another key input to monetary
policy and the interest rate outlook. Growth forecasts from economists are important
benchmarks for evaluating subsequent economic data on growth.
Trade balance: Whether a country is importing more or less than it exports. The
currency of a country with a trade deficit (the country imports more than it exports; the
country loses from trade) tends to weaken because more of its currency is being sold to
buy foreign goods (imports). A currency with a trade surplus (the country exports more
than it imports; the country gains from trade) tends to appreciate because more of it is
being bought to purchase that country’s exports.
Fiscal balance: The overall level of government borrowing and the market’s perception
of financial stability. Countries with high debt levels run the risks of a weakening currency
if economic conditions take a turn for the worse and markets fear financial instability.
Debts and deficits became a major theme for currency markets in the wake of the Great
Financial Crisis of 2008–2009 (GFC), but they were always in the background.

Assessing Economic Data Reports from a
Trading Perspective
The data that you find in economic textbooks is very neat and clean — but the data as it actually
arrives in the market can be anything but neat and clean. I’m talking here not only about the
imperfections of economic data gathering, but also about how markets interpret individual data
reports.

In Chapter 6, I introduce the idea of consensus expectations as one of the keys to understanding
how markets interpret economic news and data. In the following sections, I look at important datareporting conventions and how they can also affect market reactions. When currencies don’t react
to the headlines of a data report as you would expect, odds are that one of the following elements
is responsible, and you need to look more closely at the report to get the true picture.

Understanding and revising data history
Economic data reports don’t originate in a vacuum — they have a history. Another popular market
adage expressing this thought is “One report does not make a trend.” However, that saying is
mostly directed at data reports that come in far out of line with market estimates or vastly different
from recent readings in the data series. To be sure, the market will react strongly when data comes
in surprisingly better or worse than expected, but the sustainability of the reaction will vary
greatly depending on the circumstances. If retail sales are generally increasing, for instance, does
a one-month drop in retail sales indicate that the trend is over, or was it a one-off decline due to
bad weather keeping shoppers at home?

When you’re looking at upcoming economic data events, not only do you need to be aware
of what’s expected, but it also helps to know what, if any, trends are evident in the data
series. The more pronounced or lengthy the trend is, the more likely the reactions to out-ofline economic reports will prove short lived. The more uneven the recent data has been, the
more likely the reaction to the new data will be sustained.

The other important element to keep in mind when interpreting incoming economic data is to
see whether the data from the prior period has been revised. Unfortunately, there is no rule
preventing earlier economic data from being changed. It’s just one of those odd facts of life in
financial markets that what the market thought it knew one day (and actually traded for
several weeks based on that understanding) can be substantially changed later.
When prior-period data is revised, the market will tend to net out the older, revised report with
the newly released data, essentially looking at the two reports together for what they suggest about
the data trend. For example, if a current report comes out worse than expected, and the prior report
is revised lower as well, the two together are likely to be interpreted as more disappointing. If a
current report comes out better than expected, but the prior period’s revision is negative, the
positive reaction to the current report will tend to be restrained by the downgrade to the earlier
data.

As you can imagine, there are many different ways and degrees in which current/revised
data scenarios can play out. A general rule is that the larger the revision to the prior report,

the more significance it will carry into the interpretation of the current release. The key is to
first be aware of prior-period revisions and to then view them relative to the incoming data.
In general, current data reports tend to receive a higher weighting by the market if only
because the data is the freshest available, and markets are always looking ahead.

Getting to the core
A number of important economic indicators are issued on a headline basis and a core basis. The
headline reading is the complete result of the indicator, while the core reading is the headline
reading minus certain categories or excluding certain items. Most inflation reports and measures of
consumer spending use this convention.
In the case of inflation reports, many reporting agencies strip out or exclude highly volatile
components, such as food and energy. In the United States, for instance, the consumer price index
(CPI) is reported on a core basis excluding food and energy, commonly cited as CPI ex-F&E.
(Whenever you see a data report “ex-something,” it’s short for “excluding” that something.) The
rationale for ignoring those items is that they’re prone to market, seasonal, or weather-related
disruptions. For example, food prices may change rapidly due to drought, floods or unseasonably
hot or cold weather. By excluding those items, the core reading is believed to paint a more
accurate picture of structural, long-term price pressures, which is what concerns monetary
policymakers the most.
Looking at consumer spending reports, the retail sales report in the United States is reported on a
core basis excluding autos (retail sales ex-autos), which are heavily influenced by seasonal
discounting and sales promotions, as well as being relatively large-ticket items in relation to other
retail expenditures. The durable goods report is also issued on a core basis excluding
transportation (durable goods ex-transportation), which mostly reflects aircraft sales, which are
also highly variable on a month-to-month basis as well as extremely big-ticket items that can
distort the overall data picture.

Markets tend to focus on the core reading over the headline reading in most cases,
especially where a known preference for the core reading exists on the part of monetarypolicy makers. The result can be large discrepancies between headline data and the core
readings, such as headline retail sales falling 1 percent on a month-to-month basis but rising
0.5 percent on a core ex-autos basis. Needless to say, market reactions will be similarly
disjointed, with an initial reaction based on the headline reading frequently followed by a
different reaction to the core.

Market-Moving Economic Data Reports from

the United States
Now let’s get down to the nitty-gritty data. In this section, I run through the major economic data
reports that come out of the United States. (I list the data reports according to the model I outlined
earlier in this chapter.) My intention here is not necessarily to magnify the importance of U.S.
economic data, even though the United States is the world’s largest national economy and the U.S.
dollar is on one side of 80 percent of currency trades.
Nope, my aim here is to kill two birds with one stone:
Introduce you to the major economic reports issued by every major currency country,
using U.S. data as the example
Let you in on the finer points of how the market views the important data reports
At the end of this chapter, I take you through a country-by-country look at major non-U.S. data
reports that don’t fall into the main report categories or are too important to be ignored.

Labor-market reports
I put the job market at the top of my economic model because job creation/destruction is the
single-most important driver of overall economic growth. Every major economy issues updates on
its labor market by reporting the number of jobs added/lost, the unemployment rate, or some
variation of those. United States employment data holds special significance because it reflects on
the world’s largest economy and the primary global reserve currency. The following are the key
U.S. employment reports.

U.S. monthly employment report
Typically released on the first Friday of each month and covering the prior month, the U.S. jobs
report is considered among the timeliest of economic indicators. But it’s also subject to large
revisions to prior periods and significant statistical volatility. The main components of the report
include:
Change in non-farm payrolls (NFP): This is the big number everyone focuses on. The
NFP change is derived from the establishment survey (because it’s based on responses
from companies), and shows the number of jobs gained or lost in the prior month. The
going wisdom among economists is that the United States needs to add around 150,000
jobs each month just to offset population growth and keep the unemployment rate steady.
The market’s initial reaction is based on the difference between the actual and the forecast
change in NFP. The prior two months’ NFP changes are also revised, and those revisions
will color the market’s interpretation of the current report.

Unemployment rate: Measures unemployed individuals seeking work as a percentage of
the civilian labor force. The unemployment rate is derived from a separate survey (the
household survey because it surveys real households), which also includes a jobs change
number that may be at odds with the change in NFP. Increases in the unemployment rate
are typically interpreted as a sign of weakness in the labor market and the economy
overall, while declines in the rate are considered a positive sign for the job market and
the overall economy.
Change in manufacturing payrolls: Measures the number of jobs added or lost in
manufacturing industries and is looked at as a gauge of near-term production activity.
Average hourly earnings: Measures the change in employee wages and is looked as an
indicator of whether incomes are rising or falling and the implications for consumer
spending.
Average weekly hours: Measures the average number of hours worked each week and is
looked at as a rough gauge of the demand for labor, with increasing weekly hours seen as
a positive for the labor market.

ADP national employment report
The ADP national employment report is put together by the payroll processing company of the
same name (www.adp.com) and comes out on Wednesdays at 8:15 a.m. ET, two days before the
government’s NFP report (see the preceding section). ADP measures only private jobs and
excludes government hiring. The ADP report is intended to serve as an alternative measurement of
the labor market, but it’s got a spotty track record of predicting the NFP with any accuracy.
Because of that uncertainty, market reaction to the ADP is typically minor and short-lived, but
economists may adjust their forecasts for the NFP depending on what the ADP indicates.

Weekly initial unemployment claims
Initial jobless claims are reported every Thursday at 8:30 a.m. ET for the week ending the prior
Saturday and represent first-time filings for unemployment insurance. Initial claims are looked at
as interim updates on the overall labor market between monthly NFP reports. The changes in
initial claims can be volatile on a week-to-week basis — there are a fair number of hiccups
caused by weather, strikes, and seasonal labor patterns — so analysts look at a four-week moving
average of initial claims to factor out one-off events. Still, sharp increases or declines in initial
claims data will get the market’s attention, producing a market reaction on their own, as well as
causing estimates of upcoming monthly NFP reports to be downgraded or upgraded.
A second part of the weekly claims report is continuing claims, which is a measure of the total
number of people receiving unemployment benefits, excluding first-time filers. The market looks at
continuing claims as another gauge of labor-market conditions. Increases in continuing claims
typically suggest deterioration in the job market, because unemployed individuals are finding it

difficult to get work and staying on unemployment insurance longer. Declines in continuing claims
are similarly viewed as an improvement in the job market, because workers are presumably
finding jobs more easily.

Other labor-market indicators
On top of the reports listed in the “Labor-market reports” section of this chapter, a number of other
employment indicators come out inside other economic reports. These employment measures don’t
trigger market reactions in their own right, but they’re used to update the overall understanding of
the employment outlook. These include
Consumer confidence index (CCI): Within the monthly consumer confidence report by the
Conference Board (www.conference-board.org), respondents are asked whether “jobs are hard to
get” and also whether “jobs are plentiful.” The difference between the two is known as the labor
differential and serves as another barometer of conditions in labor-markets.
Institute for Supply Management (ISM) employment indices: The national ISM
purchasing manager indices contain a subcategory asking managers to rate the employment situation
at their companies, with responses over 50 indicating plans to hire and expand, and readings below
50 indicating contraction.
Regional Federal Reserve indices: Surveys of manufacturing businesses, like the
Philadelphia Fed survey, also include questions on the outlook for hiring. Readings above zero
indicate plans to add employees; levels below zero suggest layoffs ahead.

Consumer-level data reports
Personal consumption accounts for two-thirds or more of most developed nations’ economies, so
how consumers are doing has a big impact on the economic outlook and the direction of interest
rates, which are both key drivers of forex rates. Here are the main U.S. data reports focusing on
personal consumption.

Consumer sentiment
Consumer psychology is at the heart of the market’s attempts to interpret future consumer activity
and, with it, the overall direction of the economy. The theory is that if you feel good, you’ll spend
more, and if you feel uncertain, you’ll cut back spending. The market likes to pay attention to
consumer confidence indicators even though there is little correlation between how consumers tell
you they feel and how they’ll actually go on to spend.
In fact, consumer sentiment is frequently the result of changes in gasoline prices, how the stock
market is faring, or what recent employment indicators suggested. More reliable indicators of

consumer spending are money-in-the-pocket gauges like average weekly earnings, personal
income and spending, and retail sales reports. Still, the market likes to react to the main sentiment
gauges, if only in the short run, with improving sentiment generally supporting the domestic
currency and softer sentiment hurting it. The key confidence gauges are
Consumer confidence index: A monthly report issued by the Conference Board
comprised of the expectations index (looking six months ahead) and the present-situation
index. The surveys ask households about their outlooks for overall economic conditions,
employment, and incomes.
University of Michigan consumer sentiment index: Comes out twice a month: a
preliminary reading in the middle of the month and a final reading at the start of the next
month.
ABC Consumer Confidence: A weekly consumer-sentiment report issued each Tuesday
evening. The weekly ABC confidence report can be used to update your expectations of
upcoming monthly consumer confidence and University of Michigan reports.
If market forecasts envision an increase in the Michigan or Conference Board’s
consumer confidence index, for example, but the prior two or three weeks of the ABC
survey suggest confidence is waning, you’ve got a pretty good indication that the monthly
surveys may disappoint.

Personal income and personal spending
These two monthly reports always come out together and provide as close an indication as we can
get of how much money is going into and out of consumers’ pockets. The market looks at these
reports to get an update on the health of the U.S. consumer and the outlook for personal
consumption going forward. Personal income includes all wages and salaries, along with transfer
payments (such as Social Security or unemployment insurance) and dividends. Personal spending
is based on personal consumption expenditures for all types of individual outlays.
Personal income is watched as a leading indicator of personal spending on the basis that future
spending is highly correlated with income. The greater the increases in personal income, the more
optimistic the consumption outlook will be, and vice versa. But it’s important to note that
inflation-adjusted incomes are the key. If incomes are just keeping pace with inflation, the outlook
for spending is less positive.

Retail sales
The monthly advance retail sales report is the primary indicator of personal spending in the
United States, covering most every purchase Americans make, from gas-station fill-ups to

dinner and a movie. Retail sales are reported on a headline basis as well as on a core basis
(which excludes automobile purchases). The market focuses mainly on the core number to get
a handle on how the consumer is behaving, but substantial strength or weakness in the auto
industry doesn’t go unnoticed. The advance retail sales report is a preliminary estimate based
on survey samples and can be revised substantially based on later data.
Retail sales reports are subject to a variety of distorting effects, most commonly from weather.
Stretches of bad weather, such as major storms or bouts of unseasonable cold or heat, can impair
consumer mobility or alter shopping patterns, reducing retail sales in the affected period. Sharp
swings in gasoline prices can also create illusory effects, such as price spikes leading to an
apparent increase in retail sales due to the higher per-gallon price, while overall non-gas retail
sales are reduced or displaced by the higher outlays at the pump.

Durable goods orders
Durable goods orders are another major monthly indicator of consumption, both by individuals
and businesses. Durable goods measure the amount of orders received by manufacturers that
produce items made to last at least three years. As a data series, durable goods is one of the most
volatile of them all, with multiple percentage swings (as opposed to 0.1 percent or 0.3 percent
changes) between months a norm rather than an exception. Durable goods are reported on a
headline basis and on a core basis, excluding transportation, or ex-transportation (mostly aircraft).
