[SRG]

Irrational Exuberance

Irrational
Exuberance
REVISED AND EXPANDED THIRD EDITION

Robert J. Shiller

Princeton University Press
Princeton and Oxford

Disclosure: In addition to being a professor at Yale University, the author is currently
working part-time with Standard & Poor’s to produce home price indices; with the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange, which maintains a futures market for the S&P/CaseShiller Home Price Indices, as part of the Competitive Markets Advisory Council at
the CME Group; and with Barclays Bank and its affiliates in producing various investment products. Nothing in this book constitutes, or should be construed as, either an
offer to sell or a solicitation of an offer to purchase any securities, including any securities that may at any time be offered for sale or sold by any of the above-named
persons. In the United States, offers to sell and solicitations of offers to buy any securities may be made only by a prospectus (as defined in the Securities Act of 1933, as
amended) delivered to the prospective purchasers. Similar regulations apply in other
countries. This book contains various forward-looking statements based on the author’s
projections, hypotheses, forecasts, estimates, beliefs, and prognoses about future events.
All forward-looking statements contained herein reflect solely the author’s opinions
about such future events and are subject to significant uncertainty. Actual events may
differ materially from those described in such forward-looking statements.
Copyright © 2015 Robert J. Shiller
Nobel lecture copyright © 2013 The Nobel Foundation
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, Princeton,
New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 6 Oxford Street, Woodstock,
Oxfordshire OX20 1TW
Proudly sourced and uploaded by [StormRG]
Kickass Torrents | TPB | ExtraTorrent | h33t
press.princeton.edu
Jacket design by Steve Attardo / ninetynorth
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging‑in‑Publication Data
Shiller, Robert J.
Irrational exuberance / Robert J. Shiller.—Revised and expanded third edition.
		pages  cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-691-16626-1 (hardcover : alk. paper)
1. Stocks—United States. 2. Stock exchanges—United States. 3. Stocks—
Prices—United States. 4. Real property—Prices—United States. 5. Risk.
6. Dow Jones industrial average. I. Title.
HG4910.S457  2015 Proudly sourced and uploaded by [StormRG]
Kickass Torrents | TPB | ET | h33t
2014036705
332.63′2220973—dc23
This book has been composed in Adobe Palatino and Berkeley Old Style Book and
Black by Princeton Editorial Associates Inc., Scottsdale, Arizona
Printed on acid-free paper. ∞
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To Ben and Derek

Contents

List of Figures and Tables
Preface to the Third Edition
Preface to the Second Edition, 2005
Preface to the First Edition, 2000
Acknowledgments

One
Two
Three

ix
xi
xix
xxv
xxxi

The Stock Market in Historical Perspective
The Bond Market in Historical Perspective
The Real Estate Market in Historical Perspective

1
11
18

Part One
Structural Factors
Four
Five

Precipitating Factors: The Internet, the Capitalist
Explosion, and Other Events
Amplification Mechanisms: Naturally Occurring
Ponzi Processes

39
70

Part Two
Cultural Factors
Six
Seven

The News Media
New Era Economic Thinking
vii

101
123

viii

Eight

C ONTENTS

New Eras and Bubbles around the World

150

Part Three
Psychological Factors
Nine
Ten

Psychological Anchors for the Market
Herd Behavior and Epidemics

165
175

Part Four
Attempts to Rationalize Exuberance
Eleven
Twelve

Efficient Markets, Random Walks, and Bubbles
Investor Learning—and Unlearning

195
214

Part Five
A Call to Action
Thirteen

Speculative Volatility in a Free Society

225

Appendix Nobel Prize Lecture: Speculative Asset Prices
Notes
References
Index

281
321
339

239

Figures and Tables

Figures
1.1
1.2

U.S. Stock Prices and Earnings, 1871–2014
Real Stock Prices in Ten Countries and the World, January
1995–July 2014
1.3 U.S. Cyclically Adjusted Price‑Earnings Ratio (CAPE) and
Interest Rates, 1881–2014
2.1 U.S. Long-Term Rates and Inflation, 1871–2014
2.2 Inflation-Indexed Bond Yields for Four Countries, 1985–2014
3.1 U.S. Home Prices, Building Costs, Population, and Interest
Rates, 1890–2014
3.2 Home Prices in a Sample of U.S. Cities, Quarterly, 1983–2014
3.3 Home Prices in Some World Cities and for the World,
Quarterly, 1985–2014
5.1 Stocks as Best Investment, 1996–2014
5.2 Real Estate as Best Investment, 2003–2013
5.3 Opinion of Aftermath of a Stock Market Crash, 1996–2014
5.4 Valuation Confidence Index, 1989–2014
11.1 Cyclically Adjusted Price‑Earnings Ratio (CAPE) as Predictor
of Ten‑Year Returns
11.2 Stock Prices and Dividend Present Values, 1871–2013

ix

3
5
7
14
16
20
25
26
71
72
73
88
205
210

x

FIGUR ES AND TABLES

A.1 Real S&P Composite Stock Price Index with Two Present
Values with Constant Discount Rate of Subsequent Real
Dividends Accruing to the Index, 1871–2013
A.2 Real S&P Composite Stock Price Index along with Three
Present Values of Subsequent Real Dividends Accruing to
the Index, 1871–2013
A.3 Present Values of Future Changes in Dividends Plotted
against the Dividend Price Ratio for Forty-Nine U.S.
Individual Stocks, 1926–76
A. 4 Two Indices of U.S. Home Prices Divided by the Consumer
Price Index (CPI-U), 1987–2013

248

252

257
260

Tables
8.1
8.2
8.3

Largest Recent One‑Year Real Stock Price Index Increases
Largest Recent One‑Year Real Stock Price Index Decreases
Largest Recent Five‑Year Real Stock Price Index Increases

151
152
153

8.4

Largest Recent Five‑Year Real Stock Price Index Decreases

154

Preface to the Third Edition

O

ne might think that years after the bursting of the speculative bubbles that led to
the 2007–9 world financial crisis, we should be living in a distinctly different
post-bubble world. One might think people would have “learned their lesson” and would not again pile into expanding markets, as so many did before
the crisis, thereby worsening incipient bubbles. But evidence of bubbles has
accelerated since the crisis. Valuations in the stock and bond markets have
reached high levels in the United States and some other countries, and valuations in the housing market have been increasing rapidly in many countries.
All this has been occurring despite a disappointing world recovery from the
financial crisis, an increasingly tense international situation—with deadly
wars in Gaza, Iraq, Israel, Syria, and Ukraine—and a wave of potentially disruptive nationalist sentiment and political polarization in the United States,
Europe, and Asia.
As of this writing, the International Monetary Fund has just put out a
warning of overheated housing markets in Asia, Europe, Latin America, and
in Australia, Canada, and Israel.1 A similar warning has been issued by the
Bank for International Settlements.2
The bubbly and apparently unstable situation warrants some concern,
although not yet generally as extreme as when the first edition of this book
issued a warning about the overpriced and vulnerable stock market (see the
reprinted 2000 Preface below), or when the second edition of this book issued
a warning about the overpriced and vulnerable housing market as well (see
the reprinted 2005 Preface below).
xi

xii

PR EFAC E T O T HE T HIR D EDIT ION

By the time this book finds its way into the hands of readers, the markets
may be in a very different situation. Markets can change very rapidly, and
the optimistic pricing we see at the time of this writing (in October 2014)
is hard to predict. Current pricing may not last long when compared with
publication lag and the time needed for an issue to become part of readers’
agendas. But I am writing for future readers, years hence, who will read
about the markets in the mid–second decade of the twenty-first century
as just one of many examples described in the book—examples of broader
tendencies and uncertainties.
Hence, the themes of the first edition of this book, with some updating,
remain relevant today and probably always will be relevant. When the first
edition of this book came out in 2000, I took pains to assert that the stock
market bubble of that time, while exceptionally large, was really nothing
fundamentally new. Chapter 8 in this edition, “New Eras and Bubbles around
the World,” details how many times we have had similar, if smaller or more
localized, stock market booms and crashes. There was something relatively
new then: the stock market boom that we now know peaked in early 2000
was worldwide in scope. In the first edition, I called it the Millennium Boom,
because it came just before the dawn of the new millennium. We might also
confidently call it the Millennium Bubble now, after it is over. But this boom or
bubble was not really bigger in its collapse than its counterpart, which peaked
in 1929. These really large bubbles are rare events, but the Millennium Bubble
was not unique in history.
In the second edition (2005), I made much of the fact that for the United
States as a whole, the boom in home prices nationwide that had begun in
the late 1990s was the biggest ever, or biggest at least since 1890, when my
data began. But, at the same time, the new chapter that was added to that
edition also recounted earlier housing bubbles, and, if you look at centuries
past, land price bubbles. Centuries ago, real estate speculation would have
been more likely an investment in land—a farm or a town lot for building a
home. Another big change in the second half of the twentieth century was
a massive decline in lending standards for home mortgages. That decline,
and the magnitude of the housing boom around the world (which we might
now, after the collapse of home prices in many areas after 2006, confidently
call a bubble) was unique. We might call this the Ownership-Society Boom,
associated as it was with a slogan used by George W. Bush in his 2004 U.S.
presidential campaign to describe his plan to promote widespread ownership
of homes, stocks, and other investments. (I will call the current stock market
boom, from 2009 to the time of this writing in 2014, the New-Normal Boom,
after a term popularized by Bill Gross [then of PIMCO] in 2009.)
But there is really nothing new about these bubbles—not fundamentally
new. They are repeats of approximately the same phenomenon, of new era

PRE FA C E T O T H E TH IRD E D ITIO N

xiii

stories proliferating by word-of-mouth contagion, of the distinct feel of mass
enthusiasm for one kind of investment.
Improving information technology may accelerate their dynamics.
Changing patterns of investing are also a factor. The rising impact of international investors and of institutional investors in single-family homes has
been much noted in recent years. But the basic bubble phenomenon is the
same. In the future, we will surely have even bigger such bubbles, each built
up around its new and different new era story, and we will have to invent
new names for them.
I was not expecting to hear about housing bubbles when I visited Colombia
in mid-2013. Yet over and over again I heard about their amazing real estate
boom. While taking me through the seaside resort town of Cartagena, my
limousine driver pointed out a number of ordinary-looking homes that had
recently sold for millions of U.S. dollars.
The Banco de la República, Colombia’s central bank, has on their website
a home price index for three major cities: Bogotá, Medellín, and Cali. The
index shows home price increases of 69% in real (inflation-adjusted) terms
since 2004. That rate of price growth recalls the U.S. experience, with the S&P/
Case-Shiller Ten-City Home Price Index for the United States rising 131% in
real terms from its bottom in 1997 to its peak in 2006.
The vulnerability we have to bubbles in Colombia and all over the world
reveals our continuing lack of understanding of these phenomena. Just what
is a speculative bubble? The Oxford English Dictionary defines a bubble as
“anything fragile, unsubstantial, empty, or worthless; a deceptive show. From
17th c. onwards often applied to delusive commercial or financial schemes.”
The problem is that words like show and scheme suggest a deliberate creation,
rather than a widespread social phenomenon that is not directed by any
central impresario.
Maybe the word bubble is used too carelessly. Eugene Fama certainly
thinks so. Fama, the most important proponent of the “efficient markets
hypothesis,” denies that speculative bubbles exist. In his 2014 Nobel lecture,
Fama states that the word bubble refers to “an irrational strong price increase
that implies a predictable strong decline.”3 If that is what bubble means, and
if predictable means that we can specify the date when a bubble bursts, then
I agree with him that there may be little solid evidence that bubbles exist.
But that is not my definition of a bubble, for speculative markets are just
not so predictable.
In the second edition of this book, I tried to give a better definition of a
bubble that accords with more enlightened usage of that term. The definition,
given in Chapter 1, describes a situation in which news of price increases spurs
investor enthusiasm, in a sort of psychological epidemic. That seems to be the
core of the meaning of the word as it is most consistently used.

xiv

PR EFAC E T O T HE T HIR D EDIT ION

Implicit in this definition is a suggestion about why it is so difficult for
“smart money” to profit by betting against bubbles: the psychological contagion promotes a mindset that justifies the price increases, so that participation
in the bubble might be called almost rational. But it is not rational.
The story in every country is different, reflecting its own news, which does
not always jibe with news in other countries. For example, the current story
in Colombia appears to be that the country’s government, now under the
well-regarded management of President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, has
brought down inflation and interest rates to developed-country levels while
all but eliminating the threat posed by the FARC rebels, thereby injecting new
vitality into the Colombian economy. That is a good enough story to drive a
housing bubble.
New era stories drive high expectations for investing returns but not
necessarily high confidence. The high expectations during the upswing of a
bubble may be more in the form of a sort of wishful thinking rather than an
expression of confidence. In bubble times, there seems to be a tendency for
complacency, as an aspect of social psychology, even if people haven’t individually concluded that there is no risk.
Indeed, once you draw their attention to the risks, people are not so
confident during a growing bubble. Figure 5.4, which plots investor valuation confidence, was actually exceptionally low at the all-time U.S. stock
market peak in early 2000. People were certainly aware at some level of
risks. Moreover, in a survey of homebuyers that Karl Case and I have been
conducting over the years, we pose the following question to recent homebuyers directly: “Buying a house in this area today involves: 1. A great deal
of risk; 2. Some risk; 3. Little or no risk.” The answers are puzzling. In 2004,
when the housing market was showing its fastest price increases, only 19%
said “little or no risk.” It is not as if everyone thought that “home prices
can never fall” during the bubble, though they are often accused of having
thought that. In the 2009 survey, at the depths of the worst recession since
the Great Depression of the 1930s, the percentage of respondents choosing
that option was actually lower, at 17.2%.4
During bubbles, it seems that the psychological ambience is rather one
of public inattention to the thought that prices could fall, rather than firm
belief that they can never fall. The new era stories are not new strongly held
convictions—they are merely ideas foremost in people’s minds that serve as
justification both for the actions of others and of themselves.
Because bubbles are essentially subtle social-psychological phenomena,
they are, by their very nature, difficult to control. Regulatory action since the
financial crisis might diminish bubbles in the future, but it is yet to be seen
whether such actions will be sufficient.

PRE FA C E T O T H E TH IRD E D ITIO N

xv

Liquid public markets for home prices do not exist that would allow skeptics
of housing bubbles to take short positions against these bubbles, which would,
if it were possible, have the effect of incorporating their doubts into the market
prices. As we discuss in Chapter 11, if it is difficult to short the market, then a
basic premise of the efficient markets theory is not met. The so-called “smart
money” can stop investing in homes altogether, but afterward will not be able
to take actions to stop others from bidding prices even further up and up. Any
large group of investors, from anywhere in the world, for example, could bid
local home prices up to crazy levels if they get the idea to do so, or any large
institutional investors, playing some kind of game, could do so too. There is
no reputable theory to say that, in the absence of the possibility of short sales,
they cannot. Many have tried to make such short sales for single-family homes
possible, so far with little success.
In the past few years, some high-tech institutional players, such as the
Blackstone Group, have begun to invest in single-family homes, and the presence of these players might tend to alter the dynamics of home price bubbles,
reducing month-to-month momentum in these markets. But high short-term
momentum in home prices, as well as the longer-term real estate bubbles, are
surely still with us.
The word bubble creates a mental picture of an expanding soap bubble,
which is destined to pop suddenly and irrevocably. But speculative bubbles
are not so easily ended; indeed, they may deflate somewhat, as the story
changes, and then reflate.
It would seem more accurate to refer to these episodes as speculative epidemics. We know that a new epidemic can suddenly appear just as an older one
is fading if a new form of the virus appears, or if some environmental factor
increases the contagion rate. Similarly, a new speculative bubble can appear
anywhere if a new story about the economy appears and if it has enough narrative strength to spark a new contagion of investor thinking.
This is what happened in the bull market of the 1920s in the United States,
with its peak in 1929. We have distorted that history by thinking of bubbles
as a period of dramatic price growth, followed by a sudden turning point
and a major and definitive crash. In fact, a major boom in real stock prices in
the United States after “Black Tuesday” brought them halfway back to 1929
levels by 1930. This was followed by a second crash, another boom from 1932
to 1937, and a third crash.
Since the second edition of this book, there has been much discussion
of the price-earnings ratio that John Campbell of Harvard University and I
had developed and that this book featured from its first edition: real price
divided by the ten-year average of real earnings. The press has seemed to
adopt the name I had sometimes given it, the CAPE (for Cyclically Adjusted

xvi

PR EFAC E T O T HE T HIR D EDIT ION

Price-Earnings ratio), so now I regularly call it that, too. This ratio has appeared
as the third figure of the first chapter of this book in all editions, though the
name “CAPE” did not appear in the earlier editions of this book. The ratio
may be regarded as adjusting the usual price-earnings ratio, which is based
on one-year earnings, for the business cycle, correcting for the sudden spikes
in the price-earnings ratio that occur after business recessions when earnings
may be very low, by averaging earnings over a long period of time.
As of this writing, the CAPE for the United States stands at 26, higher than
ever before except for the times around 1929, 2000, and 2007, all major market peaks. But this book is not primarily about the current situation in asset
markets but about getting a sense of reality about the nature and dynamics
of these markets.
The current edition of this book is partly motivated by work I did with
George Akerlof for our 2009 book Animal Spirits, a book whose title correctly
suggests some overlap of topics with Irrational Exuberance. The ancient term
“animal spirits” (in Latin, spiritus animalis) refers to the fluctuations in the
basic driving force in human actions; it is a term that was resurrected by
the economist John Maynard Keynes, who gives a view of the economy
as involving fundamental psychological instabilities. Both fluctuations in
irrational exuberance and animal spirits are still very much a part of our
lives. We must still summon our whole arsenal of social sciences to try to
understand them.

Outline of This Book
Reproduced here are the Prefaces for the 2005 and 2000 editions of the book,
to give a sense how this book has evolved over the financial ups and downs.
The 2005 Preface was issued just before the peak of the Ownership-Society
Bubble. The 2000 Preface appeared with the first edition, just as the market
was reaching the peak of the Millennium Bubble.
The book proper begins with three introductory chapters that place in
historical context the ups and downs of the three major markets for investors:
the stock market, the bond market, and the real estate market. Chapter 2 is
new to this third edition of the book, added in response to widespread concern about a possible bond market bubble. The three chapters allow us to see
how remarkable fluctuations in these markets have been, and to gain overall
perspectives on trends in the markets.
Part One discusses the structural factors that drive market bubbles. This
part begins, in Chapter 4, with a discussion of the precipitating factors
that cause market fluctuations: events outside the markets, such as politics,
technology, and demography. The chapter lists precipitating factors that
are ultimately, largely through their effects on investor psychology, behind

PRE FA C E T O T H E TH IRD E D ITIO N

xvii

three recent stock market booms: the Millennium Boom, 1982–2000; the
Ownership-Society Boom, 2003–7; and the New-Normal Boom, 2009 to the
present. It is important even today to go through the precipitating factors
of past booms to help us appreciate the diverse kinds of things that may
drive booms of the future.
Part Two considers cultural factors that further reinforce the structure
of the speculative bubble. The news media, discussed in Chapter 6, are
critical, since they amplify stories that have resonance with investors, often
regardless of their validity. Chapter 7 analyzes the “new era” theories that
tend to arise spontaneously from time to time. In this edition, the analysis
applies to both the stock market and the real estate market. The popularity
of these theories is seen to derive from activity in the markets themselves,
not from disinterested analysis of the true merit of these stories. Chapter
8 looks at the major stock market booms around the world in the past half
