
Countertrend Trading
A countertrend trading style makes money when markets are not
trending by using a strategy that is the opposite of trend following.
Instead of buying when markets make new highs, traders who use
countertrend strategies sell short at prices close to the same new
highs, counting on the fact that most breakouts of new highs do
not result in trends. In Chapter 6 we will look at the market
mechanisms that are the source of proﬁt for countertrend trading:
support and resistance.

24 • Way of the Turtle

Swing Trading
Swing trading is essentially the same as trend following except that
it targets shorter-term market moves. For example, a good swing
trade may last three or four days instead of several months. Swing
traders often look for patterns in price movement that indicate a
higher likelihood of a signiﬁcant short-term price movement in one
direction or another.
Swing traders tend to use shorter-term charts that show price bars
for every ﬁve minutes, ﬁfteen minutes, or every hour. On these
charts a large three- or four-day move will appear the way a threeto six-month trend does on a daily bar chart.

Day Trading
Day trading is not so much a style as it is a reference to the
extremely short-term time frames involved. A true day trader looks
to exit the market before it closes each day. This makes his or her
position less susceptible to large adverse moves spurred by news
occurring overnight. Day traders generally use one of three different trading styles: position trading, scalping, or arbitrage.
Day traders generally use a style such as trend following or countertrend trading but do it over a much shorter period. A trade may
last a few hours instead of days or months.
Scalping is a specialized form of trading that was once the
domain of only those traders on the ﬂoor of the exchange. Scalpers
are looking to make the difference between the bid and the ask,
which is known as the spread. If gold is $550 bid and $551 ask, a
scalper will be looking to buy at $550 and sell at $551. For this reason scalpers create liquidity by bidding and offering, hoping for a
balance of buy and sell orders.

Taming the Turtle Mind • 25

Arbitrage is a form of trading that capitalizes on price differences in the same market or in very similar markets. Often these
markets are traded on different exchanges. For example, an arbitrage trader may buy gold on the Comex ﬂoor at $550 and sell
ﬁve e-mini gold contracts on the CBOT’s globex exchange for
$555 to capture a very short-term price mismatch.

Watching the Market State
Each of these strategies tends to work better some of the time:
When the price movement of a market behaves in a particular way
or when that market is in a particular state.
As Figure 2-1 illustrates, speculative markets exist in one of four
states:
• Stable and quiet: Prices tend to stay within a relatively
small range with little movement up or down outside that
range.
• Stable and volatile: There are large daily or weekly changes,
but without major changes over a period of months.
• Trending and quiet: There is slow movement or drift in prices
when measured over a period of months but without severe
retracement or price movement in the opposite direction.
• Trending and volatile: There are large changes in price
accompanied by occasional signiﬁcant shorter-term reversals
of direction.
Trend followers love markets that are trending and quiet. They can
make money without having signiﬁcant adverse price movement.

26 • Way of the Turtle

The Four Market States

Figure 2-1

Stable and Quiet

Stable and Volatile

Trending and Quiet

Trending and Volatile

The Four Market States

This makes it very easy to keep a trade for a long time because the
market does not give back proﬁts during the trade. Volatile markets
are much more punishing for trend followers. It can be very difﬁcult to hold onto a trade when proﬁts are vanishing for days or
weeks at a time.
Countertrend traders love markets that are stable and volatile.
These types of markets have relatively large swings but remain in
a fairly narrow range of prices. Swing traders like volatile markets,
whether trending or not. Volatile markets present more opportunities because swing traders make money on short term price moves.
These types of moves are the characteristic that deﬁnes volatile
markets.
Although it’s sometimes easy to tell when a market is in one of
these states, both the degree of trendiness and the volatility vary over
time. This means that many times markets simultaneously display

Taming the Turtle Mind • 27

characteristics of two states, with one of the attributes shifting from
a low value to a high one or vice versa. For instance, you may have
a market that starts out trending and quiet, and then as the trend progresses, the volatility increases so that you get price movement that
changes from trending and quiet to trending and volatile.
A Turtle never tries to predict market direction but instead looks
for indications that a market is in a particular state. This is an important concept. Good traders don’t try to predict what the market will
do; instead they look at the indications of what the market is doing.

This page intentionally left blank

three
THE FIRST $2 MILLION
IS THE TOUGHEST
Trade with an edge, manage risk, be consistent, and keep it simple.
The entire Turtle training, and indeed the basis for all successful
trading, can be summed up in these four core principles.

he Turtle training sessions were held in a conference room
at the Union League Club in Chicago, two blocks east of the
CBOT. From the get-go, the experience was rife with contradiction. For instance, we were instructed to wear jackets since
the Union League Club had a dress code, but that did not mesh
with Rich’s personality. He was not the kind of guy who would
require a dress code. Also, I have no idea how we ended up in
this particular room, but one could not have chosen a more
unlikely place for our training. The Union League Club was the
quintessential gentleman’s club. Its early members included
such Chicago luminaries as Philip Danforth Armour of the meat
company; George Pullman, who created the luxury Pullman railroad car; Marshall Field; and John Deere. Picture a room ﬁlled
with cigar smoke and you’ll have a pretty good feel for the Union

T

• 29 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

30 • Way of the Turtle

League Club in 1983. It was worlds away from the subdued
ofﬁces at C&D Commodities.
Thirteen of us made up the ﬁrst Turtle class: eleven men and
two women. Many of those in attendance already had experience
trading, but several of us were complete novices. I was considerably younger than my classmates. There were a couple of trainees
who looked to be in their mid-twenties, but most were in their thirties as far as I could tell. Even though I was only 19, I felt as though
I were among a group of peers; the age and experience of the others did not intimidate me.
Before getting into the particulars of what we were taught, let
me describe a few things about myself to help you understand how
my personality and perspectives inﬂuenced what I took away from
Rich’s class. I like to simplify concepts and am adept at getting to
the core of a matter—to its essence. Throughout the sessions, I did
not need to take detailed notes on what was said; I listened for the
most important concepts: the key ideas. I paid attention to what
was being said and why it was being said. I ﬁrmly believe that my
strong performance during the ﬁrst month of trading was due to
this ability and to identifying the most important of Rich’s lessons.

Class Begins
Both Rich and Bill taught the class, and their innovative perspectives struck me from the beginning. They approached the markets
scientiﬁcally and through the use of reason, and developed a very
mature understanding of the principles behind their success. Rich
and Bill did not rely on gut feelings. Instead, they based their methods on experimentation and investigation. They did not use anec-

The First $2 Million Is the Toughest • 31

dotal evidence but relied on computerized analysis to determine
what worked and what did not. Their intensive scientiﬁc research
gave them a special type of conﬁdence in thinking about trading
that has been crucial to their success. (This is what had given Rich
the conﬁdence required to stake his money on being able to teach
a group of neophytes to trade in the ﬁrst place.)
Rich and Bill ﬁrst taught us the foundations of basic gaming and
probability theory. I had taken probability and statistics in high
school, so that material was not new to me. They explained to us the
mathematical basis for money management, risk of ruin, and expectation—all of which are well-known gambling concepts. Several of
the Turtles had been former professional gamblers, and so they were
already familiar with these basics. I’ll explore these theories more
thoroughly in later chapters, but here I’ll give you a brief synopsis of
what was covered in the class.

Risk of Ruin
Searching for the term risk of ruin on the Internet will yield many
references to gambling and blackjack because the concept is much
more popular in gambling than in trading. However, risk of ruin is
a trader’s primary consideration in deciding how many contracts of
a particular market or shares of a particular stock to trade at any
speciﬁc time.
In gambling, risk of ruin refers to the possibility that you will
drop all your money because of a string of losses. For example,
suppose we were rolling dice and I said I would give you $2 for
every $1 you bet if a roll of a single die came up with a 4, 5, or
6. You would want to bet as much as possible, since these are

32 • Way of the Turtle

great odds. The chances that a 4, 5, or 6 will come up is 50 percent, since there are six sides, and three of those sides will pay 2
to 1. The odds indicate that if you rolled four times, you most
likely would get two losses and two wins. If you bet $100 each
time, you’d lose twice and win twice for a net gain of $200 for
the four rolls.
What size bet would you make if you had only $1,000 in your
pocket: $1,000? $500? $100? The problem is that even though the
game is in your favor, you still have a chance of losing. If you bet too
big and lose too many times in a row, you could lose all your money
and forfeit the ability to keep playing through pure chance. If you
bet $500 and lose twice in a row, you’ll be out of money. There is a
25 percent chance of losing twice in a row on the ﬁrst two rolls; so
with a $500 bet, your risk of ruin is 25 percent with just two rolls.
One of the most important aspects of risk of ruin is that it
increases disproportionately as the size of the bet rises. Doubling
the amount risked per trade typically will not just double the risk
of ruin; depending on the particulars of the system, it might triple,
quadruple, or even quintuple it.

The Science of Controlled Risk
Money management refers to managing the size of market risk
to ensure one’s ability to keep going through the inevitable bad
periods that every trader experiences. Money management is the
science of keeping your risk of ruin at acceptable levels while
maximizing your proﬁt potential.
The Turtles used two approaches to money management. First,
we put our positions in small chunks. That way, in the event of a

The First $2 Million Is the Toughest • 33

losing trade we would have a loss on only a portion of a position.
Rich and Bill called those chunks units. Second, we used an innovative method they devised for determining the position size for
each market. The method is based on the daily movement of the
market either upward or downward in constant dollar terms. They
determined the number of contracts in each market that would
cause them all to move up and down by approximately the same
dollar amount. Rich and Bill called the volatility measure N,
although it now is known more commonly as average true range.
That is the name given to it by J. Welles Wilder in his book New
Concepts in Technical Trading Systems.
Since the number of contracts we traded in each market was
adjusted for the volatility measure, N, the daily ﬂuctuations for any
speciﬁc trade tended to be similar. The concept of adjusting trade
size on the basis of volatility (position size) has been written about
by others, most notably by Van Tharp in his 1998 book Trade Your
Way to Financial Freedom and the second edition of that book, published in 2007. However, in 1983 this was an extremely innovative
concept. At that time most traders adjusted their position sizes in
various markets on the basis of loose subjective criteria or the broker’s margin requirements, which were based only loosely on
volatility.

The Turtle Edge
Since several of us did not have any trading experience, signiﬁcant
time was spent on the mechanics of order entry and trading. Rich
and Bill also covered several concepts that were important even for
experienced traders to review since few in the class had traded

34 • Way of the Turtle

accounts as large as Rich proposed giving us. Trading large
accounts presents its own difﬁculties because the size of the orders
can cause the markets to move, making it more expensive to trade.
Effectively managing orders is important in minimizing this effect.
The Turtles were taught to use limit orders rather than market
orders, which we did most of the time. Large market orders invariably move the price. A limit order, sometimes known as an or better order, is one in which you buy at a speciﬁc price or better. For
example, if you want to buy gold and the price is currently at 540
and has been moving between 538 and 542 for the last 10 minutes,
you might put in an order to buy at “539 limit” or “539 or better.”
In this scenario, if you had placed a market order, it most likely
would have been ﬁlled at the higher price of 541 or 542. Over time,
even small differences in price add up to a lot of money.
Arguably the most important element of the Turtle Way and the
pivotal difference between the approach and perspective used by
winning traders and that used by losing traders is that the Turtles
were taught how to think in terms of the long run when trading and
we were given a system with an edge.
Trading methods that work over the long run have what is known
in gambling as an edge. An edge refers to one’s systematic advantage over an opponent. Most of the time casinos have the edge over
their clientele. With some games it is possible for players to gain
an edge. Skillful blackjack card counters are able to gain a temporary edge over the house when they notice that a large number of
low cards have been played. This means that there is a higher possibility that any card draw from the deck will be a high card. During these times, the players can have an advantage over the house.
They have a temporary edge. This is because the house must hit

The First $2 Million Is the Toughest • 35

on any combination of cards up to 16. If there are a large number
of high cards remaining in the deck, that means that there is a
higher possibility that one of these cards will cause the house to go
bust, since any combination of cards over 21 points will cause the
house to lose.
So a skillful card player plays with small bets during the majority of the time when the house has an edge. They lie in wait for
the occasion when due to random chance the player gains a temporary edge over the house. At these times the players bet with
large bets to press their advantage over the house. In practice, this
is not so easy because one sure way of getting noticed by the
house and getting kicked out of the casino is to bet minimums
and then suddenly bet maximums when the odds turn in your
favor.
This is one of the reasons that many successful gamblers operate in teams. One team member might count at the table and then
indicate to another team member when the odds had turned. That
other member would show up as a new player and then proceed
to bet from the start at a much higher level. Team members would
then pool their money at the end of the night. These methods
work because the professional gamblers have a system with an
edge.
Rich and Bill taught us expectation so we would have a ﬁrm
intellectual basis for being able to continue with our methods during the periods of losing trades which come when trading any strategy. The systems we were taught had a very signiﬁcant edge during
the markets when we traded them. Expectation was one way of
quantifying that edge. It was also an intellectual foundation for
avoiding the outcome bias.

36 • Way of the Turtle

Remember outcome bias: the tendency to judge a decision on
the basis of its outcome rather than on the quality of that decision
at the time it was made? We were trained explicitly to avoid outcome bias, to ignore the individual outcomes of particular trades
and focus on expectation instead.

Expectation: Quantifying the Edge
The term expectation is also derived from gambling theory and
answers the question “What happens if I keep doing this?” in quantiﬁable terms. Positive expectation games are those in which it is
possible to win; the blackjack example above when the player
counts cards has positive expectation. Negative expectation games
are those such as roulette and craps where the house has the advantage and so over the long run a gambler will lose. Casino owners
understand expectation very well. They know that games of chance
in which the house has a positive expectation of even just a few percentage points can provide large sums of money over the course of
multiple players and many days. Casino owners do not care about
the losses they incur because such losses only encourage their gambling clientele. For owners, losses are just the cost of doing business;
they know they will come out ahead over the long run.

The Turtle Mind
• Think in terms of the long run when trading.
• Avoid outcome bias.
• Believe in the effects of trading with positive expectation.

The First $2 Million Is the Toughest • 37

The Turtle Way views losses in the same manner: They are the
cost of doing business rather than an indication of a trading error
or a bad decision. To approach losses in this way, we had to know
that the method by which the losses were incurred would pay out
over the long run. The Turtles believed in the long-term success of
trading with positive expectation.
Rich and Bill might say that a particular system had an expectation of 0.2; that meant that over time you would make 20¢ for
every dollar risked on a particular trade. They determined the
expectation for trading systems by analyzing a system’s historical
trades. Expectation was based on the average dollar amount won
per trade divided by the average amount risked. That risk is determined by the difference between the entry price and the stop loss
price (the price at which we would exit in the event of a loss), multiplied by the number of contracts traded, multiplied by the size of
the contract itself.
Here’s an example that illustrates how the Turtles measured risk.
For a gold trade entered long at $350 with a stop at $320 for 10 contracts, there is a risk of the $30 difference between the entry price and
the stop loss exit price multiplied by the position size of 10 contracts,
multiplied by the size of the contract itself, which is 100 ounces. Once
those numbers are multiplied, you have a total of $3,000.
The Turtles were encouraged to look at the long-term results of
a speciﬁc approach and ignore the losses we expected to incur
while trading with that approach. In fact, we were taught that periods of losses usually precede periods of good trading. This training
was critical to both the Turtles’ potential success and their ability
to keep trading according to a speciﬁc set of rules through extended
periods of losing trades.

38 • Way of the Turtle

Trend Following
Trends are sustained changes in price that occur over a period of
weeks or months. The basic idea of trend following is to buy just
as a trend toward higher prices starts and exit just after that trend
ends. Markets have the inclination to move, or trend, in one of
three directions: up, down or sideways. The Turtles were taught to
buy just as the market moved from trending sideways to trending
up and also to sell short just as a trend down would begin, exiting
each trend after it ended, i.e. when the trend went from moving
up or down to moving sideways again.
It is funny how over the years the secret rules of the Turtles have
been discussed and some individuals have charged thousands of
dollars to teach them. The reality is that the particular rules we
used were a fairly unimportant component of our success. There
are many other widely known trend-following methods that work
equally well, and many that are arguably better. In fact, even the
method we traded with was well known at the time we used it.
The secret of trading and of the Turtles’ success is that you can
trade successfully by using ideas and concepts that are well known
and have been around for years. But you have to follow those rules
consistently.
The speciﬁc method we used was known as the breakout, sometimes referred to as Donchian channels after Richard Donchian,
who popularized the breakout method of trading. The basic idea
was to buy if a market exceeded the highest price for a particular
number of preceding days, that is, broke out of its prior price levels. We had an intermediate-length system that Rich and Bill called
System 1 that considered 20 days (or 4 trading weeks) of prices to
determine the highs and lows and a longer-term system, System 2,

The First $2 Million Is the Toughest • 39

that used 60-day (12-week) highs and lows to determine the breakout. We would calculate the most extreme highs and lows for each
system at the end of each day. Generally, this meant looking back
to determine one or two prices that were the high on the basis of
their visual appearance. Most days, the highs would remain the
same and there would be no work to do. Each system had two types
of exits. The ﬁrst was a stop loss exit that was a maximum of 2N, or
two average true ranges away from the entry point. This also happened to represent 2 percent of our account because the way we
determined the number of contracts to trade per market also was
based on N (average true range).
The lessons of the Turtle class can be summed up in these four
points:
1. Trade with an Edge: Find a trading strategy that will
produce positive returns over the long run because it has a
positive expectation.
2. Manage Risk: Control risk so that you can continue to trade
