
210 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

the emotional pressure of falling prices, the negative is overemphasized,
resulting in a new financial-community appraisal that is significantly less
favorable than the facts warrant and that may then prevail for some time.
However, when this happens, much the same thing occurs as when the
appraisal is too favorable. The only difference is that the process is
reversed. It may take months or years for a more favorable image to sup-
plant the existing one. Nevertheless, as pleasing earnings mount upward,
sooner or later this happens.

Fortunate holders—those who don’t sell out as such a stock starts to
rise—then benefit from the phenomenon that provides the greatest
reward in relation to the risk involved the stock market can produce.
This is the dramatic improvement in price that results from the com-
bined effect of both a steady improvement in per-share earnings and a
sharp, simultaneous increase in the price-earnings ratio. As the financial
community quite correctly discovers that the fundamentals of the com-
pany (now its new image) have much more investment worth than had
been recognized when the old image was in effect, the resulting increase
in the price-earnings ratio is frequently an even more important factor
in the increased price of the stock than the actual increase in per-share
earnings that accompanies it. This is precisely what happened in our G-
company example.

We are now in a position to begin to get a true perspective on the
degree of conservatism—that is, of basic risk in any investment. On
the lowest end of the risk scale and most suitable for wise investment
is the company that measures quite high in regard to the first three
dimensions but currently is appraised by the financial community as
less worthy, and therefore has a lower price-earnings ratio, than these
fundamental facts warrant. Next least risky and usually quite suitable
for intelligent investment is the company rating quite high in regard
to the first three dimensions and having an image and therefore a
price-earnings ratio reasonably in line with these fundamentals. This is
because such a company will continue to grow if it truly has these
attributes. Next least risky and, in my opinion, usually suitable for
retention by conservative investors who own them but not for fresh
purchase with new funds are companies that are equally strong in
regard to the first three dimensions but, because these qualities have
become almost legendary in the financial community, have an apprais-
al or price-earnings ratio higher than is warranted by even the strong
fundamentals.


The Fourth Dimension 211

In my opinion there are important reasons such stocks should usu-
ally be retained, even though their prices seem too high: If the funda-
mentals are genuinely strong, these companies will in time increase
earnings not only enough to justify present prices but to justify consid-
erably higher prices. Meanwhile, the number of truly attractive compa-
nies in regard to the first three dimensions is fairly small. Undervalued
ones are not easy to find. The risk of making a mistake and switching
into one that seems to meet all of the first three dimensions but actual-
ly does not is probably considerably greater for the average investor than
the temporary risk of staying with a thoroughly sound but currently
overvalued situation until genuine value catches up with current prices.
Investors who agree with me on this particular point must be prepared
for occasional sharp contractions in the market value of these tem-
porarily overvalued stocks. On the other hand, it is my observation that
those who sell such stocks to wait for a more suitable time to buy back
these same shares seldom attain their objective. They usually wait for a
decline to be bigger than it actually turns out to be. The result is that
some years later when this fundamentally strong stock has reached peaks
of value considerably higher than the point at which they sold, they
have missed all of this later move and may have gone into a situation of
considerably inferior intrinsic quality.

Continuing up our scale of ascending risks, we come next to the
stocks that are average or relatively low in quality in regard to the first
three dimensions but have an appraisal in the financial community
either lower than, or about in line with, these not very attractive funda-
mentals. Those with a poorer appraisal than basic conditions warrant
may be good speculations but are not suitable for the prudent investor.
In the fast-moving world of today there is just too much danger of
adverse developments severely affecting such shares.

Finally we come to what is by far the most dangerous group of all:
companies with a present financial-community appraisal or image far
above what is currently justified by the immediate situation. Purchase of
such shares can cause the sickening losses that tend to drive investors
away from stock ownership in droves and threaten to shake the invest-
ment industry to its foundations. If anyone wants to make a case-by-case
study of the contrast between the financial-community appraisals that
prevailed at one time about some quite colorful companies and the fun-
damental conditions that subsequently came to light, he will find plen-
ty of material in a business library or the files of the larger Wall Street


212 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

houses. It is alarming to read some of the reasons given in brokerage
reports recommending purchase of these shares and then to compare
the outlook described in such documents with what actually was to
happen. A fragmentary list of such companies might include: Memorex
high 173%, Ampex high 497%, Levitz Furniture high 604, Mohawk
Data Sciences high 111, Litton Industries high 101%, Kalvar high
176%.

The list could go on and on and on. However, more examples
would serve only to make the same point over and over. Since it should
already be quite apparent how important is the habit of evaluating any
difference that may exist between a contemporary financial-communi-
ty appraisal of a company and the fundamental aspects of that company,
it should be more productive for us to spend our time examining fur-
ther the characteristics of these financial-community appraisals. First,
however, to avoid risk of misunderstanding, it seems advisable to avoid
semantic confusion by defining two of the words in our original state-
ment of the rule governing all major changes in the price of common
stocks: Every significant price move of any individual common stock in relation
to stocks as a whole occurs because of a changed appraisal of that stock by the
financial community.

The phrase “significant price changes” is used rather than merely
“price changes.” This is to exclude the kind of minor price variation
that occurs if, say, an estate has twenty thousand shares of a stock that a
clumsy broker rapidly dumps on the market with the result that the
stock drops a point or two and then usually recovers as the liquidation
ends. Similarly, at times an institution will determine that on going into
a new situation it must buy a minimum number of shares. The result is
frequently a small onetime bulge that subsides on completion of this
sort of buying. Such moves, in the absence of a genuinely changed
appraisal of the company by the financial community as a whole, have
no important or long-term effect on the price of the shares. Usually
such small price changes disappear once the special buying or selling
is Over.

The term “financial community” has been used to include all those
able and enough interested to be potentially ready to buy or sell a par-
ticular stock at some price, keeping in mind that, with regard to impact
on price, the importance of each of these potential buyers and sellers is
weighted by the amount of buying or selling power each is in a posi-
tion to exercise.


.)

More about
the Fourth Dimension

Pp to this point our discussion of the financial community’s apprais-

al of a stock may have given the impression that this appraisal is

nothing more than an evaluation of that particular equity, consid-
ered by itself. This is oversimplification. Actually it always results from
the blending of three separate appraisals: the current financial-commu-
nity appraisal of the attractiveness of common stocks as a whole, of the
industry of which the particular company is a part, and, finally, of the
company itself.

Let us first examine the matter of industry appraisals. Everyone
knows that, over long periods of time, there can be a sizable decline in
the price earnings ratio the financial community will pay to participate
in an industry as it passes from an early stage when huge markets appear
ahead to a much later period where it, in turn, may be threatened by
new technologies. Thus, in the early years of the electronics industry,
companies making electronic tubes, in that period the fundamental
building block of all electronics, sold at very high price-earnings ratios.
Then price-earnings ratios shrank drastically as the development of
semiconductors steadily narrowed the tube market. Makers of magnetic
memory devices have more recently suffered the same fate for the same
reason. All this is obvious and thoroughly understood. What is not so
obvious or comparably understood is how the image of an industry can
rise or fall in financial-community status, not because of such overpow-
ering influences as these but because at a given time the financial com-
munity is stressing one particular set of industry background influences
rather than another. Yet both sets of background conditions may have


214 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

been quite valid for some time, and both may give every indication of
continuing to be for the reasonable future.

The chemical industry may be cited as an example. From the depths
of the Great Depression until the middle 1950s, the shares of the largest
USS. chemical companies sold at quite high price-earnings ratios com-
pared to most other stocks. The financial community’s idea of these
companies might have been depicted in a cartoon as an endless con-
veyor belt. At one end were scientists making breathtaking new com-
pounds in test tubes. After passing through mysterious and hard-to-
imitate factories, these materials came out at the other end as fabulous
new products such as nylon, DDT, synthetic rubber, quick-drying paint,
and endless other new materials that seemed sure to be an ever-increas-
ing source of wealth for their fortunate producers. Then, as the 1960s
arrived, the image changed. The chemical industry, to the investment
community, came to resemble steel or cement or paper in that it was
selling bulk commodities on a basis of technical specification so that
Jones’s chemicals were more or less identical with Smith’s. Capital-
intensive industries usually are under major pressure to operate at high
rates of capacity in order to amortize their large fixed investments. The
result is frequently intense price competition and narrowing profit mar-
gins. This changed image caused the shares of the major chemical com-
panies to sell at significantly lower price-earnings ratios in relation to
stocks as a whole in the, say, ten-year period that ended in 1972 than
they had in the past. While still considerably higher than in many indus-
tries, chemical pricc-carnings ratios started more closely to resemble
those of industries like steel, paper, and cement.

Now the remarkable thing about all this is that with one important
exception there was little or nothing different in the fundamental back-
ground of this industry in the 1960s than there was in the prior thirty
years. It is true that in the latter half of the 1960s there was a serious glut
of capacity in certain areas such as the manufacture of most synthetic
textile products. This was a major temporary depressant of the earnings
of certain of the leading chemical companies, particularly DuPont. But
the basic characteristics of the industry had in no way changed suffi-
ciently to account for this rather drastic change in the industry’s status
in the financial community. Chemical manufacture always had been
capital-intensive. Most products had always been sold on a technical
specification basis so that Jones could seldom raise his price above Smith’.
On the other hand, as a host of new and greatly improved pesticides,


More about the Fourth Dimension 215

packaging materials, textiles, drugs, and countless other products have
shown, the 1960s and the 1970s have afforded this industry an ever-
expanding market. Opportunities seem almost limitless for human
brains to rearrange molecules so as to create products not found in
nature that will have special properties to cater to the needs of man bet-
ter or more cheaply than the previously used natural materials.

Finally, in both the previous period of higher and the more recent
period of lower esteem for chemical stocks, still another factor had
remained almost constant. The older and larger-volume chemical
products, representing in a sense the “first step” processing of tailored
materials from such basic sources of molecules as salt or hydrocarbons,
were inevitably products sold mainly by specification and on a price-
competitive basis. Nevertheless, for the alert company there always was
and continued to be the opportunity to process these first-step prod-
ucts into much more complicated and higher-priced ones. These, at
least for a while, could be sold on a much more proprietary and there-
fore less competitive basis. As these products in turn become price
competitive, the alert companies have consistently found still newer
ones to add to the higher-profit-margin end of their lines.

In other words, all the favorable factors, so much in the financial
community’s mind when chemical stocks were darlings of the market,
continued to be there after they had lost considerable status. But the
unfavorable factors so much in the forefront in the 1960s were also there
in the earlier period when they were largely ignored. What had shifted
was the emphasis, not the facts.

But the facts, too, can change. Starting about the middle of 1973,
chemical stocks began regaining favor in the financial community. This
was because a new view of the industry was starting to prevail. In the
scarcity-plagued economy the major industrial nations have been expe-
riencing for the first time (except during major wars) in modern times,
manufacturing capacity can be increased only gradually; hence, it may
be years before cutthroat price competition will occur again. This image
opens up a whole new ballgame for the investor in chemical stocks. The
problem for investors now becomes one of determining whether the
background facts warrant the new image and, if they do, whether chem-
ical stocks, in relation to the market as a whole, have risen more than or
not as much as may be warranted by the new situation.

Recent financial history offers countless other examples of much
larger changes in price-earntings ratios that occurred because the financial


216 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

conumunity’s appraisal of the industry’s background changed radically
while the industry itself remained almost exactly the same. In 1969 the
computer peripheral stocks were great market favorites. These were
the companies making all the special equipment that could be added to
the central computing unit or mainframe of a computer to increase the
user’s benefits from that central unit. High-speed printers, extra memo-
ry units, and keyboard devices to eliminate the need for keypunch oper-
ators in getting data into a computer were some of the major products
in this group. The prevailing image then was that these companies had
an almost limitless future. While the central computer itself was largely
developed and its market would be dominated by a few strong, estab-
lished companies, the small independent would be able to undercut the
big companies in these peripheral areas. Today there is a new awareness
of the financial strain on small companies with products that are usual-
ly leased rather than sold and of the determination of the major com-
puter mainframe manufacturers to fight for the market of the products
“hung on” their equipment. Have the fundamentals changed or is it the
appraisal of the fundamentals that has changed?

An extreme case of a changed appraisal is the way in which the
financial community looked on the fundamentals of the franchising
business and franchise stocks in 1969 in contrast to 1972, Here again, as
with computer peripheral stocks, all the problems of the industry were
inherently there when these stocks were being bought at such high
price-earnings ratios but were being overlooked when the prevailing
image was one of uninterrupted growth for the company momentarily
doing well.

In this whole matter of industry image, the investor’s problem is
always the same. Is the current prevailing appraisal one more favorable,
less favorable, or about the same as that warranted by the basic economic
facts? At times this can present an acute problem to even the most
sophisticated investors. One example occurred in December 1958 when
Smith, Barney & Co., traditionally conservative investment bankers,
took a pioneering step that seems purely routine today but appeared
quite the contrary at that time: They made a public offering of the
equity shares of the A. C. Nielsen Co. This company had no factories,
no tangible product, and therefore no inventories. Instead it was in the
“service business,” receiving fees for supplying market-research infor-
mation to its customers. It was true that in 1958 banks and insurance
companies had long been well regarded in the marketplace as industries


More about the Fourth Dimension 217

worthy of conservative investment. However, such industries were hard-
ly comparable. Since the book value of a bank or insurance company is
in cash, liquid investments or accounts receivable, the investor buying a
bank or insurance stock seemed to have a hard core of value to fall back
on that did not exist for this new kind of service company being intro-
duced to the financial public. However, investigation of the A. C.
Niclsen situation revealed unusually good fundamentals. There was an
honest and capable management, a uniquely strong competitive position
and good prospects for many years of further growth. Nevertheless, until
experience showed how the financial community would react to its first
exposure to this kind of an industry, there did appear to be some reason
for hesitation in buying. Would it take years for a realistic appraisal of the
investment worth of such a company to displace the fear that might be
engendered by the lack of some of the familiar yardsticks of value? It
may seem ridiculous today, when for many years a company like A. C.
Nielsen has enjoyed a price-earnings ratio signifying a very high invest-
ment appraisal, but some of us who decided to take a chance on the
fundamentals being recognized and bought these shares at that time
experienced a sensation almost like stepping off a cliff and seeing if the
air would support us, so new was the concept of a service company in
contrast to concepts to which we were accustomed. Actually within a
few years the pendulum swung quite the other way. As A. C. Nielsen’s
profits grew and grew, a new concept arose in Wall Street. A large num-
ber of companies, many quite different in economic fundamentals but
all dealing in services rather than products, were lumped together in a
financial-community image as parts of a highly attractive service indus-
try. Some began selling at higher price-earnings ratios than they might
have deserved. As always, in time, fundamentals dominated, and this false
image formed by lumping quite different companies into one group
faded away.

This point cannot be overstressed: The conservative investor must be
aware of the nature of the current financial-community appraisal of any industry
in which he is interested. He should constantly be probing to see whether
that appraisal is significantly more or less favorable than the fundamen-
tals warrant. Only by judging properly on this point can he be reason-
ably sure about one of the three variables that will govern the long-term
trend of market price of stocks of that industry.


6

Still More about
the Fourth Dimension

lhe financial community’s appraisal of a company’s own characteris—

tics is an even more important factor in the price-earnings ratio

than is the appraisal of the industry in which the company is
engaged. The most desirable investment traits of individual companies
have been defined in our discussion of the first three dimensions of a
conservative investment. In general, the more closely the financial com-
munity’s appraisal of a particular stock approaches these characteristics,
the higher will be its price-carnings ratio.To the degree by which it falls
below these standards, the price-earnings ratio will tend to decline. The
investor can best determine which stocks are importantly undervalued
or overvalued by a shrewd determination of the degree to which the
real facts concerning any particular company present an investment sit-
uation significantly better or significantly worse than that painted by the
current financial image of that company.

In making a determination as to the relative attractiveness of two or
more stocks, investors often confuse themselves by attempting too sim-
ple a mathematical approach to such a problem. Let us suppose, for
example, they compare two companies, the profits of each of which,
after careful study, appear to afford prospects of growing at a rate of
10 percent a year. If one is selling at ten times earnings and the other at
twenty times, the stock selling at ten times earnings appears cheaper. It
may be. It also may not be. There can be a number of reasons for this.
The seemingly cheaper company may have such a leveraged capitaliza-
tion (interest charges and preferred dividends that must be earned
before anything accrues to the common-stock holder) that the danger


Still More about the Fourth Dimension 219

of interruption of the expected growth rate may be much greater in the
lower price-earnings-ratio stock. Similarly, for purely business reasons,
while the growth rate would seem a most probable estimate for both
stocks, nevertheless the chance of the unexpected upsetting these esti-
mates may be considerably more fot the one stock than for the other.
