
Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

charts forces you to focus in much more minute detail on
data than you normally would, and over a period of time, I
became completely convinced the market was not efficient,
contrary to the theory at the time.4 I became convinced
that markets weren’t efficient and absolutely trended…We
trade everything using trend-following systems, and it
works. By simulation, you come up with ideas and
hypotheses, and you test those. Over the years, what we’ve
done, essentially, is conduct experiments. But instead of
using a microscope or a telescope, the computer is our
laboratory instrument. And instead of looking at the stars,
we’re looking at data and simulation languages…it’s
counterintuitive to think in terms of statistics and
probability. It takes discipline and training; it tortures the
machinery. People are much better, for instance, at judging
whether another person is cheating in a human
relationship. We’re hugely social creatures. We’re keen on
our intuition. But when our intuition is wrong, we’ll still be
very resistant to being corrected. What are traders’ biggest
failures about understanding risk? There’s a human desire
to seek spurious certainty. We try to come to a yes-no
answer, one that’s absolute, when the right answer might be
neither yes nor no. People see things in black and white
when often they need to be comfortable with shades of
gray.”5
Shades of gray are tough medicine to follow, a tough philosophy
to believe down to your core. No one wants to think that way when
it comes to their money, we want to imagine uniform precision is
possible, but if the guys who make the most money think like
Harding, isn’t it worth it for everyone else to try to think that way,
too? At the end of the day, perhaps the best lessons I took from
Harding came from his original marketing materials titled “The
Winton Papers.” His explanation about human decision making
should be absorbed by everyone before they ever put a dollar to
work in the markets:
“The aggregate effect of shared mental biases and imitation
results in patterns of behavior, which while they are
nonconsistent with Mr. Spock-like, rational decision
making or with informational efficiency, are demonstrably

31

32

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

systematic. The market equivalent of these behavioral
patterns is trending, whereby prices tend to move
persistently in one direction or another in response to
information. The widespread adoption of investing
fashions, like indexation, introduces market mechanisms,
which magnify herding behavior on a large scale.”6
Although Harding’s words were written before the events of
2008, his insights explain how the crash unfolded. To those who
want to learn how to trade better, to those who don’t just want to
affix blame for down performance, Harding offers a way out. But, he
knows his “agnostic” approach to investing has critics. “Most people
believe it doesn’t work, or if it did it soon won’t work. We almost
never do anything based on our opinions. If we do, it’s based on
opinions about mathematical phenomenon and statistical
distribution, not opinions about Fed policy.”

Bill Dunn
Whenever you can, count.
Sir Francis Galton8

Bill Dunn, like Harding, is a trend follower. He made 50 percent
in 2002 when the majority of investors were losing big. He made 21
percent in the one month of October 2008 when most of Wall Street
was melting down. He never hesitates to swing for the home run
because for Dunn, it can be all or nothing. I originally started this
chapter with a profile of Dunn because his performance data is a
clear, consistent, and dramatic demonstration of trend following.
Dunn is founder and chairman of Dunn Capital Management,
Inc. He is one of the purest trend followers alive because he trades
his trading system full throttle, aiming for huge returns. Dunn
Capital has no defined “target” for an annual return (other than
positive). There is nothing in Dunn Capital’s risk management that
precludes annual returns approaching 100 percent. There is no
policy that if, for example, a Dunn program were to be up 50
percent by mid-year that the company would “rest on its laurels,”
so to speak, and dial back trading for the rest of the calendar year.
Further, it is not surprising to see Dunn down 20 percent or more
every three or four years, and in some cases down 50 percent, but
whatever the level of volatility, this independent, self-disciplined,
long-term trend follower never deviates from his core strategy. His
son Daniel Dunn offers:

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

33

“We have a risk budgeting scheme that certainly was ahead
of its time in 1974 and is still—in our opinion—state of the
art in 2008.”7
It is not difficult to believe that Dunn adheres to principles set
forth 30 years ago if you have read Jim Collins’ work Good to Great:
“Essentially, whatever you find will be as true 10 years from
now, 20 years from now, 30 or 50 years from now as it is
today and as it was 50 years ago. And if you can put your
finger on those truths, then you’ve made a contribution.”9
Dunn has always believed that in order to make money, you
must be able to live with a certain amount of volatility. Clients who
invest their money with Dunn must have absolute, “no-questionsasked” trust in Dunn’s decision making. This trend follower has no
patience for anyone who questions his ability to take and accept
losses. He is not a role model for the faint-hearted. His “full throttle”
approach has proven itself for 30 years, making Dunn himself and
his clients rich.
His “risk-budgeting scheme” or money management is based on
objective decision making. “Caution is costly” could be his motto.
At a certain point, he enters a market, and, if the market goes down,
at a certain point he exits that market. To Dunn, trading without a
predefined exit strategy is a recipe for disaster.
Dunn’s risk management system enables him to balance the
overall volatility of his portfolio—something the average or even
professional investor generally ignores. The more volatile a market,
the less he trades. The less volatile a market, the more he trades.
For Dunn, if risk-taking is a necessary means to potential profit,
then position size should always be titrated to maintain the targeted
risk constraint, which in turn should be set at the maximum level
acceptable to the investor. Their system of risk management
ensures that they exit a market when the trade goes against them:
“One of our areas of expertise in the risk-budgeting process
is how risk is going to be allocated to say a yen trade and
how much risk is going to be allocated to an S&P trade and
what is the optimal balance of that for a full 22 market
portfolio. The risk parameters are really defined by their
buy and sell signals so it is just a matter of how much you
are going to commit to that trade so that if it goes against
you, you are going to lose only x percent.”12

The novice trader is at a
disadvantage because the
intuitions that he is going
to have about the market
are going to be the ones
that are typical of
beginners. The expert is
someone who sees beyond
those typical responses
and has an
understanding of the
deeper workings of the
market.
Charles Faulkner10

Like so many others who
share his libertarian
views, Bill’s journey to
Free Minds and Free
Markets began in 1963
when he read Ayn Rand’s
short collection of essays
on ethics.
Reason Magazine11

34

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Extreme Performance Numbers
Like Dunn, this chart (Chart 2.2) assumes an “in-your-face”
attitude. The performance data compares the returns if you had
hypothetically invested $1,000 with Dunn and $1,000 with the S&P.
The data demands a choice—either put your money with Dunn
Capital Management, learn to trend follow yourself, or pretend
trend following does not exist.

Comparison of Dunn WMA Program to the S&P 500 Cash Index
November 1984–November 2003
$1,000 Starting Value—Compounded
$30,000.00

$25,000.00

$20,000.00
$15,000.00
$10,000.00

Dunn WMA
S&P 500

$5,000.00

2003

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

$Dunn Final Value:
S&P 500 Final Value:

$26,097
$6,370

CHART 2.2: Dunn Capital Management: Composite Performance 1984–2003

How does Dunn do it? Here are two charts that reflect different
periods of his trading history but tell the same story about his
approach to trading. The first one (Chart 2.3) is the Japanese Yen
trade from December 1994 to June 1996, where Dunn made a
killing.

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

CHART 2.3: Dunn’s Japanese Yen Trade Source: Dunn Capital Management

1995 was a great year for Dunn. In 2003, for the first time, he
publicly walked through his thought processes—his trend following
process—with an audience of investors, who came away with an
invaluable lesson:
“This is 18 months of the Japanese yen and as you can see,
it went up and down and there was some significant trends
so we should have had an opportunity to make some money
and it turns out we did. Because the WMA is a reversal
system, it’s always in the market, it’s either long or short,
trying to follow and identify the major trends. So while this
is the first signal … that’s shown on the chart and is long,
we obviously must have been short coming in [to this] big
rise. [The rise] was enough to tell us we should quit being
short and start being long and it seemed like a pretty smart
thing do … after we saw that [big rise up].”13

35

36

The beginning is the most
important part of the
work.
Plato

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

He is riding the trend up that first big hill of the yen in March
1995. He is making his decisions within the context of his
mechanical system. He continues:
“Then we have significant retracement, which caused a
short signal for the WMA program; our model has always
incorporated near-term volatility and this volatility [as we
went long] was far less than the volatility that was going on
[when we went short].”14
Dunn summarizes the trade:
“Now also because the volatility was very high here … this
rise was—not enough to give us a long signal and as a result,
we rode this short position for nearly a year all the way
down—where we got a long signal that was wrong and we
reversed and went down to short. Now that was a very, very
good market for our program, but some markets are not so
good … ”15
Unfortunately, the confidence of his tone and delivery cannot
be replicated in print.

Be Nimble
Dunn once opined with a straight face after riding a trend to
great profit: “The recent volatility in the energy complex has been
quite exciting and potentially rewarding for the nimble.”16
What exactly does Dunn mean by the word nimble? He means
he is ready to make decisions based on market movement. When an
opportunity to get on a potential trend appears, he is prepared. He
takes the leap. He is nimble when, relying on his system, he reacts
to the Japanese yen move with alacrity because he trusts his trading
plan and his management of risk.
The second chart is the British pound (Chart 2.4) where, unlike
the Japanese yen, the market proved unfavorable for Dunn. It was
a typical whipsaw market, which is always difficult for trend
followers because small losses add up. You can see how he entered
and was stopped out; then entered and was stopped out again.
Remember, trend followers don’t predict markets, they react to
them—so the small losses were part of the game. He managed the
small losses because the British pound was only a portion of his

37

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

portfolio. His yen trade more than made up for his losses on the
British pound trade, because no matter how uncomfortable others
are with his approach, for Dunn, big winners offset small losers in
the long run.

CHART 2.4: Dunn’s British Pound Trade

Source: Dunn Capital Management

If you told Dunn that his approach made you uncomfortable, I
know what he would say, because he has said it often:
“We don’t make market predictions. We just ride the
bucking bronco.”17
Dunn’s failed trades on the British pound—the up and down, go
nowhere trend—is exactly what he means when he says, “We just
ride the bucking bronco.” In hindsight, you might ask yourself why

38

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

he was trading the British pound if he was losing. The simple
answer is that neither he nor anyone else could have predicted
whether or not the British pound would be the next great home run.
The real question is, “Do you stay out of the game because you can’t
predict how the game is going to unfold?”

Dunn Early Years
“I made the decision [to
concentrate on managing
money] four or five years
ago when I realized that I
would make far more
money—with the skill set
that I have—with a whole
lot less work than with
anything else,” Robert
Pardo says. That is when
he entered into a feesharing agreement with
CTA Dunn Capital
Management. Pardo calls
his relationship with
Dunn a match made in
heaven. Dunn funds his
CTA with the company’s
proprietary capital and
does the execution and
the paperwork. For that,
they share in the fees and
participate equally in the
technology. It also frees
Pardo to continue
building models that
Dunn can eventually use
for excess capacity.21

Dunn grew up in Kansas City and Southern California. After
graduating from high school, he served three years with the U.S.
Marine Corps. In the ensuing years, he received a bachelor degree
in engineering physics from the University of Kansas in 1960 and a
doctorate in theoretical physics from Northwestern University. For
the next two years, he held research and faculty positions at the
University of California and Pomona College. He then worked for
research organizations near Washington, D.C., developing and
testing logistical and operational systems for the Department of
Defense. Bottom line: Dunn enjoyed the R&D side of things, but also
understood the real world’s need for applications beyond the
theoretical. The markets are his real world.
Around the age of 35, Dunn “got it.” At the time, he was
working out of his home in suburban Fairfax, Virginia. He came
across a newsletter touting a commodity trading system, “which
almost sounded too good to be true.” Upon testing it, that turned
out to be the case [and he set about developing his new system]…
Using daily data, Dunn’s system looked for big trends, as defined by
a percentage of a price move from a recent low or high. It traded
each market three to five times a year, automatically reversing if the
trend moved in the other direction. [Dunn determined] position
size by risking 2 percent to 6 percent of equity under management
on each trade.”18
It’s not uncommon for long-term trend followers to have trades
in place for well over a year, hence the term “long.” If you want day
trading insanity or the feeling of exhilaration in Las Vegas, Dunn is
not the person you should choose as a trading role model.
Following his computerized trading system, Dunn holds longterm positions in major trends typically trading only two to five
times per year in each market. The original system was and still is
a reversal system, whereby it is always in the market, either long or

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

short. Dunn says he’s held winning positions for as long as a year
and half.19
Early on Dunn needed more capital to execute his particular
plan of trading attack. He found it, in the person of Ralph
Klopenstein. “Klopenstein … helped launch Dunn by giving him a
$200,000 house account to manage. Dunn, a Defense Department
systems analyst…[had] realized his trading hobby would require a
whole lot of other people’s money to use a promising system he
developed.”20
Ed Seykota, another trend follower profiled later in this
chapter, is fond of pointing out that when you stop trying to please
others and concentrate on pleasing yourself, you gradually become
aware of what you are passionate about in life. And when that
happens, all sorts of people come out of the woodwork to help you
achieve your goals. Dunn is proof positive.

Life at Dunn Capital
Back in the mid-nineties Marty Bergin arranged for me to visit
Stuart, Florida, and spend a day at Dunn Capital. In one of those
classic small world stories Bergin had been my baseball coach when
I was sixteen in Northern Virginia. Today, he is a key member of
Dunn’s firm.
Dunn’s office is on a quiet street, located off a waterway in the
heart of Stuart, a quiet retirement community 30 miles from West
Palm Beach. There is no receptionist at Dunn Capital, so after you
enter the office, your only recourse is to saunter down a hallway to
see if anyone is in. It feels more like an accountant’s office than a
high-powered trading firm. In fact, the atmosphere is so casual that
there is no atmosphere. Dunn is a shining example of why location,
pretentious offices, and intense activity have little to do with
trading success.
There are only a handful of employees at Dunn because it
doesn’t take many employees to run his fund (which stands around
$500 million total as of fall of 2008). Plus, employees are not all
traders. The hardest thing to deal with when running a hedge fund
is not the trading decisions, but the accounting and regulatory
concerns. No one at Dunn is tied to screens watching the market
because trades are entered only after an alarm at a PC goes off
indicating a buy or sell signal and thus the need to place an order.

39

40

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Another reason Dunn has so few employees is because he has a
relatively few well-chosen clients. In fact, he’s fond of saying, “If
people want to invest with me, they know where to find me.” Dunn’s
investors benefit from the fact that there is no disconnect between
his bottom line as a fund manager and the investor’s bottom line—
to wit, trading profits.
Dunn’s fund is different than many because he compounds
absolute returns. He leaves his money on the table by reinvesting in
the fund. As a result, Dunn’s trading capital is not only made up of
clients, but rather the result of systematically reinvesting profits of
his own over a long period of time.
Confidence comes from
success, to be sure, but it
can also come from
recognizing that a lot of
carefully examined
failures are themselves
one path to success.
Denise Shekerjian22
Profit targets imply a
trader can predict the
future. Profit targets are
profit-limiting. Trend
followers stay in the
moment of now, avoid
prognostication, and let
markets run as far as
they go.
Thomas Vician, Jr.
Student of Ed Seykota’s

By focusing on profits and incentive fees, Dunn makes money
only when the fund (read: clients) makes money. He doesn’t charge
a management fee. With no management fee, there is no incentive
to constantly raise capital. The only incentive is to make money. If
Dunn makes money, he gets a portion of the profits. Compounding,
or reinvesting your profits, makes sense if you’re serious about
making money, and Dunn is serious.
He’s also direct. In the time I spent with him, I was impressed
with his matter-of-fact, “no B.S.” attitude. He was polite without
being effusive; interested without being encouraging. He was
wearing a pair of khakis and a Hawaiian shirt, and he made it clear
that it was his way or the highway.

No Profit Targets
Dunn doesn’t say, “I want 15 percent a year.” The market can’t
be ordered to give a trader a steady 15 percent rate of return, but
even if it could, is a steady 15 percent the right way to approach
trading in the first place? If you started with $1,000, what rate of
return would you rather have over a period of three years?
+15 percent, +15 percent, and +15 percent or the unpredictable
–5 percent, +50 percent, and +20 percent? At the end of three
years, the first hypothetical investment opportunity would be worth
$1520 but the second investment would be worth $1710. The
second one would be a stream of returns representative of a Dunn
type of trading style.
You can’t dial in a certain amount return for a given year. There
are no profit targets that work well, as Dunn states:

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

41

“We only have two systems. The first system is the one I
started with in 1974. The other system, we developed and
launched in 1989. The major strategic elements of these
two models—how and when to trade, how much to buy and
sell—have never changed in almost 30 years. We expect
change. None of the things that have happened in the
development of new markets over the past 30 years strike
us as making the marketplace different in any essential
way. The markets are just the markets. I know that is
unusual. I know in the past five years a lot of competitors
have purposefully lowered the risk on their models i.e. they
are deleveraging them or trying to mix them with other
things to reduce the volatility. Of course, they have also
reduced their returns.”23
He is addressing a critical issue here: reducing risk to reduce
volatility to appeal to nervous clients. The result is always lower
absolute returns. If you remain fixated on volatility as your enemy,
instead of correctly realizing volatility is the actual source of profit,
you will never “get” trend following trading.
Dunn is very good at using risk management—more commonly
called money management (see Chapter 10, “Trading Systems”) to
his advantage. His money management techniques enable him to
score big. In June 2002, Dunn returned +24.26 percent, then
followed with +14.84 percent for the month of July. By that time, he
was up +37 percent for the same year in which buy-and-holders of
the NASDAQ for this period were crushed. He finished 2002 up
more than 50 percent. His 2008 performance is right there again—
big up when others are down.
How does Dunn do it?
• He cuts his losses.
• He never changes his core strategy: His performance is not a
result of human judgment. Dunn’s trend following is
quantitative and systematic, with no discretionary overrides of
his system-generated trade signals. This is a foreign concept to
those investors who watch CNBC for stock tips. His trading
style doesn’t drift.
• Long-term holding: For holding periods of approximately 3.75
years and beyond, all returns are positive for Dunn. Lesson?
Stay with a system for the long haul and you do well.

Money management is the
true survival key.
Bill Dunn24

42

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets
