
verse transactions conducted weekly with a maturity of two weeks,
which provide the bulk of refinancing to the financial sector.

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

228

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

2. Longer-term refinancing operations. These are liquidity-providing re-

verse transactions with a monthly frequency and a maturity of three
months, which provide counterparties with additional longer-term
refinancing.
3. Fine-tuning operations. These are executed on an ad hoc basis with
the aim of both managing the liquidity situation in the market and steering interest rates, in particular in order to smooth the effects on interest rates caused by unexpected liquidity fluctuations.
4. Structural operations. These involve the issuance of debt certificates,
reverse transactions, and outright transactions. These operations will
be executed whenever the ECB wishes to adjust the structural position of the Eurosystem vis-à-vis the financial sector (on a regular or
nonregular basis).
ECB Minimum Bid Rate (Repo Rate) The ECB minimum bid rate
is the key policy target for the ECB. It is the level of borrowing that the
ECB offers to the central banks of its member states. This is also the rate
that is subject to change at the biweekly ECB meetings. Since inflation is of
high concern to the ECB, it is more inclined to keep interest rates at lofty
levels to prevent inflation. Changes in the ECB’s minimum bid rate have
large ramifications for the euro.
The ECB does not have an exchange rate target, but will factor in exchange rates in its policy deliberations, as exchange rates impact price stability. Therefore, the ECB is not prevented from intervening in the foreign
exchange markets if it believes that inflation is a concern. As a result, comments by members of the Governing Council are widely watched by FX
market participants and frequently move the euro.
The ECB publishes a monthly bulletin detailing analysis of economic
developments and changes to its perceptions of economic conditions; it is
important to follow the bulletin for signals to changes in the bias of monetary policy.

Important Characteristics of the Euro
r The EUR/USD cross is the most liquid currency; all major euro
crosses are very liquid.
The euro was introduced as an electronic currency on January 1,
1999. At this time, the euro replaced all pre-EMU currencies, except
for Greece’s currency, which was converted to the euro in January
2001. As a result, the EUR/USD cross is now the most liquid currency
in the world and its movements are used as the primary gauge of the
health of both the European and U.S. economies. The euro is most

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

229

frequently known as the “anti-dollar” since it is dollar fundamentals
that have dictated the currency pair’s movements between 2003 and
2008. (See Figure 12.2.)
EUR/JPY and EUR/CHF are also very liquid currencies that are
generally used as gauges to the health of the Japanese and Swiss
economies. The EUR/USD and EUR/GBP crosses are great trading
currencies, as they have tight spreads, make orderly moves, and rarely
gap.
r The euro has unique risks.
Having been launched in 1999, the euro is still a relatively new
currency. There are a number of factors that need to be considered
as risks to the euro that may never be problems for other currencies:
namely, the exposure to the economic, political, and social developments of 15 member countries. Although the number of countries using
the euro is expected to grow, if any countries start dropping the euro
and reverting back to their original currency because they do not believe that the ECB’s actions are in their best interest, it could affect the
stability of the entire region. The euro is the only currency in the world
without a country. Even though Germany, France, Italy, and Spain
are the largest and most economically dominant countries within the
Eurozone, the European Central Bank has the power and the responsibility to determine monetary policy for all 15 of its member countries. With that comes the political pressure of 15 governments that
frequently test and criticize the actions of the European Central Bank.

FIGURE 12.2 EUR/USD Five-Year Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

230

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

Up until the subprime crisis, the ECB was a new and untested central
bank. However, its rapid response to the credit crunch and its deep
liquidity injections have transformed its reputation.
r The spread between 10-year U.S. Treasuries and 10-year
bunds can indicate euro sentiment.
The 10-year government bonds serve as an important indicator of
future euro exchange rates, especially against the U.S. dollar. The differential between the 10-year U.S. government bond and the 10-year
German bund rates can provide a good indication for euro movement.
If bund rates are higher than Treasury rates and the differential increases or the spread widens, this implies euro bullishness. A decrease
in the differential or spread tightening tends to be bearish for the euro.
The 10-year German bund is typically used as the benchmark bond for
the Eurozone.
r Predictions for euro area money flows.
Another useful interest rate is the three-month interest rate, also
known as the euro interbank offer rate (Euribor rate). This is the rate
offered from one large bank to another on interbank term deposits.
Traders tend to compare the Euribor futures rate with the Eurodollar futures rate. Eurodollars are deposits denominated in U.S. dollars
at banks and other financial institutions outside the United States. Because investors like high-yielding assets, European fixed income assets become more attractive as the spread between Euribor futures
and Eurodollar futures widens in favor of the Euribors. As the spread
narrows, European assets become less attractive, thereby implying a
potential decrease in money flows into the euro.
Merger and acquisition activity also has important implications for
EUR/USD movements. Recent years have seen increased M&A activity
between EU and U.S. multinationals. Large deals, especially if in cash,
often have significant short-term impacts on the EUR/USD.

Important Indicators for the Euro
All of the following economic indicators are important for the euro. However, since the EMU consists of 12 countries, it is important to keep abreast
of political and economic developments such as GDP growth, inflation, and
unemployment for all member countries. The largest countries within the
EMU are Germany, France, and Italy. Therefore, in addition to the overall
EMU economic data, the economic data of these three countries are the
most important.
Preliminary GDP Preliminary GDP is issued when Eurostat has collected data from a sufficient number of countries to produce an estimate.

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

231

This usually includes France, Germany, and the Netherlands. However,
Italy is not included in the preliminary release and is only added in the
final number. The yearly aggregates for EU-15 and EMU-11 are a simple
sum of national GDP. For the quarterly accounts, the aggregation is more
complex since some countries (Greece, Ireland, and Luxembourg) do not
yet produce quarterly national accounts data. Moreover, Portugal produces
only partial quarterly accounts with a significant lag. Thus, both the EU-15
and EMU-11 quarterly paths are the result of estimates from quarterly data
based on a group of countries accounting for more than 95 percent of total
EU GDP.
German Industrial Production The industrial production data is
seasonally adjusted and includes a breakdown into four major subcategories: mining, manufacturing, energy, and construction. The manufacturing aggregate comprises four main product groups: basic and producer
goods, capital goods, consumer durables, and consumer nondurables. The
market tends to pay attention to the annual rate of change and the seasonally adjusted month-on-month figure. Germany’s figure is most important
since it is the largest country in the Eurozone; however, the market also
occasionally reacts based on French industrial production. The initial industrial production release is based on a narrower data sample and hence
subject to revision when the full sample has become available. The Finance
Ministry occasionally indicates the expected direction of the revision in the
initial data release.
Inflation Indicators

Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices The EU Harmonized Index
of Consumer Prices (HICP) published by Eurostat is designed for international comparison as required by EU law. Eurostat has published the index
since January 1995. Since January 1998, Eurostat has published a specific
index for the EMU-11 area called MUICP. Information on prices is retrieved
by each national statistical agency. They are required to provide Eurostat
with the 100 indexes used to compute the HICP. The national HICPs are totaled by Eurostat as a weighted average of these subindexes. The weights
used are country specific. The HICP is released at the end of the month following the reference period, which is about 10 days after the publications
of the national CPIs from Spain and France, the final EMU-5 countries to
release their CPIs. Even if the information is already partly in the market
when the HICP is released, it is an important release because it serves as
the reference inflation index for the ECB. The ECB aims to keep Euroland
consumer price inflation in a range of 0 to 2 percent.

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

232

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

M3 M3 is a broad measure of money supply, which includes everything
from notes and coins to bank deposits. The ECB closely monitors M3, as it
is viewed as a key measure of inflation. At its session in December 1998, the
Governing Council of the ECB set its first reference value for M3 growth at
4.5 percent. This value supports inflation below 2 percent, trend growth of
2 to 2.5 percent, and a long-term decline in the velocity of money by 0.5 to
1 percent. The growth rate is monitored on a three-month moving average
basis in order to prevent monthly volatility from distorting the information
given by the aggregate. The ECB’s approach to monetary targeting leaves
considerable room for maneuver and interpretation. Because the ECB does
not impose bands on M3 growth, as the Bundesbank used to do, there will
be no automatic action when M3 growth diverges from the reference value.
Moreover, although the ECB considers M3 to be the key indicator, it will
also take into account the changes in other monetary aggregates.
German Unemployment The release by the Labor Office contains information on the number of unemployed, as well as the changes on the
previous month, in both seasonally adjusted (SA) and nonseasonally adjusted (NSA) terms. The NSA unemployment rate is provided, along with
data on vacancies, short-shift working arrangements, and the number of
employees (temporarily suspended in 1999). Within an hour after the Federal Labor Office (FLO) release, the Bundesbank releases the SA unemployment rate. The day ahead of the release, there is often a leak of the official
data from a trade union source. The leak is usually of the NSA level of unemployment in millions. When a precise figure is reported on Reuters as
given by “sources” for the NSA level of unemployment, the leak usually reflects the official figures. Rumors often circulate up to one week before the
official release, but these are notoriously imprecise. Moreover, comments
by German officials have in the past been mistranslated by the international press, so care needs to be exercised in interpreting news reports of
rumors.
Individual Country Budget Deficits The Stability and Growth Pact
states that deficits must be kept below 3 percent of GDP. Countries also
have targets set to further reduce their deficits. Failure to meet these targets is widely watched by market participants.
IFO (Information and Forschung [research]) Survey Germany is
by far the largest economy in Europe and is responsible for over 30 percent
of total GDP. Any insight into German business conditions is seen as an insight into Europe as a whole. The IFO is a monthly survey conducted by the
IFO institute in which over 7,000 German firms are asked for their assessment of the German business climate and their short-term plans. The initial

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

233

publication of the results consists of the business climate headline figure
and its two equally weighted subindexes: current business conditions and
business expectations. The typical range is from 80 to 120, with a higher
number indicating greater business confidence. The measure is most valuable, however, when measured against previous data.

CURRENCY PROFILE: BRITISH
POUND (GBP)
Broad Economic Overview
The United Kingdom is the world’s fourth largest economy with GDP valued at approximately US$2 trillion in 2006. With one of the most effective
central banks in the world, the U.K. economy has benefited from many
years of strong growth, low unemployment, expanding output, and resilient
consumption. The strength of consumer consumption has in large part
been due the country’s strong housing market, which peaked in 2003. The
United Kingdom has a service-oriented economy, with manufacturing representing an increasingly smaller portion of GDP, now equivalent to only
one-fifth of national output. The capital market systems are one of the most
developed in the world, and as a result finance and banking have become
the strongest contributors to GDP. Although the majority of the United
Kingdom’s GDP is from services, it is important to know that it is also one
of the largest producers and exporters of natural gas in the EU. The energy
production industry accounts for 10 percent of GDP, which is one of the
highest shares of any industrialized nation. This is particularly important,
as increases in energy prices (such as oil) will significantly benefit the large
number of U.K. oil exporters. (The United Kingdom did become a net oil
importer for a brief period due to disruptions in the North Sea in 2003, but
has already resumed its status as a net oil exporter.)
Overall, the United Kingdom is a net importer of goods with a consistent trade deficit. Its largest trading partner is the EU, with trade between
the two constituencies accounting for over 50 percent of all of the country’s
import and export activities. The United States, on an individual basis, still
remains the United Kingdom’s largest trading partner. The breakdowns of
the most important trading partners for the United Kingdom are:
Leading Export Markets
1. United States
2. France
3. Germany

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

234

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

4. Ireland
5. Netherlands

Leading Import Sources
1. Germany
2. France
3. United States
4. Netherlands
5. Belgium

Although the United Kingdom rejected adopting the euro in June 2003,
the possibility of euro adoption will still be a factor in the backs of the
minds of pound traders for many years to come. If the United Kingdom decided to join the EMU, doing so would have significant ramifications for
its economy, the most important of which is that U.K. interest rates would
have to be adjusted to reflect the equivalent interest rate of the Eurozone.
One of the primary arguments against joining the EMU is that the U.K. government has sound macroeconomic policies that have worked very well for
the country. Its successful monetary and fiscal policies have led the United
Kingdom to outperform most major economies through a recent economic
downturn, including the EU.
The U.K. Treasury has previously specified five economic tests that
must be met prior to euro adoption.
United Kingdom’s Five Economic Tests for the Euro
1. Is there sustainable convergence in business cycles and economic

structures between the United Kingdom and other EMU members, so
that the U.K. citizens could live comfortably with euro interest rates on
a permanent basis?
2. Is there enough flexibility to cope with economic change?
3. Would joining the EMU create an environment that would encourage
firms to invest in the United Kingdom?
4. Would joining the EMU have a positive impact on the competitiveness

of the United Kingdom’s financial services industry?
5. Would joining the EMU be good for promoting stability and growth in

employment?
The United Kingdom is a very political country where government officials are highly concerned with voter approval. If voters do not support

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

235

euro entry, the likelihood of EMU entry would decline. The following are
some of the arguments for and against adopting the euro.
Arguments in Favor of Adopting the Euro

r Reduced exchange rate uncertainty for U.K. businesses and lower exchange rate transaction costs or risks.

r The prospect of sustained low inflation under the governance of the
European Central Bank should reduce long-term interest rates and
stimulate sustained economic growth.
r Single currency promotes price transparency.
r The integration of national financial markets of the EU will lead to
higher efficiency in the allocation of capital in Europe.
r The euro is the second most important reserve currency after the U.S.
dollar.
r With the United Kingdom joining the EMU, the political clout of the
EMU would increase dramatically.
Arguments against Adopting the Euro

r Currency unions have collapsed in the past.
r Economic or political instabilities of one country would impact the
euro, which would have exchange rate ramifications for otherwise
healthy countries.
r Strict EMU criteria are outlined by the Stability and Growth Pact.
r Entry would mean a permanent transfer of domestic monetary authority to the European Central Bank.
r Joining a currency union with no monetary flexibility would require
the United Kingdom to have more flexibility in the labor and housing
markets.
r There are fears about which countries might dominate the ECB.
r Adjusting to new currency will require large transaction costs.

Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers—Bank
of England
The Bank of England (BOE) is the United Kingdom’s central bank. The
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) is a nine-member committee that sets
monetary policy for the United Kingdom. It consists of a governor, two
deputy governors, two executive directors of the central bank, and four
outside experts. The committee was granted operational independence in
setting monetary policy in 1997. Despite this independence, their monetary policies are centered around achieving an inflation target dictated by
the Treasury Chancellor. Currently, this target is retail price index (RPIX)

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

236

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

inflation of 2.5 percent. The central bank has the power to change interest rates to levels that it believes will allow it to meet this target. The MPC
holds monthly meetings, which are closely followed for announcements on
changes in monetary policy, including changes in the interest rate (bank
repo rate).
The MPC publishes statements after every meeting, along with a quarterly Inflation Report detailing the MPC’s forecasts for the next two years
of growth and inflation and justification for its policy movements. In addition, another publication, the Quarterly Bulletin, provides information
on past monetary policy movements and analysis of the international economic environment and its impacts on the U.K. economy. All of these reports contain detailed information on the MPC’s policies and biases for
future policy movements. The main policy tools used by the MPC and BOE
follow.
Bank Repo Rate This is the key rate used in monetary policy to meet
the Treasury’s inflation target. This rate is set for the bank’s own operations
in the market, such as the short-term lending activities. Changes to this rate
affect the rates set by the commercial banks for their savers and borrowers. In turn, this rate will affect spending and output in the economy, and
eventually costs and prices. An increase in this rate would imply an attempt
to curb inflation, while a decrease in this rate would be to stimulate growth
and expansion.
Open Market Operations The goal of open market operations is to
implement the changes in the bank repo rate, while assuring adequate liquidity in the market and continued stability in the banking system. This is
reflective of the three main objectives of the BOE: maintaining the integrity
and value of the currency, maintaining the stability of the financial system,
and seeking to ensure the effectiveness of the United Kingdom’s financial
services. To ensure liquidity, the bank conducts daily open market operations to buy or sell short-term government fixed income instruments. If
this is not sufficient to meet liquidity needs, the BOE would also conduct
additional overnight operations.

Important Characteristics of the British Pound
r GBP/USD is very liquid.
The GBP/USD is one of the most liquid currencies in the world,
with 6 percent of all currency trading involving the British pound as
either the base or counter currency. It is also one of the four most liquid currencies available for trading (among the EUR/USD, GBP/USD,
USD/JPY, and USD/CHF). One of the reasons for the currency’s

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

237

liquidity is the country’s highly developed capital markets. Many foreign investors seeking opportunities other than the United States have
sent their funds to the United Kingdom. In order to create these investments, foreigners will need to sell their local currency and buy British
pounds. (See Figure 12.3.)
r GBP has three names.
The U.K.’s currency has three names—the British pound, Sterling,
and Cable. All of these are interchangeable.
r GBP is laden with speculators.
At the time of publication, the British pound has one of the highest interest rates among the developed nations. Although Australia and
New Zealand have higher interest rates, their financial markets are not
as developed as that of the United Kingdom. As a result, many investors
who already have positions or are interested in initiating new carry
trade positions frequently use the GBP as the lending currency and will
go long the pound against currencies such as the U.S. dollar, Japanese
yen, and Swiss franc. A carry trade involves buying or lending a currency with a higher interest rate and selling or borrowing a currency
with a lower interest rate. In recent years, carry trades have increased
in popularity, which has helped spur demand for the British pound.
However, should the interest rate yield differential between the pound
and other currencies narrow, an exodus of carry traders will increase
volatility in the British pound.
