where no
Even if a gap is very small, it is still valid. And
trading has
remember that looks can be deceiving. If the stock
occurred.
is volatile, what looks like a small gap may be bigger

151

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

152

FIGURE 8.1 Upside gap
(rising window)

Page 152 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

FIGURE 8.2 Downside gap
(falling window)

percentage-wise than you realize. (Refer to the discussion on volatility in
Chapter 6.)
Most price gaps are emotionally driven events that occur largely because
of news that is released and disseminated between the close of one day’s trading
session and the open of the following session. The news need not be related directly to the stock in question. Stocks may be impacted by the news of other
companies, sectors, industry groups, and global events. If there is no news, and
no significant demand that has built up for a stock, it should open at or near
the prior session’s close. However, if there is news or enough demand, the market maker will fill the pending market orders accordingly, resulting in the
stock’s gapping up or down at the open.
Price gaps are most commonly seen on daily charts. Other than at the open,
you won’t often see true gaps (voids) on intraday charts. There are some exceptions, of course. For instance, if a stock is not very heavily traded, gaps may occur
intraday. If news is released on a stock during trading hours, it may result in
one or more price gaps intraday. If a stock’s trading is halted temporarily, price
may gap once the stock opens again for trading or in a fast-moving market gaps
may occur. Otherwise, most of the gaps that you’ll see on intraday charts are fairly
small gaps between the real bodies. The real bodies or shadows overlap, so no void
is visible on the chart. Gaps do occur frequently at the open. They are called
morning gaps and are discussed in detail later in this chapter.
True gaps are fairly rare on weekly charts, and even rarer on monthly
charts. Each weekly bar includes 5 days of data, and each monthly bar includes
about 20 days of data. Many gaps are filled during the week or month before
the next bar begins.

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 153 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

153

Gaps

Types of Price Gaps

The Japanese refer to gaps simply as rising (bullish) or falling (bearish) windows.
Western technical analysis takes the definition of gaps further. Rather than identifying gaps based strictly on the direction of the gap, either upside or downside,
they are also defined by the price action that precedes and follows the gap. There
are several different types of gaps observed in Western technical analysis.
An area gap occurs when price gaps either up or down
within a trading range. An area gap may also be called a
area gap
common gap or a pattern gap. Figure 8.3 shows two area gaps
that formed while price was consolidating. These gaps have
A gap that
very little technical significance. They are usually filled
occurs within
quickly as price moves up and down between the bounda period of
aries of the trading range (the dotted lines in Figure 8.3).
consolidation.
A breakaway gap is a technically significant gap. It
often marks the beginning of a strong price move. An
upside breakaway gap is a bullish signal that occurs when
price gaps above and closes above resistance. It should be
breakaway
accompanied by heavy volume. A downside breakaway
gap
gap is a bearish signal that occurs when price gaps below
A gap that
and closes below support. A downside breakaway gap
forms when
may be accompanied by heavy volume, but if it is not, it
price breaks
does not take away from the signal like the upside gap. It
out above
usually takes more force to propel price higher than for a
resistance or
stock to decline.
below support.
A continuation gap occurs when a stock is trending
Breakaway
and price leaps forward, accelerating the move. A contingaps are
uation gap may also be called a runaway gap. This type of
typically
gap may occur in an uptrending market (bullish) or a
accompanied
by heavy
volume.

continuation
gap
A gap that
forms while
price is
trending up or
down.
FIGURE 8.3 Area Gaps

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

154

exhaustion
gap
A gap that
forms at the
end of a trend.
Exhaustion
gaps are
typically
accompanied
by heavy
volume.

Page 154 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

downtrending market (bearish). It is said to mark the halfway
point of a trend, which is why it is sometimes referred to as a
measuring gap. A continuation gap is often filled weeks or
months later during a correction or reversal of the trend.
An exhaustion gap occurs after a sharp move or a long
trend. This gap may follow one or more prior gaps, for example, a continuation gap; however, that will not always
be the case. Sometimes an exhaustion gap is not preceded
by other gaps. As its name implies, this type of gap represents a climax or exhaustion move. It is often a last blast of
buying in an uptrend, or capitulation in a downtrend, followed by a sharp reversal, or at least a shift to a period of
consolidation. Exhaustion gaps are typically accompanied
by heavy volume, and they are usually filled quickly.

Example

Figure 8.4 shows a daily chart of Foster Wheeler Ltd. (FWLT). On April 3,
2007, price gapped up above the ceiling of a horizontal trading range (dotted
line), completing a bullish breakaway gap. Several weeks later, on May 9,
price gapped again, forming a bullish continuation gap. Both the breakaway
gap and the continuation gap were accompanied by heavy volume.

FIGURE 8.4 Breakaway gap was followed by a continuation gap
Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 155 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Gaps

155

Smart Investor Tip
The volume bars in the panel below the chart window will be rescaled
as new, higher levels of volume occur. That makes past volume bars
appear to be smaller than they actually were when they formed at the
right edge of the chart. Therefore, when analyzing a historical chart,
make sure to back up the chart to the date(s) being analyzed instead of
just looking back from the right edge. Unusually high volume days
leave volume spikes that make it difﬁcult to accurately gauge the
volume of other days. Some charting programs allow the volume to be
truncated to reduce this effect.

Example

Figure 8.5 shows a daily chart of TransOcean Inc. (RIG). After trending
up for several months, price gapped up on July 23, 2007. The gap was
accompanied by heavy volume. Price reversed direction immediately and
filled the gap, making it clear that it was an exhaustion gap.

FIGURE 8.5 Exhaustion gap was accompanied by heavy volume
Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

156

Page 156 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

When analyzing a gap at the right edge of the
chart, you cannot always identify the type of gap at the
island
time it forms. If price is consolidating and gaps, but does
reversal
not break out, it is fairly easy to identify it as an area gap.
An exhaustion
Likewise, the breakaway gap is obvious because it gaps
gap is followed
away from consolidation. However, with a continuation
soon after by
or exhaustion gap, you won’t know for sure at the time it
another gap in
forms which gap it will turn out to be. It takes at least
the opposite
one more bar, and sometimes several more, before it is
direction.
evident whether it is a continuation or exhaustion gap.
Keep this idea in mind when you develop the rules of
your trading strategies and outline how you’ll respond to a gap should one
occur.
Example

Figure 8.6 shows a daily chart of Canadian National Railway (CNI).
After a steep run up, price gapped up on July 18, 2007, accompanied by
very heavy volume. Price consolidated within the long bullish candle for
three days. On July 24, price gapped down, forming a bearish island top
(circled). By early August, price had retraced much of the prior uptrend.

FIGURE 8.6 Swift uptrend ended with a bearish island top
Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 157 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Gaps

157

An island reversal pattern is formed when price gaps in the direction of the
trend and then gaps in the opposite direction, leaving one or more bars with a
void on both sides. In an uptrend, this price action is called a bearish island top.
If it occurs in a downtrend, it is a bullish island bottom.
When Has a Price Gap Been Filled?

The market does not like voids on a chart so there is a strong tendency for gaps
to be filled. Most gaps are eventually closed. Some gaps are filled quickly, for example, most area gaps and exhaustion gaps. Others may take weeks, months, or
even years to close. A breakaway gap, or a gap that occurs at the beginning of a
long trend, may not be filled for a long time. There are occasions, although they
are infrequent, when a gap is never filled.
After an upside gap forms on a chart, at some time in the future, price may
fall back through that void. If price declines back to or near the bottom of the
void, the gap has been closed (Figure 8.7). The reverse may occur with a downside gap. In Western technical analysis, this price action is referred to as filling or
closing the gap. The Japanese would say, “The window has been closed.”
Price will not always fill the gap entirely. In some instances, much of the
gap will be filled, but price changes direction again before filling the entire gap. If
most of the void has been filled, traders generally consider the gap to be closed.
Gaps as Support or Resistance

The phenomenon of support and resistance is a very important tenet of Western
technical analysis. It is so essential that Chapter 9 is devoted to it. As you’ll learn in
that discussion, there are several types of support and resistance, including gaps.

FIGURE 8.7 Closed gap

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

158

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 158 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

When an upside gap is filled, the bottom of the void should provide support. If price closes below the gap, support has been broken and the message
turns bearish. Conversely, when a downside gap is filled, the top of the void
should act as resistance. If price closes above the gap, resistance has been broken, which is a bullish sign.
Interpreting Price Gaps

The Japanese refer to a gap as a continuation pattern. An upside gap is interpreted as bullish, and a downside gap is bearish. This is only a general concept,
though. Be careful about trying to employ a “one size fits all” rule in technical
analysis. Just because an upside gap is considered bullish does not mean price
may not decline first or move sideways before resuming the uptrend, and vice
versa for a downside gap. In addition, don’t expect price to always move again in
the direction of the gap. Sometimes price reverses direction, trades back through
the gap, and just keeps going, resulting in a reversal rather than a continuation
of the trend.
The context in which the gap forms should be considered. Each price gap
should be analyzed individually when determining how to respond to it. Following are some factors to consider:
• Size of the gap.
• Price action that preceded the gap. Did the stock gap out of consolidation? How far had price already moved prior to the gap? Is price overextended and vulnerable to a change in direction?
• Surrounding chart landscape. Is there resistance nearby that may cause
an upward price move to stall or reverse (or support below that may
stop a downside move)?
• Style of trading utilized. Is this a short-term trade or a longer-term trade
that may be held for weeks or months?
• Trader’s temperament. What is the trader’s risk tolerance and risk and
money management rules?
• Current volatility of the stock.
• Current environment of the broader market.
The discussion that follows addresses these factors and is intended to provoke thought on how you might interpret and react to an upside gap. The same
thought processes should be considered when analyzing a bearish gap, except
that the gap is to the downside.
Figure 8.8 shows a daily chart of Checkpoint Systems Inc. (CKP). The
upside gap that occurred on August 2, 2007, was a large gap driven by news.

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 159 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Gaps

159

FIGURE 8.8 Large upside gap failed to break up through strong resistance
Source: TeleChart 2007®

This gap encountered a strong resistance area at the June–July Western double top (dotted line). After such a move, it is not unusual to see price turn immediately back down and at least partially fill the gap. Additionally, the major
averages had sold off in late July, so the broad market environment was volatile.
The stock reversed direction and filled the gap within the next few days. This
example illustrates the importance of evaluating each gap individually. I certainly would not advocate entering a new long position on the gap-up day in a
scenario like this one. The stock may move higher; however, the probability is
high in such a situation that price will decline, or at least move sideways, before
it will break out to a new high. If instead of reversing at the double top resistance area price had gapped over it and closed above it, the signal would have
been a bullish one.
Figure 8.9 shows a daily chart of Fremont General Corp. (FMT). Regarding the style of trading, consider the following two scenarios: Trader A is
a swing trader, which is a shorter-term style where positions are typically
held from a few days to a couple of weeks. He entered a long position in
FMT in early April 2007 near support provided by the March low. After
price advanced for a few days, the gap-up open on April 16 was a big bonus.
Trader A used the gap to exit the trade with a sizable gain. Trader B is an investor who typically holds positions longer term. She also entered a long position at the same area as Trader A, but she intends to hold the position for

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

160

Page 160 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

FIGURE 8.9 High percentage decline back to the bottom of the gap
Source: TeleChart 2007®

several weeks or even months. She may have no reaction to the gap other
than to raise the protective stop to preserve much of the gains in the event
price breaks down.
Now consider the question of the stock’s current volatility. This stock
had already risen approximately 23 percent from the support area before it
gapped up. Then on April 16, the stock gapped open approximately 35 percent higher than the prior session’s close. After such a strong move up, profittaking by short-term traders may force the stock down and fill the gap. In the
case of FMT, the distance from the open of the April 16 gap day back to the
bottom of the void (the high of the bar prior to the gap day) was about 24
percent. The swing trader would not wish to hold through such a decline.
And, in fact, is the investor willing to allow the stock that much room to pull
back? Even for longer-term trades the volatility should be considered. Say that
Trader B has a risk management rule (recommended) that she will not allow a
long-term position to reverse more than 15 percent from the current price or
the stock will be exited. That is not to say that a stop should be placed an arbitrary 15 percent away from the current price, but rather it should be placed
at a technical level not to exceed the maximum allowed reversal of 15 percent.
In that case, Trader B’s stop is likely to be triggered. If FMT pulls back and
fills the gap, the distance to the bottom of the void is almost 10 percent further than Trader B’s maximum stop level would allow.

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 161 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Gaps

161

Smart Investor Tip
The maximum stop level may vary from one trader to the next
depending on risk tolerance and trading style. For example, a
maximum of 10 percent may be employed for a swing trade versus 15
percent for a longer-term trade. A day trader may have a much lower
maximum, such as 3 to 4 percent, or even less. Note: The maximum
stop loss for an individual trade should not exceed 2 percent of the
total account equity. For example, a $50,000 account × .02 = $1,000.

It need not be an “all or nothing” decision. The investor may elect to sell
some shares on the gap and raise the stop on the remaining shares. As such, if
price continues higher, she will still hold a partial position. However, less of the
gains would be exposed to a potential pullback that may be enough to trigger
the protective stop.
In summary, an upside gap may ultimately turn out to be a bullish event.
However, whether it is a gap, a candlestick signal, or some other technical event,
it is prudent to look beyond just that particular event. Trading successfully
means considering other factors that can impact your trades.

The Morning Gap
A morning gap is also called an opening gap because it occurs at the open of a
daily trading session. Morning gaps are very common on daily charts; much
more so than true gaps. They occur due to order imbalances that are managed
by market makers at the open. (Morning gaps occur on stocks but not on the
charts of continuous 24-hour futures.)
All gaps actually start out as opening gaps. A true
gap must open beyond the prior day’s range: above the
prior high for an upside gap and below the prior low for
morning
gap
a downside gap. By the close of market that gap has
not been filled, which leaves a void on the daily chart.
A gap that
A morning gap also gaps up or down at the open;
occurs at the
however, it does not leave a void on the daily chart. The
open of a daily
gap is closed during the trading session. Figure 8.10
trading session
shows the contrast between a true gap and a morning
and is ﬁlled
gap.
before the
A morning gap is defined by the opening and closclose of the
ing prices of two consecutive daily bars. In order to form
session.
an upside morning gap, price must open above the prior

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

162

Page 162 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

FIGURE 8.10

Price (true) gaps compared to a morning gap

Source: TeleChart 2007®

day’s close (Figure 8.11). Price may even open above the prior day’s high
(Figure 8.12), but at a minimum, there must be a gap up between the two real
bodies at the open. Some traders even refer to this gap as a body gap. For a
downside morning gap, price must open below the prior day’s close (Figure
8.13) or its low (Figure 8.14).

FIGURE 8.11 Morning gap up
above the prior close

FIGURE 8.12 Morning gap up
above the prior high

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 163 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Gaps

FIGURE 8.13 Morning gap down
below the prior close

163

FIGURE 8.14 Morning gap down
below the prior low

When Has a Morning Gap Been Filled?

A morning gap is filled when price reverses the opening direction intraday and
trades back at least to the prior day’s close. An upside morning gap is filled if
any of the following is present on the chart by the close of market (the inverse is
true for a morning gap down):
• The current day’s low is the same, or very near the same, as the prior
day’s close (see Figure 8.11). The prior day’s close is a natural support
level so it is not unusual to see price stop falling there.
• The current day’s lower shadow pierces the prior day’s real body (not
shown, but if the lower shadow in Figure 8.11 was longer it would be
an example).
• The current day’s real body touches, protrudes into, or engulfs, the
prior day’s real body (Figure 8.12).
The fact that there is an overlap between the real bodies, or their shadows,
by the end of the session means it cannot be a true gap.
Variations of the Morning Gap

A variation of the morning gap occurs when price gaps up open above the prior
bar’s high, trades back to the prior bar’s high or lower, but does not decline all
the way back to the prior bar’s close (Figure 8.15). This intraday price action
closes the void on the daily chart that is created at the market open, but it does
not close the entire intraday gap between the bodies.

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

164

FIGURE 8.15
morning gap

Page 164 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

Variation of a

FIGURE 8.16
morning gap

Variation of a

Another variation occurs when price gaps up open above the prior day’s
close and trades within that prior session’s upper shadow. Price does not trade all
the way back to the prior day’s close, so again the intraday gap between the real
bodies is not completely filled (Figure 8.16). In this case there is never an actual
void on the daily chart because price does not open above the prior session’s
high; however, there is still a gap between the two bars’ real bodies.
The inverse of the above variations may also occur with a downside morning gap.
Intraday View of a Morning Gap

Most opening gaps fill, or at least partially fill, within the trading session leaving
no void on the daily chart. They often fill early in the day—frequently within
the first hour of trading.
Example

Using the Schlumberger Ltd (SLB) chart from Figure 8.10 as an
example, let’s take a look at an intraday view of a morning gap. Figure
8.17 shows the daily price action on the left, which led up to the
opening gap on July 23, 2007. On the right is a 5-minute chart showing
the first 50 minutes after the open on July 23. The 5-minute chart
demonstrates how price gapped up open but traded no higher. That is
evident by the hanging man with a shaven top that formed in the first
five minutes of trading. If price had traded higher after the open, that
5-minute hanging man (and the daily candlestick) would have an upper
shadow. The stock declined from the open and filled the morning gap
within the first 20 minutes of the trading session.
(continues)

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 165 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Gaps
Example

165

(continued )

FIGURE 8.17

Morning gap viewed on a 5-minute chart

Source: TeleChart 2007®

Although you will no longer see a void on the daily chart once the gap has
filled, you can see how and when price rolled over and filled the gap on the
5-minute time frame. Essentially, it is an intraday exhaustion gap if it occurs after a
directional move. Depending on how fast the opening gap is filled, you may not
see the actual void on all intraday time frames. For instance, the SLB gap in Figure
8.17 filled quickly, so no void would appear on the 30- or 60-minute charts; however, it is still visible on very low time frames. There will be some cases in which the
