
Given the general scenario you are talking about—the stock market going down, the dollar
going down, etc.—is there anything that the average guy can do to protect himself?
Buy European and Far Eastern currencies; buy Treasury bills; buy farm land.
How did you first get interested in trading?
Investing. I stumbled onto Wall Street. In 1964,1 had just finished college and was going on to
graduate school. I got a summer job through a guy I met, who happened to work for a Wall Street
firm. I didn't know anything about Wall Street at the time. I didn't know the difference between
stocks and bonds. I didn't even know that there was a difference between stocks and bonds. All I
knew about Wall Street was that it was somewhere in New York and something unpleasant had
happened there in 1929.
After that summer, I went to Oxford during 1964-1966. Whereas all the Americans I knew at
Oxford were interested in politics, I was more interested in reading the Financial Times.
Were you trading while you were at Oxford?
Very lightly. I was an odd letter. The money I was investing in the market was my scholarship
money at Oxford. I would get my scholarship money at the beginning of the year and invest as long
as I could.
Not exactly deep pockets.
[He laughs] If I had lost much money in either of those two years
So you actually started making money right off the bat?
Yes, I was making money. That was the bull market of 1964-1965. By the time I left Oxford in the
summer of 1966, the bear market had started, but I had already paid off my bills. I was lucky. If I
had gone to Oxford during 1965-1967,1 probably would have gotten wiped out.
What happened after Oxford?
I was in the army for a couple of years, and since I didn't have any money, I couldn't follow the
market. In 1968, the day I got out of the army, I went to work on Wall Street. I invested everything
I could. My first wife used to say, "We need a TV." I said, "What do we need a TV for? Let's put
the money in the market, and we could have ten TVs." She said, "We need a sofa." I said, "We
could have ten sofas if we just put the money in the market for a little while."
What kind of job did you get on Wall Street?
Junior analyst.
Covering what stocks?
Machine tools and then advertising agencies.
Were you investing in the stocks you were covering?
I invested in anything.
Successfully?
I came into the market on August 1,1968, right at the top. But I still had some money left, and in
January 1970,1 figured out it was going to be a bear market. I don't know how I figured it out. As I
mentioned earlier, I took all the money I had and bought puts. By May, I had tripled my money. In
July, I started shorting stocks, and by September, I was wiped out. Those first two years were great:
I went from being a genius to a fool.
So you were back to ground zero in September 1970. What happened then?
I saved everything I had and put it back into the market. I didn't care about a TV or a sofa. The wife
got rid of me. I was the entrepreneurial spirit personified. Just like those guys who build up great
retail chains, and plow everything back into their stores, I was plowing everything back into the
market.
Were you trading just stocks at this time?
Bonds, stocks, currencies, commodities.
When did you get involved in these different markets?
I traded all of them almost from the very beginning. Bonds and stocks from day one. Currencies
147

fairly early too. When I was at Oxford, I kept as much money in dollars as I could, because I knew
they were going to devalue sterling any day. I knew it was coming, and it did—a year after I left.
Once again, I was a little early. Even then, I had a strong awareness of currencies.
In the late 1960s, I also got involved in commodities by buying gold. In my early years in the
business, I remember interviewing for a job. The fellow asked me, "What do you read in the Wall
Street Journal' I said, "One of the first things I read is the commodity page." The guy was stunned,
because he did too. This was back before commodities were commodities. He offered me a job, and
when I turned him down, he almost strangled me. This job interview was in 1970, and I was already trading commodities.
Going from ground zero in September 1970, where did you start picking up tradingwise to
build up to your ultimate trading success?
My early losses taught me a lot. Since then—I don't like to say this kind of thing—I have made
very few mistakes. I learned quickly not to do anything unless you know what you are doing. I
learned that it is better to do nothing and wait until you get a concept so right, and a price so right,
that even if you are wrong, it is not going to hurt you.
Did you have a losing year after that point?
No.
How did the Quantum Fund get started?
George Soros was the senior partner, and I was the junior partner. We started off with one senior
partner, one junior partner, and one secretary.
How did you know George Soros?
In 1970, I went to work for him at Amhold and S. Bleichroeder. We left in 1973 because new
brokerage firm regulations did not allow you to get a percentage of the trading profits. We could
have stayed, but we couldn’t' t have managed money. So we had to leave—fortunately. We left and
started our own firm.
What kind of trading did you do for the Quantum Fund? As I understand it, that fund was
managed differently from the typical fund.
We invested in stocks, bonds, currencies, commodities, everything— long and short—all over the
world.
Did you and George make independent trading decisions?
No. If you broke down the division of labor, he was the trader and I was the analyst.
Did you come up with the idea, for example, shorting the dollar, and did he decide the timing
of when to do it?
Yes, sort of.
What if you disagreed on a market? Usually if we disagreed, we just did nothing. So, you both
had to agree on a trade to do it?
There were no rules. Sometimes we would disagree and do the trade anyway, because one of us felt
more strongly. But that type of scenario rarely came up, since we were usually in agreement, and
once we worked things through, it was pretty clear that the trade was either right or wrong. When
we thought something through, a consensus was formed. I hate to use that word, because consensus
investing is a disaster, but we almost always seemed to come together.
When you were trading leveraged products such as commodities and currencies, how did you
determine what your allocation was?
Until we ran out of money, we were always leveraged to the hilt. When we bought something and
ran out of money, we would look at the portfolio and push out whatever appeared to be the least
attractive item at that point. For example, if you wanted to buy corn and ran out of money, you
either had to stop buying corn or sell something else. It was an amoebic process. You know how
amoebas grow—they grow out this way, then they run into pressure so they grow out the other
way. It was a very amoebic portfolio.
148

You never evaluated the risk of your positions on an individual basis? So, if you lost money in
one market and had to reduce your portfolio, you might just as easily cut back in another
market?
Right. We would always cut back on what we thought were the least attractive positions in the
portfolio.
Even today, that sounds like a very unconventional fund. Back then, I imagine it was
probably unique in terms of its investment strategy.
It certainly was unique. I still don't know anybody who trades all the markets. By all the markets, I
mean all the currencies, commodities, bonds, and stocks—long and short—alloverthe world. I am
retired now, and I still do all these markets. People say to me, "You're retired? We have a full staff
and can't even keep up with all these markets. What do you mean you are retired? You are short
stocks all over the world!"
I must admit, I find it amusing when you say you are retired.
Now in my retirement, I'm more active than anybody, and people say, "How do you follow all these
things?"
I have the same question.
I don't see how you can invest in American steel without understanding what is going on in
Malaysian palm oil. As I explained before, it is all part of a big, three-dimensional puzzle that is
always changing.
How do you find enough time to spend on all those markets? Just the reading itself seems to
be a monumental chore.
I do not do it nearly as actively as I used to. Over the years, I have spent a great deal of time
pouring a lot of stuff into my head. I have developed a great deal of perspective on many markets.
When I teach, students are always astonished by the range of historical markets that I am familiar
with. I know about these markets because I have pored over many commodity, bond, and stock
books so many times, for so many years. As an example, I knew about the great bull market in
cotton in 1861, when cotton went from \ cent to $1.05.
How do you find out about a market like that?
I start by finding the anomalous years in a long-term historical chart. When I see a picture like the
1861 cotton market, I ask myself, "What caused that? Why did that happen?" Then I try to figure it
out. From that, you learn an enormous amount.
In fact, one of the courses I teach at Columbia, which the kids call "Bulls and Bears," requires each
student to find a major historical market move. It doesn't matter which market, or whether the move
was up or down. My instructions are for them to tell me what one could have known at the time to
see the big move coming. When rubber was at 2 cents everyone said, "How can rubber ever go
up?" Yet it went up twelvefold. Somebody saw it. I always ask them, "What could you have seen at
the time?" I always nail them. They will say, "I knew the market would go up because there was
going to be a war." But I will make them tell me how they could have known at the time that there
was a war coming. The course gives them historical perspective across a broad spectrum of markets
and teaches them how to analyze.
I have lived through or studied hundreds, possibly even thousands, of bull and bear markets. In
every bull market, whether it is IBM or oats, the bulls always seem to come up with reasons why it
must go on, and on, and on. I remember hearing hundreds of times, "We are going to run out of
supply." "This time is going to be different." "Oil has to sell at $100 a barrel." "Oil is not a
commodity [he laughs]." "Gold is different from every other commodity." Well, damn, for 5,000
years it has not been different from every other commodity. There have been some periods when
gold has been very bullish, and other periods when it has gone down for many years. There is
nothing mystical about it. Sure, it has been a store of value, but so has wheat, corn, copper—
everything. All these things have been around for thousands of years. Some are more valuable than
others, but they are all commodities. They always have been, and they always will be.
I guess the 1987 stock market is a prime recent example of the "this time is going to be
149

different" complacency.
Right. There was going to be a shortage of stocks again. In 1968, one of the major Wall Street
houses published a great learned thesis on why there was a shortage of stocks developing, and why
the bull market had to keep going up for years—right at the top. In 1987, you started hearing it all
over again: "There is a shortage of stocks, because everybody is buying in all this stock." At the
bottom of the bear market [he begins a laugh that builds steadily] there is going to be a shortage of
money— I assure you—with a gigantic surplus of stocks.
While editing this chapter, I came across the following item in a Time magazine story about the
incredible bull market on the Tokyo Stock Exchange (August 8, 1988, p. 29). One could hardly ask
for a better current example of "this time is going to be different." The subject of the Japanese stock
market actually comes up slightly later in this interview.
The explosive growth worries some Western financial experts, who fear that the boom could go
bust. If that happened, investors with heavy losses in Tokyo could be forced to pull money out of
other markets, triggering another crash. Japanese stocks are already trading at astronomical prices
in comparison with the profits of the companies that issued the shares, at least by American
standards. On the New York Stock Exchange, such price-earnings ratios run about 15 to 1, while in
Tokyo the multiples are often four times as high. Nippon Telegraph & Telephone trades at 158
times its earnings. "Japanese authorities have allowed a speculative bubble to grow," warns George
Soros, manager of the New York City-based Quantum Fund, "At no time in the past has a bubble of
this magnitude been deflated in an orderly manner."
Such worries are groundless, argue analysts in Tokyo. The Japanese attribute the high priceearnings ratios in part to accounting rules that allow companies to understate earnings to keep their
taxes lower. Another factor propping up prices is so-called cross-holding of stock. Because many
Japanese companies hold large blocks of other companies' stock, which out of tradition are seldom
traded, fewer shares are available for purchase so their prices rise.
Is there a lot of similarity between different cases of market hysteria?
It's always the same cycle. When a market is very low, there comes a time when some peope buy it
because it has become undervalued. The market starts to go up and more people buy because it is a
fundamentally sound thing to do or because the charts look good. In the next stage, people buy
because it has been the thing to do. My mother calls me up and says, "Buy me XYZ stock." I ask
her, "Why?" "Because the stock has tripled," she answers. Finally, there comes the magical stage:
People are hysterical to buy, because they know that the market is going to go up forever, and
prices exceed any kind of rational, logical economic value.
The whole process then repeats itself on the downside. The market gets tremendously overpriced
and it starts to go down. More people sell because the fundamentals are turning poor. As the
economics deteriorate, more and more people sell. Next, people sell just because it has been the
thing to do. Everybody knows it is going to go to nothing, so they sell. Then the market reaches the
hysteria stage and gets very underpriced. That's when you can buy it for a pop. But for a long-term
investment, you usually have to wait a few years and let the market base.
Talking about extreme bull markets, I recently read that Australia sold a l\ acre plot in Tokyo
for $450 million that they bought for $250,000 twenty-five years ago. Is Japan the tulipmania
of our day? [During 1634-1636, a speculative frenzy in tulips swept Holland, causing such an
enormous rise and collapse in tulip bulb prices that the event is still famous today.]
I guarantee that the Japanese stock market is going to have a major collapse—possibly within the
next year or two. Many of our stocks are going to go down 80 to 90 percent in the bear market. A
lot more of theirs are going to go down 80 to 90 percent.
Is there any way the average U.S. trader can take advantage of that?
Short Japanese stocks, short Japanese indexes, short Japanese calls, buy Japanese puts. A lot of
Japanese stocks trade here and you can just short them. You can short the Japanese index, which
trades in Singapore and Osaka. Most American brokers can do it for you. There are at least five
major Japanese corporations which have options traded on the Chicago Board Options Exchange.
Although I think a collapse is coming, you have to be very careful about going short Japan, because
they might change the rales on you at any time.
150

I don't know if you remember the Kuwaiti stock market of 1980-1981. In that market, you could
buy stocks with a postdated check. You could buy $ 10 million worth of stocks with a postdated
check; you could buy $100 million worth of stock that way. It didn't matter. Everybody was doing
it. In the end, there was a passport clerk who owned $10 billion worth of stocks! All of it on
postdated checks.
Although that market was a very clear example of hysteria, I didn't short it. I thought about it that
long [he snaps fingers]. The reason I didn't go short was because I knew when the market caved in,
they would create rales so that I would never get my money out. Of course, the market eventually
collapsed. If I had gone short they would have blamed it on me and said I caused the damn thing by
shorting. People were even blaming me for the October crash last year, because I said it was going
to happen. Some people claim I caused oil prices to collapse, because I said the price of oil was
going to go down. I wish I were that influential or powerful.
To get back to Japan, I have a few Japanese shorts, and I'm going to have more. But whatever I do
in Japan, I know when the crisis comes, I don't want to be around near the bottom, because the
Japanese are going to protect themselves. And whatever they do to protect themselves, it ain't going
to be good for Jim Rogers. I guarantee that.
You may not be able to get your money out?
Yes, they could freeze the currency. They could have three different tiers of currency. God knows
what they will do.
Wouldn't you be protected if you were short a Japanese market that traded on an American
exchange like the СВОЕ?
Suppose they create two levels of currencies and the guy on the other side of the trade can't meet
his obligation.
The clearinghouse is responsible.
OK, fine, I'm happy to hear it. That's the best news I've had in a long time. Still, whatever I do, I'm
going to be careful. If the Japanese stock market goes from 30,000 to 24,000 or 20,000 that's fine.
But you better think about getting out of it before the last bit if it goes to 12,000. If you wait that
long, you may get your profits out, but it is going to be very painful.
Why did you leave the Quantum Fund?
I didn't want to do the same thing for the rest of my life. I always wanted to have more than one
career. When I came to New York in 1968,1 was a poor boy from Alabama. By 1979,1 had made
more money than I knew existed in the world. Also, we were getting very big. We had started with
three people, and by 1979, we had fifteen people. They wanted to know when they could go on
vacation, get raises, etc. I wasn't interested in any of that; I was interested in investing. I didn't want
to get bigger.
In September 1979,1 decided it would be my last year. But then, in October, there was a big
collapse in the stock market, which we sailed right through. It was so much fun that I decided to
stay on one more year. I left in 1980.
Was 1980 the start of your "retirement"?
Yes, in 1980,1 just cashed in my chips and retired.
Is that the point you became an independent trader?
The term I really prefer is "unemployed."
Well, you teach at Columbia.
That's unemployed. I did it as a part-time thing starting in 1983 so that I could play squash.
I thought it was the love of teaching.
It has developed into much more. But when I started out, I didn't even want to teach. I just wanted
to learn how to play squash.
You're not being facetious? You actually started teaching so you could play squash?
I'm dead serious. Columbia is right here and the Dean kept pestering me to teach a course. I told
him, "I don't think people should go to business school." I thought that, for many people, business
151

school was a waste of time. I still think so. But one thing I wanted to learn in my retirement was
how to play squash. So I made a deal with the Dean to teach one course per semester for free, in
return for lifetime access to the Columbia gym. He agreed. I thought I got a great deal, but he was
smarter than I was—I'm still teaching.
I take it, at this point, you really enjoy it.
Oh, it's good fun, yes. And Columbia is terrific.
What courses are you teaching?
Security analysis, investment analysis, and the "Bulls and Bears" course we talked about before.
Of the multitude of your trading experiences, do any stand out as particularly dramatic?
Lots. My October 19 birthday present that I talked about earlier was probably the best. August 1982
is another. I put a gigantic part of my net worth into bonds throughout 1981 and 1982, and in
August 1982, they skyrocketed.
Any negative dramatic experiences?
August 1971 was a very exciting time. We were long Japan and short America, and one Sunday
night, Nixon announced that he was taking America off the gold standard. I didn't even know it had
happened. I had been off somewhere on my motorcycle, and I came in Monday morning without
having read the papers. That week the Japanese stock market went down 20 percent, and the U.S.
stock market went up. We were losing heavily on both sides.
Did you have to liquidate your positions right off the bat?
You can't liquidate at a time like that. Who can you sell to in Japan? Who could you buy from in
the U.S.? If you covered your shorts, you made things worse. In a situation like that, you have to
figure out whether you are right or wrong. If there was going to be a major fundamental change
forever, the first loss is the best loss. But if fundamentally you are basically correct, then you do
nothing but sit there and let the market hysteria wash around you.
Did you stay with your positions?
Yes.
So, you really had to ride out a rather treacherous paper loss.
There is no such thing as a paper loss. A paper loss is a very real loss.
What was the analysis that gave you the confidence to stay with your positions?
Our analysis was that this was not the end of the world. America had simply taken a short-term
step, and it was not going to solve our country's long-term problems.
Did that position actually turn out to be OK?
It turned out fine. The Nixon announcement was just another step in the dissolution of the Bretton
Woods Agreement [a 1944 international pact that, among other things, established guidelines for
foreign exchange rate stabilization] and the decline of America. America was rallying in its own
bear market.
So, you saw it as a cosmetic move that wasn't going to change the trend, and you stayed with
your position.
Right.
Is that a general principle: When government measures are implemented to counteract a
trend, you should sell the rally after the government action?
Absolutely. It should be written down as an axiom that you always invest against the central banks.
When the central banks try to prop up a currency, go the other way.
What is the biggest public fallacy regarding market behavior?
That the market is always right. The market is nearly always wrong. I can assure you of that.
What else?
Never, ever, follow conventional wisdom in the market. You have to learn to go counter to the
markets. You have to learn how to think for yourself; to be able to see that the emperor has no
152
