
Chapter 6: Analyzing Char ts to Trade Trends, Ranges, or Both
example, each day both newspapers publish which stocks are making
new 52-week highs or new 52-week lows. These stocks are often trending
up or down, depending on whether the security is making a new high or
a new low. What you want to see is a stock that hasn’t made a new high
or a new low in a long time and then bursts onto the scene. These stocks
are often just beginning their trends.
Another bottom-up method of identifying trending stocks is through
research services. High Growth Stock (HGS) Investor software, for example, allows users to screen stocks in particular groups, markets, and so
on by those making new highs or new lows over any chosen time period.
The period you choose should be long enough to signal a meaningful
trend, but not so short as to capture stocks moving normally up and
down. After all, a stock making a new one-day high isn’t very meaningful.
 Top-down search: You can locate strongly trending stocks by looking at
strongly trending industry groups. Popular research services like Daily
Graphs, HGS Investor, and Morningstar provide data on which industry groups are the top performers over the last several months. Just
because a group is hot right now, however, doesn’t mean it will be hot
forever; industries fall out of favor just as individual securities do.
Begin your search by looking at the top ten performing industry groups
and drilling down to find securities that may be trending. Again, you
want stocks just making new highs after a period of moving sideways.
Examine the chart and see if the security is clearly rising. You get more
tools on measuring trends using indicators in Chapter 5.
To find candidates to short, examine industry groups that fall in the
bottom 10 percent of performance. Then drill down into those groups to
locate individual stocks that are just breaking into new lows. These are
the prime candidates to short.
Just because a stock belongs to an industry group that’s in an uptrend
doesn’t necessarily mean that the stock is also trending or that it’s trending
upward. It’s possible to find stocks that belong to a hot industry but that are
falling on hard times. So make sure you’re only buying stocks in strong trends
in groups that are trending upward and shorting stocks in strong trends in
groups that are trending downward.
Figure 6-1 highlights shares of Mosaic Company (symbol: MOS), which is ripe
for trading a trending stock. On February 13, 2007, shares hit a 52-week high
and appeared in The Wall Street Journal on February 14, 2007.

121

122 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis

Figure 6-1:
This security
hits a new
52-week
high and
is a prime
candidate
for trend
trading.

Knowing when to enter a trend
The biggest risk swing traders who focus on trends face is the possibility of
buying or shorting a trend that’s just about to end. Ian Woodward, a professional trader, equates buying or shorting stocks late in their trends to acting
like an unruly dog chasing speeding cars. Sure, it may be fun for the dog, but
sooner or later he’s going to get run over.
To minimize your risk of riding a crashing wave, you must follow some
system that only enters at the right time. The ideal setup is a security making
a fresh, new high or low over the last 26 days.
So how do you know if the trend you’re riding is just beginning or winding
down? If you don’t have access to a security program that can identify such
new highs or new lows, then rely on The Wall Street Journal’s daily list of
stocks hitting 52-week highs or 52-week lows. Additionally, you want to see
an ADX reading above 20 to indicate the presence of a trend.
As with all aspects of trading, you can never be 100 percent sure about a
trade. The best you can do is put the odds in your favor by only entering on
some type of signal. If the trend is genuine and is going to continue, you’ve
entered early. If the trend is failing, you’ll know shortly because your signal
will likely reverse itself if the trend ends or breaks down.
The signal you use can be based on chart patterns or technical signals. Generally,
chart patterns give traders earlier warning than technical signals, but technical
indicators require little interpretation, which makes your job easier. For example,
a stock rising above its 50-day moving average could be a signal to buy, or a MACD
crossover (covered in Chapter 5) could be a signal to short (depending on the
direction of the crossover). Many swing traders only enter trends on the long

Chapter 6: Analyzing Char ts to Trade Trends, Ranges, or Both
or short side when a security first makes a new high or new low of X number
of days, provided this is the first new high or new low in the last month or
two. Otherwise, you run the risk of buying or shorting a stock that’s extended
or has been making new highs and new lows for a long time.
Another approach to entering swing trade orders is to wait for a pause in the
trend and enter on a day of strength or day of weakness.
 To enter on a day of strength, you must wait for the stock to form three
consecutive bars of declining highs. Then you enter on the next bar that
trades higher than the previous bar’s high.
 To enter on a day of weakness, you must wait for the stock to form
three consecutive bars of rising lows. Then you enter on the next bar
that trades lower than the previous bar’s low.
In Figure 6-2, the chart of Apple Inc. (symbol: AAPL) shows a strong uptrend
that began in late July 2007 on a strong gap up in share prices. After rising 40
percent, shares retraced their steps and made three consecutive lower highs
marked by the numbers 1, 2, and 3. (Notice that the day prior to number 1
doesn’t count because its high exceeds the previous bar.) After making four
lower highs, the stock moved higher and exceeded the high of the fourth bar,
signaling the continuation of the uptrend and an ideal entry point.
Whatever signal method you use, make sure to only enter the trade on that
actual signal. You’ll find dozens of trending stocks that gave signals 5, 10, or
20 days ago — ignore them. You can’t be disciplined if you’re entering trends
late. Only enter on a signal you choose.

Figure 6-2:
A day of
strength is
often a good
opportunity
to enter
a strong
trend.

123

124 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
If you look back at Figure 6-1, you’ll notice that the 52-week high registered
on February 13, 2007, was the first in two months. Remember, you want to
avoid buying a strong trending stock that has been making new 52-week
highs every other day. An extended period of time between 52-week highs is a
means of protecting yourself from buying an extended stock. Enter either on
the sign of a new high or on a day of strength (the day of strength approach
will help you avoid getting run over by speeding cars).
Figure 6-3 highlights the day of strength for Mosaic and the ADX reading
above 20 on that day. In this example, the day of strength allows ADX time to
give a clear signal on whether the stock is trending or not. Should you have
entered on February 14, 2007, the day of the 52-week high? That depends on
what your trading strategy calls for: If you buy new highs immediately, then
the answer is yes. However, I recommend using ADX as a means of weeding
out weak trends from strong trends. In this case, the ADX was below 20 on
the day the stock made a new high. The ADX indicator didn’t register a reading over 20 until February 20, 2007.

Figure 6-3:
ADX above
20 signals
the existence of a
trend —
enter on
a day of
strength.

Managing your risk by
setting your exit level
Setting your exit level will depend on when you enter the security. I cover
exit levels in more detail in Chapter 10, but in short, your exit price (think of
it as your emergency exit) will either be based off a technical-indicator signal,
a price level, or a time exit (that is, exiting after a certain number of days
have elapsed). Your target likely will be based off a technical indicator or

Chapter 6: Analyzing Char ts to Trade Trends, Ranges, or Both
price level because of the ease of establishing the exit rules. Following is an
explanation of each of these exit-setting mechanisms:
 Technical-indicator exit signal: This includes exiting on the break down
below a moving average or on a crossover of MACD (both of which are
covered in Chapter 5).
 Price-level exit level: Entering on a new, 52-week high will require an
exit level right in the trading range that the stock is emerging from. If
you bought shares of Mosaic as they made a new high on February 13,
you would set an exit level between $21 and $22 per share. If the trend is
real, the stock shouldn’t fall back into its original base.
 Time-based exit level: Because the target exit price isn’t important to
demonstrate how to enter and manage the Mosaic trade, I assume a
simple time-based target of 20 days.
If you enter on the day of strength that I recommend in the preceding
section, your exit level is easier to compute than it would be using the other
methods identified here. In this case, your exit should be based off the low
directly preceding the day of strength.

Trading Ranges: Perhaps Stasis Is Bliss?
Finding a security in a trading range can be more difficult than a finding a
trending stock. Screening for securities making new highs or new lows is
much easier.
Technical indicators (which I cover in Chapter 5) can be useful in identifying when a security is in a trading range and when to enter or exit a trade.
However, not all technical indicators are applicable to trading ranges.
Trending indicators, as the name suggests, are useful when a security is in a
trend. Non-trending indicators (often called oscillators), on the other hand,
should be used when securities are in a trading range. You should choose
one or two oscillators (at most) to use in a trading system.

Finding a security in a
strong trading range
When swing traders want to determine if a security is in a trading range, they
often use an ADX indicator. The calculator methodology is beyond the scope
of this book, but I can tell you that most popular charting programs include
ADX (or include ADX as part of the DMI indicator). What you need to know is

125

126 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
that an ADX value below 20 signals a non-trending market, and an ADX value
above 20 often signals a trending market.
A range must be wide enough to allow for meaningful profits. For example, if
a stock trades between $56 and $60, the range would be so tight that profits
would be eaten up by commissions, taxes, and so on. No hard and fast rule
exists for how wide is wide enough, but $5 to $7 on a stock trading below $100
is a good range to target.
The strength of trading ranges depends on a few factors:
 Time: The longer a trading range has been in force, the more likely it is
to continue.
 Touches of support and resistance: The more times a security touches
its support and/or resistance level (see Chapter 4), the more powerful
that support or resistance level is. Look for trading ranges with several
touches or tests of support and resistance.
 Flat ranges: When I refer to flat ranges, I mean how much a trading range
resembles a rectangle. Some trading ranges have resistance levels that rise
or support levels that fall; these ranges are suspect because they don’t
clearly identify true areas of support or resistance. In fact, they may be
some other chart formation entirely. The flatter the support and resistance
levels, the stronger your conviction should be that the trading range is
genuine.
Figure 6-4 shows a chart of MEMC Electronics Materials (symbol: WFR). You
can see the trading range by eyeballing the chart and identifying clear support and resistance levels. Notice also that the ADX level is below 20 on the
chart, signaling a non-trending market.

Figure 6-4:
This chart
shows a
trading
range with
resistance
at $65 and
support at
$52.

Chapter 6: Analyzing Char ts to Trade Trends, Ranges, or Both

Entering on a range and
setting your exit level
Your entry is likely to be driven by either a day of strength (defined earlier
in this chapter) or a technical signal. For the MEMC Electronics example, I
assume you’re using stochastics (an indicator useful in measuring strength
or weakness in trendless markets; see Chapter 5 for more on stochastics) to
signal a buy order.
Stochastics flashes a buy signal when the signal line crosses above the
moving average from an oversold level. That area is highlighted in Figure
6-5. In the case of MEMC Electronics, the buy signal from stochastics occurs
when shares are around $55.

Figure 6-5:
This chart
shows a buy
signal from
stochastics
and a profit
objective
near the
upper end of
the trading
range.

The target profit in trading ranges is just the opposite side of the trading
range. In this case, resistance was solid around $65 per share, so a reasonable profit target is $64. Shares of WFR hit that level roughly six weeks after
the buy signal was generated.
The risk level of this trading range is located slightly below the support level.
A meaningful movement in share price below the support level signals the
trading range has ended, but don’t be strict on what you consider meaningful. For example, if the support level is at $52, a risk level of $51 may be
unreasonable given the volatility in the chart.
I prefer to set risk levels right below major, whole, round numbers. Traders
often fall into the trap of putting stop loss orders or buy stop orders at round
number levels. The problem with setting risk levels or buy orders at round numbers is that hundreds of other traders may be the doing the exact same thing,

127

128 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
meaning that you’re likely to get a bad execution or get whipsawed (shaken
out of the trade by a rapid price movement).
For the example shown in Figure 6-5, with support at $52 and an upper resistance level at $65, I recommend placing a stop loss order right below $50
per share. In my view, a trade below $50 is a good indication that the trading
range has ended and the stock is beginning a downtrend.
Note: Right after the buy signal from stochastics is generated, shares of WFR
trade down sharply, touching a low of $49.70. (Notice, though, that shares
never close below $53.) If you had set your risk level exit at $50, you would
have been exited from this trade early.

Comparing Markets to One Another:
Intermarket Analysis
Intermarket analysis is an underutilized technique in technical analysis.
Intermarket technicians analyze currencies, equity markets, bonds, and
commodities to determine which market holds the most promise. Often, an
upturn in one market signals an upturn or downturn in another market, and
intermarket analysis can give you an early lead on a rally or decline in that
sector or market. Rising bond prices often precede equity market rallies.
Rising commodity prices, on the other hand, can lead to a downturn in stock
prices. Knowing the relationships among the four major markets — bonds,
currencies, commodities, and stocks — means that you can anticipate
changes in market leadership.
I begin this review of intermarket analysis by taking a bird’s-eye view of the
investment landscape. Currencies (specifically, the U.S. dollar) analysis is
helpful as investors seek to profit from strength or weakness in an investor’s
domestic currency. Then I cover commodities (for example, oil, gold, and
copper) because commodity prices have been in a major bull market in the
last few years. I also get into bond prices and interest rates. Bonds are the
biggest competitor to the equity markets, so strength or weakness in bonds
can lead to strength or weakness in equity prices.

Passing the buck: The U.S. dollar
The U.S. dollar is the world’s reserve currency, or the most widely used currency. The dollar is affected by a host of factors, including the interest rates
the Federal Reserve sets (known as monetary policy), the national debt, and the
current budget deficit or surplus. As you may have learned in your economics

Chapter 6: Analyzing Char ts to Trade Trends, Ranges, or Both
course, the value of a currency (assuming it freely floats on the world markets)
is determined by the supply and demand for that currency.
The Federal Reserve controls short-term interest rates in the United States,
and short-term interest rates, in turn, have a significant impact on the value
(or demand) for U.S. dollars. If the Federal Reserve raises interest rates,
the dollar is likely to strengthen because investors seek out high yields on
their investments. A government that pays 10 percent interest on short-term
investments will attract a flood of investors from the outside world, prompting strength in that country’s currency. However, if that government cuts
interest rates to 2 percent, fewer investors will be willing to loan their money
to the government or banks in that country (assuming other world yields are
higher than 2 percent), thus weakening that nation’s currency.
Fiscal policies affect the dollar but usually take longer to materialize. If the
U.S. government spends more than it has (that is, it generates budget deficits), the dollar’s value may decrease because a budget deficit represents
borrowing money today at the expense of paying it back in the future. The
larger the deficit or national debt, the more pressure on the dollar. Think of
it this way: The more the government spends, the more available U.S. dollars
are. By increasing the supply, you decrease prices.
So how can you make money with this knowledge? Here’s how you may benefit
when the dollar strengthens or weakens:
 Dollar strengthening: When the U.S. dollar strengthens, it usually bodes
well for U.S. stocks and U.S. bonds. International investors are attracted to
strong currencies because the investors can increase their potential return
by profiting from the rise in a U.S. stock and a rise in the U.S. currency.
 Dollar weakening: Weakness in the U.S. dollar can translate into higher
commodity prices. Look for gold, crude oil, and other world commodities
to benefit from a weak dollar.
The chart in Figure 6-6, which shows the U.S. dollar (top) and gold prices
(bottom), illustrates how intermarket analysis can boost your returns. The
U.S. dollar began a major decline in August 2007 while gold prices began
a major advance. If you see the U.S. dollar weaken, look for swing trading
opportunities on the long side in commodities or commodity-related securities
(like gold miners or oil explorers). A weak U.S. dollar tends to lead to higher
commodity prices (in U.S. dollars), and a strong U.S. dollar tends to lead to
lower commodity prices (in U.S. dollars).

129

130 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis

Figure 6-6:
Watch the
strength or
weakness
of the U.S.
dollar for
clues on the
direction of
commodity
prices.

Tracking commodities
Commodities come in different flavors:
 Energy commodities include items like crude oil, heating oil,
and natural gas.
 Metal commodities include gold, silver, and platinum.
 Livestock and meat commodities include live cattle and lean hogs.
 Agricultural commodities include corn and soybeans.
Between the 1980s and early 2000, commodities didn’t get much respect and
were considered unimportant in the so-called new economy. Many traders
underweighted or divested altogether investments in the commodity space.
All that changed in 2000. With the equity market top in 2000, investors sought
out new investment opportunities, and gold, oil, and other commodities

Chapter 6: Analyzing Char ts to Trade Trends, Ranges, or Both
benefited from the interest. Later, at the turn of the 21st century, demand
for commodities from emerging markets like China and India rose markedly.
Because commodity prices in general had been poor investment options in
prior years, commodity producers hadn’t invested in sourcing new supplies.
For example, because crude oil prices had been range-bound during much of
the 1990s, energy firms didn’t invest in new equipment or search for new oil
discoveries. As a result, prices of these commodities shot up when demand
increased.
Most individual investors never buy commodities directly because of the
sophistication needed to trade futures contracts. But recent innovations have
allowed equity investors to take advantage of movements in commodity prices.
For example, a trader wanting to take advantage of a bull market in gold
prices can purchase shares of GLD, the streetTRACKS Gold shares, which trade
on the New York Stock Exchange.
You can track the prices of commodities in many ways, but the most popular
baskets are the Commodity Research Bureau Index and the Goldman Sachs
Commodity Index.
Although commodities can make you a pretty penny (made out of copper, I
might add), they also give important signals on the direction of other asset
classes. Commodities represent goods that you and I buy day-to-day —
whether we realize it or not. When prices of commodities rise, inflation can
result. Inflation is a principal risk of bond investors because interest payments aren’t adjusted for the value of the dollar.
Therefore, commodity prices tend to correlate negatively to bond prices
(and thus, positively correlate with interest rates because bond yields move
inversely to bond prices). Rising commodity prices usually occur with falling
bond prices and rising yields. Conversely, falling commodity prices usually
occur with rising bond prices and falling yields.
No relationship is guaranteed in the financial market, and it’s possible for
commodity prices to trend in the same direction as bond prices. But such
action is unlikely to last long. Bond investors eventually sell bonds if they
believe the risks of inflation are rising. A small move in the prices of commodities may not convince them that such a risk is imminent, but a sustained rally or
decline in commodity prices affects the strength or weakness in bond prices.
Figure 6-7 shows just how that relationship played out in 2006. Commodity
prices, as measured by the CRB Index, began rallying in late March. Shortly
thereafter, bond prices fell (and bond yields rose). The bottom chart shows
the yield on the 30-Year Treasury Bond. As you can see, commodity prices
and bond yields move in the same direction. As a swing trader, you can use
this knowledge to your advantage — a sustained rally in commodity prices
leads to higher bond yields and trading opportunities for bond traders.

131

132 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
