
P1: OTA
JWBT642-c03

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

Back-Testing Your System

21:18

Printer: Courier Westford

31

expertise is to back-test. Although it may seem like hard work, the fact
is you can simply accumulate years of experience over hours when you decide to manually back-test. It is, quite simply, the best shortcut to trading
success. The very successful traders, who are consistently finding profits
in the market, who are trading for a living, all of them share one characteristic: They back-test their systems and earn their pips on their back-testing
software. Why not join this successful group of traders today?

MANUAL BACK-TESTING
Manual back-testing is the most readily available form of back-testing available. Most traders understand it is possible to manually back-test their
trading systems, but most traders choose not to manually back-test. Many
charting packages make it easy to back-test. The vast majority of charts
will allow the historical price, so that you may advance price slowly and
“trade” the chart as it unfolds. For example, in Meta TraderTM you simply
hit the F12 key on your keyboard to advance the charts one price bar at a
time. This is all that is needed for manual back-testing.

CANDLESTICK
The candlestick is a popular chart that displays the opening price, the closing
price, the high price and the low price for a market during a given time period.
Each candlestick clearly represents the important market activity for the given
time period.

To manually back-test, you simply scroll back in time and record your
trades, the trades you would have taken had you been trading the chart
in live market conditions. You can advance the candlesticks slowly, one at
a time, record your entry price, the number of lots traded, your stop loss,
and your profit target. You may be concerned that manual back-testing involves a lot of notes, spreadsheets, and recordkeeping. It is a meticulous,
involved, and laborious method of back-testing. It is also extremely powerful. If you aspire to trade by looking at a chart and making a trading
decision, you are nearly duplicating the trading process with this form of
back-testing.
Most traders employ discretionary trading systems, so it follows that
manual back-testing is the most appropriate form of back-testing for most
traders.

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c03

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

32

21:18

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

Obviously manual back-testing will take some time, and it is sometimes
difficult to avoid “cheating” with this type of back-testing. However, you
must take care to avoid going forward on the chart and then reversing back
in time to take a trade you would have taken. The key is to trade as if
you are in that moment in time, with no information of the future. The
experience gained with manual back-testing is priceless. You can quickly
accumulate experience with your trading system if you back-test correctly.
Manual back-testing will yield statistics to help you understand the nature
of your trading system. These statistics, as we will see later in this book,
will become invaluable for determining how you should trade as they may
be utilized to project your results into the future.
A note about manual back-testing—it may seem tedious, it will take
some time, you may want to give up when it progresses slowly, particularly
when you are looking to accumulate hundreds of trades. Resist the temptation to avoid manual back-testing. Make progress in small chunks, an hour
of testing per day can give you a huge advantage. The payoff is great and
your experience testing your system will allow you to gain “experience”
trading the system through different market conditions. Each trade during
manual back-testing will march you closer to expertise. This expertise may
be the difference between you abandoning your trading system during the
inevitable drawdown, and maintaining confidence in your trading system
through a drawdown. However, there are pitfalls associated with manual
back-testing.
The most common pitfall traders fall into with this testing is engaging
in future trading by advancing the chart, either by accident or intention,
and then deciding that a trade would have been taken. Traders at times
have difficulty discerning when future price data creeps into manual backtesting. Traders who are strict about not allowing trades after future data
is viewed will avoid contaminating back-testing data. By trading only from
the current candlestick on the chart, serious back-testers avoid going forward in time.
Hindsight bias is a critical killer that may creep into your manual backtesting if you allow it to happen. A good rule of thumb is to advance the
charts slowly during your testing, and if you accidentally advance the chart
too quickly, you must keep your trades to the right-hand edge of the chart.
If you advance the chart and then go back to take a trade, you are leaving
yourself open to the hindsight bias.
HINDSIGHT BIAS
The tendency to overestimate the predictability of the market after the future
outcome is known.

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c03

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

21:18

Back-Testing Your System

Printer: Courier Westford

33

Even if you only take trades during testing by advancing the chart one
candlestick at a time, hindsight bias may still sneak into your testing. If you
are testing historical data on the EUR/USD in 2008, and you had experience
trading in 2008, you may have a problem. Your subconscious may be pulling
up the 2008 EUR/USD chart and you are obviously not even aware of it. To
fight hindsight bias, take trades on the right-hand edge of the chart, do not
go forward on the chart and then reverse back, and if you do accidentally
go forward, resign yourself to skipping over any signals that pop up and
stick to trading on the right-hand edge of the chart.

USING BACK-TESTING SOFTWARE
Back-testing software is a step up from manual back-testing. Most forex
traders are not even aware of the fact that manually back-testing your
trading system is possible. Back-testing software is an underappreciated
tool, one that will allow you to manually back-test your trading system at
an aggressive pace. Manual back-testing software records your trades for
you and enables you to quickly take trades as you advance the historical
charts. In many ways, manual back-testing with software is not much different from manual back-testing. The advantages to using software are as
follows: Software will allow faster testing, so you may accumulate experience quicker; the software will do the recordkeeping for you and allow you
to concentrate on the trade signals; you may easily export your data for
analysis; and software discourages cheating— manual back-testing software is a hindsight bias killer.
Of the many manual back-testing software packages available, my favorite is Forex Tester. Forex Tester is a manual back-testing software
package that will allow you to import any data. You may decide to import
forex data, futures data, stock data—any data will work. Forex tester will
record your trades and allow you to export your trading data into a spreadsheet, after you have completed your testing, for analysis. The beauty of
software-based testing is that it allows you to concentrate on trading your
system. In many ways, it mirrors live trading with an account platform. If
you would like to see a video demonstration of Forex Tester please go to
www.fxjake.com/book.
There are many traders, myself included, who will spend more time
back-testing with software because it is much easier than manual backtesting. Back-testing with software helps traders gain years of trading experience in a few hours. However, the real work in back-testing is examining
the results. Exporting and analyzing the data from back-testing is where
serious traders validate trading systems, find behavioral patterns, and

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c03

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

34

21:18

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

develop strategies to augment profitable trading strategies. These data are
gold for the serious trader.
Your back-testing data will help you determine your trading patterns
(Do you find profits more easily on the daily charts? Are most of your winning trades initiated during the European session? Do you trade particularly well with your system on the CAD/JPY?), and this can lead to more
fruitful back-testing sessions. You will also know, after back-testing your
system over several hundred trades, if the system makes money for you.
In fact, before you ever risk one cent, you should make hundreds of trades
while back-testing to verify that your trading system will capture profits
and also to gain expertise with your system.
Manual back-testing with software is not without problems. You must
look out for the same pitfalls that creep up with manual back-testing,
namely hindsight bias. Manual back-testing software makes it easier to
avoid hindsight bias, but you still must be careful to only take trades if
you have not advanced forward on the chart. Cheating is not allowed when
back-testing; your goal is to generate realistic trade results during your
back-testing. Also, because it is very easy to quickly execute trades with
the testing software, you must watch out for subpar trades. Trades you
would not take on a live trading account should be bypassed no matter
how tempting it may be to take them during back-testing. Try to back-test
as if you have real money at risk. This is the only way to ensure that your
statistics and experience in back-testing will closely match your live trading. If you remain vigilant and conscientious during testing, your results
will be more meaningful.

AUTOMATED BACK-TESTING
Automated back-testing is the most well-known method for testing a trading system. Most forex traders are aware of the fact that it is possible to do
some automated testing on a trading system. However, most forex traders
use discretionary, or manual, trading systems, so automated back-testing
is not the ideal method for back-testing; it does not closely duplicate the
discretionary trading most traders engage in. There are many reasons for
discouraging automated back-testing for discretionary traders:

r There may be too much human interpretation in the trading system.
Automated back-testing does not allow for the human interpretation
of trade signals.
r The trading system may involve variables that are not available on the
price chart (news releases, economic data records, interpretation of
world events, etc.).

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c03

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

Back-Testing Your System

21:18

Printer: Courier Westford

35

r It is impossible to automate the trading system (fuzzy logic, parameters
difficult to define, etc.).

r You may not be able to articulate your trading system. Automated
back-testing is only possible for trading systems with clearly defined
rules.
Most forex traders should not use automated back-testing. Automated
back-testing is appropriate for those traders who use automated trading
systems. Automated trading systems, known as trading robots, or expert
advisors, are popular with forex traders. However, most traders are more
comfortable with discretionary trading systems. So, while it may be possible to use automated back-testing, it may not be appropriate for most
traders.
Here is a test to help you decide whether automated back-testing is
for you. If you turn on your automated trading system and can allow it to
trade without any of your intervention for a month, then automated backtesting may be for you. If your system needs your input for any reason, then
you are a discretionary trader, and you should use manual back-testing or
manual back-testing with software.
There are other disadvantages to automated back-testing. It does not
allow you to gain experience with the trading system. You will not gain
the expertise that you would if you manually tested the system because
the computer takes all of the trades over the course of the back-testing.
Automated back-testing will not give you experience trading your system
through many market conditions. Automated back-testing will probably
not highlight the weaknesses of your trading system; these weaknesses will
be readily apparent when manual back-testing is done. However, with automated back-testing, the weaknesses are a bit more difficult to identify.
In short, automated back-testing is really only an option for those traders
who are not using a discretionary trading system.
There are unique pitfalls associated with automated back-testing. For
example, it is quite easy to use too many variables in an automated trading system. Using too many variables often implies that there are too many
indicators in the trading system. Seasoned traders understand how simple trading systems are robust, and may be applied to many markets over
varying timeframes. (All of the naked-trading systems in this book are incredibly simple and robust.) It is difficult for some automated-system developers to keep their trading systems simple and robust; the temptation
to add more indicators and rules is great.
It is exceptionally easy for automated traders to use too many indicators when developing and testing a system. Adding too many variables to
any trading system increases the chances that the trading system will work
quite well on one data set but will not work well on another. With too many

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c03

36

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

21:18

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

variables the system is likely to do exceptionally well during some market
conditions and then break down and perform poorly when market conditions change. This is a very real risk with automated back-testing. It is almost too easy for a trader to decide to add more conditions and indicators
to the trading system, which will increase the profitability of the trading
system over the course of the historical data in the back-test, often making the system look very good. However, these results often completely
fall apart after you apply this very same trading system to a different data
set or to future market conditions. In a very real sense, the Achilles heel
of automated back-testing is that it is too easy. Because the automated
back-tests can be generated so quickly, the automated back-tester will go
overboard tweaking and testing the system. The end result is often a system that works exceptionally well on the historical data in the back-test
but falls apart completely in live market conditions.
There is another issue that often comes up with automated backtesting. This is the postdictive error, a fancy way of saying that a trading
system uses future information to make a decision in the present time. This
is actually something that is related to the hindsight bias. Traders backtesting automated trading systems must be extremely careful. It is possible
for the back-tester to pull data from the future without knowing about it.
This is obviously a very big problem, because as a rule, future data is not
generally available, despite any claims to the contrary by technical indicator salespeople (psychics and palm readers are the obvious exceptions).
When future data is used in an automated back-test, the system looks incredible, but once the trading system is applied to real market conditions,
without the critical (future) data, the system falls apart.
There is one advantage to automated back-testing, that is, it allows
you to quickly determine whether an automated trading strategy is viable.
The back-test may be done in seconds, which is a true advantage for the
automated trader. Remember, the automated trader will not gain the same
expertise and comfort level as the trader who uses manual back-testing.
This is the biggest weakness of automated back-testing, the back-tests are
cheap. There is no experience gained each time a back-test is run. The
manual back-testing trader accumulates experience every time a trade setup is executed. This experience should not be discounted. An automated
back-test may clarify the worthiness of an automated trading system, often
involving hundreds, or thousands of trades, but remember the trades are
all taken by computer and will not lead to trader expertise. In this sense
the trades are wasted, the trader does not accumulate experience during
the back-testing, this is only possible with manual back-testing.
If you use automated trading systems, then, perhaps, automated backtesting is appropriate, but if you use manual trading systems, it may be best
to avoid automated back-testing.

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c03

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

21:18

Back-Testing Your System

Printer: Courier Westford

37

TOP THREE BACK-TESTING TIPS
There is one distinguishing characteristic between those traders who continually struggle to find consistent profits and those traders who consistently pull profits from the market. The traders who are still looking for
consistency, who are still looking for profits, are traders who usually do
not back-test trading systems. These traders fall in love with a system before establishing the veracity of the system. These traders often move from
trading system to trading system, hoping that the new system will yield
better results than the previous system. The consistently profitable traders
take a different approach. These traders know that they have a profitable
system because they back-test their system extensively. These traders have
seen their system work over years of market data and know precisely the
type of drawdown they are likely to come up against in the future.
The choice is yours; you may decide to join the group of struggling
traders who jump from system to system, never really finding comfort with
any trading system, or you may decide to join the successful traders, the
profitable group who spend time back-testing their systems. If you decide
to join the latter group, I have three back-testing tips for you. These tips
were developed by working with traders just like you, around the world.
The key is to approach your back-testing as you would any skill you are
working toward. If you were looking to learn the bass guitar, you would
probably want to take lessons and spend time playing your guitar to hone
your skills. However, it is important that you play the bass guitar in your
own style. Back-testing is much the same. You must approach it seriously,
but you must also keep this in mind: You will consistently find profits only
if you stay true to your trading style.

Consider Your Style
Use a back-testing method that fits your trading style. If you are an automated trader, then use automated back-testing; if you are a discretionary
trader, use manual back-testing. The most important thing in back-testing
is to duplicate your trading style. Back-test in a way that will be meaningful
and bring you closer to expertise with your system.

Take Time to Test
There is a real temptation, particularly when engaging in manual backtesting with software, to do it much too quickly. Back-testing is a learning
process. Just as you would not expect to complete a 16-week course in
a day, you will need to break up your back-testing sessions, particularly if

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c03

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

38

21:18

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

you are doing manual back-testing. Try to keep your sessions short—under
two hours—so that you approach each session with a fresh mind and you
are unlikely to get sloppy. Back-testing for six or more hours will usually
lead to poor results simply because you were not as sharp for your last
trades as you were for your first trades.

Mistakes Are Part of Back-Testing
Making mistakes is also part of the learning process. We have a natural
tendency to avoid mistakes. So when a trading mistake pops up several
times, it is tempting to modify the trading system so that it accounts for
this mistake. However, this is the road that leads to too many variables in
a trading system. Avoid too many variables. Try to keep your system rules
simple. It may be tempting to add a new rule to avoid some losing trades,
but this may blunt the effectiveness of your system.
If you are interested in naked trading, trading without indicators, then
you are likely to avoid the “too many rules” mistake. This is another reason
why naked trading allows traders to realize their full potential.
Naked trading also involves using the history of the market. If you ask
any psychologist how to best learn about someone, you will hear that it is
best to follow that person around. Psychologists do not have the time to
follow people around, so questionnaires are used to determine what somebody is like—their personality, their habits, and their history. Likewise, the
naked trader may use the history of the market to determine what is likely
to happen in the future. Everyone has done something and said, “Why do I
do that?” People like to believe in free choice, but most humans are creatures of habit. Likewise, the market is a huge amalgamation of habitual
traders. The market is nothing more than a community of creatures of
habit. People make up the market. The naked trader uses this to his advantage, by closely following historical turning points in the market. We
will get into this issue in detail later in the book, but for now it is important
to remember that the naked trader equates the market to a herd. Herds will
often follow one another for safety. Members of a herd will also fall on one
another as they run off a cliff. The naked trader uses specific tools to tune
into and take advantage of the herd behavior that we call the market.

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c04

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

21:20

Printer: Courier Westford

CHAPTER 4

Identifying
Support and
Resistance
Zones
There’s an old saying about those who forget history.
I don’t remember it, but it’s good.
—Stephen Colbert

ou have to pay close attention to one thing on the chart if you trade
naked: price. Price is king. Price will tell you all you need to know.
The wonderful thing that all markets have is this: a history. The market will tell you where the sweet spot is on the chart. These sweet spots
will be the foundation for everything you do as a naked trader.
A sweet spot on the chart is a support and resistance zone. You may
be familiar with the concept of support and resistance, however, support
and resistance zones are different from what many traders characterize
as support and resistance. I will call these support and resistance zones
by one word— zones. The eight important characteristics of zones are as
follows:
