
 But the larger reason Hyperion ’s crew members agreed to cross the Atlantic Ocean on a boat run by a computer that did not seem to work very well is that already they were in so deep that they really could not turn around. Clark liked to say that human beings, when they took risks, fell into one of two types, pigs or chickens. “The difference between these two kinds of people,” he’d say, “is the difference between the pig and the chicken in the ham-and-eggs breakfast. The chicken is interested, the pig is committed. If you are going to do anything worth doing, you need a lot of pigs.” The members of Hyperion ’s crew were now pigs, for a very simple reason: they all had a stake in Clark’s Internet businesses. Clark couldn’t stand the idea of anyone’s working for him without having the chance to accumulate a bit of wealth. He’d given Hyperion ’s crew members that chance by handing them stock options in Healtheon. 

 If the crew members couldn’t exactly explain the Magic Diamond that put Jim Clark at the center of 15 percent of the U.S. economy, they had heard Clark and others say that the new enterprise might one day be as big as Microsoft. And they knew that they would also get shares in the new new thing, whatever that turned out to be, and that the new new thing would likely be even bigger. Like a lot of people who entered ClarkWorld, the crew members of Hyperion suspected that Jim Clark would make their dreams come true. They needed only to keep his boat floating long enough for that to happen. 

 T he funny thing was that the engineers at Healtheon felt much the same way. They, too, were chickens who had been transformed into pigs. And they, too, soon found that pigs paid a surprisingly high price to play a role at Clark’s breakfast table. 

 The first bad sign came for Healtheon about six months after the engineers built their software for Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Massachusetts. The software created by Pavan’s group was something of a triumph. It was secure, reliable, and worked as well for ten million people as for ten. They had done the work of several years in six months. And Blue Cross/Blue Shield did not want it. After saying how pleased it was with the work, Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Massachusetts then announced that it could not really afford to focus on new technology. Blue Cross/Blue Shield had run into financial trouble; and, as always happened in bad times, its investment in the future needed to be reduced. It fired its new-technology group. 

 For most of 1996 the engineers did what they were told by their sales force. The sales force was in turn put together by a Kleiner Perkins venture capitalist, David Schnell, who, against his better judgment, had agreed to captain Clark’s new ship. The sales force told them that the key to the Magic Diamond was to write the software to enable corporate employees to interact with their health plans over the Internet. They wrote this software…and no one wanted it! The sales people hired by David Schnell had led them down a blind alley. “They had hired a bunch of perfectly nice people to sell who might as well have been selling insurance,” says Stuart Liroff. “A bunch of insurance salesmen—and they didn’t have a clue. Good old boys.” The good old boys were wrong! Worse than wrong. One day in late 1996 the engineers looked up and realized that they were no longer even thinking about the Magic Diamond. They were doing nothing but talking to big companies about making it possible for their employees to handle all their health care problems over the Internet, rather than with the usual blizzard of paperwork. A worthy goal perhaps, but nothing so grand as the original ambition of taking over the $1.5 trillion health care industry. In short, they realized that the business was misguided. And when they realized this, they were angry. “At that point,” says Pavan. “We engineers took over the business.” 

 The engineers, who had always been content to act on instructions from the marketing department, did what they had never before done. They kicked the salesmen to one side—eventually they were all fired—and went out on the road to sell their software themselves. They were looking for the keys to the Magic Diamond. If they found one large and important customer, they figured, others would follow. Briefly, they believed they might be hired to sort out Fidelity’s health care plan, but that came to nothing. Fidelity would pay them $20 million to do this. Clark reappeared and told them that Netscape’s first contract, with MCI, had been for only $6 million: they were three times better than Netscape! 

 And then in March 1997 Fidelity announced it had decided not to fiddle around with new technology after all, and the engineers found themselves without anyone who wanted to buy what they had done. “We’d just given up our lives for six months,” says Stuart. “My wife was pissed at me. My daughter was crying because I never came home. We worked twenty-hour days. And then finally we deliver the product and it was like: What did we just do? We gave up so much…for this ? It was a total look-inward kind of thing. We were all pretty pissed. Pavan, Kittu and myself…we’d sit around having these nighttime meetings to discuss what to do, and we were all essentially yelling at one another. We’d all gotten into this fucking thing. We put our life into this fucking thing. We’d been led down a path. The period in 1996 was the most awful time in any of our lives. We knew we had created something very significant. It was just that we couldn’t sell it to anybody. And what did we know? Pavan and Kittu and I, we didn’t know shit. We just built what they told us to build. It was ITV all over again.” 

 Their main fear was the main fear of every new Silicon Valley company, mass exodus. These companies could not withstand pessimism, and now there was a lot of it at Healtheon. It got so bad that Pavan went to his white board and drew what he called a “loyalty matrix.” The first ten engineers he’d hired, he figured, were loyal to him. He called each and told them to find the people who were loyal to them, and persuade them not to quit. It only took a few people trickling out the door for the flood to begin. 

 It was the second time in a few years that a highly talented group of engineers had raced down a path Clark had put them on, and yet, oddly enough, they didn’t blame Clark. It did not even occur to them to blame Clark. Through it all they viewed Clark as their patron. Whenever the Healtheon board of directors convened, the venture capitalists streamed past the engineers without saying a word. Clark stopped and spent half the day talking to them about the software. Whenever the Healtheon board spoke of watering down the equity stakes that had been given to the engineers, Clark fought it. The engineers assumed that Clark was the only one in the place who stuck up for them. 

 Instead, they blamed David Schnell, the venture capitalist who had been installed by Kleiner Perkins as temporary CEO. They told Clark, as Clark later said, that “David occasionally left customers with the impression that the train was leaving the station, and if they didn’t get on now, they would be left behind.” (This can be useful for a customer to feel but it should never be explicitly said.) But, of course, Schnell was the problem! Schnell was a venture capitalist, and venture capitalists normally did not need to be polite to anyone, as people usually came to them on hands and knees to plead for money. And as a venture capitalist Schnell had the tendency, suddenly unfortunate, to make a few quick bucks rather than reshape the world in his image. He had pushed the engineers away from the Magic Diamond and toward this mundane little backwater called benefits administrations, where he thought they might make money immediately. And he didn’t even do this well. 

 What Clark and his engineers realized was that they needed a charismatic leader who could make the Magic Diamond real. What they needed was one of those guys with gray hair and soothing manners who could speak to the CEOs of large health care companies in their own language. One of those guys from mainstream corporate America who instantly, by his mere presence on the scene, made the implausible plausible. What they needed, in other words, was something Jim Clark alone could never provide. A Serious American Executive. 

 Until that moment of high despair in early 1997, it was never entirely clear why Clark had gone to the venture capitalists on Sand Hill Road in the first place. He didn’t need their money. He had more money than all of them combined. But he did, after all, need them: he needed them to translate his extraordinary ambition into the ordinary language understood by corporate America. The man who groped for the new new thing was in many ways ill suited for mainstream business. Clark knew that the time would come to put a smiley corporate face on his ferocious ambition. He knew, also, that he did not know how to do this. As one longtime Clark watcher put it, “Jim is smart enough to know when he shouldn’t trust himself.” In particular, Clark sensed that alone he was unlikely to entice a Serious American Executive into running his insanely ambitious company. The Serious American Executive would get one long whiff of ClarkWorld and run the other way. Premised as they were not on profits but on perceptions, these new Internet businesses were still all but unrecognizable to the Serious American Executive. A simple background check would reveal that, translated into business-speak, “Jim Clark” meant “Big Trouble.” 

