
WELCOME TO THE JUNGLE
I also learned the disadvantages of trading in this environment, as there
were too many people in the room expressing too many ideas and opinions. Essentially, it was a huge room full of ambitious and highly competitive alpha males. Some of the traders had egos that were out of control,
and couldn’t help but loudly express every mundane thought that rattled
around their skulls. Others would merely express anger and frustration;
the distinctive sound of a computer keyboard being smashed, along with
the odd tinkling sound of letter keys flying through the air, is etched into
my memory.
Jealousy reared its ugly head, as losing traders sought to distract and
disrupt the winners. One trader took particular glee in trying to break my
concentration, because he felt that my results were making him “look bad.”
If he had put as much effort into improving his own trading as he did into
disrupting mine, he might have succeeded. He later left the firm to take a
sales position.
Eventually, the market reached a point where the easy money had already been made. One by one, the marginal traders began to disappear. The
market environment was changing, and traders would have to adapt to the
changes or face failure.

FOOTBALL AND FOREX
One of the many benefits of living and working in New York City is exposure to people and cultures from around the world. One of the “new”

chap01

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

6

June 2, 2007

16:47

Char Count=

THE WORLD’S MOST DYNAMIC TRADING MARKET

concepts (at least it was new to me) to which I was exposed at this time
was the currency market.
It was shocking to learn that foreign exchange trading, or forex, was
tremendously popular in the rest of the world, and had been for many
years. For most of the world, the forex market, not the stock market, is the
market to trade. You could compare forex to football, which is the world’s
most popular sport—except in the United States, where it is considerably
less popular and is referred to as “soccer.” Here was a trading market that
enjoyed wide popularity overseas, yet at the time it was “off the radar” in
the United States.
A trader friend told me that he had decided to quit stock trading and instead switch to currencies, and that my style of trading would be perfectly
suited to this new endeavor. I laughed, not knowing that soon I would make
a similar move. Why on earth would I ever want to give up trading stocks?

STOCK MARKET HEADACHES
In life, there are certain unpleasantries with which we must learn to deal.
We have to go to school, pay our bills, watch our weight, and so on. We
accept these unpleasantries with thoughts such as “deal with it” or “that’s
life.” After a while, we no longer think of these things as a burden; instead,
they become the norm.
For equity traders, there are many unpleasant situations that are considered to be normal, just “part of the game.” Stock traders don’t think
twice about these situations, because they are an ingrained part of their
daily lives.

Partial Fills
For example, the “partial fill” is a normal occurrence in stock trading. A
partial fill occurs when a trader places an order for a certain number of
shares, let’s say for 2,000 shares of stock, and instead receives only a portion of the order, for example, 300 shares. This happens all the time; the
most logical explanation is that perhaps there were only 300 shares available at that particular price.
In trading terminology, we say that the market is too “thin” to absorb
the entire order, meaning that there are not enough shares available at that
price. This can be really frustrating, especially if the trader wants to enter
large orders, but it is something that equity traders accept as normal, just
another hurdle to overcome on the road to success.

chap01

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

Getting Started in Forex

June 2, 2007

16:47

Char Count=

7

The forex market, however, is highly liquid or “thick.” Partial fills are
extremely rare for all but the biggest traders.

Slippage
“Slippage” is another problem that stock and futures traders must deal with
every day. Slippage is defined as “the difference between estimated transaction costs and the amount actually paid.”
For example, suppose you purchased 1,000 shares of stock XYZ at a
price of $50 per share. In order to protect yourself in the event that the
price moves against you, you place a protective “stop” order (an order to
sell) at $49. So your worst-case scenario is that you’ll lose $1 per share,
which in this case equals $1,000, right?
Wrong. If the price falls below $49 without touching the exact price
of $49 (remember, stock markets are “thin” compared to forex), one of
two things will happen. Either your order will not be executed at all, or it
will be executed at a price in the vicinity of $49. Amazingly, the executed
price is almost always less favorable than the price you desired! Slippage
cuts into a trader’s profits and is a major headache for stock and futures
traders.
Slippage is rare in the currency market. Many forex market makers
have a “no slippage” policy, giving currency traders a greater degree of
price certainty.

The Specialist
Another hurdle to successful professional stock trading is the specialist.
The specialist is a single individual who literally controls all of the trading
activity of a listed stock. Early in my Wall Street career, I had an unforgettable trading experience that featured the specialist of a once high-flying
stock that has since crashed in disgrace and scandal.
One day while trading shares listed on the New York Stock Exchange,
I was long (meaning that I purchased shares in anticipation that the price
would rise) 4,000 shares of stock, and the price began to fall toward my
protective stop. Subsequently, the price reached my stop, and I took a small
loss on my 4,000 shares. Or so I thought. . . .
Imagine my surprise when I looked at the computer screen to see that
the stock was continuing its rapid descent, and I was still the unhappy
owner of 3,900 shares. This was the day I learned that the specialist has
the discretion to give a partial fill on a stop order.
Apparently, the specialist decided that the price was likely to continue
falling (bad news about the company had just hit the newswire, obviously

chap01

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

8

June 2, 2007

16:47

Char Count=

THE WORLD’S MOST DYNAMIC TRADING MARKET

not for the last time), so he or she only filled my order by the minimum
amount required (just 100 shares), leaving yours truly in a rather painful
position.
There are no specialists in the forex market.

The Spread
In the stock market, the specialist also controls the spread (the difference
between the buy and sell prices), and can widen or narrow the spread at his
or her discretion. Since the specialist is trading against you, he can make
your life miserable by widening the spread just as you are trying to exit a
profitable trade. Gee, thanks, Mr. Specialist!

In the forex market, the spread is often “fixed,” allowing the trader a
greater degree of certainty.

The “Uptick Rule”
Yet another frustrating roadblock to the success of equity traders is the
“uptick rule.” Stock traders can “go long” (place a trade that will become
profitable if the stock rises) whenever they wish, but in order to “sell short”
(place a trade that will become profitable if the stock falls), equity traders
must go through a series of machinations that can prove both maddening
and costly.
This rule requires that every short sale transaction be entered at a price
that is at least equal to, or higher than, the price of the previous trade. The
uptick rule prevents short sellers from adding to the downward momentum
when the price of a stock is already experiencing a sharp decline. The problem this presents for the trader is that an opportunity to sell a stock short
is often missed, because the stock was ticking down at the time, making it
ineligible for a short sale.
In order to circumvent this rule, professional equity traders use various hybrid instruments known as bullets, conversions, or married puts.
These instruments accomplish their intended task, but they are not always
available, and they are not free. There is a cost involved—one of many that
eats into the profits of equity traders.
There is no uptick rule in the forex market. You can buy or sell at will.
There is no need to purchase bullets, conversions, or married puts.

chap01

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

Getting Started in Forex

June 2, 2007

16:47

Char Count=

9

WELCOME TO FOREX
While these impediments make stock trading more difficult than many of
us would like, some good traders can and do overcome these hurdles. Yet
I often hear stock traders complaining about how the specialist ruined
their trade (in language that would scorch your ears), or how they’ve been
“slipped” out of their profits, or that they placed a perfect entry, only to
be foiled by a partial fill, or that they missed an opportunity to sell short
because of the uptick rule.
What if these hurdles didn’t exist? What if they were removed from the
playing field, so that traders could relax and stop worrying, and instead get
on with the business at hand? What if traders could just trade? What would
that be like?
I was about to find out. One day after the closing bell, I had a few drinks
with a trader friend who had quit the stock market to focus solely on the
forex market. The conversation went something like this:
“It’s called forex, short for foreign exchange. I just grab on to the
trend and ride it for all it’s worth.”
“Haven’t I seen that on TV? Something about green and red arrows?”
“Don’t be a rube. When was the last time you saw someone on a
trading floor looking at green and red arrows?”
“Okay, I get it. So what’s so special about forex?”
“Ed, you’ve got to try this market! It’s huge, it’s liquid, and it’s
open for business 24 hours per day. You’ve never seen anything like
it!”
“That’s what I’m afraid of. I’m pretty happy right now trading
stocks, so why would I want to switch to forex?”
“Because it’s liquid! I can always get in, I can always get out,
and I never get a partial fill.”
“You never get a partial fill? Yeah, right.”
“It hasn’t happened yet. And I haven’t been slipped yet either. My
fills are always at the exact price where I place the order.”
“You’re lying! Where are you trading, in Disneyland?”
“You have no concept of how liquid this market is. It hardly ever
gaps!”
“Okay, but how does it trade? Is it random, or does it trend?”
“That’s the best part! The trends go on and on!”
“Kind of like you?”
“Very funny. If you don’t believe me, open up a practice account
and see for yourself.”
“What are you talking about?”

chap01

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

10

June 2, 2007

16:47

Char Count=

THE WORLD’S MOST DYNAMIC TRADING MARKET

“They have these practice accounts. You can trade real time, on
their price feed, without any risk. It’s a great way to get a feel for
this market. It’s free!”
“So I go to their office and trade their practice account while they
try to sell me stuff, right? Sounds like a nightmare.”
“No, genius, you trade the practice account from your home. You
download it to your computer.”
“Hmmm. No more tantrums. No more chair throwing. No more
letter keys flying past my head while I try to decide if I should raise
my stop. Maybe I’ll give this market a shot.”

A NEW BEGINNING
And so the journey began. As much as I used to enjoy trading stocks, I
don’t miss the headaches. It took a while to get used to the “feel” of the
forex market, as it trades very differently from the way stocks trade. At
first, I tried to trade forex the same exact way that I traded stocks, and for
a few months I lost money. Once I adjusted to the different speed of the
forex market, things eventually fell into place. You see, individual stocks
move like jackrabbits—one moment they are standing still and the next
moment they are zigzagging and flying around.
The forex market is huge compared to the stock market, so it takes a
while longer for it to get moving. Once a currency pair does begin to move,
it can continue moving in one direction for an incredibly long time.
The good news was that much of what I already knew about stock
trading was transferable to the forex market. A chart was still a chart, and
a trend was still a trend. The important concepts of risk management that
I had learned from working on the equity desks in New York were still
applicable.
At first, trading the forex market felt like visiting a foreign country. I
was worried that it would feel as if I were visiting a distant planet. The
difference in the market’s reactions to economic news was startling. I was
coming from an environment where traders had mere split seconds to react
to news events. When trading stocks during a news release, if you don’t get
in right away, you are not likely to get in at all.
In the forex market, at first it almost seemed as if I had too much time
to react to news and events. I actually had time to think about what was
happening and to analyze the data. Better still, the forex market’s reactions to news events usually made sense. As a certifiable “news junkie,” it
seemed that I had found the perfect trading vehicle.
It was almost too good to be true. It was a strange new market, yet
something about it seemed so familiar. . . .

chap02

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

19:10

Char Count=

CHAPTER 2

All About Forex

I

f you’ve ever traveled outside of your home country, there’s a good
chance that you’ve already performed a currency transaction. In most
cases, travelers must exchange their “home” currency for the currency
of the country they are visiting. Please note that there are two currencies
involved in this transaction, but only one exchange rate.
For example, when a traveler from the United States crosses the border into Canada, he or she now must exchange U.S. dollars for Canadian
dollars. This traveler is essentially selling the U.S. dollar and buying the
Canadian dollar.

THE CANADIAN DOLLAR AND THE U.S. DOLLAR
In 2002, our traveler would have received about C$1.60 in Canadian currency for every U.S. dollar. We could say that the exchange rate at that
time for the U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar was about 1.60 Canadian dollars
per U.S. dollar. If we wanted to be precise, we could add several decimal
spaces, and express the exchange rate as 1.6000.
In the years that followed, the exchange rate changed dramatically,
and by 2006 it had fallen to 1.10. This meant that a traveler from the United
States to Canada in 2006 would only receive about C$1.10 in Canadian currency for every U.S. dollar exchanged.
If we wanted to measure very small changes in this exchange rate, it
could be expressed as 1.1000. We can safely say that the U.S. dollar depreciated significantly against the Canadian dollar during the early part of the
twenty-first century (see Figure 2.1).
11

chap02

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

12

May 31, 2007

19:10

Char Count=

THE WORLD’S MOST DYNAMIC TRADING MARKET

1.6500

Exchange rate 1.6000

1.6000
1.5500
1.5000
1.4500
1.4000

2002

2006 1.3500
1.3000
1.2500
1.2000

Exchange rate 1.1000

1.1500
1.1275
1.1000

FIGURE 2.1 U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar exchange rate tumbles from 2002
through 2006.
c 2001–2006 FXtrek.com, Inc.
Source: FXtrek IntelliChartTM . Copyright 

How does this affect our traveler? As the U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar
exchange rate fell, U.S. dollars bought fewer Canadian goods and services.
A U.S. citizen landing in Toronto used to enjoy receiving a thick wad of
cash from the airport’s currency exchange kiosk. Visitors from the United
States would spend freely, because goods and services seemed inexpensive
compared to the prices at home.
As the Canadian dollar gained strength against the U.S. dollar, all of
this changed. Eventually, the Canadian dollar approached parity to the U.S.
dollar.
While this had a negative impact on visitors from the United States,
Canadian travelers were pleased to find that U.S. goods and services were
now relatively cheap. As the U.S. dollar weakened, the comparative buying
power of the Canadian dollar grew.
U.S. citizens were now less likely to visit Canada. If they did, they were
likely to spend less than they would have in the past, when the exchange
rate was more favorable. Canadian travelers, however, were more likely
to visit the United States, since the Canadian currency bought more U.S.
goods and services than it had previously.

THE EURO AND THE U.S. DOLLAR
The rise of the euro created a similar situation. The euro made dramatic
gains against the U.S. dollar in 2002, 2003, and 2004, and during that time

chap02

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

19:10

Char Count=

13

All About Forex

1.4000

Exchange rate 1.3500

1.3500
1.2000
1.2875
1.2500
1.2000

2005 1.1500

2002

1.1000
1.0500
1.0000
0.0600

Exchange rate 0.8500

FIGURE 2.2 Euro/U.S. dollar exchange rate climbs from 2002 through 2005.
c 2001–2006 FXtrek.com, Inc.
Source: FXtrek IntelliChartTM . Copyright 

the value of the euro rose from about US$0.85 cents to above US$1.35
(see Figure 2.2). Due to this shift in exchange rates, U.S. citizens found
that vacationing in Europe became much more expensive, while persons
visiting the United States from Europe found that their buying power had
increased dramatically.
This resulted in a huge influx of shoppers from Europe visiting the
United States, especially around the Christmas holiday season. One European trader explained to me that it was less expensive for him to fly to
New York City, stay in a hotel, shop, and return home than it would be to
simply stay at home and shop.
While there can be no doubt that fortunes were made and lost on the
huge movements described above, we will see how even a tiny move in
exchange rates can result in substantial gains or losses. This is how forex
traders make money.

TRADING TERMINOLOGY
Traders have their own language. They use words that might confuse a
“newbie” or a nontrader. Trading lingo is almost a type of secret handshake
that lets other traders know that you’re a member of the club.
There is a method to the madness of trading terminology. Many of
these terms allow a trader to express a concise thought in one or two quick
syllables. In any discussion involving trading, you’ll often hear the terms
long, short, and flat. In fact, every trader is always long, short, or flat. What
do these terms mean?

chap02

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

14

May 31, 2007

19:10

Char Count=

THE WORLD’S MOST DYNAMIC TRADING MARKET

Going long. When a trader says he is “going long,” he is placing a trade
that will become profitable if the exchange rate rises.
Selling short. When a trader says he is “going short” or “selling short,” he
is placing a trade that will become profitable if the exchange rate falls.
Flat. When a trader says he is “flat,” he is neither long nor short. This trader
has no open positions in the market.
Why do traders use these terms? Why not just use the word buy instead
of long, and use the word sell instead of short?
The answer is simple when you consider that traders can make money
whether the exchange rate moves up or down. For example, suppose you
walk into my office and ask me what sort of trade I will be making today. I
tell you that I’m going to sell today.
Isn’t it true that the word sell could have two different meanings? Perhaps I’m going to sell a currency pair that I bought last week, in order
to take a profit. Or it could mean that I’m opening a short trade; in other
words, I’m selling a currency pair today in order to profit from an expected
drop in the exchange rate.
However, if you ask that same question of me and I answer, “I’m going
short,” there can be no confusion as to my meaning. If I’m selling short,
I am definitely going to make money if the exchange rate falls, and I’m
definitely going to lose money if the exchange rate rises. There can be no
doubt about it.
Suppose you ask me what I am planning to do today, and I tell you that
I plan to buy. Again, this word has two potential meanings. Perhaps I’m
going to buy because I think the exchange rate is going to rise. Or it could
be that I sold short last week, and the exchange rate has fallen. In order to
take a profit and “close” the trade, I have to buy back the currency pair that
I sold short last week. This is called “covering a short.”
If I do cover my short position, and I have no other open trades, I will
be “flat.” I will have no open positions in the market.
If I were to tell you, “I’m going long today,” this can have only one
meaning. It means that if the exchange rate rises, I’ll make a profit, and if
it falls, I’ll lose money. The use of these terms removes ambiguity because
they describe trading activity in precise terms.

What Is a Pip?
A pip is the smallest increment of price in the forex market. It is an
acronym for the phrase “percentage in point.” You might recall that in an
earlier example, the exchange rate for the U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar currency pair was 1.10, and we expanded that to 1.1000 for the sake of precise
measurement.

chap02

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

19:10

Char Count=

15

All About Forex

The reason why this is a more precise representation is that it allows
us to show the smallest possible increment of change in the exchange rate.
For example, suppose the exchange rate rises from 1.1000 to 1.1001. We
could say that the exchange rate rose by one pip—the smallest increment
of change possible.

The Major Currencies
Here is a list of some of the most actively traded currencies and their currency codes. Please note that this is a partial list, as there are many currencies traded in the world today:
EUR = euro
GBP = Great Britain pound
USD = U.S. dollar
JPY = Japanese yen
CHF = Swiss franc
CAD = Canadian dollar
AUD = Australian dollar
NZD = New Zealand dollar

Nicknames
Many of these currencies possess colorful nicknames. Traders love to use
slang, so you need to know these nicknames in order to understand what
they are saying. Here are some examples:
U.S. dollar
British pound
Euro
Swiss franc
Canadian dollar
Australian dollar
New Zealand dollar

“greenback” or “buck”
“cable” or “sterling”
“single currency”
“Swissy”
“loonie”
“Aussie”
“kiwi”
