trader even 20 years from now.
2. Learn as much as you can. Read and listen to experts, but keep a degree of
healthy skepticism about everything. Ask questions, and do not accept experts
at their word.
3. Do not get greedy and rush to trade—take your time to learn. The markets will
be there, offering more good opportunities in the months and years ahead.
4. Develop a method for analyzing the market—that is, “If A happens, then B is
likely to happen.” Markets have many dimensions—use several analytic methods
to confirm trades. Test everything on historical data and then in the markets,
using real money. Markets keep changing—you need different tools for trading
bull and bear markets and transitional periods as well as a method for telling the
difference (see the sections on technical analysis).
5. Develop a money management plan.Your first goal must be long-term survival;
your second goal, a steady growth of capital; and your third goal, making high
profits. Most traders put the third goal first and are unaware that goals 1 and
2 exist (see Section 9, “Risk Management”).
6. Be aware that a trader is the weakest link in any trading system. Go to a meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous to learn how to avoid losses or develop your own
method for cutting out impulsive trades.
7. Winners think, feel, and act differently than losers. You must look within yourself, strip away your illusions, and change your old ways of being, thinking, and
acting. Change is hard, but if you want to be a professional trader, you have to
work on changing and developing your personality.
In order to succeed, you need drive, knowledge, and discipline. Money is important, but less so than any of those qualities. If you have enough drive to work through
this book, you’ll acquire much knowledge, and then we’ll close the circle by returning to the topic of discipline in the final chapters.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

PA R T 2

Mass Psychology

W

all Street is named after a wall that kept farm animals from wandering away
from the settlement at the southern tip of Manhattan. The farming legacy
lives on in the language of traders. Four animals are mentioned especially often on
Wall Street: bulls and bears, hogs and sheep. Traders say: “Bulls make money, bears
make money, but hogs get slaughtered.”
A bull fights by striking up with his horns. A bull is a buyer—a person who bets on
a rally and profits from a rise in prices. A bear fights by striking down with his paws.
A bear is a seller—a person who bets on a decline and profits from a fall in prices.1
Hogs are greedy. Some of them buy or sell positions that are too large for their
accounts and get slaughtered by a small adverse move. Other hogs overstay their positions—they keep waiting for profits even after the trend reverses. Sheep are passive
and fearful followers of trends, tips, and gurus. They sometimes put on a bull’s horns
or a bearskin and try to swagger. You can recognize them by their pitiful bleating
when the market becomes volatile.
Whenever the market is open, bulls are buying, bears are selling, hogs and sheep
get trampled underfoot, and the undecided traders wait on the sidelines. Quote
screens around the world show a steady stream of the latest prices for any trading vehicle. Thousands of eyes are focused on each price as people make trading decisions.

1

There is plenty of room in the market for both, and occasionally even at the same time. It always
amuses me in SpikeTrade when two elite traders pick the same stock—one long and the other short.
Often by the end of the week both are profitable, proving that how you manage your trade is more
important than what stock and direction you pick.

31

32

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

■■11. What Is Price?
Traders can be divided into three groups: buyers, sellers, and undecided. Buyers
want to pay as little as possible, and sellers want to charge as much as possible.
Their permanent conflict is reflected in bid-ask spreads, discussed in the Introduction. “Ask” is what a seller asks for his merchandise. “Bid” is what a buyer offers for
that merchandise.
A buyer has a choice: to wait until prices come down or pay what the sellers
demand. A seller has a similar choice: wait until prices rise or accept a lower offer
for his merchandise.
A trade occurs when there is a momentary meeting of two minds: an eager bull
agrees to a seller’s terms and pays up, or an eager bear agrees to a buyer’s terms and
sells a little cheaper.
The presence of undecided traders puts pressure on bulls and bears. Buyers and
sellers move fast because they know that they’re surrounded by a crowd of undecided traders who may step in and snatch away their deal at any moment.
The buyer knows that if he thinks too long, another trader can step in and buy
ahead of him. A seller knows that if he tries to hold out for a higher price, another
trader may step in and sell at a lower price. The crowd of undecided traders makes
buyers and sellers more willing to deal with their opponents. A trade occurs when
there is a meeting of two minds.

A Consensus of Value
â•›
Each tick on your quote screen represents a deal between a buyer and a seller.
Buyers are buying because they expect prices to rise. Sellers are selling because
they expect prices to fall. Buyers and sellers are surrounded by crowds of undecided traders who put pressure on them because they may become buyers or sellers
themselves.
Buying by bulls pushes markets up, selling by bears pushes them down, and undecided traders make everything happen faster by creating a sense of urgency among
buyers and sellers.
Traders come to the markets from all over the world: in person, via computers,
or through their brokers. Everybody has a chance to buy and to sell. Each price is a
momentary consensus of value of all market participants, expressed in action. Prices are created by masses of traders—buyers, sellers, and undecided people. The patterns of
prices and volume reflect mass psychology of the markets.

Behavior Patterns
Huge crowds trade on stock, commodity, and option exchanges. Big money and
little money, smart money and dumb money, institutional money and private money, long-term investors and short-term traders, all meet at the exchange. Each
price represents a momentary consensus of value between buyers, sellers, and undecided
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

12. WHAT IS THE MARKET?

33

traders at the moment of transaction. There is a crowd of traders behind every pattern on the
screen.
Crowd consensus changes from moment to moment. Sometimes it gets established in a very low-key environment, and at other times the environment turns
wild. Prices move in small increments during quiet times. When a crowd becomes
either spooked or elated, prices begin to jump. Imagine bidding for a life preserver
aboard a sinking ship—that’s how prices leap when masses of traders become emotional about a trend. An astute trader aims to enter the market during quiet times
and take profits during wild times. That, of course, is the total opposite of how amateurs act: they jump in or out when prices begin to run, but grow bored and not
interested when prices are sleepy.
Chart patterns reflect swings of mass psychology in the financial markets. Each
trading session is a battle between bulls, who make money when prices rise, and
bears, who profit when they fall. The goal of a serious technical analyst is to discover
the balance of power between bulls and bears and bet on the winning group. If bulls
are much stronger, you should buy and hold. If bears are much stronger, you should
sell and sell short. If both camps are about equal in strength, a wise trader stands
aside. He lets bulls and bears fight with each other, and enters a trade only when he
is reasonably sure which side is likely to win.
Prices and volume, along with the indicators that track them, reflect crowd behavior.Technical analysis is similar to poll taking. Both combine science and art: They
are partly scientific because we use statistical methods and computers; they are partly
artistic because we use personal judgment and experience to interpret our findings.

■■12. What Is the Market?
What’s the reality behind market quotes, numbers, and graphs? When you check
prices in your newspaper, follow ticks on your screen, or plot an indicator on a
chart, what exactly are you looking at? What is this market that you want to analyze
and trade?
Amateurs act as if the market is a giant happening, a ball game in which they
can join the professionals and make money. Traders from a scientific or engineering
background often treat the market as a physical event and apply the principles of
signal processing, noise reduction, etc. By contrast, all professional traders know full
well that the market is a huge mass of people.
Every trader tries to take money from others by outguessing them on the probable direction of the market. The members of the market crowd live on different
continents, but are brought together by modern telecommunications in the pursuit
of profit at each other’s expense. The market is a huge crowd of people. Each member of the
crowd tries to take money from others by outsmarting them. The market is a uniquely harsh
environment because everyone is against you, and you are against everyone.
Not only is the market harsh, you have to pay whenever you enter and exit. You
have to jump over the barriers of commissions and slippage before you can collect a

34

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

dime. The moment you place an order, you owe your broker a commission—you’re
behind the game the moment you enter. Market makers try to hit you with slippage
when your order arrives for execution. They try to take another bite out of your
account when you exit. In trading, you compete against some of the brightest minds in the
world, while fending off the piranhas of commissions and slippage.

Worldwide Crowds
In the old days, markets were small, and many participants knew one another. The
New York Stock Exchange was formed in 1792 as a club of two dozen brokers. On
sunny days, they used to gather under a cottonwood tree, and on rainy days, they
moved to Fraunces Tavern. As soon as those brokers organized the New York Stock
Exchange, they stuck the public with fixed commissions, which lasted for the next
180 years.
These days, the few remaining floor traders are on the way out. Most of us
are linked to the market electronically. Still, as we watch the same quotes on our
screens and read the same articles in the financial media, we become members
of the market crowd—even if we live thousands of miles away from one another.
Thanks to modern telecommunications, the world is becoming smaller, while the
markets are growing. The euphoria of London flows to New York, and the gloom of
Tokyo infects Frankfurt.
When you analyze the market, you are looking at crowd behavior. Crowds behave
alike in different cultures on different continents. Social psychologists have uncovered several laws that govern crowd behavior, and a trader needs to understand them
in order to see how the market crowd influences him.

Groups, Not Individuals
Most people feel a strong urge to join the crowd and “act like everybody else.” â•›This
primitive urge clouds your judgment when you put on a trade. A successful trader
must think independently. He needs to be strong enough to analyze the market alone
and carry out his trading decisions.
Crowds are powerful enough to create trends. The crowd may not be too bright,
but it is stronger than any of us. Never buck a trend. If a trend is up, you should only
buy or stand aside. Never sell short just because “the prices are too high”—never
argue with the crowd. You do not have to run with the crowd—but you shouldn’t
run against it.
Respect the strength of the crowd—but don’t fear it. Crowds are powerful, but
primitive, their behavior simple and repetitive. A trader who thinks for himself can
take money from crowd members.

The Source of Money
Do you ever stop to wonder where your expected profits will come from? Is there
money in the markets because of higher company earnings, or lower interest rates,
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

12. WHAT IS THE MARKET?

35

or a good soybean crop? The only reason there is money in the markets is that other traders
put it there. The money you want to make belongs to other people who have no intention of
giving it to you.
Trading means trying to take money from other people, while they are trying to
take yours—that’s why it is such a hard business. Winning is especially difficult because brokers and floor traders take money from winners and losers alike.
Tim Slater compared trading to a medieval battle. A man used to go on a battlefield with his sword and try to kill his opponent, who was trying to kill him. The
winner took the loser’s weapons, his chattels, and his wife, and sold his children into
slavery. Now we go to the exchanges instead of an open field. When you take money
away from a man, it is not that different from drawing his blood. He may lose his
house, his chattels, and his wife, and his children will suffer.
An optimistic friend of mine once snickered that there are plenty of poorly prepared people on the battlefield: “Ninety to ninety-five percent of the brokers don’t
know the first thing about research. They don’t know what they’re doing. We have
the knowledge, and some poor people who do not have it are just giving their money away to charity.” â•›This theory sounds good, but he soon found out that it was
wrong—there is no easy money in the market.
Sure enough, there are plenty of dumb sheep waiting to be fleeced or slaughtered.
The sheep are easy—but if you want a piece of their meat, you’ve got to fight some
very dangerous competitors. There are mean professionals: American gunslingers,
English knights, German landsknechts, Japanese samurai, and other warriors, all
going after the same hapless sheep. Trading means battling crowds of hostile people,
while paying for the privilege of entering the battle and leaving it, whether alive,
wounded, or dead.

Inside Information
There is at least one group of people who get information before us. Records show
that corporate insiders as a group consistently make profits in the stock market. And
those are legitimate trades, reported by insiders to the Securities and Exchange Commission.They represent the tip of the iceberg—but there is a great deal of illegitimate
insider trading.
People who trade on inside information are stealing our money. The insider trials
have landed some of the more notorious insiders in prison. Convictions for insider
trading continue at a steady pace, especially after bull markets collapse. After the
2008 debacle, a group of executives from the Galleon fund, led by its CEO, have
been sentenced to lengthy jail terms, while a former board member of several leading U.S. corporations got two years behind bars, and recently a money manager from
SAC Capital was convicted.
People convicted during the insider trials were caught because they became
greedy and careless. The tip of the iceberg has been shaved down, but its bulk continues to float, ready to hit any account that comes in contact with it.
Trying to reduce insider trading is like trying to get rid of rats on a farm. Pesticides keep them under control, but do not root them out. A retired chief executive

36

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

of a publicly traded firm explained to me that a smart man does not trade on inside
information but gives it to his golfing buddies at a country club. Later they give him
inside information on their companies, and both profit without being detected. The
insider network is safe as long as its members follow the same code of conduct and
don’t get too greedy. Insider trading is legal in the futures markets, and until recently
it was legal for congressmen, senators, and their staff.
Charts reflect all trades by all market participants—including insiders. They leave
their footprints on the charts just like everyone else—and it is our job as technical
analysts to follow them to the bank. Technical analysis can help you detect insider
buying and selling.

■■13. The Trading Scene
Humans have traded since the dawn of history—it was safer to trade with your
neighbors than raid them. As society developed, money became the medium of
exchange. Stock and commodity markets are among the hallmarks of an advanced
society. One of the key economic developments in Eastern Europe following the
collapse of communism was the establishment of stock and commodity exchanges.
Today, stock, futures, and options markets span the globe. It took Marco Polo, a
medieval Italian merchant, 15 years to get from Italy to China and back. Now, when
a European trader wants to buy gold in Hong Kong, he can get his order filled in
seconds. There are hundreds of stock and futures exchanges around the world. All
exchanges must meet three criteria, first developed in the agoras of ancient Greece
and the medieval fairs of Western Europe: an established location, rules for grading
merchandise, and defined contract terms.

Individual Traders
Private traders usually come to the market after a successful career in business or in
the professions. An average private futures trader in the United States is a 50-yearold, married, college-educated man. The two largest occupational groups among
futures traders are farmers and engineers.
Most people trade for partly rational and partly irrational reasons. Rational reasons
include the desire to earn a large return on capital. Irrational reasons include gambling
and a search for excitement. Most traders are not aware of their irrational motives.
Learning to trade takes time, money, and work. Few individuals rise to the level
of professionals who can support themselves by trading. Professionals are extremely
serious about what they do. They satisfy their irrational goals outside the markets,
while amateurs act them out in the marketplace.
The major economic role of a trader is to support his broker—to help him pay
his mortgage bills and keep his children in private schools. In addition, the role of a
speculator is to help companies raise capital in the stock market and to assume price
risk in the commodities markets, allowing producers to focus on production. These
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

13. THE TRADING SCENE

37

lofty economic goals are far from a speculator’s mind when he places his orders to
buy or sell.

Institutional Traders
Institutions are responsible for a huge volume of trading, and their deep pockets give
them several advantages. They pay low institutional commissions. They can afford to
hire the best researchers and traders. A friend of mine who headed a trading desk at
a bank based some of his decisions on a service provided by a group of former CIA
officers. He got some of his best ideas from their reports, while the substantial annual fee was small potatoes for his firm compared to its huge trading volume. Most
private traders do not have such opportunities.
Some large firms have intelligence networks that enable them to act before the public. One day, when oil futures rallied in response to a fire on a platform in the North
Sea, I called a friend at an oil firm. The market was frantic, but he was happy, having
bought oil futures half an hour before they exploded. He got a telex from an agent in
the area of the fire before the reports appeared on the newswire.Timely information is
priceless, but only a large company can afford an intelligence network.
An acquaintance who traded successfully for a Wall Street investment bank felt
lost when he quit to trade for himself. He discovered that a real-time quote system
in his Park Avenue apartment didn’t give him news as fast as the squawk box on the
trading floor of his old firm. Brokers from around the country used to call him with
the latest ideas because they wanted his orders. “When you trade from your house,
you are never the first to hear the news,” he says.
The firms that deal in both futures and cash markets have two advantages. They
have true inside information, and they are exempt from speculative position limits
that exist in many futures markets. I went to visit an acquaintance at a multinational
oil company; after passing through security barriers tighter than at an airport, I
walked down a glass corridor that overlooked rooms where clusters of men huddled
around monitors trading oil products. When I asked my host whether his traders
were hedging or speculating, he looked me straight in the eye and said, “Yes.” I asked
again and received the same answer. Companies crisscross the thin line between
hedging and speculating, using inside information.
In addition to the informational advantage, employees of trading firms have a
psychological one—they can be more relaxed because their own money isn’t at risk.
When young people tell me of their interest in trading, I tell them to get a job with a
trading firm and learn on someone else’s dime. Firms almost never hire traders past
their mid-twenties.
How can an individual coming later to the game compete against institutions
and win?
The Achilles heel of most institutions is that they have to trade, while an individual
trader is free to trade or stay out of the market when he wants. Banks have to be
active in the bond market and grain producers have to be active in the grain market
at almost any price. An individual trader is free to wait for the best opportunities.

38

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

Most private traders fritter away this fantastic advantage by overtrading. An individual who wants to succeed against the giants must develop patience and eliminate
greed. Remember, your goal is to trade well, not to trade often.
Successful institutional traders receive raises and bonuses. Even a high bonus can
feel puny to someone who earns millions of dollars for his firm. Successful institutional traders often talk of quitting and going to trade for themselves. Very few of
them manage to make this transition.
Most traders who leave institutions get caught up in the emotions of fear, greed,
elation, and panic when they start risking their own money. They seldom do well
trading for their own accounts—another sign that psychology is at the root of trading success or failure. Few institutional traders realize to what a large extent they
owe their success to their trading managers, who control their risk levels. Going out
on your own means becoming your own manager—we’ll return to this in a later
chapter, when we focus on how to organize your trading.
