
But then, something really interesting and completely unanticipated happened before I got there. As I
got closer to fulfilling my five-mile objective, little by little, the conflicting thoughts began to dissipate.
Eventually they didn't exist at all. At that point, I found that if I wanted to run, I was completely free to
do so without any mental resistance, conflict, or competing thoughts. Given what a struggle it had been,
I was amazed (to say the least). The result: I went on to run on a very regular basis for the next 16
years. For those of you who may be interested, I don't run so much now because five years ago I
decided to start playing ice hockey again.
Hockey is an extremely strenuous sport. Sometimes I play as many as four times a week. Considering
my age (over u\j) and the level of exertion the sport requires, it usually takes me a day or two to
recover, which doesn't leave much room for running any more. Now, if you take these experiences and
put them into the context of what we now understand about the nature of beliefs, there are a number of
observations we can make:
1. Initially, my desire to be a runner had no foundation of support in my mental system. In other words,
there was no other source of energy (an energized concept demanding expression) consistent with my
desire.
2. I actually had to do something to create that support. To create a belief that "I am a runner" required
that I create a series of experiences consistent with the new belief. Remember that everything we think,
say, or do contributes energy to some belief in our mental system. Each time I experienced a
conflicting thought and was able to successfully refocus on my objective, with enough conviction to get
me into my running shoes and out the door, I added energy to the belief that "I am a runner." And, just
as important, I inadvertently drew energy away from all of the beliefs that would argue otherwise. I say
inadvertently because there are various techniques specifically designed to identify and de-activate
conflicting beliefs, but at that time in my life, I didn't understand the underlying dynamics of the
process of transformation I was going through. So, it wouldn't have occurred to me to avail myself of
such techniques.
3. Now I can effortlessly (from a mental perspective) express myself as a runner, because "I am a
runner." That energized concept is now a functioning part of my identity. When I first started out, I
happened to have a number of conflicting beliefs about running. As a result, I needed the technique of
self-discipline to bfCCITic One. Now I don't need self-discipline because "bHn" a. rj^iicr" 'c "who I L ~o am." When our bfeliers are completely aligned with our goals or desires, there's no source of
conflicting energy. If there's no source of conflicting energy, then there's no source of distracting
thoughts, excuses, rationalizations, justifications, or mistakes (conscious or subconscious).
4. Beliefs can be changed, and if it's possible to change one belief, then it's possible to change any
belief, if you understand that you really aren't changing them, but are only transferring energy from one
concept to another. (The form of the belief targeted for change remains intact.) Therefore, two
completely contradictory beliefs can exist in your mental system, side by side. But if you've drawn the

energy out of one belief and completely energized the other, no contradiction exists from a functional
perspective; only the belief that the energy will have the capacity to act as a force on your state of
mind, on your perception and interpretation of information, and your behavior. Now, the sole purpose
of trading mechanically is to transform yourself into a consistently successful trader. If there's anything
in your mental environment that's in conflict with the principles of creating the belief that "I am a
consistently successful trader," then you will need to employ the technique of self-discipline to
integrate these principles as a dominant, functioning part of your identity. Once the principles become
"who you are," you will no longer need self-discipline, because the process of "being consistent" will
become effortless. Remember that consistency is not the same as the ability to put on a winning trade,
or even a string of winning trades for that matter, because putting on a winning trade requires
absolutely no skill. All you have to do is guess correctly, which is no different than guessing the
outcome of a coin toss, whereas consistency is a state of mind that, once achieved, won't allow you to
"be" any other way. You won't have to try to be consistent because it will be a natural function of your
identity. In fact, if you have to try, it's an indication that you haven't completely integrated the
principles of consistent success as dominant, unconflicted beliefs. For example, predefining your risk is
a step in the process of "being consistent." If it takes any special effort to predefine your risk, if you
have to consciously remind yourself to do it, if you experience any conflicting thoughts (in essence,
trying to talk you out of doing it), or if you find yourself in a trade where you haven't predefined your
risk, then this principle is not a dominant, functioning part of your identity. It isn't "who you are." If it
were, it wouldn't even occur to you not to predefine your risk. If and when all of the sources of conflict
have been de-activated, there's no longer a potential for you to "be" any other way. What was once a
struggle will become virtually effortless. At that point, it may seem to other people that you are so
disciplined (because you can do something they find difficult, if not impossible), but the reality is that
you aren't being disciplined at all; you are simply functioning from a different set of beliefs that compel
you to behave in a way that is consistent with your desires, goals, or objectives.
CREATING A BELIEF IN CONSISTENCY
Creating a belief that "I am a consistent winner" is the primary objective, but like my intention to
become a runner, it's too broad and abstract to implement without breaking it down into a step-by-step
process. So what I'm going to do is break this belief down into its smallest definable parts and then give
you a plan to integrate each part as a dominant belief. The following sub-beliefs are the building
Thinking Like a Trader 185 blocks that provide the underlying structure for what it means "to be a
consistent winner."

I AM A CONSISTENT WINNER BECAUSE:
1. I objectively identify my edges.
2. I predefine the risk of every trade.
3. I completely accept risk or I am willing to let go of the trade.
4. I act on my edges without reservation or hesitation.
5. I pay myself as the market makes money available to me.
6. I continually monitor my susceptibility for making errors.
7. I understand the absolute necessity of these principles of consistent success and, therefore, I
never violate them.
These beliefs are the seven principles of consistency. To integrate these principles into your mental
system at a functional level requires that you purposely create a series of experiences that are consistent
with them. This is no different from the boy who wanted to play with dogs or my desire to be a runner.
Before he could play with a dog, the boy first had to make several attempts just to get close to one.
Eventually, as the balance of energy in his mental system shifted, he could play with dogs without any
internal resistance. To become a runner, I had to create the experience of running in spite of everything
inside me that argued otherwise. Eventually, as the energy shifted more and more in favor of this new
definition of myself, running became a natural expression of my identity.
Obviously, what we're trying to accomplish here is far more complex than becoming a runner or petting
a dog, but the underlying dynamics of the process are identical. We'll start with a specific objective.
The first principle of consistency is the belief, "I objectively identify my edges." The key word here is
objectively. Being objective means there's no potential to define, interpret, and therefore perceive any
market information from either a painful or euphoric perspective.
The way to be objective is to operate out of beliefs that keep your expectations neutral and to always
take the unknown forces into consideration. Remember, you have to specifically train your mind to be
objective and to stay focused in the "now moment opportunity flow." Our minds are not naturally wired
to think this way, so to be an objective observer you have to learn to think from the market's
perspective. From the market's perspective, there are always unknown forces (traders) waiting to act on
price movement. Therefore, from the market's perspective, "every moment is truly unique," even
though the moment may look, sound, or feel exactly the same as some moment logged away in your
memory bank.
The instant you either decide or assume you know what's going to happen next, you will automatically
expect to be right. However, what you know, at least at the rational level of thinking, can only take into
consideration your unique past, which may not have any relationship to what is actually happening
from the markets perspective. At that point, any market information that is not consistent with your
expectation has the potential to be defined and interpreted as painful. To avoid experiencing the pain,

your mind will automatically compensate, with both conscious and subconscious pain-avoidance
mechanisms, for any differences between what you expect and what the market is offering. What you
will experience is commonly referred to as an "illusion." In a state of illusion, you are neither objective
nor connected to the "now moment opportunity flow."
Instead, you become susceptible to committing all the typical trading errors (hesitating, jumping the
gun, not predefining your risk, defining your risk but refusing to take the loss and letting the trade turn
into a bigger loser, getting out of a winning trade too soon, not taking any profits out of a winning
trade, letting a winning trade turn into a loser, moving a stop closer to your entry point, getting stopped
out and watching the market trade back in your favor, or trading too large a position in relationship to
your equity). The five fundamental truths about the market will keep your expectations neutral, focus
your mind in the "now moment opportunity flow" (by disassociating die present moment from your
past), and, therefore, eliminate your potential to commit these errors. When you stop making trading
errors, you'll begin trusting yourself. As your sense of self-trust increases, so will your sense of
selfconfidence. The greater your confidence, the easier it will be to execute your trades (act on your
edges without reservation or hesitation).
The five truths will also create a state of mind in which you will genuinely accept the risks of trading.
When you genuinely accept the risks, you will be at peace with any outcome. When you're at peace
with any outcome, you will experience a carefree, objective state of mind, where you make yourself
available to perceive and act upon whatever the market is offering you (from its perspective) at any
given "now moment." The first objective is to integrate as a dominant belief, "I objectively identify my
edges." The challenge now is, how do you get there? How do you transform yourself into a person who
can consistently think in the market's perspective? The process of transformation starts with your desire
and your willingness to refocus on the object of your desire (self-discipline). Desire is a force. It does
not have to coincide or agree with anything that you currently believe to be true about the nature of
trading.
A clear desire aimed squarely at a specific objective is a very powerful tool. You can use the force of
your desire to create an entirely new version or dimension to your identity; shift energy between two or
more conflicting concepts; or change the context or polarity of your memories from negative to
positive. I'm sure you are familiar with the saying, "Make up your mind." The implication of "making
up our minds" is that we decide exactly what we desire with so much clarity (absolutely no lingering
doubts) and with so much conviction that literally nothing stands in our way, either internally or
externally. If there's enough force behind our resolve, it's possible to experience a major shift in our
mental structure virtually instantaneously.
De-activating internal conflicts is not a function of time; it's a function-focused desire (although it can
take a considerable amount of time to get to the point where we really make up our minds). Otherwise,
in the absence of extreme clarity and conviction, the technique of self-discipline, over time, will do the
job quite nicely (if, of course, you're willing to use it). To get there, you must "make up your mind,"

with as much conviction and clarity as possible, that more than anything else you desire consistency
(the state of mind of trust, confidence, and objectivity) from your trading. This is necessary because if
you're like most traders, you're going to be up against some very formidable conflicting forces. For
example, if you've been trading to get high from the euphoria of catching a big move, to impress your
family and friends, to be a hero, to fulfill an addiction to random rewards, to be right about your
predictions, or for any other reason that has nothing to do with being consistent, then you'll find the
force of these other motivations will not only act as an obstacle making the trading exercise I'm about
to give you veiy difficult, but it could very well be strong enough even to keep you from doing the
exercise at all. Remember the boy who had no desire to be like the other children and interact with
dogs? In essence, he decided to live with the active contradiction between his minimally charged
positive belief that not all dogs are dangerous and his core, negatively charged belief that all dogs are
dangerous. He had the ability to perceive friendly dogs, but at the same time found it impossible to
interact with them. Unless he desires to change it, the imbalance of energy between these two beliefs
will stay exactly as it is for his entire life.
To even start this process, you have to want consistency so much that you would be willing to give up
all the other reasons, motivations, or agendas you have for trading that aren't consistent with the
process of integrating the beliefs that create consistency. A clear, intense desire is an absolute
prerequisite if you're going to make this process work for you.
EXERCISE: LEARNING TO TRADE AND EDGE LIKE A CASINO’
The object of this exercise is to convince yourself that trading is just a simple game of probabilities
(numbers), not much different from pulling the handle of a slot machine. At the micro level, the
outcomes to individual edges are independent occurrences and random in relationship to one another.
At the macro level, the outcomes over a series of trades will produce consistent results. From a
probabilities perspective, this means that instead of being the person playing the slot machine, as a
trader, you can be the casino, if:
1. you have an edge that genuinely puts the odds of success in your favor;
2. you can think about trading in the appropriate manner (the five fundamental truths); and
3. you can do everything you need to do over a series of trades. Then, like the casinos, you will own the
game and be a consistent winner.

SETTING UP THE EXERCISE
Pick a market.
Choose one actively traded stock or futures contract to trade. It doesn't matter what it is, as long as it's
liquid and you can afford the margin requirements for trading at least three hundred shares or three
futures contracts per trade.
Choose a set of market variables that define an edge. This can be any trading system you want. The
trading system or methodology you choose can be mathematical, mechanical, or visual (based on
patterns in price charts). It doesn't matter whether you personally design the system or purchase it from
someone else, nor do you need to take a long time or be too picky trying to find or develop the best or
right system. This exercise is not about system development and it is not a test of your analytical
abilities. In fact, the variables you choose can even be considered mediocre by most traders' standards,
because what you are going to learn from doing this exercise is not dependent upon whether you
actually make money.
If you consider this exercise an educational expense, it will cut down on the amount of time and effort
you might otherwise expend trying to find the most profitable edges. For those of you who might be
wondering, I'm not going to make any specific recommendations about what system or variables you
should use, because I assume that most of the people reading this book are already well schooled in
technical analysis. If you need additional assistance, there are hundreds of books available on the topic,
as well as system vendors who are more than willing to sell you their ideas. However, if you've made a
genuine attempt to do this on your own but are still having problems picking a system, you can contact
me at markdouglas.com or tradinginthezone.com and I will make some recommendations. Whatever
system you choose to use has to fit within the following specifications.
Trade Entry. The variables you use to define your edge have to be absolutely precise. The system has
to be designed so that it does not require you to make any subjective decisions or judgments about
whether your edge is present. If the market is aligned in a way that conforms with the rigid variables of
your system, then you have a trade; if not, then you don't have a trade. Period! No other extraneous or
random factors can enter into the equation.
Stop-Loss Exit. The same conditions apply to getting out of a trade that's not working. Your
methodology has to tell you exactly how much you need to risk to find out if the trade is going to work.
There is always an optimum point at which the possibility of a trade not working is so diminished,
especially in relationship to the profit potential, that you're better off taking your loss and getting your
mind clear to act on the next edge. Let the market structure determine where this optimum point is,
rather than using an arbitrary dollar amount that you are willing to risk on a trade. In any case,
whatever system you choose, it has to be absolutely exact, requiring no subjective decision making.

Again, no extraneous or random variables can enter into the equation.
Time Frame. Your trading methodology can be in any time frame that suits you, but all your entry and
exit signals have to be DUSCCi Hi cne same time frame. For example, if you use variables that identify
a particular support and resistance pattern on a 30-minute bar chart, then your risk and profit objective
calculations also have to be determined in a 30-minute time frame. However, trading in one time frame
does not preclude you from using other time frames as filters. For example, you could have as a filter a
rule that states you're only going to take trades that are in the direction of the major trend. There's an
old trading axiom that "The trend is your friend." It means that you have a higher probability of success
when you trade in the direction of the major trend, if there is one. In fact, the lowest-risk trade, with the
highest probability of success, occurs when you are buying dips (support) in an up-trending market or
selling rallies (resistance) in a down-trending market. To illustrate how this rule works, let's say that
you've chosen a precise way of identifying support and resistance patterns in a 30- minute time frame
as your edge. The rule is that you are only going to take trades in the direction of the major trend. A
trending market is defined as a series of higher highs and higher lows for an up-trending market and a
series of lower highs and lower lows for a downtrending market. The longer the time frame, the more
significant the trend, so a trending market on a daily bar chart is more significant than a trending
market on a 30-minute bar chart. Therefore, the trend on the daily bar chart would take precedence over
the trend on the 30-minute bar chart and would be considered the major trend.
To determine the direction of the major trend, look at what is happening on a daily bar chart. If the
trend is up on the daily, you are only going to look for a sell-off or retracement down to what your edge
defines as support on the 30-minute chart. That's where you will become a buyer. On the other hand, if
the trend is down on the daily, you are only going to look for a rally up to what your edge defines as a
resistance level to be a seller on the 30-minute chart. Your objective is to determine, in a downtrending market, how far it can rally on an intraday basis and still not violate the symmetry of the
longer trend. In an up-trending market, your objective is to determine how far it can sell off on an
intraday basis without violating the symmetry of the longer trend. There's usually very little risk
associated with these intraday support and resistance points, because you don't have to let the market
go very far beyond them to tell you the trade isn't working.
Taking Profits. Believe it or not, of all the skills one needs to learn to be a consistently successful
trader, learning to take profits is probably the most difficult to master. A multitude of personal, often
very complicated psychological factors, as well as the effectiveness of one's market analysis, enter into
the equation. Unfortunately, sorting out this complex matrix of issues goes way beyond the scope of
this book. I point this out so that those of you who might be inclined to beat yourselves up for leaving
money on the table can relax and give yourselves a break. Even after you've acquired all the other
skills, it might take a very long time before you get this one down pat. Don't despair. There is a way to

set up a profit-taking regime that at least fulfills the objective of the fifth principle of consistency ("I
pay myself as the market makes money available to me").
If you're going to establish a belief in yourself that you're a consistent winner, then you will have to
create experiences that correspond with that belief. Because the object of the belief is winning
consistently, how you take profits in a winning trade is of paramount importance. This is the only part
of the exercise in which you will have some degree of discretion about what you do. The underlying
premise is that, in a winning trade, you never know how far the market is going to go in your direction.
Markets rarely go straight up or straight down. (Many of the NASDAQ Internet stocks in the fall of
1999 were an obvious exception to this statement.) Typically, markets go up and then retrace some
