
Summary of Risk and Money Management Procedures
The procedures described above are easily reducible to simple formulas, even for the
mathophobic.
Trade size is the basic unit for controlling risk. Regardless of volatility, 500
shares of anything is riskier than 100 shares.
To determine trade size, take the difference between the entry price and the stop
price, giving Dollar Risk 1 ($R1). Take the Risk Control Factor, the percentage of
total capital to be ventured on the trade, and multiply times Total Capital — e.g.,
3% times TC of $100,000, giving Risk-per-Trade. Divide Dollar Risk 1 by Risk-pertrade to determine Trade Size.
EP − SP = $R1
RCF × TC = RpT
$R1 RpT = TS
where
TS = Trade Size
EP = Entry Price
SP = Stop Price
$R1 = Dollar Risk 1
RCF = Risk Control Factor
TC = Total Capital
RpT = Risk-per Trade
Daily, measure Operational Risk as described above. Divide Operational Risk
by Total Capital to determine Portfolio Operational Risk Factor. If this factor is too
high, look for hedges or positions to eliminate, starting, of course, with those which
are underwater.
Recompute stops frequently (daily for a trader) raising them according to the
Basing Points Procedure. Or Support and Resistance, or Trendlines. Or a money
management stop may be employed, where the trader says, for instance, that no
more than 8% from the market price will be risked. And this 8% must represent no
more than x% of total capital. Money management stops, it should be noted, are
inherently less dynamic than technically placed stops.
As the markets proceed inevitably through their phases, track their internal
composition with the Magee Evaluative Index, and as positions are naturally terminated, put on new positions in accord with the general long/short strength
readings of the MEI. Remember that exceptionally high MEI readings coincide with

AU3772_book.fm Page 608 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

608

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

broad market tops, and exceptionally low MEI readings coincide with broad market
bottoms.
Professional risk managers compute daily the Extraordinary Risk potential in
the markets using the procedure described above to constrain traders under their
authority from overexposure. In fact, panics and crashes rarely occur out of the blue.
There is almost always a prepanic phase which the truly alert trader can identify,
especially with the aid of a computer. These are marked by insider and professional
selling which creates increasing volume with Reversal Days occurring in many
stocks and Gaps and Runaway down days. Almost always these conditions will be
preceded by many top formations among key stocks — double and triple tops and
heads and shoulders and v-tops.
Eternal vigilance is the cost of freedom. It is also the cost of investing success.

AU3772_book.fm Page 609 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter forty-three

Stick to Your Guns
It has often been pointed out that any of several different plans of operation,
if followed consistently over a period of years, would have produced consistently a net gain on market operations. The methods we have discussed
in this book (representing the technical approach) are a case in point.
The fact is, however, that many traders, not having set up a basic strategy
and having no sound philosophy of what the market is doing and why, are
at the mercy of every Panic, boom, rumor, tip, in fact, of every wind that
blows. And since the market, by its very nature, is a meeting place of conflicting and competing forces, they are constantly torn by worry, uncertainty,
and doubt. As a result, they often drop their good holdings for a loss on a
sudden dip or shakeout; they can be scared out of their short commitments
by a wave of optimistic news; they spend their days picking up gossip,
passing on rumors, trying to confirm their beliefs or alleviate their fears; and
they spend their nights weighing and balancing, checking and questioning,
in a welter of bright hopes and dark fears.
Furthermore, a trader of this type is in continual danger of getting caught
in a situation that might be truly ruinous. Since he has no fixed guides or
danger points to tell him when a commitment has gone bad and it is time
to get out with a small loss, he is prone to let stocks run entirely past the
red light, hoping that the adverse move will soon be over, and that there
will be a “chance to get out even,” a chance that often never comes. And,
even should stocks be moving in the right direction and showing him a
profit, he is not in a much happier position, since he has no guide as to the
point at which to take these profits. The result is he is likely to get out too
soon and lose most of his possible gain, or overstay the market and lose part
or all of the expected profits.
If you have followed the preceding chapters carefully, you will have
realized that none of the technical formations and signals is certain and
unfailing. The chart action of a stock discounts and records all presently known
information about that stock (which includes all matters of dividends
declared or expected, split-ups, and mergers that are known to be planned,
political angles as they affect the market, world affairs, management, earning
records, etc.). The chart does not and cannot forecast unforeseeable events,
matters that are completely unknown to anybody. In a majority of cases, the
charts are dependable. If you are not satisfied that this is true, you should
study further, or else plan not to use charts at all.
609

AU3772_book.fm Page 610 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

610

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

On the other hand, if you have satisfied yourself that the charts are, for
you, the most dependable indication of the probable future course of stock
prices, then you should follow explicitly the signals given on your charts,
either according to the rules we suggest here, or according to such other
rules and modifications as your experience dictates. But while you are following any set of rules and policies, follow them to the letter. It is the only
way they can help you.
If you do this, you will have certain large advantages, right at the start:
(1) you will never be caught in a situation where a single stock commitment
can wipe out your entire capital and ruin you; (2) you will not find yourself
frozen in a market that has turned against you badly, with a large accumulated loss and your capital tied up, so that you cannot use it in the reversed
trend to make new and potentially profitable commitments; and (3) you can
make your decisions calmly, knowing exactly what you will be looking for
as a signal to take profits, and knowing also that your losses, at the very
worst, will be limited to a certain definite amount.
All of this means that you will have peace of mind. You will take losses
and you will make gains. In neither case will you have to take your notebooks
home and lie awake worrying. You will have made certain decisions. If
developments prove you were right, you will, at the proper point, take your
profit. And if it turns out that you were wrong, then you can take your
comparatively small loss, and start looking for a better situation, with your
capital still largely intact, liquid, and available.
Your job, as a speculator, is to provide liquidity in the market, and to
counteract the irrational excesses of market-in-motion. Part of that job is to
keep yourself free to become liquid whenever it is necessary, in order to
reverse your position. And to keep yourself free from irrational and excessive
emotional actions. If you do this intelligently and consistently, you will be
performing a useful and necessary service to the general economic welfare,
and you will find that the market offers as good or better returns for your
efforts as any other line of endeavor.
EN9: With the 9th Edition I expect the reader will have some powerful new guns to
stick to: the Turtle trading manual (which has applications to stocks, as Robert Colby
has shown); new lessons in Basing Points which show what a powerful procedure
it can be; new analyses of Dow Theory which refresh and reinforce the validity and
persuasiveness not just of the Theory but of long-term investing as such. Good
trading and stick to all your guns!

AU3772_book.fm Page 611 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

appendix A
Chapter A
(Magee’s Original Chapter 24 from the Seventh Edition)
The Probable Moves of Your Stocks
At first glance, all stocks appear to move helter-skelter without rhyme or
reason, all over the lot. All stocks go up at times, and all go down at times —
not always at the same time. But we already have seen that in these rises
and falls, stocks do follow trends, make various typical patterns, and behave
in a not completely disorderly manner.
It is also true that each stock has its own habits and characteristics, which
are more or less stable from year to year. Certain stocks normally respond
to a Bullish Phase of the market with a very large upsurge, while others,
perhaps in the same price class, will make only moderate moves. You will
find that the same stocks which make wide upward swings are also the ones
which make large declines in Bear Markets, whereas the ones that make less
spectacular up-moves are more resistant to downside breaks in the market.
In Appendix A, Chapter B you will find in a discussion of Composite Leverage that there are stocks which ordinarily move many, many times as fast
as others. We do not know, for example, whether a year from now Glenn
Martin (EN: Read, Microsoft) will be moving up or down, but we do know,
and it is one of the most dependable things we know, that whichever way
it is going, it will be covering ground much faster than American Telephone
and Telegraph. These differences of habit, of course, are due to the size of
issue, floating supply, nature of business, and leverage in the capital structure, matters we have touched on briefly before. As a matter of fact, we are
not especially concerned with why the differences exist. We are interested
mainly in what the differences are, and how we can determine them.
This is important: stocks which habitually move in a narrow range,
although excellent for investment purposes where stability and income are
the chief desiderata, are not good trading stocks. A fairly high degree of
sensitivity (EN: volatility), with wide percentage moves, is necessary in order
to make possible profitable commitments that will cover costs and leave a
net gain. In order to be in a position to make a profit, you should see the
probability of at least a 15% move in your stock.
How then are you going to tell which stocks are most sensitive and
potentially most profitable?

611

AU3772_book.fm Page 612 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

612

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

By examining the record of a certain stock for a number of years back,
and comparing the percentage moves it has made with the percentage moves
of the market as a whole, you can obtain a fair picture of that stock’s habits.
You will not be able to say, at any particular moment, “This stock is now
going to move up 25%,” but you can say, with a good deal of confidence,
“If the market as a whole makes an advance of 10%, this stock will probably
advance about 25%.” Or, conversely, of course, “If the market goes down
10%, this stock will very likely go down at least 25%.”
Many methods have been used for measuring and checking these percentage-move habits, differing only in detail. Indexes on several hundred
important stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange have been computed by the authors and are presented in Appendix A, Chapter D, Sensitivity Indexes.
EN: Current day betas may be compared with these and/or substituted for them
in other computations suggested in this book, for example in Composite Leverage
formulas. The reader may read in the following text “beta” for “Sensitivity Index”
and avoid the annoyance of excessive notation by the editor.
The Indexes are relative. They show that stocks with a high Sensitivity
Index (EN: beta) will move much faster in either Bull Markets or Bear Markets
than stocks with low Indexes, and about how much faster, relative to the
other stocks.
(EN9: The general investor who in the 21st century operates with a computer
and the Internet will not find the following necessary reading.) In order to compute
the Sensitivity Indexes, the range of each stock from high closing to low
closing, each sheet of the chart is marked with a dotted blue (top) and red
(bottom) line in the left-hand margin of the next chart sheet for that particular
stock. At the end of each series of chart sheets, this price range for each stock
in the period covered by the chart sheet just finished is measured from top
(blue) line to red (bottom) line, and these ranges, expressed in eighths of an
inch, are added together and divided by the total number of stocks charted.
This gives you an average range for the period, representing the composite
or average movement of the entire group of stocks. An arbitrary “normal”
average range is permanently selected (on the basis of the average range for
a number of series of charts for several years),* and as each series of new
charts is completed, this “normal” average range is divided by the average
range for the new series, to arrive at a decimal fraction which represents the
reciprocal of that market movement for the period. (Thus, a period of wide
market activity would show a small decimal less than 1, such as 0.65, whereas
a period of dull and inactive markets would result in a larger figure, such
as 1.49.) We will call this (just to give it a handy name for future reference)
the Market Reciprocal for this period or series of charts.

* Theoretically, the “normal” average range should be adjusted continuously at the close of
each period. Practically, there is no need for such refinement.

AU3772_book.fm Page 613 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Appendix A

613

Now the price range, expressed in eighths of an inch, for each stock in
turn, is divided by the range corresponding to the “normal” or average range
for a stock at that price (see Range-for-Price table, Appendix A, Chapter C),
and this fraction is multiplied by the Market Reciprocal. The resulting figure
is the fractional Sensitivity Index covering the action of this particular stock
for this particular market period. In order to obtain the overall or long-term
Sensitivity Index for a stock, we simply add the fractional indexes for each
period together and divide by the number of periods. As new chart sheets
are completed, we add the new fractions and compute the new index. A
single fractional index is, as you might expect, unreliable and rather meaningless as regards the future. The second, third, and fourth series fractions
will revise and “smooth” the Index. As time goes on and new series are
added, these Sensitivity Indexes will settle down to fairly constant figures;
corrections, if any, will be slight as new series are added. And these Indexes
are very reliable in forecasting the probable future sensitivity of each stock.
The measuring of price ranges in eighths of an inch, in order to get
figures representing percentage moves, implies of course that you are using
a ratio chart paper. With other types of paper, you would have to compute
the percentage price range for each period from the high and low closing
prices on your charts.
We have outlined this method in some detail so that you can, if you
wish, compute your own Sensitivity Indexes. EN: As previously mentioned, the
modern reader will probably wish to obtain betas, if interested, from sources documented in Resources (Appendix D). It is not necessary that your stocks all be
from the New York Stock Exchange. Using this method, you can include
others from other exchanges, averaging them all together and treating your
entire portfolio as a group in determining your Market Reciprocals.
You will find that sensitivity runs from over 2.00 (which we would speak
of as 200%) in the case of highly speculative issues, down to 0.20 (20%, that
is) or less on ultraconservative investment stocks. Roughly, you may consider
that stocks with a Sensitivity Index of 50% or less are extremely conservative,
50% to 100% moderately conservative, 100% to 150% speculative, and anything over 150% highly speculative.

Chapter B
(Magee’s original Chapter 42 in the Seventh Edition)
A Discussion of Composite Leverage
EN: The general reader may expect more than a little difficulty in comprehending
this chapter. The editor has kindly supplied some comments as an endnote, which
will aid those interested in Magee’s thinking. As the chapter predates much work
in risk analysis and portfolio management theory, I have left it “as is.” In concept,
it certainly has more than historical value and can in fact be used by the manual
chart-keeping investor. The concern of the chapter, namely measuring portfolio risk,
is addressed for the computerized investor in Chapter 42.

AU3772_book.fm Page 614 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

614

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

As we suggested in the preceding chapter, there is some relation between
the state or stage of a Major Market and its potentialities for profit. There
are many mechanical plans and systems for coping with the problem, but
we do not believe it can be fully solved by mechanical means alone. We
mentioned one plan by which the commitments were governed according
to the consensus of trends in an entire portfolio of charts. (EN: The Magee
Evaluative Index.) There are other plans which depend on pyramiding the
commitment as the trend proceeds; and still others which are based on
averaging costs by increasing the commitment working against the trend,
that is, by buying on a scale-down at progressively lower levels in a Bear
Market, and selling on a scale-up in Bull Markets.
None of the plans, taken by themselves, are adequate to answer the
questions of when to buy and when to sell. The primary purpose of this
book is to study the technical phenomena of individual stocks. If we can
learn from the charts at what points to buy and under what conditions to
sell, we have acquired the basic machinery for successful trading. On the
other hand, obviously, if your buying and selling are at points which more
often than not result in net losses, then it makes no difference how you divide
up your capital or apply it in the market, for it will be bound to shrink until,
eventually, it has all disappeared. EN: An investor who finds himself in this
situation should set a benchmark. He should decide that if he loses 50% of his capital,
he will quit trading and put his money in mutual funds. They can certainly do no
worse than that.
The first problem, then, is to learn to use the technical tools, patterns,
trends, Supports, Resistances, etc. Then we can consider how much money
we will risk and in what way.
We have already seen that it makes a difference, sometimes a great
difference, how we apply our capital. The various factors of price level,
sensitivity, and margin enter into the concept we are going to call the Composite Leverage Index. In the latter part of this chapter, we will give a
definition of this. Meanwhile, we have said enough so you will understand
what we are driving at if we use the term in connection with your market
commitments.
You realize, of course, that you do not want to be so conservative that
you will rule out practically all opportunities for making gains. If you decide
never to oppose the Primary Trend, you will have to be inactive during long
Secondary Trends, and may be left waiting, sometimes for weeks on end,
for a continuation of the Primary Move. Naturally, you will pass up all weak
signals and convergent trends, and shun new commitments after very active
blow-offs or Panic Climaxes. You could, no doubt, carry your refinement of
caution so far that your percentage of success, instead of being a mere 60,
70, or 80%, might approach 90%; you might actually be right 95% of the time
in your decisions. But this extreme conservatism would also mean that you
would trade only in the very finest possible situations, when every factor

AU3772_book.fm Page 615 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Appendix A

615

was clean-cut and favorable. You would not have such opportunities very
often. The result might be a profit, but too small a profit to justify all the
work and study you would be putting into your charts — for you can obtain
nominally respectable returns on your capital without very much study and
without much risk, and you must expect a much higher rate of return if your
efforts are to be worthwhile.
EN: These “nominally respectable” returns are obtained by investing in T Bonds
and similar instruments. Bond traders and investors traditionally consider these
investments “risk free,” which is, of course, another form of the denial of reality. In
reality as David Dreman has demonstrated, bonds are a wasting asset due to the
unarrestable deterioration in the commodity denominated value of currency.
In order to put your charts to work, you have to avail yourself of the
higher-leveraged stocks, stocks which carry more opportunity for gain and,
hence, more risk of loss. You have to accept, deliberately, a greater risk than
the man who is content to buy a “safe” security, put it in the box, and forget it.
By maintaining your Composite Leverage (EN: Portfolio Risk) at or near
some constant level which your experience and judgment tells you is safe
for the particular state of the market, you will be protected against overcaution. More important, if you maintain this Composite Leverage in your
operations, you will be protected against unconsciously overtrading. This is
a fault more common than extreme caution, and can be a dangerous enemy
even when your percentage of theoretical trading gains is high. When you
select a definite Composite Leverage and adhere to it in your trading commitments, changing it as necessary to meet changed conditions, you will be
forced to restrain your enthusiasm within safe limits, and you will be continually aware of the risks you are taking.

Overtrading — and a Paradox
This leads to another point. A series of identical percentage gains and losses
on your capital does not give you a series of equal gains and losses in dollars
and cents. This is a serious problem, worth understanding — for a trader
who is greatly overextended is intensifying this problem (which exists in
any case, but which does not need to cause him too much worry if he has
planned his program).
You can understand the paradoxical statement that percentage gains and
losses are not equal if you take the extreme case, first, of a man, who, in
every business venture he enters, risks his entire capital with the expectation
of either a 100% gain or a 100% loss. If this first venture is a loss, he loses
100%. He is finished, because he cannot gain by making 100% on nothing.
However, if the first venture is successful and he then uses his entire capital,
including the new profits, again on the same terms, and the second venture
is a failure, he will be wiped out completely. No matter how many successes
