
CAGLIOSTRO
This famous charlatan, the friend and successor of St. Germain, ran a career still more
extraordinary. He was the arch-quack of his age, the last of the great pretenders to the
philosopher's stone and the water of life, and during his brief season of prosperity one of
the most conspicuous characters of Europe.
His real name was Joseph Balsamo. He was born at Palermo about the year 1743, of
humble parentage. He had the misfortune to lose his father during his infancy, and his
education was left in consequence to some relatives of his mother, the latter being too
poor to afford him any instruction beyond mere reading and writing. He was sent in his
fifteenth year to a monastery, to be taught the elements of chemistry and physic; but his
temper was so impetuous, his indolence so invincible, and his vicious habits so deeply
rooted, that he made no progress. After remaining some years, he left it with the character
of an uninformed and dissipated young man, with good natural talents but a bad
disposition. When he became of age, he abandoned himself to a life of riot and
debauchery, and entered himself, in fact, into that celebrated fraternity, known in France
and Italy as the "Knights of Industry," and in England as the "Swell Mob." He was far
from being an idle or unwilling member of the corps. The first way in which he

distinguished himself was by forging orders of admission to the theatres. He afterwards
robbed his uncle, and counterfeited a will. For acts like these, he paid frequent
compulsory visits to the prisons of Palermo. Somehow or other he acquired the character
of a sorcerer - of a man who had failed in discovering the secrets of alchymy, and had
sold his soul to the devil for the gold which he was not able to make by means of
transmutation. He took no pains to disabuse the popular mind on this particular, but rather
encouraged the belief than otherwise. He at last made use of it to cheat a silversmith,
named Marano, of about sixty ounces of gold, and was in consequence obliged to leave
Palermo. He persuaded this man that he could show him a treasure hidden in a cave, for
which service he was to receive the sixty ounces of gold, while the silversmith was to
have all the treasure for the mere trouble of digging it up. They went together at midnight
to an excavation in the vicinity of Palermo, where Balsamo drew a magic circle, and
invoked the devil to show his treasures. Suddenly there appeared half a dozen fellows, the
accomplices of the swindler, dressed to represent devils, with horns on their heads, claws
to their fingers, and vomiting apparently red and blue flame. They were armed with
pitchforks, with which they belaboured poor Marano till he was almost dead, and robbed
him of his sixty ounces of gold and all the valuables he carried about his person. They
then made off, accompanied by Balsamo, leaving the unlucky silversmith to recover or
die at his leisure. Nature chose the former course; and soon after daylight he was restored
to his senses, smarting in body from his blows and in spirit for the deception of which he
had been the victim. His first impulse was to denounce Balsamo to the magistrates of the
town; but on further reflection he was afraid of the ridicule that a full exposure of all the
circumstances would draw upon him: he therefore took the truly Italian resolution of
being revenged on Balsamo by murdering him at the first convenient opportunity. Having
given utterance to this threat in the hearing of a friend of Balsamo, it was reported to the
latter, who immediately packed up his valuables and quitted Europe.
He chose Medina, in Arabia, for his future dwelling-place, and there became acquainted
with a Greek named Altotas, a man exceedingly well versed in all the languages of the
East, and an indefatigable student of alchymy. He possessed an invaluable collection of
Arabian manuscripts on his favourite science, and studied them with such unremitting
industry that he found he had not sufficient time to attend to his crucibles and furnaces
without neglecting his books. He was looking about for an assistant when Balsamo
opportunely presented himself, and made so favourable an impression that he was at once
engaged in that capacity. But the relation of master and servant did not long subsist
between them; Balsamo was too ambitious and too clever to play a secondary part, and
within fifteen days of their first acquaintance they were bound together as friends and
partners. Altotas, in the course of a long life devoted to alchymy, had stumbled upon
some valuable discoveries in chemistry, one of which was an ingredient for improving
the manufacture of flax, and imparting to goods of that material a gloss and softness
almost equal to silk. Balsamo gave him the good advice to leave the philosopher's stone
for the present undiscovered, and make gold out of their flax. The advice was taken, and
they proceeded together to Alexandria to trade, with a large stock of that article. They
stayed forty days in Alexandria, and gained a considerable sum by their venture. They
afterwards visited other cities in Egypt, and were equally successful. They also visited
Turkey, where they sold drugs and amulets. On their return to Europe, they were driven

by stress of weather into Malta, and were hospitably received by Pinto, the Grand Master
of the Knights, and a famous alchymist. They worked in his laboratory for some months,
and tried hard to change a pewter-platter into a silver one. Balsamo, having less faith than
his companions, was sooner wearied; and obtaining from his host many letters of
introduction to Rome and Naples, he left him and Altotas to find the philosopher's stone
and transmute the pewter-platter without him.
He had long since dropped the name of Balsamo on account of the many ugly
associations that clung to it; and during his travels had assumed at least half a score
others, with titles annexed to them. He called himself sometimes the Chevalier de
Fischio, the Marquis de Melissa, the Baron de Belmonte, de Pelligrini, d'Anna, de Fenix,
de Harat, but most commonly the Count de Cagliostro. Under the latter title he entered
Rome, and never afterwards changed it. In this city he gave himself out as the restorer of
the Rosicrucian philosophy; said he could transmute all metals into gold; that he could
render himself invisible, cure all diseases, and administer an elixir against old age and
decay. His letters from the Grand Master Pinto procured him an introduction into the best
families. He made money rapidly by the sale of his elixir vitae; and, like other quacks,
performed many remarkable cures by inspiring his patients with the most complete faith
and reliance upon his powers; an advantage which the most impudent charlatans often
possess over the regular practitioner.
While thus in a fair way of making his fortune he became acquainted with the beautiful
Lorenza Feliciana, a young lady of noble birth, but without fortune. Cagliostro soon
discovered that she possessed accomplishments that were invaluable. Besides her
ravishing beauty, she had the readiest wit, the most engaging manners, the most fertile
imagination, and the least principle of any of the maidens of Rome. She was just the wife
for Cagliostro, who proposed himself to her, and was accepted. After their marriage, he
instructed his fair Lorenza in all the secrets of his calling - taught her pretty lips to invoke
angels, and genii, sylphs, salamanders, and undines, and, when need required, devils and
evil spirits. Lorenza was an apt scholar: she soon learned all the jargon of the alchymists
and all the spells of the enchanters; and thus accomplished the hopeful pair set out on
their travels, to levy contributions on the superstitious and the credulous.
They first went to Sleswig on a visit to the Count de St. Germain, their great predecessor
in the art of making dupes, and were received by him in the most magnificent manner.
They no doubt fortified their minds for the career they had chosen, by the sage discourse
of that worshipful gentleman; for immediately after they left him, they began their
operations. They travelled for three or four years in Russia, Poland, and Germany,
transmuting metals, telling fortunes, raising spirits, and selling the elixir vitae wherever
they went; but there is no record of their doings from whence to draw a more particular
detail. It was not until they made their appearance in England in 1776, that the names of
the Count and Countess di Cagliostro began to acquire a European reputation. They
arrived in London in the July of that year, possessed of property in plate, jewels, and
specie to the amount of about three thousand pounds. They hired apartments in
Whitcombe-street, and lived for some months quietly. In the same house there lodged a
Portuguese woman named Blavary, who, being in necessitous circumstances, was

engaged by the Count as interpreter. She was constantly admitted into his laboratory,
where he spent much of his time in search of the philosopher's stone. She spread abroad
the fame of her entertainer in return for his hospitality, and laboured hard to impress
everybody with as full a belief in his extraordinary powers as she felt herself. But as a
female interpreter of the rank and appearance of Madame Blavary did not exactly
correspond with the Count's notions either of dignity or decorum, he hired a person
named Vitellini, a teacher of languages, to act in that capacity. Vitellini was a desperate
gambler; a man who had tried almost every resource to repair his ruined fortunes,
including among the rest the search for the philosopher's stone. Immediately that he saw
the Count's operations, he was convinced that the great secret was his, and that the golden
gates of the palace of fortune were open to let him in. With still more enthusiasm than
Madame Blavary, he held forth to his acquaintance, and in all public places, that the
Count was an extraordinary man, a true adept, whose fortune was immense, and who
could transmute into pure and solid gold, as much lead, iron, and copper as he pleased.
The consequence was, that the house of Cagliostro was besieged by crowds of the idle,
the credulous, and the avaricious, all eager to obtain a sight of the "philosopher," or to
share in the boundless wealth which he could call into existence.
Unfortunately for Cagliostro, he had fallen into evil hands; instead of duping the people
of England as he might have done, he became himself the victim of a gang of swindlers,
who, with the fullest reliance on his occult powers, only sought to make money of him.
Vitellini introduced to him a ruined gambler like himself, named Scot, whom he
represented as a Scottish nobleman, attracted to London solely by his desire to see and
converse with the extraordinary man whose fame had spread to the distant mountains of
the north. Cagliostro received him with great kindness and cordiality; and "Lord" Scot
thereupon introduced a woman named Fry, as Lady Scot, who was to act as chaperone to
the Countess di Cagliostro, and make her acquainted with all the noble families of
Britain. Thus things went swimmingly. "His lordship," whose effects had not arrived
from Scotland, and who had no banker in London, borrowed two hundred pounds of the
Count; they were lent without scruple, so flattered was Cagliostro by the attentions they
paid him, the respect, nay, veneration they pretended to feel for him, and the complete
deference with which they listened to every word that fell from his lips.
Superstitious, like all desperate gamesters, Scot had often tried magical and cabalistic
numbers, in the hope of discovering lucky numbers in the lottery, or at the roulette tables.
He had in his possession a cabalistic manuscript, containing various arithmetical
combinations of the kind, which he submitted to Cagliostro, with an urgent request that
he would select a number. Cagliostro took the manuscript and studied it; but, as he
himself informs us, with no confidence in its truth. He however predicted twenty as the
successful number for the 6th of November following. Scot ventured a small sum upon
this number, out of the two hundred pounds he had borrowed, and won. Cagliostro,
incited by this success, prognosticated number twenty-five for the next drawing. Scot
tried again, and won a hundred guineas. The numbers fifty-five and fifty-seven were
announced with equal success for the 18th of the same month, to the no small
astonishment and delight of Cagliostro, who thereupon resolved to try fortune for
himself, and not for others. To all the entreaties of Scot and his lady that he would predict

more numbers for them, he turned a deaf ear, even while he still thought him a lord and a
man of honour. But when he discovered that he was a mere swindler, and the pretended
Lady Scot an artful woman of the town, he closed his door upon them and on all their
gang.
Having complete faith in the supernatural powers of the Count, they were in the deepest
distress at having lost his countenance. They tried by every means their ingenuity could
suggest, to propitiate him again; they implored, they threatened, and endeavoured to bribe
him. But all was vain. Cagliostro would neither see nor correspond with them. In the
mean time they lived extravagantly; and in the hope of future, exhausted all their present
gains. They were reduced to the last extremity, when Miss Fry obtained access to the
Countess, and received a guinea from her on the representation that she was starving.
Miss Fry, not contented with this, begged her to intercede with her husband, that for the
last time he would point out a lucky number in the lottery. The Countess promised to
exert her influence, and Cagliostro thus entreated, named the number eight, at the same
time reiterating his determination to have no more to do with any of them. By an
extraordinary hazard, which filled Cagliostro with surprise and pleasure, number eight
was the greatest prize in the lottery. Miss Fry and her associates cleared fifteen hundred
guineas by the adventure; and became more than ever convinced of the occult powers of
Cagliostro, and strengthened in their determination never to quit him until they had made
their fortunes. Out of the proceeds, Miss Fry bought a handsome necklace at a
pawnbrokers for ninety guineas. She then ordered a richly chased gold box, having two
compartments, to be made at a jeweller's, and putting the necklace in the one, filled the
other with a fine aromatic snuff. She then sought another interview with Madame di
Cagliostro, and urged her to accept the box as a small token of her esteem and gratitude,
without mentioning the valuable necklace that was concealed in it. Madame di Cagliostro
accepted the present, and was from that hour exposed to the most incessant persecution
from all the confederates, Blavary, Vitellini, and the pretended Lord and Lady Scot. They
flattered themselves they had regained their lost footing in the house, and came day after
day to know lucky numbers in the lottery; sometimes forcing themselves up the stairs,
and into the Count's laboratory, in spite of the efforts of the servants to prevent them.
Cagliostro, exasperated at their pertinacity, threatened to call in the assistance of the
magistrates; and taking Miss Fry by the shoulders, pushed her into the street.
From that time may be dated the misfortunes of Cagliostro. Miss Fry, at the instigation of
her paramour, determined on vengeance. Her first act was to swear a debt of two hundred
pounds against Cagliostro, and to cause him to be arrested for that sum. While he was in
custody in a sponging house, Scot, accompanied by a low attorney, broke into his
laboratory, and carried off a small box, containing, as they believed, the powder of
transmutation, and a number of cabalistic manuscripts and treatises upon alchymy. They
also brought an action against him for the recovery of the necklace; and Miss Fry accused
both him and his Countess of sorcery and witchcraft, and of foretelling numbers in the
lottery by the aid of the devil. This latter charge was actually heard before Mr. Justice
Miller. The action of trover for the necklace was tried before the Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, who recommended the parties to submit to arbitration. In the mean time
Cagliostro remained in prison for several weeks, till having procured bail, he was

liberated. He was soon after waited upon by an attorney named Reynolds, also deep in
the plot, who offered to compromise all the actions upon certain conditions. Scot, who
had accompanied him, concealed himself behind the door, and suddenly rushing out,
presented a pistol at the heart of Cagliostro, swearing he would shoot him instantly, if he
would not tell him truly the art of predicting lucky numbers, and of transmuting metals.
Reynolds pretending to be very angry, disarmed his accomplice, and entreated the Count
to satisfy them by fair means, and disclose his secrets, promising that if he would do so,
they would discharge all the actions, and offer him no further molestation. Cagliostro
replied, that threats and entreaties were alike useless; that he knew no secrets; and that the
powder of transmutation of which they had robbed him, was of no value to anybody but
himself. He offered, however, if they would discharge the actions, and return the powder
and the manuscripts, he would forgive them all the money they had swindled him out of.
These conditions were refused; and Scot and Reynolds departed, swearing vengeance
against him.
Cagliostro appears to have been quite ignorant of the forms of law in England, and to
have been without a friend to advise him as to the best course he should pursue. While he
was conversing with his Countess on the difficulties that beset them, one of his bail
called, and invited him to ride in a hackney coach to the house of a person who would see
him righted. Cagliostro consented, and was driven to the King's Bench prison, where his
friend left him. He did not discover for several hours that he was a prisoner, or in fact
understand the process of being surrendered by one's bail.
He regained his liberty in a few weeks; and the arbitrators between him and Miss Fry,
made their award against him. He was ordered to pay the two hundred pounds she had
sworn against him, and to restore the necklace and gold box which had been presented to
the Countess. Cagliostro was so disgusted, that he determined to quit England. His
pretensions, besides, had been unmercifully exposed by a Frenchman, named Morande,
the Editor of the Courier de l'Europe, published in London. To add to his distress, he was
recognised in Westminster Hall, as Joseph Balsamo, the swindler of Palermo. Such a
complication of disgrace was not to be borne. He and his Countess packed up their small
effects, and left England with no more than fifty pounds, out of the three thousand they
had brought with them.
They first proceeded to Brussels, where fortune was more auspicious. They sold
considerable quantities of the elixir of life, performed many cures, and recruited their
finances. They then took their course through Germany to Russia, and always with the
same success. Gold flowed into their coffers faster than they could count it. They quite
forgot all the woes they had endured in England, and learned to be more circumspect in
the choice of their acquaintance.
In the year 1780, they made their appearance in Strasbourg. Their fame had reached that
city before them. They took a magnificent hotel, and invited all the principal persons of
the place to their table. Their wealth appeared to be boundless, and their hospitality equal
to it. Both the Count and Countess acted as physicians, and gave money, advice, and
medicine to all the necessitous and suffering of the town. Many of the cures they

performed, astonished those regular practitioners who did not make sufficient allowance
for the wonderful influence of imagination in certain cases. The Countess, who at this
time was not more than five-and-twenty, and all radiant with grace, beauty, and
cheerfulness, spoke openly of her eldest son as a fine young man of eight-and-twenty,
who had been for some years a captain in the Dutch service. The trick succeeded to
admiration. All the ugly old women in Strasbourg, and for miles around, thronged the
saloon of the Countess to purchase the liquid which was to make them as blooming as
their daughters; the young women came in equal abundance that they might preserve
their charms, and when twice as old as Ninon de L'Enclos, be more captivating than she;
while men were not wanting fools enough to imagine, that they might keep off the
inevitable stroke of the grim foe, by a few drops of the same incomparable elixir. The
Countess, sooth to say, looked like an incarnation of immortal loveliness, a very goddess
of youth and beauty; and it is possible that the crowds of young men and old, who at all
convenient seasons haunted the perfumed chambers of this enchantress, were attracted
less by their belief in her occult powers than from admiration of her languishing bright
eyes and sparkling conversation. But amid all the incense that was offered at her shrine,
Madame di Cagliostro was ever faithful to her spouse. She encouraged hopes, it is true,
but she never realised them; she excited admiration, yet kept it within bounds; and made
men her slaves, without ever granting a favour of which the vainest might boast.
In this city they made the acquaintance of many eminent persons, and among others, of
the Cardinal Prince de Rohan, who was destined afterwards to exercise so untoward an
influence over their fate. The Cardinal, who seems to have had great faith in him as a
philosopher, persuaded him to visit Paris in his company, which he did, but remained
only thirteen days. He preferred the society of Strasbourg, and returned thither, with the
intention of fixing his residence far from the capital. But he soon found that the first
excitement of his arrival had passed away. People began to reason with themselves, and
to be ashamed of their own admiration. The populace, among whom he had lavished his
charity with a bountiful hand, accused him of being the Antichrist, the Wandering Jew,
the man of fourteen hundred years of age, a demon in human shape, sent to lure the
ignorant to their destruction; while the more opulent and better informed called him a spy
in the pay of foreign governments, an agent of the police, a swindler, and a man of evil
life. The outcry grew at last so strong, that he deemed it prudent to try his fortune
elsewhere.
He went first to Naples, but that city was too near Palermo; he dreaded recognition from
some of his early friends, and after a short stay, returned to France. He chose Bordeaux as
his next dwelling-place, and created as great a sensation there as he had done in
Strasbourg. He announced himself as the founder of a new school of medicine and
philosophy, boasted of his ability to cure all diseases, and invited the poor and suffering
to visit him, and he would relieve the distress of the one class, and cure the ailings of the
other. All day long the street opposite his magnificent hotel was crowded by the
populace; the halt and the blind, women with sick babes in their arms, and persons
suffering under every species of human infirmity flocked to this wonderful doctor. The
relief he afforded in money more than counterbalanced the failure of his nostrums; and
the affluence of people from all the surrounding country became so great, that the jurats
