
sorcery. Bohmen's works were translated into English, and published, many years
afterwards by an enthusiast, named William Law.

MORMIUS.
Peter Mormius, a notorious alchymist, and contemporary of Bohmen, endeavoured, in
1630, to introduce the Rosicrucian philosophy into Holland. He applied to the StatesGeneral to grant him a public audience, that he might explain the tenets of the sect, and
disclose a plan for rendering Holland the happiest and richest country on the earth, by
means of the philosopher's' stone and the service of the elementary spirits. The StatesGeneral wisely resolved to have nothing to do with him. He thereupon determined to
shame them by printing his book, which he did at Leyden the same year. It was entitled
"The Book of the most Hidden Secrets of Nature," and was divided into three parts; the
first treating of "perpetual motion," the second of the "transmutation of metals," and the
third of the "universal medicine." He also published some German works upon the
Rosicrucian philosophy, at Frankfort, in 1617.
Poetry and Romance are deeply indebted to the Rosicrucians for many a graceful
creation. The literature of England, France, and Germany contains hundreds of sweet
fictions, whose machinery has been borrowed from their day-dreams. The "delicate
Ariel" of Shakspeare stands pre-eminent among the number. From the same source Pope
drew the airy tenants of Belinda's dressing-room, in his charming "Rape of the Lock;"
and La Motte Fouque, the beautiful and capricious water-nymph, Undine, around whom
he has thrown more grace and loveliness, and for whose imaginary woes he has excited
more sympathy, than ever were bestowed on a supernatural being. Sir Walter Scott also
endowed the White Lady of Avenel with many of the attributes of the undines, or watersprites. German romance and lyrical poetry teem with allusions to sylphs, gnomes,
undines, and salamanders; and the French have not been behind in substituting them, in
works of fiction, for the more cumbrous mythology of Greece and Rome. The sylphs,
more especially, have been the favourites of the bards, and have become so familiar to
the popular mind as to be, in a manner, confounded with that other race of ideal beings,
the fairies, who can boast of an antiquity much more venerable in the annals of
superstition. Having these obligations to the Rosicrucians, no lover of poetry can wish,
however absurd they were, that such a sect of philosophers had never existed.
BORRI.
Just at the time that Michael Mayer was making known to the world the existence of such
a body as the Rosicrucians, there was born in Italy a man who was afterwards destined to
become the most conspicuous member of the fraternity. The alchymic mania never called
forth the ingenuity of a more consummate or more successful impostor than Joseph
Francis Borri. He was born in 1616 according to some authorities, and in 1627 according
to others, at Milan; where his father, the Signor Branda Borri, practised as a physician. At
the age of sixteen, Joseph was sent to finish his education at the Jesuits' College in Rome,
where he distinguished himself by his extraordinary memory. He learned everything to

which he applied himself with the utmost ease. In the most voluminous works no fact was
too minute for his retention, and no study was so abstruse but that he could master it; but
any advantages he might have derived from this facility, were neutralized by his
ungovernable passions and his love of turmoil and debauchery. He was involved in
continual difficulty, as well with the heads of the college as with the police of Rome, and
acquired so bad a character that years could not remove it. By the aid of his friends he
established himself as a physician in Rome, and also obtained some situation in the
Pope's household. In one of his fits of studiousness he grew enamoured of alchymy, and
determined to devote his energies to the discovery of the philosopher's stone. Of
unfortunate propensities he had quite sufficient, besides this, to bring him to poverty. His
pleasures were as expensive as his studies, and both were of a nature to destroy his health
and ruin his fair fame. At the age of thirty-seven he found that he could not live by the
practice of medicine, and began to look about for some other employment. He became, in
1653, private secretary to the Marquis di Mirogli, the minister of the Archduke of
Innspruk at the court of Rome. He continued in this capacity for two years; leading,
however, the same abandoned life as heretofore, frequenting the society of gamesters,
debauchees, and loose women, involving himself in disgraceful street quarrels, and
alienating the patrons who were desirous to befriend him.
All at once a sudden change was observed in his conduct. The abandoned rake put on the
outward sedateness of a philosopher; the scoffing sinner proclaimed that he had forsaken
his evil ways, and would live thenceforth a model of virtue. To his friends this
reformation was as pleasing as it was unexpected; and Borri gave obscure hints that it had
been brought about by some miraculous manifestation of a superior power. He pretended
that he held converse with beneficent spirits; that the secrets of God and nature were
revealed to him; and that he had obtained possession of the philosopher's stone. Like his
predecessor, Jacob Bohmen, he mixed up religious questions with his philosophical
jargon, and took measures for declaring himself the founder of a new sect. This, at Rome
itself, and in the very palace of the Pope, was a hazardous proceeding; and Borri just
awoke to a sense of it in time to save himself from the dungeons of the Castle of St.
Angelo. He fled to Innspruck, where he remained about a year, and then returned to his
native city of Milan.
The reputation of his great sanctity had gone before him; and he found many persons
ready to attach themselves to his fortunes. All who were desirous of entering into the new
communion took an oath of poverty, and relinquished their possessions for the general
good of the fraternity. Borri told them that he had received from the archangel Michael a
heavenly sword, upon the hilt of which were engraven the names of the seven celestial
Intelligences. "Whoever shall refuse," said he, "to enter into my new sheepfold, shall be
destroyed by the papal armies, of whom God has predestined me to be the chief. To those
who follow me, all joy shall be granted. I shall soon bring my chemical studies to a happy
conclusion by the discovery of the philosopher's stone, and by this means we shall all
have as much gold as we desire. I am assured of the aid of the angelic hosts, and more
especially of the archangel Michael's. When I began to walk in the way of the spirit, I had
a vision of the night, and was assured by an angelic voice that I should become a prophet.
In sign of it I saw a palm-tree, surrounded with all the glory of Paradise. The angels come

to me whenever I call, and reveal to me all the secrets of the universe. The sylphs and
elementary spirits obey me, and fly to the uttermost ends of the world to serve me, and
those whom I delight to honour." By force of continually repeating such stories as these,
Borri soon found himself at the head of a very considerable number of adherents. As he
figures in these pages as an alchymist, and not as a religious sectarian, it will be
unnecessary to repeat the doctrines which he taught with regard to some of the dogmas of
the Church of Rome, and which exposed him to the fierce resentment of the papal
authority. They were to the full as ridiculous as his philosophical pretensions. As the
number of his followers increased, he appears to have cherished the idea of becoming one
day a new Mahomet, and of founding, in his native city of Milan, a monarchy and
religion of which he should be the king and the prophet. He had taken measures, in the
year 1658, for seizing the guards at all the gates of that city, and formally declaring
himself the monarch of the Milanese. Just as he thought the plan ripe for execution, it was
discovered. Twenty of his followers were arrested, and he himself managed, with the
utmost difficulty, to escape to the neutral territory of Switzerland, where the papal
displeasure could not reach him.
The trial of his followers commenced forthwith, and the whole of them were sentenced to
various terms of imprisonment. Borri's trial proceeded in his absence, and lasted for
upwards of two years. He was condemned to death as a heretic and sorcerer in 1661, and
was burned in effigy in Rome by the common hangman.
Borri, in the mean time, lived quietly in Switzerland, indulging himself in railing at the
Inquisition and its proceedings. He afterwards went to Strasbourg, intending to fix his
residence in that town. He was received with great cordiality, as a man persecuted for his
religious opinions, and withal a great alchymist. He found that sphere too narrow for his
aspiring genius, and retired in the same year to the more wealthy city of Amsterdam. He
there hired a magnificent house, established an equipage which eclipsed in brilliancy
those of the richest merchants, and assumed the title of Excellency. Where he got the
money to live in this expensive style was long a secret: the adepts in alchymy easily
explained it, after their fashion. Sensible people were of opinion that be had come by it in
a less wonderful manner; for it was remembered that, among his unfortunate disciples in
Milan, there were many rich men, who, in conformity with one of the fundamental rules
of the sect, had given up all their earthly wealth into the hands of their founder. In
whatever manner the money was obtained, Borri spent it in Holland with an unsparing
hand, and was looked up to by the people with no little respect and veneration. He
performed several able cures, and increased his reputation so much that he was vaunted
as a prodigy. He continued diligently the operations of alchymy, and was in daily
expectation that he should succeed in turning the inferior metals into gold. This hope
never abandoned him, even in the worst extremity of his fortunes; and in his prosperity it
led him into the most foolish expenses: but he could not long continue to live so
magnificently upon the funds he had brought from Italy; and the philosopher's stone,
though it promised all for the wants of the morrow, never brought anything for the
necessities of to-day. He was obliged in a few months to retrench, by giving up his large
house, his gilded coach, and valuable blood-horses, his liveried domestics, and his
luxurious entertainments. With this diminution of splendour came a diminution of

renown. His cures did not appear so miraculous, when he went out on foot to perform
them, as they had seemed when "his Excellency" had driven to a poor man's door in his
carriage with six horses. He sank from a prodigy into an ordinary man. His great friends
showed him the cold shoulder, and his humble flatterers carried their incense to some
other shrine. Borri now thought it high time to change his quarters. With this view he
borrowed money wherever he could get it, and succeeded in obtaining two hundred
thousand florins from a merchant, named De Meer, to aid, as he said, in discovering the
water of life. He also obtained six diamonds, of great value, on pretence that he could
remove the flaws from them without diminishing their weight. With this booty he stole
away secretly by night, and proceeded to Hamburgh.
On his arrival in that city, he found the celebrated Christina, the ex-Queen of Sweden. He
procured an introduction to her, and requested her patronage in his endeavour to discover
the philosopher's stone. She gave him some encouragement; but Borri, fearing that the
merchants of Amsterdam, who had connexions in Hamburgh, might expose his
delinquencies if he remained in the latter city, passed over to Copenhagen, and sought the
protection of Frederic III, the King of Denmark.
This Prince was a firm believer in the transmutation of metals. Being in want of money,
he readily listened to the plans of an adventurer who had both eloquence and ability to
recommend him. He provided Borri with the means to make experiments, and took a
great interest in the progress of his operations. He expected every month to possess riches
that would buy Peru; and, when he was disappointed, accepted patiently the excuses of
Borri who, upon every failure, was always ready with some plausible explanation. He
became, in time, much attached to him; and defended him from the jealous attacks of his
courtiers, and the indignation of those who were grieved to see their monarch the easy
dupe of a charlatan. Borri endeavoured, by every means in his power, to find aliment for
this good opinion. His knowledge of medicine was useful to him in this respect, and often
stood between him and disgrace. He lived six years in this manner at the court of
Frederic; but that monarch dying in 1670, he was left without a protector.
As he had made more enemies than friends in Copenhagen, and had nothing to hope from
the succeeding sovereign, he sought an asylum in another country. He went first to
Saxony; but met so little encouragement, and encountered so much danger from the
emissaries of the Inquisition, that he did not remain there many months. Anticipating
nothing but persecution in every country that acknowledged the spiritual authority of the
Pope, he appears to have taken the resolution to dwell in Turkey, and turn Mussulman.
On his arrival at the Hungarian frontier, on his way to Constantinople, he was arrested on
suspicion of being concerned in the conspiracy of the Counts Nadasdi and Frangipani,
which had just been discovered. In vain he protested his innocence, and divulged his real
name and profession. He was detained in prison, and a letter despatched to the Emperor
Leopold to know what should be done with him. The star of his fortunes was on the
decline. The letter reached Leopold at an unlucky moment. The Pope's Nuncio was
closeted with his Majesty; and he no sooner heard the name of Joseph Francis Borri, than
he demanded him as a prisoner of the Holy See. The request was complied with; and
Borri, closely manacled, was sent under an escort of soldiers to the prison of the

Inquisition at Rome. He was too much of an impostor to be deeply tinged with
fanaticism, and was not unwilling to make a public recantation of his heresies if he could
thereby save his life. When the proposition was made to him, he accepted it with
eagerness. His punishment was to be commuted into the hardly less severe one of
perpetual imprisonment; but he was too happy to escape the clutch of the executioner at
any price, and he made the amende honorable in face of the assembled multitudes of
Rome on the 27th of October 1672. He was then transferred to the prisons of the Castle of
St. Angelo, where he remained till his death, twenty-three years afterwards. It is said that,
towards the close of his life, considerable indulgence was granted him; that he was
allowed to have a laboratory, and to cheer the solitude of his dungeon by searching for
the philosopher's stone. Queen Christina, during her residence at Rome, frequently visited
the old man, to converse with him upon chemistry and the doctrines of the Rosicrucians.
She even obtained permission that he should leave his prison occasionally for a day or
two, and reside in her palace, she being responsible for his return to captivity. She
encouraged him to search for the great secret of the alchymists, and provided him with
money for the purpose. It may well be supposed that Borri benefited most by this
acquaintance, and that Christina got nothing but experience. It is not sure that she gained
even that; for, until her dying day, she was convinced of the possibility of finding the
philosopher's stone, and ready to assist any adventurer either zealous or impudent enough
to pretend to it.
After Borri had been about eleven years in confinement, a small volume was published at
Cologne, entitled "The Key of the Cabinet of the Chevalier Joseph Francis Borri; in
which are contained many curious Letters upon Chemistry and other Sciences, written by
him; together with a Memoir of his Life." This book contained a complete exposition of
the Rosicrucian philosophy, and afforded materials to the Abbe de Villars for his
interesting "Count de Gabalis," which excited so much attention at the close of the
seventeenth century.
Borri lingered in the prison of St. Angelo till 1695, when he died in his eightieth year.
Besides "The Key of the Cabinet," written originally in Copenhagen, in 1666, for the
edification of King Frederic III, he published a work upon alchymy and the secret
sciences, under the title of "The Mission of Romulus to the Romans."

INFERIOR ALCHYMISTS OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY.
Besides the pretenders to the philosopher's stone whose lives have been already narrated,
this and the preceding century produced a great number of writers, who inundated
literature with their books upon the subject. In fact, most of the learned men of that age
had some faith in it. Van Helmont, Borrichius, Kirchen, Boerhaave, and a score of others,
though not professed alchymists, were fond of the science, and countenanced its
professors. Helvetius, the grandfather of the celebrated philosopher of the same name,
asserts that he saw an inferior metal turned into gold by a stranger, at the Hague, in 1666.
He says that, sitting one day in his study, a man, who was dressed as a respectable
burgher of North Holland, and very modest and simple in his appearance, called upon

him, with the intention of dispelling his doubts relative to the philosopher's stone. He
asked Helvetius if he thought he should know that rare gem if he saw it. To which
Helvetius replied, that he certainly should not. The burgher immediately drew from his
pocket a small ivory box, containing three pieces of metal, of the colour of brimstone,
and extremely heavy; and assured Helvetius, that of them he could make as much as
twenty tons of gold. Helvetius informs us, that he examined them very attentively; and
seeing that they were very brittle, he took the opportunity to scrape off a very small
portion with his thumb-nail. He then returned them to the stranger, with an entreaty that
he would perform the process of transmutation before him. The stranger replied, that he
was not allowed to do so, and went away. After his departure, Helvetius procured a
crucible and a portion of lead, into which, when in a state of fusion, he threw the stolen
grain from the philosopher's stone. He was disappointed to find that the grain evaporated
altogether, leaving the lead in its original state.
Some weeks afterwards, when he had almost forgotten the subject, he received another
visit from the stranger. He again entreated him to explain the processes by which he
pretended to transmute lead. The stranger at last consented, and informed him, that one
grain was sufficient; but that it was necessary to envelope it in a ball of wax before
throwing it on the molten metal; otherwise its extreme volatility would cause it to go off
in vapour. They tried the experiment, and succeeded to their heart's content. Helvetius
repeated the experiment alone, and converted six ounces of lead into very pure gold.
The fame of this event spread all over the Hague, and all the notable persons of the town
flocked to the study of Helvetius to convince themselves of the fact. Helvetius performed
the experiment again, in the presence of the Prince of Orange, and several times
afterwards, until he exhausted the whole of the powder he had received from the stranger,
from whom, it is necessary to state, he never received another visit; nor did he ever
discover his name or condition. In the following year Helvetius published his "Golden
Calf," ["Vitulus Aureus quem Mundus adorat et orat, in quo tractatur de naturae miraculo
transmutandi metalla."--Hagae, 1667.] in which he detailed the above circumstances.
About the same time, the celebrated Father Kircher published his "Subterranean World,"
in which he called the alchymists a congregation of knaves and impostors, and their
science a delusion. He admitted that he had himself been a diligent labourer in the field,
and had only come to this conclusion after mature consideration and repeated fruitless
experiments. All the alchymists were in arms immediately, to refute this formidable
antagonist. One Solomon de Blauenstein was the first to grapple with him, and attempted
to convict him of wilful misrepresentation, by recalling to his memory the transmutations
by Sendivogius, before the Emperor Frederic III. and the Elector of Mayence; all
performed within a recent period. Zwelfer and Glauber also entered into the dispute, and
attributed the enmity of Father Kircher to spite and jealousy against adepts who had been
more successful than himself.
It was also pretended that Gustavus Adolphus transmuted a quantity of quicksilver into
pure gold. The learned Borrichius relates, that he saw coins which had been struck of this
gold; and Lenglet du Fresnoy deposes to the same circumstance. In the Travels of

Monconis the story is told in the following manner:-- "A merchant of Lubeck, who
carried on but little trade, but who knew how to change lead into very good gold, gave
the King of Sweden a lingot which he had made, weighing, at least, one hundred pounds.
The King immediately caused it to be coined into ducats; and because he knew positively
that its origin was such as had been stated to him, he had his own arms graven upon the
one side, and emblematical figures of Mercury and Venus on the other. "I," continued
Monconis, "have one of these ducats in my possession; and was credibly informed, that,
after the death of the Lubeck merchant, who had never appeared very rich, a sum of no
less than one million seven hundred thousand crowns was found in his coffers." [Voyages
de Monconis, tome ii. p. 379.]
Such stories as these, confidently related by men high in station, tended to keep up the
infatuation of the alchymists in every country of Europe. It is astonishing to see the
number of works which were written upon the subject during the seventeenth century
alone, and the number of clever men who sacrificed themselves to the delusion. Gabriel
de Castaigne, a monk of the order of St. Francis, attracted so much notice in the reign of
Louis XIII, that that monarch secured him in his household, and made him his Grand
Almoner. He pretended to find the elixir of life; and Louis expected, by his means, to
have enjoyed the crown for a century. Van Helmont also pretended to have once
performed with success the process of transmuting quicksilver; and was, in consequence,
invited by the Emperor Rudolph II. to fix his residence at the court of Vienna. Glauber,
the inventor of the salts which still bear his name, and who practised as a physician at
Amsterdam about the middle of the seventeenth century, established a public school in
that city for the study of alchymy, and gave lectures himself upon the science. John
Joachim Becher, of Spire, acquired great reputation at the same period; and was
convinced that much gold might be made out of flint stones by a peculiar process, and the
aid of that grand and incomprehensible substance, the philosopher's stone. He made a
proposition to the Emperor Leopold of Austria, to aid him in these experiments; but the
hope of success was too remote, and the present expense too great to tempt that monarch;
and he therefore gave Becher much of his praise, but none of his money. Becher
afterwards tried the States-General of Holland, with no better success.
With regard to the innumerable tricks by which impostors persuaded the world that they
had succeeded in making gold, and of which so many stories were current about this
period, a very satisfactory report was read by M. Geoffroy, the elder, at the sitting of the
Royal Academy of Sciences, at Paris, on the 15th of April, 1722. As it relates principally
to the alchymic cheats of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the following
abridgment of it may not be out of place in this portion of our history:-- The instances of
successful transmutation were so numerous, and apparently so well authenticated, that
nothing short of so able an exposure as that of M. Geoffroy could disabuse the public
mind. The trick to which they oftenest had recourse, was to use a double-bottomed
crucible, the under surface being of iron or copper, and the upper one of wax, painted to
resemble the same metal. Between the two they placed as much gold or silver dust as was
necessary for their purpose. They then put in their lead, quicksilver, or other ingredients,
and placed their pot upon the fire. Of course, when the experiment was concluded, they
never failed to find a lump of gold at the bottom. The same result was produced in many
