
One way that immediately suggests itself is logical but rather imprac-
tical. This is to find someone who is sufficiently skilled in the various facets
of management to examine each subdivision of a company’s organization
and by detailed investigation of its executive personnel, its production, its
sales organization, its research, and each of its other major functions, form
a worthwhile conclusion as to whether the particular company has out-
standing potentialities for growth and development.

Such a method may appear sensible. Unfortunately there are sever-
al reasons why it usually will not serve the average investor very well. In
the first place, there are only a few individuals who have the necessary
degree of top management skill to do a job of this kind. Most of them
are busy at top-level and high-paying management jobs. They have nei-
ther the time nor the inclination to occupy themselves in this way. Pur-
thermore, if they were so inclined, it is doubtful if many of the real
growth companies of the nation would allow someone outside their
own organization to have all the data necessary to make an informed
decision. Some of the knowledge gained in this way would be too valu-
able to existing or potential competition to permit its being passed on
to anyone having no responsibility to the company furnishing the data.



What “Scuttlebutt” Can Do 45

Fortunately, there is another course which the investor can pursue.
If properly handled, this method will provide the clues that are needed
to find really outstanding investments, For lack of a better term, | shall
call this way of proceeding the “scuttlebutt” method.

As this method is spelled out in detail in the pages that follow, the
average investor will have one predominant reaction. This is that regard-
less of how beneficial this “scuttlebutt” method may be to someone else,
it is not going to be helpful to him, because he just won’t have much
chance to apply it.I am aware that most investors are not in a position
to do for themselves much of what is needed to get the most from their
investment funds. Nevertheless I think they should thoroughly under-
stand just what is needed and why. Only in this way are they in a posi-
tion to select the type of professional advisor who can best help them.
Only in this way can they adequately evaluate the work of that advisor.
Furthermore, when they understand not only what can be accom-
plished, but also how it can be accomplished, they may be surprised at
how from time to time they may be in a position to enrich and make
more profitable the worthwhile work already being done for them by
their investment advisors.

The business “grapevine” is a remarkable thing. It is amazing what
an accurate picture of the relative points of strength and weakness of
each company in an industry can be obtained from a representative
cross-section of the opinions of those who in one way or another are
concerned with any particular company. Most people, particularly if
they feel sure there is no danger of their being quoted, like to talk about
the field of work in which they are engaged and will talk rather freely
about their competitors. Go to five companies in an industry, ask each
of them intelligent questions about the points of strength and weakness
of the other four, and nine times out of ten a surprisingly detailed and
accurate picture of all five will emerge.

However, competitors are only one and not necessarily the best
source of informed opinion. It is equally astonishing how much can be
learned from both vendors and customers about the real nature of the
people with whom they deal. Research scientists in universities, in
government, and in competitive companies are another fertile source of
worthwhile data. So are executives of trade associations.

In the case of trade association executives especially, but to a great
extent the other groups as well, it 1s impossible to lay too much stress
on the importance of two matters. The inquiring investor must be able


46 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

to make clear beyond any doubt that his source of information will
never be revealed. Then he must scrupulously live up to this policy. Oth-
erwise, the danger of getting an informant into trouble is obviously so
great that unfavorable opinions just do not get passed along.

There is still one further group which can be of immense help to
the prospective investor in search of a bonanza company. This group,
however, can be harmful rather than helpful if the investor does not use
good judgment and does not do plenty of cross-checking with others
to verify his own judgment as to the reliability of what is told him. This
group consists of former employees. Such people frequently have a real
inside view in regard to their former employer's strength and weakness.
Equally important, they will usually talk freely about them. But cnough
such former employees may, rightly or wrongly, feel they were fired
without good cause or left because of a justified grievance that it is
always important to check carefully into why employees left the com-
pany being studied. Only then is it possible to determine the degree of
prejudice that may exist and to allow for it in considering what the for-
mer employee has to say.

If enough different sources of information are sought about a com-
pany, there is no reason to believe that each bit of data obtained should
agree with each other bit of data. Actually, there is not the slightest need
for this to happen. In the case of really outstanding companies, the pre-
ponderant information is so crystal clear that even a moderately experi-
enced investor who knows what he is seeking will be able to tell which
companies are likely to be of enough interest to him to warrant taking
the next step in his investigation. This next step is to contact the officers
of the company to try and fill out some of the gaps still existing in the
investor's picture of the situation being studied.



3
What to Buy

The Fifteen Points to Look for in a Common Stock

is to obtain the type of investment which in a few years might

show him a gain of several hundred per cent, or over a longer
period of time might show a correspondingly greater increase? In other
words, what attributes should a company have to give it the greatest
likelihood of attaining this kind of results for its shareholders?

There are fifteen points with which I believe the investor should con-
cern himself. A company could well be an investment bonanza if it failed
fully to qualify on a very few of them. do not think it could come up to
my definition of a worthwhile investment if it failed to qualify on many.
Some of these points are matters of company policy; others deal with how
efficiently this policy is carried out. Some of these points concern matters
which should largely be determined from information obtained from
sources outside the company being studied, while others are best solved by
direct inquiry from company personnel. These fifteen points are:

W:: are these matters about which the investor should learn if he

POINT 1. Does the company have products or services
with sufficient market potential to make possible a
sizable increase in sales for at least several years?

It is by no means impossible to make a fair one-time profit from com-
Pamies with a stationary or even a declining sales curve. Operating


48 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

economies resulting from better control of costs can at times create
enough improvement in net income to produce an increase in the mar-
ket price of a company’s shares. This sort of one-time profit is eagerly
sought by many speculators and bargain hunters. It does not offer the
degree of opportunity, howevet, that should interest those desiring to
make the greatest possible gains from their investment funds.

Neither does another type of situation which sometimes offers a
considerably larger degree of profit. Such a situation occurs when a
changed condition opens up a large increase in sales for a period of a very
few years, after which sales stop growing. A large-scale example of this
is what happened to the many radio set manufacturers with the com-
mercial development of television. A huge increase in sales occurred
for several years. Now that nearly 90 per cent of United States homes
that are wired for electricity have television sets, the sales curve is
again static. In the case of a great many companies in the industry, a
large profit was made by those who bought early enough. Then as the
sales curve leveled out, so did the attractiveness of many of these
stocks.

Not even the most outstanding growth companies need necessar-
ily be expected to show sales for every single year larger than those of
the year before. In another chapter I will attempt to show why the
normal intricacies of commercial research and the problems of mar-
keting new products tend to cause such sales increases to come in an
irregular series of uneven spurts rather than in a smooth year-by-year
progression. The vagaries of the business cycle will also have a major
influence on year-to-year comparisons. Therefore growth should not
be judged on an annual basis but, say, by taking units of several years
each. Certain companies give promise of greater than normal growth
not only for the next several-year period, but also for a considerable
time beyond that.

Those companies which decade by decade have consistently shown
spectacular growth might be divided into two groups. For lack of bet-
ter terms I will call one group those that happen to be both “fortunate
and able” and the other group those that are “fortunate because they are
able.” A high order of management ability is a must for both groups. No
company grows for a long period of years just because it is lucky. It must
have and continue to keep a high order of business skill, otherwise it will
not be able to capitalize on its good fortunc and to defend its compet-
itive position from the inroads of others.



What to Buy 49

The Aluminum Company of America is an example of the “fortu-
nate and able” group. The founders of this company were men with
great vision. They correctly foresaw important commercial uses for their
new product. However, neither they nor anyone else at that time could
foresee anything like the full size of the market for aluminum products
that was to develop over the next seventy years. A combination of tech-
nical developments and economies, of which the company was far more
the beneficiary than the instigator, was to bring this about. Alcoa has and
continues to show a high order of skill in encouraging and taking
advantage of these trends. However, if background conditions, such as
the perfecting of airborne transportation, had not caused influences
completely beyond Alcoa’s control to opcn up cxtensive new markets,
the company would still have grown—but at a slower rate.

The Aluminum Company was fortunate in finding itself in an even
better industry than the attractive one envisioned by its early manage-
ment. The fortunes made by many of the early stockholders of this com-
pany who held on to their shares is of course known to everyone. What
may not be so generally recognized is how well even relative newcom-
ers to the stockholder list have done. When I wrote the original edition,
Alcoa shares were down almost 40 per cent from the all-time high made
in 1956. Yet at this “low” price the stock showed an increase in value of
almost 500 per cent over not the low price, but the median average
price at which it could have been purchased in 1947, just ten years
before.

Now let us take Du Pont as an example of the other group of
growth stocks—those which I have described as “fortunate because they
are able.” This company was not originally in the business of making
nylon, cellophane, lucite, neoprene, orlon, milar, or any of the many
other glamorous products with which it is frequently associated in the
public mind and which have proven so spectacularly profitable to the
investor. For many years Du Pont made blasting powder. In time of
peace its growth would largely have paralleled that of the mining industry.
In recent years, it might have grown a little more rapidly than this as
additional sales volume accompanied increased activity in road building.
None of this would have been more than an insignificant fraction of the
volume of business that has developed, however, as the company’s bril-
liant business and financial judgment teamed up with superb technical
skill to attain a sales volume that is now exceeding two billion dollars
each year. Applying the skills and knowledge learned in its original


50 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

powder business, the company has successfully launched product after
product to make one of the great success stories of American industry.

The investment novice taking his first look at the chemical indus-
try might think it is a fortunate coincidence that the companies which
usually have the highest investment rating on many other aspects of
their business are also the ones producing so many of the industry’s most
attractive growth products. Such an investor is confusing cause and
effect to about the same degree as the unsophisticated young lady who
returned from her first trip to Europe and told her friends what a nice
coincidence it was that wide rivers often happened to flow right
through the heart of so many of the large cities. Studies of the history
of corporations such as Du Pont or Dow or Union Carbide show how
clearly this type of company falls into the “fortunate because they are
able” group so far as their sales curve is concerned.

Possibly one of the most striking examples of these “fortunate
because they are able” companies is General American Transportation.
A little over fifty years ago when the company was formed, the railroad
equipment industry appeared a good one with ample growth prospects.
In recent years few industries would appear to offer less rewarding
prospects for continued growth. Yet when the altered outlook for the
railroads began to make the prospects for the freight car builders increas-
ingly less appealing, brilliant ingenuity and resourcefulness kept this
company’s income on a steady uptrend. Not satisfied with this, the man-
agement started taking advantage of some of the skills and knowledge
learned in its basic business to go into other unrelated lines affording still
further growth possibilities.

A company which appears to have sharply increasing sales for some
years ahead may prove to be a bonanza for the investor regardless of
whether such a company more closely resembles the “fortunate and
able” or the “fortunate because it is able” type. Nevertheless, examples
such as General American Transportation make one thing clear. In either
case the investor must be alert as to whether the management is and
continues to be of the highest order of ability; without this, the sales
growth will not continue.

Correctly judging the long-range sales curve of a company is of
extreme importance to the investor. Superficial judgment can lead to
wrong conclusions. For example, | have already mentioned radio-television
stocks as an instance where instead of continued long-range growth there
was one major spurt as the homes of the nation acquired television sets.



What to Buy 51

Nevertheless, in recent years certain of these radio-television companies
have shown a new trend. They have used their electronic skills to build
up sizable businesses in other electronic fields such as communication
and automation equipment. These industrial and, in some cases, military
electronic lines give promise of steady growth for many years to come.
In a few of these companies, such as Motorola for example, they already
are of more importance than the television operation. Meanwhile, cer-
tain new technical developments afford a possibility that in the early
1960's current model television sets will appear as awkward and obso-
lete as the original wall-type crank-operated hand telephones appear
today.

One potential development, color television, has possibly been. ov-
erdiscounted by the general public. Another is a direct result of transis—
tor development and printed circuitry. It is a screen-type television with
sets that would be little different in size and shape from the larger pic-
tures we now have on our walls. The present bulky cabinet would be a
thing of the past. Should such developments obtain mass commercial
acceptance, a few of the technically most skillful of existing television
companies might enjoy another major spurt in sales even larger and
longer lasting than that which they experienced a few years ago. Such
companies would find this spurt superimposed on a steadily growing
industrial and military electronics business. They would then he enjoy-
ing the type of major sales growth which should be the first point to be
considered by those desiring the most profitable type of investments.

I have mentioned this example not as something which is sure to
happen, but rather as something which could easily happen. I do so
because I believe that in regard to a company’s future sales curve there
is one point that should always be kept in mind. If a company’s man-
agement is outstanding and the industry is one subject to technological
change and development research, the shrewd investor should stay alert
to the possibility that management might handle company affairs so as
to produce in the future exactly the type of sales curve that is the first
step to consider in choosing an outstanding investment.

Since I wrote these words in the original edition, it might be inter-
esting to note, not what “is sure to happen” or “may happen,” but what
has happened in regard to Motorola. We are not yet in the early 1960’,
the closest time to which I refer as affording a possibility of developing
television models that will obsolete those of the 1950's. This has not
happened nor is it likely to do so in the near future. But in the meanwhile


52 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

let us see what an alert management has done to take advantage of tech-
nological change to develop the type of upward sales curve that I stat-
ed was the first requisite of an outstanding investment.

Motorola has made itself an outstanding leader in the field of two-
way electronic communications that started out as a specialty for police
cars and taxicabs, and now appears to offer almost unlimited growth.
Trucking companies, owners of delivery fleets of all types, public utili-
ties, large construction projects, and pipe lines are but a few of the users
of this type of versatile equipment. Meanwhile, after several years of cost-
ly developmental effort, the company has established a semi-conductor
(transistor) division on a profitable basis which appears headed toward
obtaining its share of the fabulous growth trend of that industry. It has
become a major factor in the new field of stereophonic phonographs
and is obtaining an important and growing new source of sales in this
way. By a rather unique style tie-in with a leading national furniture
manufacturer (Drexel), it has significantly increased its volume in the
higher-priced end of its television line. Finally, through a small acquisi-
tion it is just getting into the hearing-aid field and may develop other
new specialties as well. In short, while some time in the next decade
important major stimulants may cause another large spurt in its original
radio-television lines, this has not happened yet nor is it likely to hap-
pen soon. Yet management has taken advantage of the resources and
skills within the organization again to put this company in line for
growth. Is the stock market responding to this? When | finished writing
the original cdition, Motorola was 45/4. Today it is 122.

When the investor is alert to this type of opportunity, how prof-
itable may it be? Let us take an actual example from the industry we
have just been discussing. In 1947 a friend of mine in Wall Street was
making a survey of the infant television industry. He studied approxi-
mately a dozen of the principal set producers over the better part of a
year. His conclusion was that the business was going to be competitive,
that there were going to be major shifts in position between the lead-
ing concerns, and that certain stocks in the industry had speculative
appeal. However, in the process of this survey it developed that one of
the great shortages was the glass bulb for the picture tube. The most suc-
cessful producer appeared to be Corning Glass Works. After further
examination of the technical and research aspects of Corning Glass
Works it became apparent that this company was unusually well quali -
fied to produce these glass bulbs for the television industry. Estimates of



What to Buy 53

the possible market indicated that this would be a major source of new
business for the company. Since prospects for other product lines
seemed generally favorable, this analyst recommended the stock for both
individual and institutional investment. The stock at that time was sell-
ing at about 20. It has since been split 2’4-for-l and ten years after his
purchase was selling at over 100, which was the equivalent of a price of
250 on the old stock.

POINT 2. Does the management have a determination to
continue to develop products or processes that will still
further increase total sales potentials when the growth

potentials of currently attractive product
lines have largely been exploited?

Companies which have a significant growth prospect for the next few
years because of new demand for existing lines, but which have neither
policies nor plans to provide for further developments beyond this may
provide a vehicle for a nice one-time profit. They are not apt to provide
the means for the consistent gains over ten or twenty-five years that are
the surest route to financial success. It is at this point that scientific
research and development engineering begin to enter the picture. It is
largely through these means that companies improve old products and
develop new ones. This is the usual route by which a management not
content with one isolated spurt of growth sees that growth occurs in a
series of more or less continuous spurts.

The investor usually obtains the best results in companies whose
engineering or research is to a considerable extent devoted to products
having some business relationship to those already within the scope of
company activities. This does not mean that a desirable company may
not have a number of divisions, some of which have product lines quite
different from others. It does mean that a company with research cen-
tered around each of these divisions, like a cluster of trees each growing
additional branches from its own trunk, will usually do much better
than a company working on a number of unrelated new products
which, if successful, will land it in several new industries unrelated to its
existing business.
