
Eurodollar Chart
MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 7.10

■ Eurodollar Chart

117
TREND BREAKOUTS

Figure 7.10 is interesting. The question can come up why the trade seemed to have
occurred late. It would have seemed that the trade hit the X day high yet the trade
was hit.
This is a hypothetical example but there will be many reasons in the real world.
It could have been that you had more than 10 longs at the time and you did not have
permission to take the trade. Maybe one of those longs exited and you had a slot open.
Another reason could have been that you exceeded your sector risk of 5 percent.You
were allowed to take this trade because another trade in that sector dropped out.
Another possible situation could have been that you had too much open trade equity
versus your core equity. (Do not take trades when you have 20 percent OTE versus
your core equity.)
The irony could be that once you finally do enter, almost immediately the trade
does not work and incurs a loss. This is trend following. We do not know the future.
Most trades do not work! We take low‐risk bets and put ourselves in a position to be
carried in when trades do actually work. Forget about the concept of win percentages.
What is critical for your success is the profit percentage when the trades do work.

FIGURE 7.11 Sugar Example

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

■ Sugar

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

118

See Figure 7.11 for a commodity example dealing with sugar.
Many times when we are trend following we will have initial profits. However,
we give the trade enough room to work via the average true range stop we utilize. In
the real world, there will be countless times when you have some small initial profit;
however, you end up giving up some of it and, at best, having a small profit. The other
reality, however, is that in the real world there will be times that these small open
profits even turn into small losses. This is the price we as trend followers have to pay in
order to put ourselves in a position over time to compound money.

Silver Example
MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 7.12

■ Silver

119
TREND BREAKOUTS

An interesting example of the necessity of taking every trade is exemplified with the
silver chart shown in Figure 7.12. As you can vividly see, you had two small losses one
after the other (green vertical lines). If you had not followed the plan and taken the
third trade, you would have beaten yourself up. This is why you need to take every
trade without question. Neither you nor I know the future. Forget about all the so‐
called analysts and gurus. They do not know the future either. The only thing we know
is that we will have numerous small losses, numerous small profits, and at rare times
big profits of trades that surpass our expectations.
With my help as your mentor you will be consistent. Consistent does not mean
every trade has to work. Consistent means you follow the plan and let the odds work
over time.

The Trend Following Bible: How Professional Traders Compound Wealth and Manage Risk
by Andrew Abraham
Copyright © 2013 by Andrew Abraham, Inc.

CHAPTER 8

Trend
Retracements
A

s for trend breakouts, there are seven basic rules you must follow for trend retracements.
1. Identify the strongest markets and the weakest markets via a smoothed rate
of change. These should be the only markets where you look for a trade.
2. When you get a trend breakout signal, confirm the breakout risk is not more
than 1 percent of your core account size; if so, go to the next step. In most
cases I risk even less personally.
3. Trade only in the direction of the MACD. If long, confirm you are above the
zero line. If short, confirm you are below the zero line.
4. Do not exceed more than 10 longs and 10 shorts.
5. Do not take a commodity trade if the dollar risk exceeds $2,500 a contract
regardless of account size.
6. Do not take the trade if you have already allocated 5 percent of your account
in that sector.
7. Do not take the trade if you have already have 20 percent of your total core
equity in open profits.

We have some additional parameters that I have added. Throughout my career
many trend followers have used the concept of multiple time frames. Trend followers

121

from David Harding from Winton to Don Steinitz to Alexander Elder are proponents
of multiple time frames. You want to be in sync with a time frame one step higher.
For example, if you are trading daily bars, you want to look at the weekly bars
direction. If you are day trading and trading hourly bars, you want to look at daily bars
to determine trend direction.

■ Don Steinitz’s Approach
Don Steinitz’s approach, discussed in “Improving the Odds by Trading Multiple Time
Frames” article, is very clear. He presents the laws of multiple time frames, as outlined
below:

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

122

■

Every time frame has its own structure.

■

The higher time frames overrule the lower time frames.

■

Prices in the lower time frame structure tend to respect the energy points
of the higher time frame structure.

■

The energy points of support/resistance created by the higher time frame’s
vibration (prices) can be validated by the action of lower time periods.

■

The trend created by the next time period enables us to define the tradable
trend.

■

What appears to be chaos in one time period can be order in another time
period.1

■ Alexander Elder’s Approach
Elder’s approach is similar. He looks for retracements within the larger trend. His
methodology is called the triple screen and is a good basis for a trend follower to use
as well as his Force Index for retracements.
However, in order to complete the whole trading plan, I strongly suggest adding
the risk management rules that I have been referring to throughout thisbook.

■ Step 1: Identify the Trend on the Higher

Time Frame

One of the easiest ways to identify the trend on the higher time frame is to use the
weekly MACD. You can see, quantitatively or numerically, the increase or decrease in

the MACD. As well, you can also use a 20‐period exponential moving average. Either
way, it is your personal preference. The premise is to easily identify the trend on the
higher time frame. It should be easily visible.

Examples of Trend Retracement
An Example of Trend Retrecements are demonstrated in this weekly crude oil chart.
Weekly Crude Oil On the weekly chart shown in Figure 8.1 you see, even from a
distance, a strong downtrend.

123

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

The MACD is negative and below the zero line. The trend is down.
Daily Crude Oil On the daily crude chart in Figure 8.2, you will notice the MACD
is below the zero line and negative. Highlighted with the red arrows are points in time
when crude is retraced. On the second pane is an indicator called the Elder Force Index. This oscillator demonstrates the pullback. These retracements become potential
entry points to get in with the trend if these pullbacks fail and the trend continues
negatively.

As you can see, from late 2005 till 2007 the yen was in a strong downtrend (Figure 8.3). This is evidenced by the MACD being below zero.

Weekly Yen

TREND RETRACEMENTS

FIGURE 8.1 Strong Downtrend in the Weekly Chart

FIGURE 8.2 Daily Crude Oil

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

124

FIGURE 8.3 Weekly Yen

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

You will notice on the daily chart in Figure 8.4 that in June, July, and
September there were some strong upward retracements on the weekly charts. These
are potential entry points. It is not known if the trend is ending or if this was a retracement. These retracements can be used for possible trend short entries.
Daily Yen

FIGURE 8.4 Daily Yen

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

Weekly Royal Bank of Canada You can see from Figure 8.5 that in 2011 there
was a strong downtrend noted by the MACD.

125
TREND RETRACEMENTS

FIGURE 8.5 Weekly Royal Bank of Canada

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

Daily Royal Bank of Canada You will notice within the downtrend there were
some retracements as noted by the down arrows (Figure 8.6). Furthermore, you can
look at the middle retracement oscillator indicator for moves above the zero line.
These were potential entry points to go short.

FIGURE 8.6 Daily Royal Bank of Canada

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

126

Sugar was in a strong uptrend as evidenced by the weekly MACD,
shown in Figure 8.7.

Weekly Sugar

FIGURE 8.7 Weekly Sugar

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 8.8 Daily Sugar

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

As noted by the up arrows in Figure 8.8, there were pullbacks on a
daily chart. Note on the retracement oscillator points in which it fell below the zero
line (August and October). These were potential points at which to start looking for
a long trade.

Daily Sugar

The basis is that if you are looking for a long trade, you want to see that on the higher
time frame it is trending positively, yet on the lower time frame there is a pullback and
slight downtrend. This retracement is identified by the Oscillator Rec indicator crossing the zero line and becoming negative.

Identify Long Buy Potential
Look for a weekly MACD that is positive and above the zero line.
Daily there is a pullback via the retracement oscillator when it crosses below the
zero line.

Identify Short Sell Potential
Look for a weekly MACD that is negative and below the zero line.
Daily there is a pullup via the retracement oscillator when it crosses above the
zero line.

127
TREND RETRACEMENTS

■ Step 2: Identify the Retracement/Pullback

The concept is similar to waves at the seashore.Within the tides you have big waves
and then inside of them smaller counterwaves or tides. We want to trade with the
trend and look to enter on these retracements with a low‐risk trade.
These are the indications you look for in a retracement trade due to the pullback for a long and pullup for a short. You never know if it is just a retracement
or if it is a change in trend. No one ever rings a bell to tell you there is a
change in trend. You need to ask yourself how much you are willing to lose to
see if the trade will work.

■ Step 3: Putting the Trade On
As we do not know if the trend is reversing or retracing, we want to be pulled into the
trade if it starts retracing back in the direction of the trend as identified on the higher
time frame.

For Buys

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

128

We put in a buy stop one tick or .001 percent above the high of the prior two bars. We
want the market to show us it wants to continue back in the direction of the higher
time frame. If prices continue to fall, our buy stop will not be filled. If we do not get
filled, then on the next bar put the buy stop one tick or .001 percent above the high
of the prior two bars. We continue lowering our buy stop at each bar until either we
are stopped in or if on the higher time frame the MACD reverses and our buy stop is
cancelled.
Baidu was in an uptrend on the weekly bars, yet there was a pullback on the
daily toward the end of February (Figure 8.9). Note on the Retracement Osc indicator

Baidu

FIGURE 8.9 Baidu Shares Retracement Buy

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

toward the end of February the Retracement Osc turned negative as noted from two
red bars. For two consecutive days we tried to enter the trend. Eventually, when the
trend resumed, we were pulled into the trade.
Sugar was in an uptrend on the weekly bars yet had a pullback (Figure
8.10). We were looking to go long. We kept on moving the buy stop until we were
pulled back into the trade.
Sugar

Sugar Buy
MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

129

CMG CMG was up on the weekly (Figure 8.11). CMG had a pullback on the daily
bars toward the end of July as noted by the Retracement Osc indicator. We looked to
go long and set up our buy stops until filled.

TREND RETRACEMENTS

FIGURE 8.10

CMG Buy
MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 8.11

Gold Gold was in an uptrend on the weekly bars (Figure 8.12). There was a pullback
on the daily bars around the beginning of May. We wanted to see if we could go long.
We kept on lowering our buy stops until we were pulled into a trade.There were other
points if we wanted to pyramid our positions (put on additional contracts); however,
this increases both our risks and our drawdowns.

Gold Buy
MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 8.12

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

130
Toward the end of February Netflix started to pull back on the daily bars
(Figure 8.13). The weekly was up and we wanted to put on a long trade. We noted the
Retracement Osc turned negative and looked to jump in. We were taken long by the
noted arrow.
Netflix

Netflix Buy
MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 8.13

For Sells
We put in a sell stop one tick or .001 percent below the low of the prior two bars.
We want the market to show us it wants to continue back in the direction of the
higher time frame. If prices continue to rise, our sell stop will not be filled. If we do
not get filled, then on the next bar put the sell stop one tick or .001 percent above
the low of the prior two bars. We continue raising our sell stop at each bar until
either we are stopped in or if on the higher time frame the MACD reverses and our
sell stop is cancelled.
Netflix Netflix was in a severe downtrend on the weekly (Figure 8.14). There was a
retracement as noted in the Retracement Osc turning positive around November with
one bar. We started looking to go short. We kept on moving our sell short stop until
we were pulled into the trade.

131

In the fall of 2008 crude was in a huge selloff. On the weekly charts the
trend was down; however, every time the Retracement Osc crossed the zero line to
the upside a potential short trade was available (Figure 8.15). The actual short entry
was a sell stop at the one tick below the two bars low.

Crude Oil

Eurodollar The trend on the Eurodollar on the weekly was negative (Figure
8.16). As evidenced by the Retracement Osc indicator when it crossed the zero
line, we had a potential short trade. We would sell one tick below the low of a
two‐day bar. As you can see, this was a choppy period in which several of the
trades did not work.

TREND RETRACEMENTS

Netflix
MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 8.14

Crude Oil
MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 8.15

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

132

Eurodollar
MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 8.16

On the weekly chart RY was in a downtrend as evidenced by the weekly MACD (Figure 8.17). On the daily there were retracements
as evidenced in the Retracement Osc that crossed the zero line. Each of these times
a potential sell short was presented. A sell short was put at one tick below the two
day low.
Royal Bank of Canada

Royal Bank of Canada
MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 8.17

■ Summary
The summary of our discussion on trend retracement trades is as follows:
Identify the strongest markets and the weakest markets via the average rate
of change. These should be the only markets in which you look for a trade.

■

Trade only in the direction of the higher term MACD to determine the trend.
If the higher term MACD is above the zero line and increasing, you want to
be long. If the higher term MACD is below the zero line and decreasing, you
want to be short.

■

For long trades look at the lower time frame bar that on the Elder Force–
Retracement Osc bars fell below the zero line and are negative. For short
trades look at the lower time frame bar that on the Elder Force–Retracement Osc bars rose above the zero line and are positive.

■

For long trades put in buy stop orders at one tick or .001 percent above the
two‐bar high. Keep on raising your buy stop orders at each following bar
until you are stopped in or until the higher time frame MACD turns negative and cancel the buy stop. For short trades put in sell stop orders at one
tick or .001 percent below the two‐bar low. Keep on lowering your sell stop
orders at each following bar until you are stopped in or until the higher time
frame MACD turns positive and cancels the sell stop.

133
TREND RETRACEMENTS

■

■

Do not exceed more than 10 longs and 10 shorts.

■

Do not risk more than 1 percent on any trade as determined by the hard
stop.

■

Do not take a commodity trade if the dollar risk exceeds $2,500 a contract
regardless of account size.

■

Do not take the trade if you have already allocated 5 percent of your account
in that sector.

■

Do not take the trade if you have already have 20 percent of your total core
equity in open profits.

■ Protect Yourself
Now that you are in the trade, you need to protect yourself.
As in the case of the trend breakout we use two stops for our protection. We use
a hard stop and if the trade starts working, we replace it with the average true range
Stop, which adjusts for volatility.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

134

For Buys
For buys the hard stop is one tick or .001 percent above the two‐bar low. I prefer to
use the parameter two‐bar as if the trade is going to work I will be pulled into the
trade. I have tried the one‐bar and it has resulted in many whipsaw trades. It is too
sensitive. In order to determine the position sizing we measure the entry price to one
tick or .001 percent below the two‐day low divided by our account size.
To determine how many shares to trade: As an example, our two‐day low is $50, the
buy stop is $52.10, and we are trading a $100,000 account, so we can risk 1 percent or
$1,000 – $52.10 – $49.95 = $2.15 – $1,000/$2.15 = 465 shares.
If the trade starts working we have open trade profit, and we switch our stop to
the trailing average true range stop.We hold our hard stop until the average true range
stop is less than our hard stop. We trail the trade and have patience and discipline to
see what happens.

For Shorts
For shorts the hard stop is one tick or .001 percent below the two‐bar high. If the
trade starts working we have open trade profit, and we switch our stop to the trailing
average true range stop. We hold our hard stop until the average true range stop is

less than our hard stop. We trail the trade and have patience and discipline to see what
happens.
To determine how many shares to trade: As an example, our two‐day high including the .001 percent is $36.80, the sell stop is $34.10 including the .001 percent, and
we are trading a $100,000 account, so we can risk 1 percent or $1,000 – $36.80 –
$34.10 = $2.70 – $1,000/$2.70 = 370 shares.

■ Note
1. http://www.tradingmarkets.com/.site/forex/how_to/articles/trading‐
with‐the‐trend‐on‐multiple‐time‐frames‐81828.cfm.

135
TREND RETRACEMENTS

The Trend Following Bible: How Professional Traders Compound Wealth and Manage Risk
by Andrew Abraham
Copyright © 2013 by Andrew Abraham, Inc.

CHAPTER 9

The Trend
Follower Mindset
T

here’s more to trading than just having a strategy.
There are countless trading strategies for you to choose from. The most
important aspect of a trading strategy is that it matches your personality and risk
thresholds.You can find hundreds of books with different trading strategies, along with
countless websites that offer trading strategies for free. In trading magazines as well as
websites that list trading system results, they all seem to highlight “the trading strategy
of the month.”
If it were as simple as buying one of these systems, you would have
retirement in a box.
With all of these trading strategies available, why isn’t everyone rich?
The sad reality is that most traders fail. There are estimates that only 3–5 percent
of all traders are successful over time.
The problem is that strategies do NOT make a good trader.
There’s more to trading than just having a strategy. Only time, knowledge, experience, and guidance can make you the trader you want to be.
You are your biggest enemy because of your emotions, fear, and greed!
In order to develop the right mindset, you need to know what to expect when
trading. Many traders mistakenly believe that trading will result in a consistently rising
account balance, like having an ATM in their office. But you already know that losses
are a part of our business as traders. There will be some days and weeks when your
trading exceeds your expectations, but more likely there will be periods when your
trading results are far worse than you expected.

137

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

138

It’s essential that you maintain a long‐term perspective. That is why I commonly
say trend following is a marathon.Too many traders and even investors in traders focus
on short‐term results and lose their perspective. I am asked all the time how I did last
month or last year. The reality is, that is meaningless. If I had a great month or year,
does that mean I will have a great month or year following? Probably not! I am at the
mercy of the markets trending. If they do not trend, I will not make any money. They
do not have to do anything. I like the analogy: If there are fish, I believe I stand a good
chance to catch them. (If there are no fish . . . I’m probably going to eat pasta that day.)
After experiencing a loss or a bad week, too many traders give up and start looking for or start trading a different strategy. And while the trading strategy they just
abandoned is recovering from the drawdown, the new trading strategy may result in
yet more losses, so again, they start looking for another. It becomes a vicious cycle.
You need to be convinced that trend following is right for you. Truthfully, it might
not be. It might too boring or too slow. You have to believe that over time you stand
the potential to grind out profits. If you do not really believe or internalize this, you
will quit at the first steep drawdown. I promise you . . . there is a drawdown out there
that can stop anyone from trading.
The biggest single mistake beginning traders make is that they believe that trading
is easy.
Successful trading has to be the hardest thing to achieve. My goal is to enlighten
you and teach you what it took me decades to truly learn.
You will learn to have an exact plan with exact entries, exact exits with both profits
and losses, and exact quantities to buy or sell. My goal is to teach you to manage the
uncertainty and risks in the markets. We are dealing in the unknown and uncertainty;
this is why trading is full of tremendous risks.
You will learn to take losses easily and quickly because you will know exactly
where the trade does not work. You will learn that if you do not exit you will cause
yourself tremendous financial and emotional damage.
You will learn that trend following is a marathon, that any trade or month really
does not mean anything.
You will learn to trust your trading plan.
You will learn to take responsibility for all of your trades.
You will learn to be objective.You will not become emotionally attached to your trades.
You will learn that you do not need to be right all the time in order to make
money! You need to have an exact plan as well as the discipline and patience to let it
work over time.
Luckily for me, my mentors instilled in me that it was more important how to think
than to find that elusive magical system or indicator. Richard Dennis and William Eckhardt from the Turtle legend also emphasized this when they taught their Turtle protégés.
In 1983 William Eckhardt and Richard Dennis made a bet that trading can be
taught. The bet was lost by William Eckhardt. He believed that trading was a skill not
