
MY FAVORITE TOP 10 TRADING THOUGHTS
Based on my own experiences as a trader and on conversations with many
top analysts and traders on my radio program and elsewhere, here is a top-10
list of observations I would like to pass along to you after 23 years in the trading business. You may recognize some of these thoughts as market clichés,
but they have stood the test of time and should be helpful for you as well.
1. You only have three choices when you are in a bad position, and it is not

hard to figure out what to do: (1) Get out, (2) double up, or (3) spread it
off. I have always found getting out to be the best of all three choices.
2. No opinion on the market or you are doubtful about market direction?
Then stay out. Remember, when in doubt, stay out.

My Favorite Top 10 Trading Thoughts

239

3. Don’t ever let anyone know how big your wallet is, and don’t ever let

anyone know how small it is either.
4. If you snooze, you lose. Know your markets, when they trade, and what
reports will affect the market price.
5. The markets will always let you in on the losers; the market’s job is to
keep you out of winners. Dump the dogs and ride the winning tide.
6. Stops are not for sissies.
7. Plan your trade, then trade your plan. He who fails to plan, plans to fail.
8. Buy the rumor and sell the fact. Watch for volatility in these situations;
it usually marks tops or bottoms in the markets.
9. Buy low, sell high. Or buy it when nobody wants it, and sell it when
everybody has to have it!
10. It’s okay to lose your shirt, just don’t lose your pants; that is where your
wallet is.
One last thought I want to leave with you. It applies not only to everyday life but to trading the markets as well: Success is measured not so much
by the wealth or position you have gained, but rather by the obstacles you
have overcome to succeed!
Good luck in all of your investing and trading endeavors. And, remember, you are trading to take money out of the market, not to build a big account to satisfy your ego or to invest in your grandchildren’s retirement fund.
Be sure to take money out of the market for yourself and immediate needs
so you can enjoy the fruits of your labors.

Glossary

abandoned baby Candlestick pattern that resembles a bar chart version of an island top or bottom formation. Generally, the gap island candle is a doji.
all or none A specific order that instructs the floor broker to fill all contracts in
an order or none at all.
American-style option An option that trades on U.S. exchanges and can be exercised at any time during the life of the option prior to expiration.
arbitrage The action of a simultaneous buy and sell of a similar or like commodity or futures product that may be made in different contract months, on different
exchanges, or in different countries to profit from a discrepancy in price.
assignment The notification to a holder of a short option position that his or her
position has been exercised by the opposite party (buyer), and he or she has been
issued a position in the underlying derivative market. The holder of a short call would
be assigned a short position at the strike price level, and the holder of a short put
option would be assigned a long position at the strike price level.
associated person An individual who solicits orders, customers, or customer
funds on behalf of a futures commission merchant, an introducing broker, a Commodity Trading Advisor, or a Commodity Pool Operator.
at the money When the strike price of an option is equal or very close to the price
of the underlying derivative market price.
automatic exercise A procedure whereby options that are in the money at expiration are exercised without instruction from the option holder. Buyers of options
may abandon such options if they did not offset the position, but need to notify their
FCMs and or instruct their brokers to do so.
backwardation A condition in which futures prices are lower in each succeeding
contract month rather than higher in a normal carry charge market due to a supply
or demand imbalance.
bar charting A method of charting a period’s price action as a vertical line that
represents the high and low with a small horizontal line marking the open and closing prices.

241

242

GLOSSARY

basis The price difference between a futures contract and the underlying cash
market. The basis can be affected by supply/demand functions and carrying costs.
bearish

A downtrending market or a period in which prices are declining.

belt-hold candle A candle that can be a bearish or bullish candle. The bullish candle opens on the low, forming a flat bottom or shaved-bottom appearance. The
bearish candle opens at the high, forming a flat top or shaved-top look.
beta An option term that measures the percentage of price move of the option in
relation to the underlying futures contract.
bid

A reference to buy at a certain price.

Black–Scholes The standard formula for pricing the value of options. Fischer
Black and Myron Scholes developed the calculation.
breakaway gap A chartist term that applies when prices move substantially away
from a congestion or consolidation area. The gap area leaves a space or hole on the
charts.
broker A registered representative of a brokerage firm who is paid commissions
for accepting and placing orders for customers.
bullish

An uptrending market or a period in which prices appreciate in value.

bull spread In most commodities and financial instruments, the term refers to
buying the nearby month and selling the deferred month to profit from the change
in the price relationship.
butterfly spread Buying and selling two spreads in opposite directions with the
center delivery month common to both spreads.
calendar spread An options trade where one buys and sells options in different
expiration months in the same underlying contract.
call option A derivative product that gives a buyer the right, but not the obligation, to be long or to be a buyer of an underlying derivative product at the strike
price level.
candlestick charting Charting method that provides a visual presentation of the relationship between the open, high, low, and close. Color schemes are used to illustrate
a candle’s real body, which is the difference between the close and the open. If the
close is lower than the open, the body is usually shown as black; if the close is higher
than the open, the body is usually shown as clear or white.
carrying charges The cost associated with holding or storing cash or physical
commodities and financial instruments. Three variables are involved: storage, insurance, and finance charges or interest payments on borrowed money.
cash settlement A means to settle a contract on the last trading day. Instead of
physical delivery, the product is settled by the contract’s cash value. Stock indexes,
the U.S. Dollar Index, and a number of other futures contracts are cash settled.

Glossary

243

clearinghouse A company or separate corporation of an exchange that is responsible for reconciling trading accounts, clearing trades, collecting and maintaining
margin monies, regulating delivery, and reporting trading data. Clearinghouses act as
third parties to all futures and options contracts, acting as a buyer to every clearing
member seller and a seller to every clearing member buyer.
clearing member A firm that holds seats on an exchange and has the right to
clear and reconcile trades of individual floor traders on that exchange.
close The settlement or last price at the end of a trading session established by
the exchange.
commodity A physical product that is used in commerce and is traded mainly on
a regulated commodity exchange. The types of products range from agricultural,
such as meats and grains, to metals to petroleum. The term is also often applied to
financial instruments such as foreign currencies, stock index futures, single stock
futures, and various interest rate vehicles such as T-notes and T-bonds.
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) The federal regulatory agency
overseeing the U.S. futures industry, established under the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission Act, as amended in 1974 and renewed periodically. The commission consists of five commissioners, one of whom is designated as chairman, all
appointed by the president subject to Senate confirmation, and is independent of all
cabinet departments. This agency regulates all nonbank Forex dealings as well as
the futures industry.
commodity pool An enterprise in which funds contributed by a number of persons
are combined for the purpose of trading futures contracts or commodity options.
Commodity Trading Advisor (CTA) A specific registration that requires an associated person to be registered with the National Futures Association for two years.
A registered individual or entity can then advise others, for compensation or profit,
about buying or selling futures contracts or commodity options. A CTA can exercise
trading authority over a customer’s account as well as provide research and analysis through newsletters or other media.
coupon The interest rate on a debt instrument expressed in terms of a percent on
an annualized basis that the issuer guarantees to pay the holder until maturity.
crop reports Reports compiled and released by private forecasting agencies and
the U.S. Department of Agriculture providing pertinent information regarding estimates on planted acreage, yield, and expected production as well as the growing
conditions and progress of the crops.
crush spread The purchase of soybean futures and the simultaneous sale of soybean oil and soybean meal futures contracts.
daily trading limit
contract.

The maximum price range set by the exchange each day for a

244

GLOSSARY

day traders Speculators who trade positions during the day in the derivative markets and liquidate them prior to the close to avoid exposure to adverse risk overnight.
dead cross A chart pattern whereby a sell signal is generated when one or more
shorter-term moving averages cross below a longer-term moving average.
deferred month The more distant month in which futures trading is taking place,
as opposed to the active nearby or front contract delivery month.
delivery The transfer of a cash commodity from the seller of a futures contract to
the buyer of a futures contract. Exchanges are responsible for establishing the specific quantity, quality, and procedures for physical delivery.
delta A calculation percentage measure for how much an option premium
changes based on the change in the underlying derivative product, interpreted as
the probability that the option will be in the money by expiration.
discount rate
ber banks.

The interest rate charged on loans by the Federal Reserve to mem-

doji A candlestick term used to describe a time period when the open and close are
nearly identical. It is a strong sell signal at a top, but a cautionary warning at bottoms.
Elliott wave Analysis theory that was developed by Ralph N. Elliott based on the
premise that prices move in two basic types of waves. Five impulse waves move
with the main trend and three corrective waves move against the main trend.
Eurodollars

U.S. dollars on deposit with banks outside of the United States.

exchange for physicals (EFP) A transaction generally used by two hedgers who
want to exchange futures for cash positions.
exercise The process by which options traders implement their right to convert
an options position into the underlying futures or derivative market. For example,
buyers of call options would convert their calls for a long position, and buyers of put
options would convert their puts to a short futures contract.
expiration date

The established time when options expire.

face value The amount of money printed on the face of the certificate of a security; the original dollar amount of indebtedness incurred.
falling three methods A bearish continuation pattern similar to the Western version of a bear flag. It can be a four-candle pattern, but usually has five candles.
Federal funds The interest rate charged to member banks on money loaned by
other member banks.
Federal Reserve System The central banking system in the United States, created by the Federal Reserve Act in 1913, designed to assist the nation in attaining its
economic and financial goals. The structure of the Federal Reserve System includes
a Board of Governors, the Federal Open Market Committee, and 12 Federal Reserve
banks.

Glossary

245

Fibonacci numbers and ratios The sequence of numbers that adds a number to
the preceding number to produce a series that continues to infinity. The ratios are
the math calculations derived from dividing the series numbers or in some cases the
square root of the numbers. The important ratio numbers are 0.38 percent, 0.618
percent, 50 percent and 100 percent.
fill-or-kill A customer order that is a price limit order that must be filled immediately or canceled.
financial instrument A document having monetary value or recording a monetary transaction. There are two basic types. One is a debt instrument, which is a loan
with an agreement to pay back funds with interest. The other is an equity security,
which is a share or stock in a company.
first notice day According to Chicago Board of Trade rules, the first day on
which a notice of intent to deliver a commodity in fulfillment of a given month’s futures contract can be made by the clearinghouse to a buyer. The clearinghouse also
informs the sellers with whom they have been matched. Each exchange sets its own
guidelines and rules for this process.
floor broker An individual who executes orders for the purchase or sale of any
commodity futures or options contract on any contract market for any other person.
floor trader An individual who executes trades for the purchase or sale of any
commodity futures or options contract on any contract market for such individual’s
own account.
forex market Usually refers to the over-the-counter market where buyers and
sellers conduct foreign currency exchange business.
forward contract A cash contract in which a seller agrees to deliver a specific
cash commodity to a buyer sometime in the future. Forward contracts, in contrast
to futures contracts, are privately negotiated and are not standardized.
full carrying charge market A futures market where the price difference between delivery months reflects the total costs of interest, insurance, and storage.
fundamental analysis A method of anticipating future price movement using
supply and demand information.
futures commission merchant (FCM) An individual or organization that solicits
or accepts orders to buy or sell futures contracts or options on futures and accepts
money or other assets from customers to support such orders. Also referred to as
commission house or wire house.
futures contract A legally binding agreement, made on an exchange trading floor
or via computer, to buy or sell a commodity or financial instrument at a specified
time in the future. Futures contracts are standardized as to the quality, quantity, and
delivery time and location for each market. These guidelines are established by the
exchange and overseen by the CFTC.

246

GLOSSARY

futures exchange A central marketplace with established rules and regulations
where buyers and sellers meet to trade futures and options on futures contracts.
gamma An option valuation term used to measure how fast delta changes, given
a unit change in the underlying futures price.
Gann, William D. An early pioneer in technical analysis. He is credited with developing mathematical systems based on Fibonacci numbers, cycles of various
lengths, and the Gann square.
GLOBEX A global electronic trading system used on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME).
golden cross A bullish term used to describe a chart pattern when one or more
shorter-term moving averages cross above a longer-term moving average. It generally generates a buy signal.
grain terminal Large grain elevator facility with the capacity to ship grain by rail
or barge to domestic or foreign markets.
gravestone doji A candlestick pattern that represents a wide-range period where
the open and close are near the low of the period’s range.
gross domestic product (GDP) The value of all final goods and services produced by an economy over a particular time period, normally a year.
gross national product (GNP) Gross domestic product plus the income accruing
to domestic residents as a result of investments abroad less income earned in domestic markets accruing to foreigners abroad.
hammer A candlestick pattern that forms at bottoms. At market tops the same
construction is called a hanging man. The shadow is generally twice the length of
the real body.
harami A two-candle pattern that marks tops and bottoms. The second candle of
this formation is contained within the real body of the prior session’s candle.
hedger An individual or company owning or planning to own the underlying
product and concerned that the cost of the market may change before either buying
or selling it in the cash market. A hedger achieves protection against changing cash
prices by purchasing (selling) futures contracts of the same or similar commodity
and later offsetting that position by selling (purchasing) futures contracts of the
same quantity and type as the initial transaction.
hedging The practice of offsetting the price risk inherent in any cash market position by taking an equal but opposite position in the futures market. Hedgers use
the futures markets to protect their businesses from adverse price changes.
high wave A candle that has a wide range with a small real body that develops in
the middle of that range. It has significance as a reversal formation, especially if
several of these form in succession.

247

Glossary

horizontal spread The purchase of either a call or put option and the simultaneous sale of the same type of option with typically the same strike price but with a
different expiration month. Also referred to as a calendar spread.
implied volatility The term used to measure an expected price move based on the
underlying futures market for an option.
index option

Options on a stock index, either cash or futures.

initial margin The good-faith deposit that must be posted initially to enter into a
futures position. Margins are subject to change without notice. It is the responsibility of the exchanges to set these price amounts.
intercommodity spread The purchase of a given delivery month of one futures
market and the simultaneous sale of the same delivery month of a different, but related, futures market.
interdelivery spread The purchase of one delivery month of a given futures contract and simultaneous sale of another delivery month of the same commodity on
the same exchange. Also referred to as an intramarket or calendar spread.
intermarket spread The sale of a given delivery month of a futures contract on
one exchange and the simultaneous purchase of the same delivery month and futures contract on another exchange.
in-the-money option An option having intrinsic value. A call option is in-themoney if its strike price is below the current price of the underlying futures contract. A put option is in-the-money if its strike price is above the current price of the
underlying futures contract.
intrinsic value

The amount by which an option is in-the-money.

introducing broker (IB) A person or organization that solicits or accepts orders
to buy or sell futures contracts or commodity options but does not accept money or
other assets from customers to support such orders.
inverted market A futures market in which the relationship between two delivery months of the same commodity is abnormal.
island chart pattern A pattern formed when the market gaps in one direction and
then in the next session, gaps open in the opposite direction leaving the prior period’s bar or range isolated on the chart like an island. At tops this is extremely bearish; at bottoms it is considered extremely bullish. This is a rare chart pattern and is
similar in nature to the Japanese candlestick pattern called the abandon baby.
J-Trader An independent electronic trading order-entry platform provider by
Pats Systems that routes orders to exchange electronic trading systems.
lagging indicators Market indicators showing the general direction of the economy and confirming or denying the trend implied by the leading indicators.
last trading day (LTD) The final day when trading may occur in a given futures
or options contract month.

248

GLOSSARY

leading indicators Market indicators that signal the state of the economy for the
coming months. Some of the leading indicators include average manufacturing
workweek, initial claims for unemployment insurance, orders for consumer goods
and material, percentage of companies reporting slower deliveries, change in manufacturers’ unfilled orders for durable goods, plant and equipment orders, new
building permits, index of consumer expectations, change in material prices, prices
of stocks, and change in money supply.
LEAPS Long-term Equity Anticipation Securities. These are options that have an
extended life as long as five years. Generally used for options on stocks.
leverage The ability to control large dollar amounts of a commodity with a comparatively small amount of capital.
limit order
execution.

An order in which the customer sets a limit on the price or time of

liquid A characteristic of a security or commodity market with enough units outstanding to allow large transactions without a substantial change in price. Institutional investors are inclined to seek out liquid investments so that their trading
activity will not influence the market price.
liquidate Closing a position with an offsetting transaction in the futures markets.
A long holder would sell and a short holder would buy to make their market position flat.
long

The position in a market when one buys contracts or owns a cash commodity.

long-legged doji A specific doji that forms when the open and close occurs near
the middle of a wide-range trading session.
maintenance margin A set minimum margin that a customer must maintain in
his or her margin account. If the cash amount in the trading account drops below
this level and a margin call is generated, the trader must either send additional
funds to get the account back to the initial margin level or liquidate positions to satisfy the call.
managed futures Client assets are held in an account that is traded by professional money managers known as Commodity Trading Advisors on a discretionary
basis, using global futures markets as an investment medium.
margin call A call from a clearinghouse to a clearing member or from a brokerage firm to a customer to bring margin deposits up to a required minimum level.
marked-to-market The act of debiting or crediting a margin account based on
the close of that day’s trading session.
market order An order to buy or sell a futures contract of a given delivery month
to be filled at the best possible price and as soon as possible.
market profile
time brackets.
