
200

STOCK MARKET INDICATORS

The position of NH-NL in relation to its centerline shows whether bulls or
bears are in control. When NH-NL is above its centerline, it shows that more
market leaders are bullish than bearish. Then it is better to trade the stock
market from the long side. When NH-NL is below its centerline, it shows
that bearish leadership is stronger, and it is better to trade from the short side.
NH-NL can stay above its centerline for months at a time in bull markets and
below its centerline for months at a time in bear markets.

5. If NH-NL stays negative for several months but then rallies above its
centerline, it signals that a bull move is likely to begin. Then it is time
to look for buying opportunities, using oscillators for precise timing. If
NH-NL stays positive for several months but then falls below its centerline, it shows that a bear move is likely to begin. Then it is time to
look for shorting opportunities using oscillators for precise timing.
More o n NH-NL
Old analysts used to smooth NH-NL using 10-day and 30-day simple moving averages. When a 10-day MA of NH-NL crossed above a 30-day MA, it
gave a buy signal. When a 10-day MA crossed below a 30-day MA, it gave a
sell signal. Raw NH-NL gives clearer signals, but if you still want to smooth
NH-NL, it is better to use exponential moving averages.
The number of new highs and new lows is reported daily by the New
York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange, the Over-the-counter
Exchange, and the London Stock Exchange. Most overseas s t o c k
exchanges do not report these numbers, but a computer-equipped analyst
should have no difficulty creating NH-NL for any market. Traders who use
NH-NL outside of the United States get an edge over competitors who lack
this indicator. You need to obtain one year's worth of daily data for every
stock on the exchange you follow and update that file daily. Program your
computer to examine your database each day and flag those stocks that have
reached a new high or a new low for the past 52 weeks.
NH-NL does not work in the stock markets dominated by a handful of
stocks. For example, hundreds of stocks are listed on the Milan Stock
Exchange in Italy, but only 2 of them - FIAT and Generale - represent
nearly 70 percent of total market capitalization. These two giants can override the rest of the market.

38. TRADERS' INDEX A N D OTHER STOCK MARKET INDICATORS

201

38. TRADERS' INDEX AND OTHER STOCK
MARKET INDICATORS
The Traders' Index (TRIN) is a leading stock market indicator. It shows
when major rallies and declines get ready to reverse by measuring the intensity of optimism of the dominant market group. Excessive optimism is associated with market tops and excessive pessimism with bottoms.
TRIN measures the ratio of advancing to declining stocks and compares it
to the ratio of advancing to declining volume. This indicator was popularized
by Richard Arms and is included in most quote systems. Any broker with a
terminal on his desk can punch a few keys and see the latest TRIN. It is easy
to calculate TRIN by hand or by using a computer at the end of each trading
day.
New market developments have changed TRIN over the years: listed
stock options, index arbitrage, dividend recapture plays, and so on. The original interpretation of TRIN had to be adjusted, but TRIN continues to stand
out as one of the best stock market indicators. It helps in timing stock trades
as well as trades in stock index futures and options.

How to Construct TRIN

You need four pieces of data to calculate the Traders' Index: the number and
volume of advancing and declining stocks as well as the volume of both
groups. These figures are released by the New York Stock Exchange and
several other exchanges throughout each trading session.
TRIN =

Adv Issues
Decl Issues

/

Adv Volume
Decl Volume

TRIN compares the relationship between the ratio of advancing and
declining stocks and the ratio of advancing and declining volume (see worksheet, Figure 38-1). If 1000 stocks rally on a volume of 100 million shares,
and 1000 stocks decline on a volume of 100 million shares, then TRIN
equals 1. If 1500 stocks go up on a volume of 150 million shares and 500
stocks go down on a volume of 50 million shares, TRIN remains 1.
TRIN falls when the volume of advancing stocks is disproportionately
high, compared to their number. TRIN rises when the volume of declining
stocks is disproportionately high, compared to their number.

STOCK MARKET INDICATORS

202

S&P 500
--

Adv Vol *I..................................................................
Decl Vol TRIN:l I TRIN: 13-EMA
Decl
Date
Adv
................................................................................
6/04

,

784

765

8374

868

680

9371

j

7107

i .87 i

4831

.66

7162 f 9418 0 ..............
.97 9! ............................
6/05
661 1 895
......................................................................................................
6/06
681 1 861
6339 f 8783 i 1.10 i
6/07 [ 445 1 1113 [ 3251 f 11771 1 1.45 i
4230 !...........
6644
6/10
648
905
1.12 f
"................ '" ............"....................
................................................................................
!

6111

,

Figure 38-1.

Traders' Index (TRIN) Worksheet

TRIN tracks the ratio of advancing to declining stocks and compares it
with the ratio of advancing to declining volume. It works best when it is
smoothed with an exponential moving average, such as a 13-day EMA.

The volume of advancing stocks often swells out of proportion to their
number during rallies. If the ratio of advancing to declining issues is 2:1, but
the ratio of advancing to declining volume is 4:1, then TRIN equals 0.50 (211
+ 411). A low TRIN shows that bulls are highly optimistic, a rally is being
overdone, and a top is near.
When the market falls, the volume of declining stocks often swells out of
proportion to their number. If the ratio of advancing to declining issues is
1:2, but the ratio of advancing to declining volume is 1:4, then TRIN equals
2 (112 + 114). A high TRIN shows that bears are too optimistic, too much
volume goes into the declining stocks, a decline is being overdone, and the
market is nearing a bottom.
TRIN can change sharply from day to day. TRIN gives better signals
when it is smoothed with a moving average. You can use a 13-day exponen-

38. TRADERS' INDEX A N D OTHER STOCK MARKET INDICATORS

203

tial moving average of daily TRIN (see Section 25). It filters out the noise of
daily swings and shows the true trend of this indicator. For the rest of this
chapter, the term TRIN is used as shorthand for 13-day EMA of daily TRIN.
Plot TRIN on an inverted vertical scale. Low numbers on the top identify
market peaks, and high numbers at the bottom identify market lows. Two
horizontal reference lines mark overbought and oversold levels. When TRIN
rises above its upper reference line, it shows that the stock market is overbought and nearing a top. When TRIN falls below its lower reference line, it
shows that the market is oversold and nearing a bottom.
The level of reference lines depends on whether the stocks are in a bull or
bear market or a neutral trading range. The overbought line is usually placed
at 0.65 or 0.70 in bull markets, 0.70 or 0.75 in bear markets. The oversold
line is placed at 0.90 or 0.95 in bull markets, 1.00 or 1.10 in bear markets.
These levels may shift by the time you read this book-use them as a starting point for your own research.
The best way to draw reference lines is to examine a chart of an index
such as the S&P 500 for the past six months, along with TRIN. Mark all
important tops and bottoms of the S&P 500 and draw two reference lines
that cut across the corresponding tops and bottoms of TRIN. When TRIN
enters those extreme areas again, you will know that the market has entered
a reversal zone. Adjust oversold and overbought lines every three months.

Crowd Psychology

The stock market is a manic-depressive beast-it swings from expansive
mania to fearful depression. The mood of a manic-depressive patient goes
through cycles. When he reaches the bottom of depression, his mood starts
to improve. When he rises to the height of mania, he starts to slow down.
Traders can use TRIN to diagnose manic and depressive episodes in the
stock market and bet on their reversals (see Figure 38-2).
Crowds are emotional and short-term oriented. Trends often go farther
than you expect because crowds act out their feelings and run instead of acting rationally. Trends reverse when masses of traders get tired of running.
TRIN shows when they become exhausted.
If bulls become greedy during a rally, they buy so many shares that
advancing volume swells out of proportion with the number of advancing
stocks. When TRIN rises above its upper reference line it shows that mass
optimism has risen to a level associated with tops.

STOCK MARKET INDICATORS

204

368

348
337
325
314
-8,68
-8,78
-8,89
-8,99

-1,H
Figure 38-2.

Traders' Index (TRIN)

When the volume of rising stocks rises out of proportion to their number,
it reflects bullish enthusiasm, and TRlN becomes overbought. It rises and
then flashes a sell signal when it leaves its overbought zone. When the
volume of declining stocks becomes too large relative to their number,
TRlN becomes oversold. It gives a buy signal when it leaves its oversold
zone.
TRlN gives its best buy and sell signals when it diverges from the pattern of the S&P 500 index. The market rose higher in October than in
September, but TRlN reached a lower top, giving a strong sell signal.
After the October fall, the market retested its bottom in November, but a
much higher bottom in TRlN showed that bears were out of breath. This
bullish divergence gave a strong buy signal. At the right edge of the
chart, the market is strong but TRlN i s nowhere near overbought-hold
longs.

If bears dump shares during a decline, then downside volume swells out
of proportion with the number o f declining stocks. When TRIN falls below
its lower reference line, i t shows that bearishness is being overdone and an
upside reversal is near.

38. TRADERS' INDEX A N D OTHER STOCK MARKET INDICATORS

205

Changes of TRIN are similar to what happens during rush hours at a suburban commuter train station. In the morning, the departure platform gets
overcrowded, while at night there is a crowd at the arriving platform. The
biggest crowd identifies the peak of the trend-either into the city or back
home. You can identify traffic reversals by measuring the number of commuters crowding a platform. That is what TRIN does in the stock market.
TRIN identifies rush hours in uptrends and downtrends. It flags bullish
extremes at stock market tops and bearish extremes at market bottoms. TRIN
identifies mood swings of the stock market crowd. Professionals use this
information because they tend to trade against deviations and for a return to
normalcy.

Trading Rules

TRIN is plotted on an inverted scale. High numbers mark the bottoms and
low numbers signal market tops. TRIN hovers between 0.75 to 0.85 in neutral markets. It is less than 1.0 because the volume of advancing stocks normally exceeds the volume of declining stocks. People are normally more
bullish than bearish.
TRIN cannot be used mechanically - the same readings mean different
things under different market conditions. Overbought and oversold readings
are lower during bear markets and higher during bull markets. For example,
TRIN of 0.60 marks great bullish strength at an early stage of a bull market. It
tells you to look for every opportunity to add to long positions. The same reading of 0.60 during a rally in a bear market marks a major shorting opportunity.
This is why it pays to adjust overbought and oversold lines every three months.
1. Buy when TRIN leaves its oversold zone. When it crosses above its
lower reference line, it shows that bears have run out of steam. Buying
at this time is like betting on a traffic reversal after the rush hour.
2. Sell when TRIN leaves its overbought zone. When TRIN sinks below
its upper reference line, it shows that bulls are running out of breath.
Selling short at this time is safer than trying to pick the exact top.
3. TRIN works best when combined with the New High-New Low
Index (see Section 37). If TRIN becomes oversold while NH-NL
reaches a new low, it shows that bearish leadership is strong and the
downtrend is likely to continue. If TRIN becomes oversold but NH-

STOCK MARKET INDICATORS

206

NL traces a bullish divergence, it marks an important low. The combined signals of TRIN and NH-NL give traders confidence to buy a
larger position.
4. If TRIN becomes overbought but NH-NL rises to a new high, it shows
that the upside leadership is strong and the uptrend is likely to continue. If TRIN becomes overbought while NH-NL traces a bearish
divergence, it often marks an important stock market top. Then you
can short a larger position.

TRIN gives its strongest buy and sell signals when it diverges from prices.

5. When the stock market rises to a new high but TRIN traces a lower
peak than it did during its previous rally, it shows that bulls are losing
power. When bulls cannot purchase as many shares as before, the
uptrend is in trouble. A bearish divergence between TRIN and the
stock market gives a strong sell signal.

6. When the stock market falls to a new low but TRIN flattens out at a
more shallow level than during its previous decline, it shows that bears
have fewer stocks to sell. When bears start losing power, the market is
ready to rally. A bullish divergence between TRIN and the stock market gives a strong buy signal.

More on TRIN

The New York. Stock Exchange releases information on advancing and
declining stocks and their volume throughout each trading session. Intraday
TRIN can be used by day-traders.
TRIN can be applied to any stock exchange that reports the numbers of
advancing and declining stocks and their volume. When that data becomes
available for overseas exchanges, the first traders to use it will have a competitive advantage.

The AdvanceDecline line ( A D line) measures mass participation in rallies
and declines. If New Highs and New Lows are the officers, and the Dow

38. TRADERS' INDEX AND OTHER STOCK MARKET INDICATORS

207

Jones Industrials are the generals, then the A/D line shows whether or not
the soldiers are following their leaders. A rally or decline is more likely to
persist when the A/D line rises to a new high or falls to a new low in gear
with the Dow.
To calculate A/D for each day, subtract the number of declining stocks
from the number of advancing stocks and ignore unchanged stocks. The
result is positive or negative, depending on whether more stocks advanced or
declined. For example, if 1900 stocks were traded, 900 advanced, 700
declined, and 300 were unchanged, then Advancemecline equals t200 (900
- 700). Each day's Advancemecline figures are added to the previous day's
total, creating a cumulative A/D line.
Traders should keep an eye on new peaks and valleys in the A/D line
because its absolute level depends mostly on its starting date. Broadly based
rallies and declines have greater staying power. If a new high in the stock
market is accompanied by a new high in the A D line, it shows that the rally
has broad support and is likely to continue. If the stock market reaches a new
peak but the AID line reaches a lower peak than during the previous rally, it
shows that fewer stocks are participating, and the rally may be near its end.
When the market falls to a new low but the A/D line traces a more shallow
bottom than during the previous decline, it shows that the decline is narrowing down and the bear move is nearing an end. These signals tend to precede
reversals by weeks if not months.

Most Active Stocks

The Most Active Stocks indicator (MAS) is an advanceldecline line of the
15 most active stocks on'the New York Stock Exchange. They are listed
daily in many newspapers. Several large capitalization stocks, such as IBM,
frequently appear on this list. Other stocks make the list only when they
catch the public's eye due to an extremely positive or negative piece of
news. MAS is a big money indicator - it shows whether big money is bullish
or bearish.
MAS for each day equals the number of the most active stocks that
advanced minus the number of the most active stocks that declined. For
example, if 9 of the most active stocks went up, 4 fell, and 2 were
unchanged, then MAS for that day is 5 (9 - 4). Each day's MAS is added to
the previous day's total, creating a cumulative MAS line.
When MAS moves in the same direction as the broad stock market, it

208

STOCK MARKET INDICATORS

shows that big money supports the trend and it is likely to continue. When
the market goes one way and MAS goes the other way, it shows that big
money is betting on a reversal. When the trend of MAS diverges from the
price trend, the market is especially likely to reverse.

Other Stock Market Indicators
Only a few stock market indicators have withstood the test of time. The New
High-New Low Index and TRIN are probably the best stock market indicators, followed by AdvancePecline and Most Active Stocks.
Old stock market books are full of fascinating indicators, but you have to
be very careful using them today. Changes in the market over the years have
killed many indicators.
Indicators based on volume of low-priced stocks lost their usefulness
when the average volume of the U.S. stock market soared tenfold and the
Dow rose sixfold. The Member Short Sale Ratio and the Specialist Short
Sale Ratio stopped working after options became popular. Member and specialist short sales are now tied up in the intermarket arbitrage. Odd-lot
statistics lost value when conservative odd-lotters bought mutual funds. The
Odd-lot Short Sale Ratio stopped working when gamblers discovered puts.

VII
Psychological Indicators

39. CONSENSUS INDICATORS
Many private traders keep their market opinions to themselves, but financial
journalists and market letter writers spew them forth like open fire hydrants.
Some writers are very bright, but both groups as a whole have poor trading
records.
Financial journalists and letter writers overstay important trends and miss
major turning points. When these groups become bullish or bearish, it pays
to trade against them. The behavior of groups is more primitive than individual behavior.
Consensus indicators, also known as contrary opinion indicators, are not
as exact as trend-following indicators or oscillators. They simply draw your
attention to the fact that a trend is ready to reverse. When you get that message, use technical indicators for more precise timing.
As long as the market crowd remains in conflict, the trend can continue.
When the crowd reaches a strong consensus, the trend is ready to reverse.
When the crowd becomes highly bullish, it pays to get ready to sell. When
the crowd becomes strongly bearish, it pays to get ready to buy.
The foundations of the contrary opinion theory were laid by Charles
Mackay, a Scottish barrister. He described in his book, Extraordinary
Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds, crowd behavior during the
Dutch Tulip Mania and the South Seas Bubble in England. Humphrey B.
Neil1 applied the theory of contrary opinion to stocks and other financial

210

PSYCHOLOGICAL INDICATORS

markets. He explained in his book, The Art of Contrary Thinking, why the
majority must be wrong at the market's major turning points. Prices are
established by crowds, and by the time the majority turns bullish, there are
not enough new buyers left to support a bull market.
Abraham W. Cohen, a New York lawyer, came up with the idea of polling
market advisors and using their responses as a proxy for the entire body of
traders. Cohen was a skeptical man who spent many years on Wall Street and
saw that the advisors as a group performed no better than the market crowd.
In 1963, he established a service called Investors Intelligence for tracking
market letter writers. When the majority of them became bearish, Cohen
identified a buying opportunity. Selling opportunities were marked by strong
bullishness among letter writers. James H. Sibbet applied this theory to commodities. In 1964, he set up an advisory service called Market Vane. He
studied the opinions of advisors and also weighed them in proportion to the
numbers of their subscribers.
Tracking Advisory Opinion
Some letter writers are very smart, but taken as a group they are no better
than average traders. They become very bullish at major tops and very bearish at major bottoms. Their consensus is similar to that of the trading crowd.
Most letter writers follow trends because they are afraid to appear foolish
and lose subscribers by missing a major move. The longer a trend continues,
the louder letter writers bay at it. The advisors are most bullish at market
tops and most bearish at market bottoms. When most letter writers become
strongly bullish or bearish, it is a good idea to trade against them.
Several rating services track the percentage of bulls and bears among
advisors. The main rating services are Investors Intelligence in the stock
market and Market Vane in the futures markets. Some advisors are very
skilled at doubletalk. The man who speaks from both sides of his mouth can
later claim that he was right regardless of the market's direction. Editors of
Investors Intelligence and Market Vane have plenty of experience pinning
down such lizards. As long as the same editor does the ratings, they remain
internally consistent.
Investors Intelligence

Investors Intelligence was founded by Abe Cohen in 1963. He died in 1983,
and his work is being continued by Michael Burke, the new editor and pub-

39. CONSENSUS INDICATORS

211

lisher. Investors Intelligence monitors about 130 stock market letters. It tabulates the percentage of bulls, bears, and fence-sitters among letter writers.
The percentage of bears is especially important because it is emotionally
hard for stock market writers to be bearish.
When the percentage of bears among stock market letter writers rises
above 55, the market is near an important bottom. When the percentage of
bears falls below 15 and the percentage of bulls rises above 65, the stock
market is near an important top.
Market Vane

Market Vane rates about 70 newsletters covering 32 markets. It rates each
writer's degree of bullishness in each market on a 9-point scale. It multiplies
these ratings by an estimated number of subscribers to each service (most
advisors wildly inflate those numbers to appear more popular). A consensus
report on a scale from 0 (most bearish) to 100 (most bullish) is created by
adding the ratings of all advisors. When bullish consensus approaches 70
percent to 80 percent, it is time to look for a downside reversal, and when it
nears 20 percent to 30 percent, it is time to look to buy.
The reason for trading against the extremes in consensus is rooted in the
structure of the futures markets. The number of contracts bought long and
sold short is always equal. For example, if open interest in gold is 12,000
contracts, then 12,000 contracts are long and 12,000 contracts are short.
While the number of long and short contracts is always equal, the number
of individuals who hold them keeps changing. If the majority is bullish, then
the minority, those who are short, has more contracts per person than the
longs. If the majority is bearish, then the bullish minority has bigger positions per person. The following example illustrates what happens when the
consensus changes among 1000 traders who hold 12,000 contracts in one
market.
Open
Interest
