
- 70 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"No last name, huh?" Critz took a sip from his glass and said, "How, exactly,
do you know my name?"
"I know everything about you."
"Didn't realize I was that famous."
"I wouldn't call it fame, Mr. Critz. I'll be brief. I work for some people who
desperately want to find Joel Backman. They'll pay serious money, cash.
Cash in a box, or cash in a Swiss bank, doesn't matter. It can be done
quickly, within hours. You tell us where he is, you get a million bucks, no
one will ever know."
ilHow did you find me?"
"It was simple, Mr. Critz. Were, let's say, professionals."
"Spies?"
"It's not important. We are who we are, and we're going to find Mr.
Backman. The question is, do you want the million bucks?"
"I don't know where he is."
"But you can find out."
"Maybe."
"Do you want to do business?"
"Not for a million bucks."
"Then how much?"
"I'll have to think about it."
"Then think quickly."
"And if I can't get the information?"
"Then we'll never see you again. This meeting never took place. It's very
simple."
Critz took a long pull on his pint and contemplated things. "Okay, let's say
I'm able to get this information-I'm not too optimistic-but what if I get
lucky? Then what?"
"Take a Lufthansa flight from Dulles to Amsterdam, first class. Check into
the Amstel Hotel on Biddenham Street. We'll find you, just like we found
you here."
Critz paused and committed the details to memory. "When?" he asked.
"As soon as possible, Mr. Critz. There are others looking for him."
Ben vanished as quickly as he had materialized, leaving Critz to peer
through the smoke and wonder if he'd just witnessed a dream. He

- 71 -

John Grisham

The Broker

left the pub an hour later, with his face hidden under an umbrella, certain
that he was being watched.
Would they watch him in Washington too? He had the unsettling feeling that
they would.

- 72 -

John Grisham

The Broker

The siesta didn't work. The wine at lunch and the two after
noon
beers didn't help. There was simply too much to think about.
Besides, he was too rested; there was too much sleep in his system. Six years
in solitary confinement reduces the human body to such a passive state that
sleep becomes a principal activity. After the first few months at Rudley, Joel
was getting eight hours a night and a hard nap after lunch, which was
understandable since he'd slept so little during the previous twenty years
when he was holding the republic together during the day and chasing skirts
till dawn. After a year he could count on nine, sometimes ten hours of sleep.
There was little else to do but read and watch television. Out of boredom, he
once conducted a survey, one of his many clandestine polls, by passing a
sheet of paper from cell to cell while the guards were themselves napping,
and of the thirty-seven respondents on his block the average was eleven
hours of sleep a day. Mo, the Mafia snitch, claimed sixteen hours and could
often be heard snoring at noon. Mad Cow Miller registered the lowest at just
three hours, but the poor guy had lost his mind years earlier and so Joel was
forced to discount his responses to the survey.
There were bouts of insomnia, long periods of staring into the

- 73 -

John Grisham

The Broker

darkness and thinking about the mistakes and the children and
grandchildren, about the humiliation of the past and the fear of the future.
And there were weeks when sleeping pills were delivered to his cell, one at a
time, but they never worked. Joel always suspected they were nothing more
than placebos.
But in six years there had been too much sleep. Now his body was well
rested. His mind was working overtime.
He slowly got up from the bed where he'd been lying for an hour, unable to
close his eyes, and walked to the small table where he picked up the cell
phone Luigi had given him. He took it to the window, punched the numbers
taped to its back, and after four rings he heard a familiar voice.
"Ciao, Marco. Come stai?"
"Just checking to see if this thing works," Joel said.
"You think I'd give you a defective phone?" Luigi asked.
>lNo, of course not."
"How was your nap?"
"Uh, nice, very nice. I'll see you at dinner."
"Ciao."
Where was Luigi? Lurking nearby with a phone in his pocket, just waiting
for Joel to call? Watching the hotel? If Stennett and the driver were still in
Treviso, along with Luigi and Ermanno, that would add up to four "friends"
of some variety assigned to keep tabs on Joel Backman.
He gripped the phone and wondered who else out there knew about the call.
Who else was listening? He glanced at the street below and wondered who
was down there. Only Luigi?
He dismissed those thoughts and sat at the table. He wanted some coffee,
maybe a double espresso to get the nerves buzzing, certainly not a
cappuccino because of the late hour, but he wasn't ready to pick up the
phone and place an order. He could handle the "Hello" and the "Coffee," but
there would be a flood of other words he did not yet know.
How can a man survive without strong coffee? His favorite secretary had
once brought forth his first cup of some jolting Turkish brew at exactly sixthirty every morning, six days a week. He'd almost married her. By ten each
morning, the broker was so wired he was

- 74 -

John Grisham

The Broker

throwing things and yelling at subordinates and juggling three calls at once
while senators were on hold.
The flashback did not please him. They seldom did. There were plenty of
them, and for six years in solitary he'd waged a ferocious mental war to
purge his past.
Back to the coffee, which he was afraid to order because he was afraid of the
language. Joel Backman had never feared a damn thing, and if he could keep
track of three hundred pieces of legislation moving through the maze of
Congress, and if he could make one hundred phone calls a day while rarely
looking at a Rolodex or a director}', then he could certainly learn enough
Italian to order coffee. He arranged Ermanno's study materials neatly on the
table and looked at the synopsis. He checked the batteries in the small tape
player and fiddled with the tapes. The first page of lesson one was a rather
crude color drawing of a family living room with Mom and Pop and the kids
watching television. The objects were labeled in both English and Italiandoor and porta, sofa and sofa, window and finestra, painting and quadro, and
so on. The boy was ragazzo, the mother was madre, the old man teetering on
a cane in the corner was the grandfather, or il nonno.
A few pages later was the kitchen, then the bedroom, then the bath. After an
hour, still without coffee, Joel was walking softly around his room pointing
and whispering the name of everything he saw: bed, letto; lamp, lampada;
clock, orologio; soap, sapone. There were a few verbs thrown in for caution:
to speak, parlare; to eat, mangiare; to drink, here; to think, pensare. He stood
before the small mirror (specchio) in his bathroom (bagno) and tried to
convince himself that he was really Marco. Marco Lazzeri. "Sono Marco,
sono Marco," he repeated. I am Marco. I am Marco. Silly at first, but that
must be put aside. The stakes were too high to cling to an old name that
could get him killed. If being Marco would save his neck, then Marco he
was.
Marco. Marco. Marco.
He began looking for words that were not in the drawings. In his new
dictionary he found carta igienica for toilet paper, guanciale for pillow,
soffitto for ceiling. Everything had a new name, every object in his room, in
his own little world, everything he could see at that moment became
something new. Over and over, as his eyes bounced from one article to
another, he uttered the Italian word.

- 75 -

John Grisham

The Broker

And what about himself? He had a brain, cervello. He touched a hand,
mano; an arm, braccio; a leg, gamba. He had to breathe, respirare; see,
vedere; touch, toccare; hear, sentire; sleep, dormire; dream, sognare. He was
digressing now, and he caught himself. Tomorrow Ermanno would begin
with lesson one, the first blast of vocabulary with emphasis on the basics:
greetings and salutations, polite talk, numbers one through a hundred, the
days of the week, the months of the year, even the alphabet. The verbs to be
(essere) and to have (avere) were both conjugated in the present, simple past,
and future.
When it was time for dinner, Marco had memorized all of the first lesson
and had listened to the tape of it a dozen times. He stepped into the very cool
night and walked happily in the general direction of Trattoria del Monte,
where he knew Luigi would be waiting with a choice table and some
excellent suggestions from the menu. On the street, and still reeling from
several hours of rote memorization, he noticed a scooter, a bike, a dog, a set
of twin girls, and he was hit hard with the reality that he knew none of those
words in his new language.
All of it had been left in his hotel room.
With food waiting, though, he plowed ahead, undaunted and still confident
that he, Marco, could become a somewhat respectable Italian. At a table in
the corner, he greeted Luigi with a flourish. "Buona sera, signore, come
sta?"
"Sto bene, grazie, e to?" Luigi said with an approving smile. Fine, thanks,
and you?
"Molto bene, grazie," Marco said. Very well, thank you.
"So you've been studying?" Luigi said.
"Yes, there's nothing else to do."
Before Marco could unwrap his napkin, a waiter stopped by with a strawcovered flask of the house red. He quickly poured two glasses and then
disappeared. "Ermanno is a very good teacher,'" Luigi was saying.
"You've used him before?" Marco asked casually.
"Yes."
"So how often do you bring in someone like me and turn him into an
Italian?"
Luigi gave a smile and said, "From time to time."
"That's hard to believe."

- 76 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Believe what you want, Marco. It's all fiction."
"You talk like a spy."
A shrug, no real response.
"Who do you work for, Luigi?"
"Who do you think?"
"You're part of the alphabet-CIA, FBI, NSA. Maybe some obscure branch of
military intelligence."
"Do you enjoy meeting me in these nice little restaurants?" Luigi asked.
"Do I have a choice?"
"Yes. If you keep asking these questions, then we'll stop meeting. And when
we stop meeting, your life, shaky as it is, will become even more fragile."
"I thought your job was to keep me alive."
"It is. So stop asking questions about me. I assure you there are no answers."
As if he were on the payroll, the waiter appeared with perfect timing and
dropped two large menus between them, effectively changing whatever
course the conversation was taking. Marco frowned at the list of dishes and
was once again reminded of how far his Italian had to go. At the bottom he
recognized the words caffe, vino, and birra.
"What looks good?" he asked.
"The chef is from Siena, so he likes Tuscan dishes. The risotto with porcini
mushrooms is great for a first course. I've had the steak florentine,
outstanding."
Marco closed his menu and savored the aroma from the kitchen. Til take
both."
Luigi closed his too and waved at the waiter. After he ordered, they sipped
the wine for a few minutes in silence. UA few years ago," Luigi began, "I
woke up one morning in a small hotel room in Istanbul. Alone, with about
five hundred dollars in my pocket. And a fake passport. I didn't speak a
single word of Turkish. My handler was in the city, but if I contacted him
then I would be forced to find a new career. In exactly ten months I was
supposed to return to the same hotel to meet a friend who would take me out
of the country."
"Sounds like basic CIA training."
"Wrong part of the alphabet," he said, then paused, took a sip,

- 77 -

John Grisham

The Broker

and continued. "Since I enjoy eating, I learned to survive. I absorbed the
language, the culture, everything around me. I managed quite nicely,
blended in with the surroundings, and ten months later when I met my friend
I had more than a thousand dollars."
"Italian, English, French, Spanish, Turkish-what else?"
"Russian. They dropped me in Stalingrad for a year."
Marco almost asked who "they" might be, but he let it pass. There would be
no answer; besides, he thought he knew.
"So I've been dropped here?" Marco asked.
The waiter plunked down a basket of mixed breads and a small bowl of olive
oil. Luigi began dipping and eating, and the question was either forgotten or
ignored. More food followed, a small tray of ham and salami with olives,
and the conversation lagged. Luigi was a spy, or a counterspy, or an
operative, or an agent of some strain, or simply a handler or a contact, or
maybe a stringer, but he was first and foremost an Italian. All the training
possible could not divert his attention from the challenge at hand when the
table was covered.
As he ate, he changed subjects. He explained the rigors of a proper Italian
dinner. First, the anitpasti-usually a plate of mixed meats, such as they had
before them. Then the first course, primi, which is usually a reasonably sized
serving of pasta, rice, soup, or polenta, the purpose of which is to sort of
limber up the stomach in preparation for the main course, the secondi-a
hearty dish of meat, fish, pork, chicken, or lamb. Be careful with desserts, he
warned ominously, glancing around to make sure the waiter wasn't listening.
He shook his head sadly as he explained that many good restaurants now
buy them off premises, and they're loaded with so much sugar or cheap
liqueur that they practically rot your teeth out.
Marco managed to appear sufficiently shocked at this national scandal.
"Learn the word 'gelato,' " he said, his eyes glowing again.
"Ice cream," Marco said.
"Bravo. The best in the world. There's a gelateria down the street. We'll go
there after dinner."
Room service terminated at midnight. At 11:55, Marco slowly picked up the
phone and punched number four twice. He swallowed

- 78 -

John Grisham

The Broker

deeply, then held his breath. He'd been practicing the dialogue for thirty
minutes.
After a few lazy rings, during which time he almost hung up twice, a sleepy
voice answered and said, l'Buona sera."
Marco closed his eyes and plunged ahead. "Buona sera. Vbrrei un caffe, per
favore. Un espresso doppio."
"Si, latte e zucchero?" Milk and sugar?
"No, senza latte e zucchero."
"Si, cinque minuti."
"Grazie." Marco quickly hung up before risking further dialogue, though
given the enthusiasm on the other end he doubted it seriously. He jumped to
his feet, pumped a fist in the air, and patted himself on the back for
completing his first conversation in Italian. No hitches whatsoever. Both
parties understood all of what the other said.
At 1:00 a.m., he was still sipping his double espresso, savoring it even
though it was no longer warm. He was in the middle of lesson three, and
with sleep not even a distant thought, he was thinking of maybe devouring
the entire textbook for his first session with Ermanno.
He knocked on the apartment door ten minutes early. It was a control thing.
Though he tried to resist it, he found himself impulsively reverting to his old
ways. He preferred to be the one who decided when the lesson would begin.
Ten minutes early or twenty minutes late, the time was not important. As he
waited in the dingy hallway he flashed back to a high-level meeting he'd
once hosted in his enormous conference room. It was packed with corporate
executives and honchos from several federal agencies, all summoned there
by the broker. Though the conference room was fifty steps down the hall
from his own office, he made his entrance twenty minutes late, apologizing
and explaining that he'd been on the phone with the office of the prime
minister of some minor country.
Petty, petty, petty. The games he played.
Ermanno was seemingly unimpressed. He made his student wait at least five
minutes before he opened the door with a timid smile and a friendly "Buon
giorno, Signor Lazzeri."
"Buon giorno, Ermanno. Come stair"

- 79 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Molto bene, grazie, e to?"
"Molto bene, grazie."
Ermanno opened the door wider, and with the sweep of a hand said, "Prego."
Please come in.
Marco stepped inside and was once again struck by how sparse and
temporary everything looked. He placed his books on the small table in the
center of the front room and decided to keep his coat on. The temperature
was about forty outside and not much warmer in this tiny apartment.
"Vorrebbe un caffe?" Ermanno asked. Would you like a coffee?
"Si, grazie." He'd slept about two hours, from four to six, then he'd
showered, dressed, and ventured into the streets of Treviso, where he'd
found an early bar where the old gentlemen gathered and had their espressos
and all talked at once. He wanted more coffee, but what he really needed
was a bite to eat. A croissant or a muffin or something of that variety,
something he had not yet learned the name of. He decided he could hold off
hunger until noon, when he would once again meet Luigi for another foray
into Italian cuisine.
"You are a student, right?" he asked when Ermanno returned from the
kitchen with two small cups.
"Non inglese, Marco, non inglese."
And that was the end of English. An abrupt end; a harsh, final farewell to the
mother tongue. Ermanno sat on one side of the table, Marco on the other,
and at exactly eight-thirty they, together, turned to page one of lesson one.
Marco read the first dialogue in Italian, Ermanno gently made corrections,
though he was quite impressed with his student his preparation. The
vocabulary was thoroughly memorized, but the accent needed work. An
hour later, Ermanno began pointing at various objects around the room-rug,
book, magazine, chair, quilt, curtains, radio, floor, wall, backpack-and
Marco responded with ease. With an improving accent, he rattled off the
entire list of polite expressions-good day, how are you, fine thanks, please,
see you later, goodbye, good night-and thirty others. He rattled off the days
of the week and the months of the year. Lesson one was completed after
only two hours and Ermanno asked if they needed a break. 'lNo." They
turned to lesson two, with another page of vocabulary that Marco had
already mastered and more dialogue that he delivered quite impressivelv.

- 80 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"You've been studying," Ermanno mumbled in English.
"Non inglese, Ermanno, non inglese," Marco corrected him. The game was
on-who could show more intensity. By noon, the teacher was exhausted and
ready for a break, and they were both relieved to hear the knock on the door
and the voice of Luigi outside in the hallway. He entered and saw the two of
them squared off across the small, littered table, as if they'd been arm
wrestling for several hours.
"Come va?" Luigi asked. How's it going?
Ermanno gave him a weary look and said, "Molto intense" Very intense.
"Vbrrei pranzare," Marco announced, slowly rising to his feet. I'd like some
lunch.
Marco was hoping for a nice lunch with some English thrown in to make
things easier and perhaps relieve the mental strain of trying to translate every
word he heard. However, after Ermanno's glowing summary of the morning
session, Luigi was inspired to continue the immersion through the meal, or
at least the first part of it. The menu contained not a word of English, and
after Luigi explained each dish in incomprehensible Italian, Marco threw up
his hands and said, "That's it. I'm not speaking or listening to Italian for the
next hour."
"What about your lunch?"
"I'll eat yours." He gulped the red wine and tried to relax.
"Okay then. I suppose we can do English for one hour."
"Grazie," Marco said before he caught himself.

- 81 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Midway through the morning session the following day,
Marco abruptly changed direction. In the middle of a particularly tedious
piece of dialogue he ditched the Italian and said, "You're not a student."
Ermanno looked up from the study guide, paused for a moment, then said,
"Non inglese, Marco. Soltanto Italiano." Only Italian.
"I'm tired of Italian right now, okay? You're not a student."
Deceit was difficult for Ermanno, and he paused a bit too long. "I am," he
said, without much conviction.
"No, I don't think so. You're obviously not taking classes, otherwise you
wouldn't be able to spend all day teaching me."
"Maybe I have classes at night. Why does it matter?"
"You're not taking classes anywhere. There are no books here, no student
newspaper, none of the usual crap that students leave lying around
everywhere."
"Perhaps it's in the other room.'
"Let me see."
"Why? Why is it important?"
"Because I think you work for the same people Luigi works for."
"And what if I do?"

- 82 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"I want to know who they are."
"Suppose I don't know? Why should you be concerned? Your task is to learn
the language."
"How long have you lived here, in this apartment?"
"I don't have to answer your questions."
"See, I think you got here last week; that this is a safe house of some sort;
that you're not really who you say you are."
"Then that would make two of us." Ermanno suddenly stood and walked
through the tiny kitchen to the rear of the apartment. He returned with some
papers, which he slid in front of Marco. It was a registration packet from the
University of Bologna, with a mailing label listing the name of Ermanno
Rosconi, at the address where they were now sitting.
"I resume classes soon," Ermanno said. "Would you like some more
coffee?"
Marco was scanning the forms, comprehending just enough to get the
message. "Yes, please," he said. It was just paperwork-easily faked. But if it
was a forgery, it was a very good one. Ermanno disappeared into the kitchen
and began running water.
Marco shoved his chair back and said, "I'm going for a walk around the
block. I need to clear my head."
The routine changed at dinner. Luigi met him in front of a tobacco shop
facing the Piazza dei Signori, and they strolled along a busy alley as
shopkeepers were closing up. It was already dark and very cold, and smartly
bundled businessmen hurried home, their heads covered with hats and
scarves.
Luigi had his gloved hands buried deep in the wool pockets of his kneelength rough fabric duster, one that could've been handed down by his
grandfather or purchased last week in Milan at some hideously expensive
designer shop. Regardless, he wore it stylishly, and once again Marco was
envious of the casual elegance of his handler.
Luigi was in no hurry and seemed to enjoy the cold. He offered a few
comments in Italian, but Marco refused to play along. "English, Luigi," he
said twice. "I need English."
"All right. How was your second day of class?"

- 83 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Good. Ermanno's okay. No sense of humor, but an adequate teacher."
"You're making progress?"
"How could I not make progress?"
"Ermanno tells me you have an ear for the language."
"Ermanno is a bad con man and you know it. I'm working hard because a lot
depends on it. I'm drilled by him six hours a day, then I spend three hours at
night cramming. Progress is inevitable/'
"You work very hard,' Luigi repeated. He suddenly stopped and looked at
what appeared to be a small deli. "This, Marco, is dinner."
Marco stared with disapproval. The storefront was no more than fifteen feet
across. Three tables were crammed in the window and the place appeared to
be packed. "Are you sure?" Marco asked.
"Yes, it's very good. Lighter food, sandwiches and stuff. You're eating by
yourself. I'm not going in."
Marco looked at him and started to protest, then he caught himself and
smiled as if he gladly accepted the challenge.
"The menu is on a chalkboard above the cashier, no English. Order first,
pay, then pick up your food at the far end of the counter, which is not a bad
to place to sit if you can get a stool. Tip is included."
Marco asked, "What's the specialty of the house?"
"The ham and artichoke pizza is delicious. So are the panini. I'll meet you
over there, by the fountain, in one hour."
Marco gritted his teeth and entered the cafe, very alone. As he waited behind
two young ladies he desperately searched the chalkboard for something he
could pronounce. Forget taste. What was important was the ordering and
paying. Fortunately, the cashier was a middle-aged lady who enjoyed
smiling. Marco gave her a friendly "Buona sera," and before she could shoot
something back he ordered a "panino prosciutto e formaggio"-ham and
cheese sandwich-and a Coca-Cola.
Good ol' Coca-Cola. The same in any language.
The register rattled and she offered a blur of words that he did not
understand. But he kept smiling and said, "Si," then handed over a twentyeuro bill, certainly enough to cover things and bring back some change. It
worked. With the change was a ticket. "Numero sessantasette," she said.
Number sixty-seven.
He held the ticket and moved slowly along the counter toward
