
39

40

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

What Is Relative Strength?

If you’re already familiar with technical analysis, you may know an indicator known as
the relative strength index (RSI). The relative-strength trading discussions in this book
do not refer to RSI. Rather, the deﬁnition of relative strength here pertains to how one
index or ETF acts in relation to the broad market.
Relative strength is created when institutions focus their buying efforts on a speciﬁc industry sector or on the industries represented by a specialized index. The buying interest could be due to new technology within a speciﬁc sector, anticipated news
within a sector, or a variety of other reasons. Since the top-down system is based on
technical analysis, not fundamental analysis, the actual reason for the relative strength
is irrelevant. Your job is simply to ﬁnd it. Even on the lethargic, sideways days of the
S&P 500 or the Nasdaq Composite, at least one or two speciﬁc industry sectors always
exhibit relative strength or weakness due to institutional sector rotation. The speciﬁc
ETFs tied to these individual sectors are the ones you want to trade.
If a sector index is moving in lockstep with one of the major indexes, such as the
S&P 500 or the Nasdaq Composite, it does not have relative strength and should
probably be avoided. Rather, you want to buy or sell short ETFs in the sector indexes
acting more strongly than the broad market (in an uptrend) or sell short those that
are weaker than the broad market (in a downtrend). This is what is meant by “relative
strength” and “relative weakness,” respectively.
Mutual funds, pension funds, and other institutions have bylaws that require
most of their assets to be invested in the stock market at all times. They obviously put
their buying power into the sectors and indexes they feel have the best chance of price
appreciation. Conversely, they liquidate holdings they feel have a limited chance of
going higher. This constant movement of funds out of one sector and into another
is known as “institutional sector rotation,” and is the reason why at least one or two
sectors will always show relative strength or weakness in relation to the broad market
regardless of what type of trend the major indexes are showing. Sectors with relative
strength often generate double-digit percentage gains even while the S&P 500 and the
Nasdaq Composite are mostly unchanged.
During uptrends, the prices of stocks, ETFs, and sector indexes with relative
strength rise at a greater rate than do the broad-based indexes, while they also fall less
than the major indexes during periods of downward price movement. If a sector is so
strong that it simply moves sideways while the broad market is moving lower, what do
you think happens when the major indexes eventually bounce?
That sector will usually be the ﬁrst sector to shoot to a new high. If a new downtrend suddenly starts, the sector with relative strength will also be the last to fall. This
is the one you want to buy: Not only is the upside proﬁt potential greater, but also the
downside risk is lower.
Just as you should look to buy ETFs in sectors with relative strength during
uptrending or bull markets, you should conversely look to sell short ETFs in sectors
with the most relative weakness during conﬁrmed broad-market downtrends. Sector
indexes with relative weakness will be the last ones to rise when the market rallies,

Finding Indexes with the Most Relative Strength

41

thereby reducing your risk on the short side. Further, the proﬁt potential is greater
because sectors with relative weakness will also fall at a faster pace than do the major
indexes during periods of broad-based weakness.
How Do I Find Sectors with Relative Strength or Weakness?

Your next step is to ﬁnd the best sectors for a proﬁtable trade. Understand that before
searching for the individual ETFs with the most relative strength or weakness, you
must ﬁrst ﬁnd the sector indexes that are trending the most strongly relative to the
broad market. Then, you move on to discovering which of the speciﬁc ETF families
within the sector are showing the best chart pattern and/or strength relative to the
corresponding sector index.
You can spot relative strength (and weakness) within individual sector indexes two
ways: graphically and numerically. Both methods work equally well, so it’s just a matter of personal preference as to which route you take. Some traders respond better to
visual charts, while others are distracted by too many images and react better by just
looking at a table full of numbers.

The Graphical Method
For the graphical method, use your trading software to create a “percentage-change
chart,” which enables you to overlay the percentage change (not price change) of two
or more tickers on the same chart axis.
A standard stock chart shows the price of an index or ETF, along with optional
technical indicators such as volume, moving averages (MAs), and more. A percentagechange chart is different because it shows only the percentage that an equity has gained
or lost during a speciﬁed period, while ignoring the actual price in its scaling. When
you overlay more than one index on this type of chart, it becomes an excellent way to
quickly determine the relative strength or weakness of one index compared to another.
Speciﬁcally, you should use a broad market index such as the S&P 500 or the Nasdaq
Composite and overlay it with the percentage change of various sector indexes. By creating a separate chart of this type with all the major industry sectors, you can instantly
see which sectors are showing the greatest amount of positive or negative institutional
money ﬂow for any given period. Then, simply buy ETFs in the sectors with relative
strength and/or sell short those with relative weakness.
Figure 4.1 is an example of a percentage-change chart showing hourly intervals
over a trailing ﬁve-day period. This chart shows the S&P 500 overlaid with the Amex
Oil Index ($XOI) in late September 2007. Notice how, during this ﬁve-day period, the
S&P 500 was essentially ﬂat, losing just 0.18 percent, but the $XOI fell 2.0 percent.
For trades with an average holding time of several weeks, you would most
commonly use the 60-minute chart interval shown in Figure 4.1. For trades that you
intend to hold longer, you would switch to the daily chart interval but still overlay the
industry sectors with the main stock market indexes in the same manner.

42

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

FIGURE 4.1 Percentage-Change Chart
$XOI.X – 60 min

$SPX.X – 60 min
Percentage-change chart of the hourly interval,
trailing back over the last five days

0.500%
S&P 500
–0.18%

0.000%
–0.179%
–0.500%
–1.000%
–1.500%

Oil index
–2.00%
15:00 9/25

15:00 9/26

15:00 9/27

15:00 9/28

–2.000%

15:00 Oct

Source: TradeStation

You can use the concepts of the technical ETF trading strategy throughout this
book equally effectively for trades with both shorter and longer time horizons. Day
traders, for example, might use a ﬁve-minute intraday chart to see which sectors are
showing the most relative strength or weakness 30 minutes after the market opens.
Then, they can focus on buying pullbacks (price retracements off the highs) of the
strongest indexes throughout the day and/or selling short those with the most relative
weakness. Conversely, position traders who hold positions for many months could
even do the percentage-change charts with the weekly time interval. You can effectively use percentage-change charts with any time interval, as the method for spotting
relative strength is the same regardless of the chart’s time interval. No matter which
time frame is used, the ability to quickly and easily see divergent trends with this type
of chart is impressive. Initially, the task of setting up your percentage-change charts is
time intensive. The good news is that it only needs to be done once. Once you’ve done
so, the charts will be dynamically updated, continually giving you a current snapshot
of the most relative strength and weakness within the broad market.
Six Steps for Setting Up Percentage-Change Charts to Find Relative Strength
1. Be sure your online brokerage ﬁrm provides the capability of overlaying the percentage-change chart of one symbol with that of another, so you can create this
type of chart. If not, I suggest opening an account for the purposes of doing so.
Search on the Internet for “direct access brokerage ﬁrms” to get a list of brokers to
choose from. I personally prefer the advanced technology and technical capabilities of TradeStation, but many others will do the job just as well.

Finding Indexes with the Most Relative Strength

43

2. Create a fresh layout or page to be used exclusively for your sector overlay
charts.
3. Determine your preferred time interval. If you are unsure where to start, I suggest
the hourly (60-minute) charts. From there, you can scale to a shorter or longer
time frame if you later decide it would be more suited to your style.
4. Begin by overlaying each of the stock market’s main sector indexes (as per the next
ﬁgure) with the most closely corresponding broad market index. For example,
you should overlay the Dow Jones (DJ) Transportation Average with the S&P
500, but overlay the technology-related Philadelphia Semiconductor Index with
the Nasdaq Composite. For spotting divergent trends the fastest, I suggest creating a separate chart for each of the sector indexes, as opposed to plotting more
than one on the same chart. Line charts are also preferable to bar charts, as it is
easier to spot the divergent trends with line charts.
5. Add any additional indexes for specialized ETFs that you wish to track. This
might include the price of the Spot Gold commodity (for the Gold ETFs), the
Euro-Dollar Spread (for the currency ETFs), or any variety of foreign indexes for
spotting opportunities in the international ETFs.
6. Finish by creating a chart in which the main broad-based indexes are overlaid
with one another, without any industry sector or specialty indexes. At a minimum, this would be the S&P 500, the Nasdaq Composite, and the Dow, but
you can also include the small-cap Russell 2000 and the S&P MidCap 400 (or
include them on a separate chart). This chart enables you to quickly see which of
the major indexes is showing the most relative strength.
After following the above steps, you should be armed with one work space dedicated exclusively to ﬁnding sectors and other specialized indexes with the most relative
strength or weakness compared to the broad market.

The Numerical Method
Examining the graphical work space described above is the easiest way to spot divergent trends, but those of you who are mathematically inclined might prefer a slightly
different method of ﬁnding sectors with the most relative strength or weakness. This
alternative method also requires less bandwidth and does not require a software package that provides the ability of doing percentage-change charts.
The basic concept of monitoring all the major industry sectors is the same, but
you record their index ticker symbols, prices, and percentage changes on a daily watch
list instead. Then, you sort all industry sectors, and any other indexes you wish to
track, by percentage change. Figure 4.2 is a snapshot of my main industry sector
watch list, sorted by daily percentage change. I also maintain a separate watch list just
for specialty indexes, including commodity, currency, and international indexes.
Though there are hundreds of sector indexes available, I monitor just twenty to
twenty-ﬁve of the main industry sectors at any given time. Certain “hot” industries of
the moment occasionally get added to my watch list as well.

44

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

FIGURE 4.2 Example of Industry Sector Watch List

Source: TradeStation

Most of the columns in this sector index watch list are self-explanatory; however, the
column labeled “% Range” may not be. This calculation, which was done with the use
of TradeStation’s EasyLanguage programming capabilities, displays where each sector
index closed the day (or any time interval used), relative to that day’s range. This helps
conﬁrm that the sector is showing relative strength to itself, as well as the broad market.
With the top-down strategy, you need to see which sectors are showing the most
strength or weakness relative not only to the broad market, but also to themselves.
The closer an index is to the top of its intraday range when it closes, the more relative
strength to itself it is showing. Conversely, indexes that close near the bottom of their
intraday ranges are showing the most relative weakness to themselves. Using the graphical method, you can also spot an index’s relative strength to itself by noticing where
the line chart closed relative to its illustrated trading range.
As a rule of thumb, sectors showing relative strength to the broad market should
also ﬁnish in the upper 30 percent of their intraday ranges, while weak ones will often
close in the bottom 30 percent of their intraday ranges. The middle 40 percent of the

Finding Indexes with the Most Relative Strength

45

range is called “the danger zone,” as it often indicates a tug-of-war or balance of power
was occurring in the ﬁnal hours of trading. Without any clear indication of strength or
weakness going into the close, it can be more dangerous to enter a position at that level.
It is also important to distinguish between absolute strength and relative strength.
Looking at the screenshot in Figure 4.2, notice how the CBOE Gold Index ($GOX)
gained 0.64 percent on this particular day but closed in the bottom 25 percent of its
intraday range.
On a purely absolute basis, the $GOX was the second-biggest gainer of all the
industry sectors on my watch list, rivaled only by the 2.25 percent gain in the Amex
Networking Index ($NWX). Because it gained 0.64 percent while the major indexes
closed lower, the $GOX had relative strength to the broad market, but ﬁnished with
relative weakness to itself because it closed near its intraday low. On the other hand,
the $NWX showed the greatest absolute and relative strength by gaining the highest
percentage and closing just 20 percent off its intraday high.
The best examples of sectors with relative strength are those that not only outperform
the percentage gains of the major stock market indexes, but also close near the upper end
of their intraday ranges. The inverse is true for sectors with relative weakness that you are
considering for potential short sale. Sector indexes with relative weakness should not only
lose a greater percentage than the broad market on downward moves, but also ﬁnish near
their intraday lows.
Now that you have the necessary data at your disposal, the next step is getting on a
regular schedule to do the scanning. With my hedge fund, I look for divergent trends
each day after the market has closed. Longer-term investors may only need to look
for trend divergence on a weekly basis, while day traders will use very short intraday
chart intervals to look for relative strength during the trading day. The best way to
catch divergent trends and relative strength in its early stages is to become disciplined
at scanning your sector watch list at a regular, predetermined interval. The frequency
of doing so depends on what your preferred trading time horizon may be. Regardless of
the time horizon you trade, the strategy works in the same way.
After you become accustomed to scanning all the sector indexes, either graphically
or numerically, the divergent trends within the market will become readily apparent.
If the same indexes are showing bullish or bearish divergence every time you do your
scanning, a longer-term trend resulting from institutional sector rotation is probably
taking place. Again, the opposite is true of sectors with relative weakness. Buying the
sector ETFs with relative strength (bullish trend divergence) and/or shorting those
with relative weakness (bearish divergence) enables you to ride along on the coattails
of institutions who also realize the beneﬁts of sector trading with ETFs.
What to Look for When You Scan

Once you’ve established a regular schedule of scanning your sector charts or price
table, you need to know exactly what to look for. As the strategy is top-down based,
you must ﬁrst note the overall trend of the broad market, as discussed in Chapter 3.

46

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

In overall broad market uptrends, the general idea is to identify the sector and
specialty indexes that gain a greater percentage than the S&P 500, the Nasdaq
Composite, and the Dow when these main indexes move up, as well as drop the
least percentage every time the major indexes pull back. Pay close attention to how
each index acts whenever the S&P 500 or the Nasdaq Composite makes a move
within your preferred time frame. Sectors with relative strength should trend sideways, or even slightly higher, whenever the major indexes drop. Conversely, the best
sectors will rocket to new highs on the slightest bounce in the broad market. Both
the numerical and graphical methods explained above make it easy to spot relative
strength at a glance.
During a downtrend, you can spot relative weakness by looking for sector and
specialty indexes that drop a greater percentage than the major indexes do and that stay
ﬂat or move marginally higher when the overall market bounces. The weakest sectors
should barely lift off their lows when the major indexes rally, and should fall to new
lows on any broad market weakness.
Identifying the sector indexes with the most relative strength or weakness is easier
in range-bound or sideways markets than when most sectors are moving in the same
direction, which often occurs in steadily trending broad markets. The positive thing
about sideways markets is that trend divergences can be spotted with little effort.
In sideways markets, you can simultaneously be long the sector indexes with the most
relative strength and short those with the greatest relative weakness. When the broad
market eventually snaps out of its range and resolves itself in one direction or the
other, you can quickly close the positions on the opposite side of the trend. The gain
on the trade in the same direction as the resultant trend should more than make up
for the loss on the opposite side.

Sector Indexes with Relative Strength
Figure 4.3 is a standard ﬁve-day chart of hourly percentage changes. It compares the
price action of the S&P 500 ($SPX) with the Amex Biotechnology Index ($BTK) for
the week ending September 7, 2007.
This particular week, the $SPX lost approximately 1.17 percent, but the $BTK
powered 2.62 percent higher. Relative strength in the Biotechnology Index was readily
apparent and could have been spotted with the relative strength strategy, even as early
as the ﬁrst day of the week.
In Figure 4.3, the letter A marks where relative strength in the $BTK ﬁrst became
apparent. Though both indexes rallied in the ﬁrst half of that day, the S&P 500 pulled
back in the afternoon. Nevertheless, notice how the $BTK did not pull back with the
S&P 500. Instead, it merely moved in a sideways pattern, closing the session near its
intraday high.
If you took advantage of that relative strength and bought one of the biotechnology ETFs in the ﬁnal hour, you would have been quickly rewarded the next day. By
the close of trading on September 4 (B), the $BTK was showing a two-day gain of 2.7
percent, compared to a 1.3 percent gain in the $SPX.

47

Finding Indexes with the Most Relative Strength

FIGURE 4.3 S&P 500 ($SPX) versus Amex Biotech Index ($BTK), Week Ending September 7, 2007
$BTK.X – 60 min

$SPX.X – 60 min

4.500%

5-day chart of hourly
percentage changes

4.000%
C

3.500%
$BTK
+2.62%

B

3.000%
2.617%
2.500%
2.000%
1.500%

A

1.000%
0.500%
0.000%
–0.500%
$SPX
–1.17%

15:00 9/4

15:00 9/5

15:00 9/6

15:00 9/7

–1.000%
–1.171%

15:00 9/10

Source: TradeStation

Conﬁrmation of its relative strength and a second chance for entry into the $BTK
sector was provided the following day, on September 5. In that session, the $SPX surrendered all the prior day’s gains to revert back and be unchanged for the week. Rather
than following the S&P 500 back down to the ﬂat line, however, the $BTK held ﬁrm
and merely moved sideways, holding tight to all its recent gain.
This action, on September 5, illustrates the beauty of the whole relative strength strategy.
When you’re positioned in the sectors and indexes with relative strength, not only are
your upside proﬁt potentials greater, but the downside risk is lower. Sectors and indexes
with relative strength are the last to fall when the broad market does, and they are also
the ﬁrst to build on their gains when the main stock market indexes recover, as can be
seen in this example at C. On September 6, the S&P 500 bounced to ﬁnish the day
0.5 percent higher for the week, but the Biotech Index zoomed another 1.3 percent to
show a weekly gain of 4 percent.
The $SPX ﬁnally fell sharply to close the week, bringing the $BTK down a bit
as well. Nevertheless, the $BTK still ﬁnished with a respectable gain of 2.6 percent
compared with the 1.2 percent loss in the $SPX.
Bullish divergences caused by relative strength will not always be as obvious as
this example. Nevertheless, ongoing experience of using your sector overlay charts will
enable you to learn the subtle intricacies of detecting relative strength way before the
“me too” crowd does.

Sector Indexes with Relative Weakness
Figure 4.4 is a percentage-change chart of the daily time interval that overlays the S&P
500 with the Philadelphia Semiconductor Index ($SOX) from June 13 to July 10, 2006.

48

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

FIGURE 4.4 S&P 500 ($SPX) versus Philadelphia Semiconductor Index ($SOX), June 13–July 10,

2006
$SPX.X – Daily

$SOX – Daily

6.000%
5.000%

C
$SPX
+3.57%

4.000%
3.567%
3.000%
2.000%

A

1.000%
0.000%
B

This chart shows the daily time
interval instead of hourly, but
the relative strength or weakness
can be spotted just as easily.
19

–1.000%
–2.000%
–3.000%
$SOX
–4.27%

26

Jul

–4.000%
–4.269%

10

Source: The Wagner Daily, July 11, 2006

Although you may want to use the hourly time interval for your daily scanning routine,
this example illustrates that the percentage-change chart works just as well for identifying relative strength or weakness on longer time frames. Long-term position traders may
prefer to use the daily time interval on their chart overlays instead of the hourly.
Like the rest of the major indexes, the $SOX had been in a steady downtrend
since the beginning of May 2006, but a key difference is that the $SOX failed to
recover when the major indexes bottomed in mid-June of that year. On the contrary, it showed quite a bit of relative weakness that was easily spotted on the graphical work space on which you overlaid all the sectors. Though I normally overlay
the $SOX with the Nasdaq Composite, I used the S&P 500 ($SPX) in this example
to show the major divergence between the $SOX and the benchmark S&P Index.
From the time the broad market formed its intermediate-term bottom on June 13
through July 10, 2006, the S&P 500 gained 3.5 percent, but the Semiconductor
Index lost 4.3 percent during the same period.
Because the Semiconductor Index is so heavily weighted within the broad market,
the chart in Figure 4.4 offers an explanation of why the broad market was showing so
much weakness in July 2006. Notice how the charts can be used to ﬁnd relative weakness just as quickly as relative strength.
The ﬁrst clear sign of relative weakness in the $SOX occurred in the latter half of
June (A). The $SPX was only moving sideways during that time, but the $SOX was
drifting lower. If you did your scanning on a daily basis, this divergence and relative
weakness in the $SOX would have been apparent on the percentage-change chart
every day during that period. If you used the numerical method and examined the
