
c03.indd 54

11/2/07 12:16:13 PM

It Pays to Be Trendy

55

are going to buy high to sell higher. Thinking this way will put you
on the right side of the trend.

Uptrends
In order to understand what it means to position yourself ahead
of the money flow, we need to look at what defines the three types of
trends. Let’s start with the uptrend. Charles Dow defined an uptrend
as a time when successive rallies in a security price close at levels
higher than those achieved in previous rallies and when lows occur
at levels higher than previous lows. When you see a chart that looks
like Figure 3.1, it should be obvious to you that the buyers are controlling price. The story of an uptrend tells us that the buyers are
willing to support the stock at higher levels while at the same time
the sellers are moving their sell limits higher in order to get the best
sale price. If you had a crowd of people rushing over to buy stock
from you, wouldn’t you want to raise your sale price to get the highest possible profit? Of course you would. Our strategy on the buy
side is to position ourselves alongside the other buyers who are busy
pushing the stock up. Recognizing an uptrend allows us to put our
money in the direction of the money flow. If your strategy is to find
stocks that are in upward trends, then try looking at companies that
are trading on their 52-week highs.

Figure 3.1 Defining an Uptrend

c03.indd 55

11/2/07 12:16:13 PM

56

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Another way is to scan headlines for companies that are in the
news, and if the trend is going up with a nice steady slope, you can
add them to your watch list. We prefer you qualify a stock for
your watch list by looking at the moving averages. As you can see in
Figure 3.1, this stock’s 50-day simple moving average (SMA) is above
the 200-day simple moving average. When the moving averages are
running up and parallel to one another, we know that the stock has
been in an uptrend for some time. This is just one easy way to sort
for stocks that are being bought up by the buyers. We have had great
success in using this method, which is why we will be expanding on
the use of moving averages throughout this book.
In the real world, not all stocks are going to look like the one
in our example. Some will have uptrends that are more extreme,
meaning the price action will be more vertical, while other stocks
may show a more erratic footprint that might reflect a more volatile
price history. This, of course, would make it harder for us to identify
the actual trend of the stock. Although using the 50- and 200-day
moving averages makes it easier for us to identify the overall trend,
it is important for you to know how to draw a trend line. As we mentioned earlier in the definition of an upward trend, lows occur at
levels higher than previous lows, which means it’s the buyers who are
more motivated to push the stock higher. This also means that the
sellers are less willing to push the stock lower; therefore, it only makes
sense that we monitor the behavior pattern of the buyers when looking at stocks that are trending higher. If the buyers decide to give up
on the stock, we will see this in the price action because these lows,
also known as troughs, will no longer be successively higher. If we
notice that the lows or troughs are moving successively lower, then
that would be our signal to get out of the stock.
When constructing a trend line in a stock that is going up, we
would measure the lows because we want to keep our eyes on the
buyers. In Figure 3.2, points A, B, and C are lows that are successively
higher. This tells us that during the time these points were established, the buyers were willing to pay higher prices. The aggressive
action of the buyers causes the sellers to back off to higher levels and
the footprint is seen with higher highs following the higher lows.
Drawing the trend line begins with your connecting the dots. Before
you do this, you would scan the price chart to see if there are any
other low points that fall in line with the ones you have already identified as established lows (see Figure 3.3).

c03.indd 56

11/2/07 12:16:13 PM

It Pays to Be Trendy

57

Figure 3.2 Identifying the Lows in an Uptrend

Figure 3.3 Connecting the Lows to Form the Uptrend Line

In Figure 3.4 you will see that we have connected points A, B, and
C while extending the line further to the right. Notice how successive
lows reach the trend line and then will occasionally dip below. Drawing
a trend line takes minimal artistic talent, but it’s important to know that
you don’t have to get the points to match up exactly in a row. There
may be points on the chart where the price will dip slightly below your
line or rise before touching the line. Just remember that you are using
your trend line to gauge the intensity of the buying activity.

c03.indd 57

11/2/07 12:16:14 PM

58

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 3.4 Lows May Vary around the Uptrend Line

Looking at the Angle of the Trend Line

Measuring the angle of the trend line will also help you develop a
feel for the market or stock you are trading. If you see a stock that
has been gradually going up in price over time with a nice steady
30- to 40-degree slope in the trend line, chances are the trend will
continue. This means we would stay in a long position for as long as
this trend continues in an upward direction. However, if we see prices
start to drop and stay below the trend line, this would be our signal
to get out of the stock entirely, defend our profits, or, more importantly, protect our account from a potential loss. Just understand
that it is the buyers who are controlling the price in an uptrend, and
focusing on the price will help us control the emotional side of the
trading plan, as we discussed in Chapter 2.
Buying pressure can also be measured by the steepness of the
trend, relative to recent trend angles. Assume you’re looking at a
stock with an uptrend angle of 20 degrees. If the slope of the trend
line begins to accelerate to 50 to 70 degrees or more, this means the
buyers are becoming more aggressive. When you see this happen,
make sure you are ready to exit the position as the chances of a pullback in price becomes greater as the angle of the slope increases. It
should make sense to you that, although we see vertical price moves
in stocks from time to time, vertical price moves do not last forever.
Of course, understand that the angle of the trend is a function of the

c03.indd 58

11/2/07 12:16:14 PM

It Pays to Be Trendy

59

scale that you’re using on your chart. Therefore, the angles that we
discuss are relative to each other, not absolute.
Another way to think about this is to remember that the steeper
the trend, the less reliable the trend line becomes. Figure 3.5 shows
an example of a stock that started out with a nice steady trend, but
over time the angle of the trend line increases. Adjusting our trend
lines to account for the increase in angle is called fanning the lines.
Trend line A is where we connected a series of low points, giving us
a nice steady slope. There is nothing out of the ordinary here, but if
you look at the angle of trend line B, you will see that the increase in
slope tells us the buying pressure is increasing. This is a signal that
the buyers are getting more aggressive. As time passes, we can once
again see the angle of the trend continuing to increase. If you were in
this stock and found your trend line looking like the one at point D,
it would be time to take action. Your call to action would require selling out of all or at least some of the position. If you are unsure of the
exit point, then another good idea would be to place a sell stop order
just below the trend line at point D. Let the buyers tell you when
it’s time to get out. If they ease up on the buying pressure, then the
stock will naturally pull back in price and your stop order will trigger
automatically. This will move you to cash, and once again you’ll have
enough buying power in your account for the next trade.

Figure 3.5 Increasing Relative Trend Angles

c03.indd 59

11/2/07 12:16:14 PM

60

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Volume Confirms the Trend

One of the other important tenets of Dow Theory has to do with
volume analysis, and it states that trends are confirmed by volume.
What this means is that if you see the trading volume of a stock increasing in the direction of the trend, you have supporting evidence that
the trend is a strong one (see Figure 3.6). If you see a stock going up
in price but notice that the volume is steadily decreasing, this would
tell us that we wouldn’t want to rely on that trend as much.
Imagine you are flying a kite. The kite represents the stock price,
while the daily trading volume represents the wind needed to get
the kite to fly. Hopefully, you have happy childhood memories that
will help you picture this in your mind. If not, then by all means go
out there and fly a kite. It is a great stress reliever, and if you have
any friends or family members that you can invite, bring them along,
pack a nice picnic basket, and make a day out of it. It will be fun.
Flying this kite will absolutely help you learn how to read volume
on a price chart. In order for your kite to fly, you will need wind
under it. The stronger the wind, the faster the kite will climb.

Figure 3.6 Uptrend with Supporting Volume

c03.indd 60

11/2/07 12:16:15 PM

It Pays to Be Trendy

61

The same applies for the stocks you will be trading. For a stock
to sustain an upward trend, you need volume under it (the stronger
the volume, the steeper the trend). But what would happen to your
kite if all of a sudden the wind started to die down? If you have had
this happen to you as a child you might remember having to run a
little bit in order to create your own wind, right? If you didn’t run,
the kite would start to flounder in the sky and you knew that if the
wind didn’t pick up soon, the kite would fall.
You will see the same thing happen to the price of a stock. If
the volume starts to drop and you see that your stock is starting to
flounder in price, then there is a good chance your stock is going to
drop. If you see a steep trend line and you notice that the volume is
dramatically falling off, then you will often see the stock price break
the trend line or fall below an established support level and you
are now in a freefall. This is why we are so focused on encouraging
you to use trailing stops. You don’t have to look at your stocks every
minute of every day; just make it a point to keep tabs on the price,
and if you see these signs, then you know it’s time to take action. The
worst thing you could do is just sit there and hope that the stock is
going to go higher. If you feel that something is changing but you’re
not quite sure if you see a clear signal, then your first move should
always be to protect the position. You can never go wrong by being
defensive. We are usually caught off guard when we are in our most
relaxed position.

Downtrends
Downtrends are price patterns that show a negative slope. The highs
are getting lower and the lows are also moving successively lower.
Downtrend lines are drawn from high to high because we want to
track the path of the sellers who are, during this time, controlling
the price. You can also think of a downtrend line as a signal that tells
us supply is greater than the demand. It is not a good idea to be a
buyer while the downtrend is in force, yet there are many people
who take this advice lightly. If this is the only thing you get out of this
chapter, then the price you paid for this book will pay for itself over
and over again.
To construct a downtrend line, scan the chart with your eyes to see
if you can pick out any noticeable highs or peaks in the price action.

c03.indd 61

11/2/07 12:16:15 PM

62

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

We did this for you in Figure 3.7 where you can see our high points
at A, B, and C. From there, it’s just a matter of you connecting the
dots. In Figure 3.8 you can see how we have drawn our line through
the tops. You do not have to be precise when connecting these points,
so don’t worry about being exactly on the mark. Many times, you will
cross through some of the peaks, but the main goal is to identify a
general area where the sellers have displayed a history of selling.
This selling action eventually pushes the price to lower lows, and the
downtrend is identified. You will also see that downtrend lines act as
resistance. In Figure 3.8 lower lows follow lower highs because the

Figure 3.7 Identifying the Highs in a Downtrend

Figure 3.8 Connecting the Highs to Form the Downtrend Line

c03.indd 62

11/2/07 12:16:15 PM

It Pays to Be Trendy

63

buyers continue to fade the market and move to the sidelines. Any
move over this downtrend line confirmed by an increase in volume
tells us that demand is increasing; therefore, a change in trend could
be coming.

Sideways Trend
The third type of trend is one of our favorites. The sideways trend
frustrates most investors, but it’s a price trend that many traders,
especially option traders, look for. Simply put, it is a period of time
on a chart where prices lay flat or move within a well-defined trading
range. Also known as a consolidation pattern or price channel, buyers and sellers reach a stalemate where each side establishes boundaries that represent support and resistance.
Another way to look at a sideways trend is to think of it as a time
when supply and demand are in balance. Figure 3.9 is an example
of a sideways trend where the stock is basically stuck in a price range.
As mentioned before, option traders favor such price ranges because
there are many different trading strategies they can initiate within this
channel. They can profit from such trades because there are clear lines
of support and resistance, which allows them to manage their risk.

Support and Resistance
We’ve covered the ideas behind building a trend line and how
important it is to gauge the motivation level of the buyers and sellers. In doing so, we’ve referred to the support and resistance. Let’s

Figure 3.9 Sideways Trending Stock

c03.indd 63

11/2/07 12:16:16 PM

64

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

develop those concepts a little more. Support is the level at which
demand for the stock is strong enough to keep the stock from dropping any further. Support levels are usually identified somewhere
below where the stock is actually trading, and although it is not an
exact price point, we look at support as a general area. You could
also think of support as a floor where the buyers are more motivated
than the sellers. Understand that technical analysis is not an exact
science, so many times the support level may not seem clear to you.
However, practice will hone your skills, and over time your eye will
easily be able to pick out support levels.
On the other side is resistance. Resistance is the price level at
which the selling pressure is strong enough to prevent the stock
from rising further. You can think of this as a ceiling where the sellers have convinced the buyers that they are outnumbered and the
buyers move to the sidelines. Like support, this is not an exact price
level. It’s best to think of resistance as a price area where supply
in the stock has overcome the demand. These resistance areas are
found above where the stock is currently trading, and every buyer
should be aware of the price points where overhead supply exists. It’s
good practice to know where the sellers are stacking up before you
ever consider taking a long position.
Looking back at Figure 3.9 you see an example of a stock that
has been trading in a horizontal price channel. Notice the support
level, which connects the lows of the channel. Remember, we are
looking for general areas where there has been a history of buying
activity. We know that this is an area of demand because the buyers
were able to rally the stock from these points. Should the price drop
and stay below the lows, this would tell us that the buyers are losing
their ability to hold up the stock and the sellers are taking charge of
the price action.
The resistance line is drawn horizontally by connecting the
channel highs. If there were any highs that crossed slightly over this
line, it would be okay because once again we are looking for general
areas as opposed to exact price points. Should we see a strong move
over resistance on high volume, this would be called a breakout.
Breakouts are footprints that tell us the buyers are getting aggressive. When the sellers see this aggression, they will “fade the market”
by raising their sell prices in an effort to see how far the buyers will
chase the market.

c03.indd 64

11/2/07 12:16:16 PM

It Pays to Be Trendy

65

Moving Averages
We would be missing a big piece of the trend story if we didn’t discuss
moving averages. We’ll discuss the details of constructing and using the
moving average more in the next chapter. For now, recognize that
they are one of the most valuable tools we have when it comes to
identifying and analyzing price trends. Many times, you will find that
the trend lines you draw will run parallel or even on top of one of the
major moving averages.
You may have heard it said that a moving average is a lazy man’s
trend line. With that said, let us point out that we are always in favor
of simplifying the process, so think of this as our way of helping you
keep things super simple. The other point to consider is that you are
not the only person in the world using moving averages to identify
trends in the market. Therefore, when a stock is breaking below a
major moving average, the general trading population is put on alert.
Once the traders are in defense mode, you will see a drop in the buying pressure. From there, the natural progression is an increase in
supply and the sell off begins. The fact that many millions of investors and traders use moving averages as a signal to get in or out of
a stock tells us that we cannot ignore the power these simple lines
have with regard to affecting the price action of a stock or index.
In Figure 3.10 you will see how closely the 50-day moving average

Figure 3.10 Trend Line Closely Following the 50-Day Moving Average

c03.indd 65

11/2/07 12:16:16 PM

66

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

correlates to the intermediate trend line. Notice how the stock shows
a pattern of price rallies near these support levels. Many people follow moving averages, so it’s not unusual to see the major moving
averages act as support for the stock.
Unfortunately, not enough investors have realized the value in
using moving averages. Most charts include a basic selection of moving averages. Not only will they help you determine the trend of the
market, but they also serve as tools to manage risk. Learning how to
minimize loss when you pick the wrong stock is critical to your success. If you have never used moving averages before, then we strongly
recommend you start using them now. After a while, you may eliminate the need to draw trend lines altogether. Your trained eye will
eventually be able to see the trend in a flash. This not only saves you
time in selecting a good stock, but it also removes any doubt when it
comes time to exit a stock or option position.

Back on Track
After reading this chapter, you may have recognized that you have
been fighting the trend. You try to buy the next low because you just
know that the rally is coming. Or you short the stock that is pushing
new heights because there is no good reason for the price to be at
such high levels. Our hope is that you will get back on the track of
following the money trail. Maybe the company isn’t worthy of the
lofty stock price it happens to possess, but you need to understand
that your short sale won’t bring the market back in balance. Put your
money where the money is flowing. If the money is flowing into a
stock, go ahead and buy it. When the money is flowing out of a stock,
join the sellers. Your profits and sanity will both reap the rewards of
moving with the market rather than against it.

c03.indd 66

11/2/07 12:16:16 PM

4

C H A P T E R

The Trader’s Toolbox
H O W T O PIC K A HAMMER WHEN
T HE MA RKET G IVES YOU A NAIL

T

here are many choices in analysis tools and strategies for traders
and investors. One of the biggest challenges facing the trader is
which tool to use for a given market condition. And once you’ve
selected a tool, when should you switch to a different tool? You need
to properly apply the right technical or fundamental strategy, or
you’ll find yourself making the wrong move at the right time.

Chatter Box—Rick
Several years after purchasing my first new home, I decided to finish
the basement. The space was a walk-out basement (now cleverly
described as “terrace-level” by creative real estate marketers) with
three sides that were poured concrete walls. Since my construction
expertise falls at the lower end of the skill spectrum, I consulted several
friends about the best way to finish the walls. They told me that the
simplest approach would be to install furring strips along the entire
length of the poured walls. Furring strips are nothing more than slats of
treated lumber that run perpendicular to the floor. The drywall panels
(Continued)

67

c04.indd 67

11/2/07 12:17:39 PM

68

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

could then be attached to the furring strips and the wall finished the
same as a typical framed wall.
The challenge was figuring out the best way to attach the furring
strips to the concrete wall. The two most common methods are drilling
into the wall and installing masonry screws or using a powder-actuated
nail gun to drive the nails into the wall. For those of you who aren’t
familiar with a powder-actuated nail gun, I can explain it very easily.
The tool looks like a small weapon. One end is loaded with a powder
cartridge, quite similar to a rifle shell. The other end is loaded with
a nail wrapped in a rubber seat. In order to set the nail, you simply
place the nail tip against the wall and pull the trigger. The powder in
the cartridge explodes, firing the nail into the wall with a single shot.
Now let’s review the options. First, I could do a lot of work manhandling a drill against a solid wall followed by more work setting the
screw. Or I could fire a gun at the wall. In my book, this was a classic
no-brainer.
So I went to my local home improvement store and purchased
a nail gun with plenty of cartridges and nails. I dutifully loaded the
gun per the instructions and carefully set the nail tip against the wall.
Taking care to ensure that everything was in order, I pulled the trigger.
There was a loud crack, a bit of recoil, and a puff of smoke where the
nail was firmly set through the furring strip into the wall. It would be an
understatement to say that the nail gun became my favorite tool that
day. Furring strips only require several anchors to attach them to a
wall but I had an excuse to set a dozen nails into each strip. Eventually,
I ran out of furring strips. There I was with a perfectly good nail gun and
nothing to nail! Now I was trying to figure out alternative uses for this
tool. Sure, a handsaw was specifically designed for cutting lengths of
board but a properly aligned nail gun just might be able to accomplish the task with a single shot.
