
CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

Trading Rules

Once you identify a head-and-shoulders top, you need to make two trading
decisions: what to do about your long position and how to go about shorting.
You have three choices for managing your longs: sell them outright, tighten
your stops, or sell some and hold the rest.
Many traders take the fourth choice - they simply freeze and do nothing.
Trading is a complex, nontrivial game that demands making decisions in an
atmosphere of uncertainty.
Your decision depends on how certain you feel about the pattern. It also
depends on the size of your account. A large account allows you to buy and
sell gradually. Having to trade a single contract in a small account demands
precise timing- it is a good school for a beginning trader.
You must analyze your charts in more than one timeframe (see Section
36). If weekly charts are toppy, a head-and-shoulders pattern on the dailies
should prompt you to run for the exit. If weeklies are strong, then it is often
better to simply tighten the stops. Technical indicators can also help you
decide how urgent it is to sell.
Markets often are more volatile at tops, with wide swings between shortterm highs and lows. Selling short and placing a stop above the latest high
may expose you to more risk than the maximum amount allowed per contract in your account (see Chapter 10). You may have to pass up the trade or
buy puts to keep your monetary risk within allowed limits.

1. Sell when you recognize the head or the right shoulder of a head-andshoulders pattern, based on low volume, a break of an uptrend, and a
divergence between indicators and prices.

2. The decline from the head establishes a neckline. If you still hold a
long position, place a stop below the neckline.
3. The rally to the right shoulder is usually marked by low volume and
glaring weakness in technical indicators; it offers the last good opportunity to cash out of the uptrend. Technical indicators often reach
higher levels on the right shoulder than on the head but they never
exceed the levels reached during the left shoulder. When you sell short
into the right shoulder, place your stop at the top of the head. Make
that order "stop-and-reverse"-if stopped out of the short position,
reverse and go long (see "The Hound of the Baskervilles" signal).

23. CHART PATTERNS

105

4. Once the neckline is broken, a pullback on low volume offers an
excellent shorting opportunity, with a protective stop slightly above
the neckline.
The Hound of the Baskervilles

This signal occurs when a reliable chart or indicator pattern does not lea$ to
the action you expect and prices move in the opposite direction. A head-andshoulders pattern indicates that the uptrend is over. If prices continue to rise,
they give the Hound of the Baskervilles signal.
This signal is named after the story by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle in which
Sherlock Holmes was called to solve a murder at a country estate. He found
the essential clue when he realized that the family dog did not bark while the
murder was being committed. That meant the dog knew the criminal and the
murder was an inside job. The signal was given by the lack of expected
action - by the lack of barking!
When the market refuses to bark in response to a perfectly good signal, it
gives you the Hound of the Baskervilles signal. This shows that something is
fundamentally changing below the surface. Then it is time to get in gear with
the new powerful trend.
A head-and-shoulders pattern gives a strong sell signal. If the market
refuses to collapse but rallies from the right shoulder, it gives you its Hound
of the Baskervilles signal. When pqces rise above the head, it is time to
cover shorts, reverse, and go long. An aborted head-and-shoulders top often
leads to a very strong rally. Buy the upside breakout, and place a protective
stop slightly below the top of the head.
Inverse Head and Shoulders

Some traders call this pattern a head-and-shoulders bottom-a mirror image
of a head-and-shoulders top. It looks like a silhouette of a person upside
down: the head at the lowest point, surrounded by two shoulders. This pattern develops when a downtrend loses its force and gets ready to reverse
(Figure 23-2).
In a valid downtrend, each new low falls lower than the previous low, and
each rally stops at a lower level. A strong rally from the head allows you to

106

Figure 23-2.

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

Inverse Head and Shoulders

While the downtrend is in effect, high volume confirms all declines until
the left shoulder (LS). The decline into the head (H) comes on low volume-a warning to the bears. The rally out of the head breaks above the
downtrendline and signals that the downtrend is over.
Low volume during the right shoulder (RS) and the upward-sloping
neckline indicate that a powerful rally is coming. The burst of volume
during the neckline break confirms the new uptrend. No pullback ever
reached this neckline.
The preliminary target (B) is as high above the neckline as the head of
the pattern (A) is below it. It is common for rallies out of head-and-shoulders bottoms to exceed their targets. The best buying opportunity was at
the right shoulder, with a protective stop a few ticks below the head. At
the right edge of the chart, a gap confirms a strong uptrend. Place a protective stop on long positions a few ticks below the gap's lower rim.

draw a neckline. When a decline from the neckline fails to reach the level of
the head, it creates the right shoulder. When prices rally from the right shoul-

23. CHART PATTERNS

I
I

107

der above the neckline on increased volume, they complete the head-andshoulders bottom and a new uptrend begins.
Sometimes a head-and-shoulders bottom is followed by a pullback to the
neckline on low volume, offering an excellent buying opportunity. Measure
the distance from the bottom of the head to the neckline and project it
upward from the point where the neckline was broken. This gives you a minimum measurement for a rally, which is frequently exceeded.
The tactics for trading inverse head and shoulders is similar to head-andshoulders tops. You risk less money trading at bottoms because prices are
less volatile, and you can use closer stops.

Rectangles

A rectangle is a chart pattern that contains price movements between two
parallel lines. They are usually horizontal but can sometimes slant up or
down (see "Lines and Flags," later in this section). Rectangles and triangles
can serve as continuation or reversal patterns.
You need four points to draw a rectangle: The upper line connects two
rally tops, and the lower line connects two bottoms (Figure 23-3). These
lines should be drawn through the edges of congestion areas rather than
across the extreme highs and lows (see Section 19).
The upper line of a rectangle identifies resistance, while the lower line
identifies support. The upper line shows where bulls run out of steam; the
lower line shows where bears become exhausted. A rectangle shows that
bulls and bears are evenly matched. The key question is whether bulls or
bears will eventually win the battle within this pattern.
If volume swells when prices approach the upper border of a rectangle, an
upside breakout is more likely. If volume increases when prices approach the
lower border, a downside breakout is more likely. A valid breakout from a
rectangle is usually confirmed by an increase in volume - one-third to onehalf higher than the average of the previous five days. If volume is thin, it is
likely to be a false breakout.
Rectangles tend to be wider in uptrends and narrower in downtrends. The
longer a rectangle, the more significant a breakout. Breakouts from rectangles on weekly charts are especially important because they mark important
victories for bulls or bears.
There are several techniques for projecting how far a breakout is likely to
go. Measure the height of a rectangle and project it from the broken wall in

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

108

92,60
9240
92,20
92,U
91,80
91-68
91,M
91,20
91,W
90,80
Figure 23-3.

Rectangles

The upper border of each rectangle is drawn across two or more highs.
The lower border is drawn across two or more lows. A rectangle may
serve either as a continuation or a reversal pattern. As long as a major
trendline is intact, a rectangle is more likely to serve as a continuation
pattern.
After prices break out of a rectangle, they often return and touch its
wall from the outside (B, D, and E). These pullbacks offer excellent
entries into low-risk trades in the direction of the breakout, with a protective stop inside the rectangle.
The same price levels tend to serve as both support and resistance.
Notice how line D turned from support into resistance and back into
support. At the right edge of the chart, prices are well above their
uptrendline, and it i s better to wait for a pullback before buying.

the direction of the breakout. This is the minimum target. The maximum target is obtained by taking the length of the rectangle and projecting it vertically from the broken wall in the direction of a breakout. Tony Plummer
writes that a rectangle is a part of a spiral-like development of a trend. He
recommends measuring the height of a rectangle, multiplying it by three

23. CHART PATTERNS

109

Fibonacci ratios (1.618, 2.618, and 4.236), and projecting those measurements in the direction of the breakout to obtain a price target.
Trading Rules
Floor traders can profit from trading short-term swings between a rectangle's
walls, but the big money is made by trading in the direction of a breakout.
1. When trading within a rectangle, buy at the lower boundary and sell
short at the upper boundary. Oscillators can help you decide when
prices are ready to reverse within a rectangle. Stochastic, the Relative
Strength Index, and Williams %R (see Chapter 4) mark price reversals within rectangles when they hit their reference lines and change
direction.
If you buy at the lower border of a rectangle, place your protective
stop slightly below that rectangle. If you sell short near the upper wall
of a rectangle, place a protective stop slightly above that border. You
have to be very nimble and take profits at the first sign of a reversal. It
is dangerous to hold on for a few extra ticks within a rectangle.

2. To find out whether an upside or a downside breakout is more likely,
analyze the market in a longer timeframe than the one you are trading.
If you want to catch a breakout on a daily chart, identify the weekly
trend because a breakout is more likely to go in its direction (see
Section 43).

3. Once you buy an upside breakout or sell short a downside breakout,
place your protective stop slightly inside the rectangle. There may be a
pullback to the rectangle wall on light volume, but prices should not
return into a rectangle after a valid breakout.
Lines and Flags

A line is a kind of a rectangle-a lengthy congestion area. In Dow theory, a
line is a correction against the primary trend. It is a congestion zone whose
height is approximately 3 percent of current stock market value. When the
stock market "draws a line" instead of reacting more deeply against its major
trend, it shows a particularly strong primary trend.
A flag is a rectangle whose boundaries are parallel but slant up or down.

110

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

Breakouts tend to go against the slope of the flag. If a flag slants upward, a
downside breakout is more likely. If the flag slants down, an upside breakout
is more likely.
If you see a downsloping flag in an uptrend, place a buy order above the
latest peak of the flag to catch an upside breakout. A rising flag in an uptrend
marks distribution, and a downside breakout is more likely. Place an order to
sell short below the latest low of that flag. Reverse the procedure in downtrends.

Triangles

A triangle is a congestion area whose upper and lower boundaries converge
on the right (Figure 23-4). It can serve either as a reversal or, more often, as
a continuation pattern. Some technicians call triangles coils. The market
winds up and the energy of traders becomes compressed, ready to spring
from a triangle.
A small triangle whose height is 10 to 15 percent of the preceding trend is
more likely to serve as a continuation pattern. Many uptrends and downtrends are punctuated by these triangles, as sentences are punctuated by commas. Large triangles whose height equals a third or more of the preceding
trend are more likely to serve as reversal patterns. Finally, some triangles
simply fizzle out into listless trading ranges.
Triangles can be divided into three major groups, depending on their
angles. The upper and lower lines of symmetrical triangles converge at the
same angles. If the upper line is inclined 30 degrees to the horizontal, then
the lower line is also inclined 30 degrees. Symmetrical triangles reflect a fair
balance of power between bulls and bears and are more likely to serve as
continuation patterns.
An ascending triangle has a relatively flat upper boundary and a rising
lower boundary. Its flat upper boundary shows that bulls are maintaining
their strength and can lift prices to the same level, while bears are losing
their ability to drive prices lower. An ascending triangle is more likely to
result in an upside breakout.
A descending triangle has a relatively flat lower boundary, while its upper
boundary slants down. Its flat lower boundary shows that bears are maintaining their strength and continue to drive prices down, while bulls are losing
their capacity to lift prices. A descending triangle is more likely to lead to a
downside breakout.

23. CHART PATTERNS

"

t

111

. 28888
.. 27222
.. 26444

Nikkei Dow

,

Jan Peb llar IPP
Figure 23-4. Triangles

hr

Jun

Jul

hug

Sep

..

25667

..

24889

..

24111

..

23333

..

22556

..

21778
21888

Each triangle is defined by two converging lines. The upper line connects two or more peaks, and the lower line connects two or more bottoms.
A triangle whose lower boundary is rising is called an ascending triangle (marked Asc T on the chart). It tells you to expect an upside breakout. A descending triangle (Desc T) has a declining upper boundary. It
shows that prices are more likely to break down. A symmetrical triangle
(Symm T) shows that the forces of bulls and bears are evenly matched
and the trend is likely to continue.
Valid breakouts tend to occur during the first two thirds of a triangle's
length. Sometimes prices pull back to a triangle after a breakout. Those
pullbacks offer excellent entry points into trades in the direction of the
breakout.

Volume tends to shrink as triangles get older. If volume jumps on a rally
toward the upper boundary, an upside breakout is more likely. If volume
becomes heavier when prices fall toward the lower boundary, a downside
breakout is more likely. Valid breakouts are accompanied by a burst of volume - at least 50 percent above the average for the past 5 days.

112

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

Valid breakouts occur during the first two thirds of a triangle. It is better
not to trade breakouts from the last third of a triangle. If prices stagnate all
the way into the apex, they are likely to remain flat. A triangle is like a fight
between two tired boxers who keep leaning on each other. An early breakout
shows that one of the fighters is stronger. If prices stay within a triangle all
the way into the apex, that shows that both boxers are exhausted and no
trend is likely to emerge.
Charts of related markets often show triangles at the same time. If gold,
silver, and platinum all trace triangles and gold breaks out to the upside, then
platinum and silver are likely to follow. This approach works well with currencies, especially with closely related ones, such as the German Mark and
Swiss Franc. It also works with stocks in the same group-compare General
Motors to Ford but not to IBM.
Triangles provide a minimum target for a move following a breakout.
Measure the height of a triangle at its base and project vertically from the
point where the triangle was broken. If you are dealing with a small triangle
in the midst of a dynamic trend, that minimum measurement is likely to be
exceeded. You can also use the Fibonacci projections mentioned earlier.

Trading Rules

It's better not to trade minor swings within a triangle unless that triangle is
very large. As a triangle grows older, the swings become narrower. Profit
potential shrinks, while slippage and commissions continue to take just as
bad a bite from your account as before.
1. If you trade inside a triangle, use oscillators such as Stochastic (see
Section 30) and Elder-ray (see Section 41). They can help you catch
minor swings.
2. In trying to decide whether a triangle on a daily chart is likely to lead
to an upside or a downside breakout, look at the weekly chart (see
Section 43). If the weekly trend is up, then a triangle on the daily
charts is more likely to break out to the upside, and vice versa.

3. When you want to buy an upside breakout, place a buy order slightly
above the upper boundary of a triangle. Keep lowering your order as
the triangle becomes narrower. If you want to short a downside break-

23. CHART PATTERNS

113

out, place a sell order slightly below the lower boundary. Keep raising
it as the triangle becomes narrower. Once you are in a trade, place a
protective stop slightly inside the triangle. Prices may pull back to the
wall, but they should not return deep inside a triangle following a
valid breakout.
4. When a breakout from a triangle is followed by a pullback, pay attention to volume. A pullback on heavy volume threatens to abort the
breakout, but a pullback on light volume offers a good opportunity to
add to your position.

5. When prices approach the last third of a triangle, cancel your buy or
sell orders. Breakouts from the last third of a triangle are very unreliable.

Atypical Triangles

A pennant is a small triangle whose lines are slanted in the same direction.
Pennants that slant against the trend serve as continuation patterns. There is
an old saying "The pennant flies at half-mast '-a rally is likely to travel as
far after the pennant as it did before. A pennant that slants in the direction of
the trend indicates exhaustion - a trend is nearing a reversal.
A widening triangle occurs when prices set a series of higher highs and
lower lows. This pattern shows that the market is becoming hysterically
volatile, with bulls and bears pouring in. The fight between bulls and bears
becomes too hot for the uptrend to continue-a widening triangle kills an
uptrend.
A diamond starts out as a widening triangle and ends as a symmetrical
triangle. You have to squint very hard to recognize it. Diamonds are prime
examples of Rorschach-type patterns for chartists. If you look long enough,
you will find them, but their trading usefulness is minimal. I used to look for
diamonds . . . and most of them were fake zirconium.
9

Double Tops and Bottoms

Double tops occur when prices rally to the area of the previous high. Double
bottoms occur when prices fall near the previous low. The second top or bot-

114

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

tom can be slightly above or below the first. This often confuses beginning
analysts.
Savvy traders use technical indicators to identify double tops and bottoms.
They are often marked by bullish and bearish divergences. Buying at double
bottoms and selling short at double tops offer some of the best trading opportunities.

Computerized Technical
Analysis

24. COMPUTERS IN TRADING
To be a successful trader, you must understand markets better than your
competitors do. You can analyze them more thoroughly using a computer.
Many traders who compete with you in the markets already have these
machines.
Manual charting can help you develop an intuitive, physical feel for
prices. You can buy some graph paper and plot several stocks or commodities each day. Once you post your charts, write down at what level you will
be a buyer or a seller and where you will place your stops.
After you do that for a while, you will probably want to analyze more
markets using technical indicators. Then it is time to look for a computer and
technical analysis software.

Driving or Walking

A trader without a computer is like a man traveling on a bicycle. His legs
grow strong and he sees a lot of scenery, but his progress is slow. When you
travel on business and want to get to the point fast, you get a car.
A computer can help you track and analyze more markets in depth. It can
take over routine tasks and free up your mind for thinking. A computer

116

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

allows you to use more indicators and spot more opportunities in the markets. Trading is an information game. A computer helps you process more
information.
Computerized technical analysis is more objective than classical charting.
You can argue about whether a head-and-shoulders pattern is present - but
there is never an argument about an indicator's direction. When an indicator
points up, it is clearly up, and when it is down, it is clearly down.
Switching from manual charting to computerized analysis is like giving
up an abacus for a calculator. It may slow you down for a while, as you learn
to push the keys, but the eventual increase in speed is worth the effort.

Three Steps to Computerized Analysis

There are three steps to becoming a computerized trader. First you must
choose software, then a computer, and finally data for analysis. Different
programs require different computers, which is why it pays to choose software first. Software tells a computer how to process data and how to display
the results. Each program has a unique list of features and its own look and
feel.
Draw a list of tasks you want your computer to perform for you and show
it to computerized traders. Contact a traders' group such as Club 3000 to see
what its members like. Many traders call Financial Trading Seminars, Inc.
for our opinion on the best packages. Magazines for traders, such as Futures
and Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities carry many ads for technical analysis software. Read those ads and software reviews, and send away
for demo diskettes.
Once you narrow down your choices to two or three programs, call the
companies whose software you like and ask for names of users in your area.
Insist on names of real users-your best source of practical and unbiased
advice. Many traders feel isolated and enjoy contact with other traders. They
like to show their equipment and tell you about the quality of technical s u p
port.
Most programs for technical analysis fall into one of three groups: toolboxes, black boxes, and gray boxes. Toolboxes are for serious traders, black
boxes are for people who believe in Santa Claus, and gray boxes are in
between. When considering a new package, ask yourself which group it
belongs to.
