
15. When In Doubt, Get Out—In swing trading, we are looking for an
immediate short-term move. If the market doesn’t move immediately,
then there’s no need to remain in the market—even if you’re not
stopped out. The longer you are in a market that is not moving in
your favor, the more you are exposing yourself to a potential adverse
move. In most cases, you're better off exiting the position and waiting
for the market to set up again. A good rule-of-thumb here is to exit
positions that aren’t profitable within one to two days.

16. Know When to Say When—Be willing to stop trading and re-evaluate
the markets, yourself and your methodologies when you encounter a
string of losses. The markets will always be there. Gann said it best:
“When you make one to three trades that show losses, whether they be large
or small, something is wrong with you and not the market. Your trend may
have changed. My rule is to get out and wait. Study the reason for your
losses. Remember, you will never lose any money by being out of the market.”

17. Re-Read Rule #5!



CHAPTER 3

TREND QUALIFIERS

The trend is your friend.

— truest market adage

Most of the methods in this manual involve first identifying strongly
trending markets. In this chapter we will look at how to define a trend.

WHAT IS A TREND?

Quite simply an uptrend is a series of higher prices over time. If a stock
was at $50 per share a month ago and is now trading at $100 per share,
it’s obviously in an uptrend. When looking at a bar chart, it is a series of
higher highs and higher lows.

Higher —— |
Highs | , |
| i

\

s
!
ey)

“~Higher
Lows



a
18 Chapter 3

A downtrend is quite simply a series of lower prices over time. If a stock
was trading at $100 per share a month ago and is now trading at $50 per
share, then obviously it is in a downtrend. When looking at a bar chart, it
is a series of lower highs and lower lows.

oe Lower
7 Highs
eo ?
f
Lower | / |
Lows gS j
NS
SN
a
I

MEASURING TREND

ADX

Developed by Welles Wilder, the ADX is used to measure the strength of
a market but not its direction. The higher the reading, the stronger the
trend, regardless of whether it is up or down. The direction of the market
is suggested by two components that make up the ADX: the Positive Di-
rectional Movement Index (+DMI) and the Minus Directional Movement
Index (-DMI). In general, an ADX reading of 30 or higher with +DMI >
-DMI denotes a strong uptrend. Referring to Figure 3.1 of Veritas Soft-
ware, notice at point (a) the ADX reading was greater than 30 and the
+DMI was above the -DMI suggesting an uptrend was developing.



Trend Qualifiers 19

FIGURE 3.1

Conversely, an ADX reading of 30 or higher with -DMI > +DMI denotes
a strong downtrend. Referring to Figure 3.2 of Metricom, notice that at
point (a) the ADX was greater than 30 and the -DMI > +DMI suggesting
a strong downtrend was developing.



20 Chapter 3

FIGURE 3.2

DMI 16.53

“29.56 35.69
DML

Details on how ADX and DMI are calculated are provided in the Appen-
dix. For purposes of this manual, all you need to know is that ADX >=
30 and +DMI > -DMI suggests an uptrend and ADX >= 30 and -DMI >
+DMI suggests a downtrend.

DEVELOPING AN EYE FOR TREND

Many are obsessed with finding exact formulas to define trend. They get
caught up in precise measurements. For instance, they won’t trade a mar-
ket because the ADX is less than X or the RS isn’t greater than Y. The
truth is, like trading in general, there are no “exacts” when it comes to
measuring trend.

This is not to say that trend indicators such as ADX do not have their
place. These standardized indicators are very useful when running com-
puter scans on thousands of stocks. In addition, to those newer to trad-
ing, these indicators can help take away some of the guesswork.



Trend Qualifiers 21

So how should trends be measured? The good news is that determining
trend does not have to be complex. With a little experience, you'll find
that a simple “eyeballing” of a chart will give you a much better idea of
the trend than any precise computerized method.

TREND QUALIFIERS

There are certain clues that a trending market will leave behind. I have
dubbed these “Trend Qualifiers.” With a little practice, you'll be able to
quickly glance at a chart, recognize these patterns and know instinctively
whether or not a market is in a strong trend.

Base Breakouts—A base breakout is when a wide-range bar that goes
higher occurs after a sideways market movement. When a stock goes
sideways, it suggests the buyers and the sellers agree on price. When the
stock breaks out of this base, the buyers have gained control with the
likelihood that the trend is developing.

tipttrtr]
l ae

I



LL
22 Chapter 3

Gaps in the direction of the trend—A gap occurs when a stock opens
above the prior day’s high (a gap higher) or opens below the prior day’s
low (a gap lower). When a stock gaps in the direction of the uptrend, it
suggests strong demand for the stock as buyers are bidding up the stock
before it opens. Note in the diagram below that the lows of the gap
days are also greater than the prior day’s high. This indicates even more

strength.

Laps in the direction of the trend—A lap occurs when a stock opens
greater than the prior day’s close but less than the prior day’s high.
While not as strong as a gap, a lap in the direction of trend suggests de-
mand for the stock.

La

Ss

Lap

it]



Trend Qualifiers

New Highs—A stock must hit new highs if it is in an uptrend. A
two-month calendar high (approximately 43 trading days) is a good rule
of thumb to use here.

New Lows—A stock must hit new lows if it is in a downtrend. A
two-month calendar low (approximately 43 trading days) is a good rule
of thumb to use here.

Percentage Moves—how much a stock has risen or fallen over a given
period of time. For instance, a stock that goes from $50 to $100 in a
month is up 100%. Obviously, though, it doesn’t take mathematics Ph.D.
to determine that stocks making such moves are in uptrends.

Strong Closes—When a stock closes within the top 25% of its range, it
suggests that traders were willing to carry the position overnight. This
implies demand for the stock. The more days in a row that this occurs,
the stronger the uptrend.

High,
“~- Top 25%
-

“Low

Wide-Range Bars (Thrusts) in the direction of the trend—The stock’s
range is greater than the prior five days (or more) range.

™ Wide
Range

h Hid”

th

23



24 Chapter 3

Here’s an example of a stock that shows multiple Trend Qualifiers
throughout a 90-day period. The trend was easily determined early on by
the base breakout. The stock then proceeded to show strong trending
characteristics.

FIGURE 3.3

Tere a eT eo Ee ee

Base N

Breakout Meat . : :
1 771. nn WRB
000 Feb

arts by Omega Research © 1997

Alexion Pharmaceuticals (ALXN) rises over 700% in 10 weeks. During that period, it broke out from
a base, made new two-month highs (NH), had strong closes and gaps and wide-range bars (WRB) in
the direction of the uptrend.

MOVING AVERAGES

Moving averages are also helpful when determining trend. | like to use a
10-day simple moving average (SMA), 20-day exponential moving aver-
age (EMA) and 30-day EMA. The 10-day SMA gives me a true represen-
tation of price over the last two weeks (10 trading days). The 20- and
30-period EMAs give a rough representation of performance over the last
month and six weeks, respectively. I like the exponential averages for



Trend Qualifiers 25

these longer periods as they are front-weighted and catch up to prices
faster.

The characteristics of moving averages that I use to help me determine
trend include slope, Daylight and proper order.

SLOPE

Slope is quite simply the direction in which the moving averages are
pointing. Positive slope suggests an uptrend, negative slope suggests a
downtrend and very little slope suggests a consolidation.

DAYLIGHT

In December of 1996, I published the 2/20 EMA Breakout System in
Stocks And Commodities Magazine. The system essentially looks to go long
after two or more lows are greater than the 20-day EMA. Soon after it
was published, several traders contacted me to discuss how they used
and modified the system to fit their needs. One trader, Joe Sansolo,
dubbed the lows being greater than the moving average “Daylight” be-
cause you could see “daylight” in between the low of the bar (or highs
for downtrends) and the moving average. This daylight many times
means the trend is in place and beginning to accelerate.

Moving
Average

‘

PROPER ORDER

In an uptrend, a faster (shorter time frames) moving average will follow
closer to price than a slower (longer time frames) moving average. There-
fore, when using a 10-day SMA, a 20-day EMA and a 30-day EMA, the



26 Chapter 3

10-day SMA should be greater than the 20-day EMA and the 20-day
EMA should be greater than the 30-day EMA.

Notice the moving averages in Alexion Pharmaceuticals, mentioned pre-
viously. There was Daylight and the moving averages were in proper or-
der and had a positive slope throughout its strong uptrend.

FIGURE 3.4

Alexion Pharma Ine-Dai L420 |

: beeeeeed ne covet beret rr : ee v-Gay +100 ;
vibes r60
Paylight L4o

\ 7: ‘Pasitive Slope:

ae Proper Order P20

. . q r r TT, r r rey

THE TREND SHOULD BE OBVIOUS

Even though we have gone to great length to describe trend, the truth is,
it doesn’t have to be rocket science. Therefore, don’t get too caught up in
the specific details. In fact, if you have a young child at home, ask him or
her what direction they think a chart is headed. If you don’t have any
young kids, think to yourself, “In which direction would a 6-year-old say
this stock is headed?”

And finally, keep in mind that markets only trend about 30% of the time.

Trade that 30% and ignore the remaining 70%. This will further ensure
you are trading in the correct markets.



Trend Qualifiers

Q&A

Do you recommend any additional reading on determining trends?

Yes. Mark Boucher has done intensive studies of early identification of
runaway markets. He has quantified market constructs such as gaps,
laps and thrusts. He published this research in his book The Hedge
Fund Edge.

Are there any hard fast rules when it comes to determining trend?

No. If the right side of the chart is higher than the left, then that is an
uptrend. If the right side of the chart is lower than the left side, then it
is in a downtrend. Seriously, it should be obvious.

You used 10-day simple and 20-day and 30-day exponential moving
averages for stocks. Do you also use these in other markets?

Yes. For an index, like the Nasdaq or S&P, I like to also plot a 50-day
and 200-day simple moving average simply because it is well-watched
by institutions.

Is a simple moving average better than an exponential moving aver-
age or vise versa?

I think both have their place. I like the simple for shorter time periods,
say 10 days or less, because this gives me true representation of the
average price. Longer term, I like to use exponential moving averages
as they still give me a feel for the longer-term average price, but being
front-weighted, tend to catch up to current prices faster.

27





CHAPTER 4

STOCK SELECTION

As momentum swing traders, we are looking to capture explosive
short-term market moves. We do not have the luxury of waiting around for
something to happen. Therefore, it’s vitally important that we are trading in
stocks that show the most immediate potential. Obviously, as momentum
players, trend is one of our main criteria. In addition to trend, the stocks
must be volatile, a member of the strongest sector, priced high enough and
have a reasonable spread to make short-term trading worthwhile. These,
along with several other criteria for selecting stocks, are discussed below.

Trend—In general, the stocks should have an ADX reading of 30 or
higher and +DMI > -DMI for uptrends and -DMI > +DMI for down-
trends. Keep in mind that no indicator guarantees that a stock is in a
trend. Therefore, make sure the trend is obvious (regardless of the ADX
reading) and shows characteristics described under “Trend Qualifiers.”

Sector—Trade in stocks that are members of the strongest sectors. The
old stock market adage “A rising tide lifts all boats” is as relevant to in-
dividual sectors as it is to the major averages. In fact, because sectors can
often outperform and even trade counter to the overall market, the sector
action is more important than the overall stock market.

Under ideal conditions, the overall sector should be in a strong trend.
However, keep in mind that sometimes sub-sectors can trade independ-
ently of the overall sector. For instance, in mid-2000, the telecommunica-

29


30 Chapter 4

tion stocks overall were in a strong downtrend but the fiber sub-sector
was in a strong uptrend.

Spread—The spread is the difference between the bid price and the ask
price. For instance, if a stock is bidding 98 and asking 100, it has a
2-point spread. So if you bought that stock at the market for $100, you
would immediately have a 2-point loss, as the best you could sell the
stock for would be $98. In general, you should avoid stocks with such
large spreads and focus on issues that have a spread of % point or less.
Keep in mind, however, that in trading, there are trade-offs. Sometimes
stocks in fast moves will have larger spreads, as traders are reluctant to
sell near the bid. In these cases, you'll have to decide whether or not the
potential for gains outweighs the immediate loss.

Price—As I've learned from Jeff Cooper, professional trader and author
of Hit and Run Trading I & Il, if you are going to trade on a short-term ba-
sis, you need to be in higher-priced stocks. This is because they have the
potential to make larger point moves than their lower-priced counter-
parts. For instance, a $10 stock must gain 30% in value for a 3-point
move. A $50 stock would only have to gain 6% and $100 stock would
only have to gain 3%. Therefore, I suggest only trading in stocks priced
$20 and preferable $30 or higher.

Price Persistency—Focus on those stocks that tend to be most price per-
sistent. This means that the stock price tends to follow through from one
day to the next. For instance, if the stock is up sharply today, it tends to
follow through to the upside over the next few days. I have yet to find
an accurate measurement of persistency other than looking at charts. No-
tice how a stock acts when coming out of a pullback. Does it tend to
thrust and fail? Or do thrusts tend to carry through over the next few
days?

Daily Range—The stock must exhibit the potential to make large moves
over a short period of time. One of the easiest ways to recognize this po-
tential is to look at the average range (high — low). As a general rule, the
average range should be two points or higher.

Volume/Liquidity—-One advantage of being a smaller independent
trader versus an institution is that you can trade in smaller cap issues.
Many times, these issues have the potential to make larger gains than
their bigger cap counterparts. However, the issues need to be liquid
enough to allow you to move in and out with ease. In general, the stock's
10-day average volume should be at least 100,000 shares.



Stock Selection 31

Volatility—Volatility is simply how much prices fluctuate over time. The
longer-term trader has the luxury of waiting for a stock to move. The
swing trader, on the other hand, is looking for an immediate move
within a short time frame. Therefore, he must trade in more volatile is-
sues. I believe the best, standardized measurement of volatility is histori-
cal volatility (HV). Stocks you trade should have a HV reading of at least
40% or higher. I will discuss HV in further detail in Section Three,

Volatility.





CHAPTER 5

PULLBACKS

ao 8 @ 8@ @ 8 © 9 9 69 89 8 BO Bw oO eB ew ea ew Bw eo ow ow a ge

The simplest theory that fits the facts of a problem
is the one that should be selected.

— Occam's Razor

Although I emphasize trading with the trend, this does not mean blindly
buying a stock simply because it is in a strong uptrend. Strongly trending
markets are prone to correct. And, you never know when what appears to
be a correction, may in fact be the end of the trend. Therefore, it’s much
wiser to wait for the correction to occur and then look to enter if (and only i)
the original trend begins to re-assert itself—this is the theory and essence of
the pullback. In my opinion, this is the single strongest way to trade.

Referring to Figure 5.1, a hypothetical pullback example, the market is in
a strong uptrend (a) and begins to correct (b). Upon trend resumption (a
rally), an entry is triggered (c). A protective stop (d) is placed right below
the low of the pullback (d), just in case the correction is not complete.

33


34 Chapter 5

FIGURE 5.1

Correction |

(b) |
Trend
| | | Resumption
| 1 | | | | Entry (Cc)
—— Protective Stop
| C)

Entering if, and only if, the trend resumes helps to avoid markets that
have topped. Notice in Figure 5.2, another hypothetical example, what at
first looked like a pullback, turned out to be the exact top of the market
and the beginning of a new downtrend.



Pullbacks

FIGURE 5.2

35

i | " Failure

Strong
Trend

Trends often last much longer and go much further than most are willing
to accept. Markets often thrust, pull back and thrust over and over again.
This is why top and bottom picking is often a loser’s game.

This is nof to say that trends last forever. Eventually, all trends end.
Therefore, when trading pullbacks, there’s always a chance that what ap-
pears to be yet another pullback, in fact, turns out to be a major reversal.
However, by waiting for an entry and using protective stops, you may be
fortunate enough to either avoid the trade (no entry) or get stopped out
with no more than a modest loss.



36 Chapter 5

Infospace (INSP) provides a good real-world example. Referring to Fig-
ure 5.3, notice that the stock “stair stepped” higher, over and over again,
but eventually fails. One note of observation: The more times a stock
pulls back and resumes its trend, the less likely the next pullback will fol-
low through. Said another way, early pullbacks are superior to later pull-
backs.

FIGURE 5.3

DEFINING A PULLBACK

A pullback can be-defined in terms of the trend, the new high, the width
and the depth. These are illustrated in Figure 5.4.



Pullbacks 37
FIGURE 5.4
New
| | Wa Depth
| —
| | ~ Width
| | Trend

TREND AND NEW HIGH

Obviously, a market must be in a trend and make a significant new high
before a pullback can take place. Trend can be defined in terms of an
ADX reading of 30 or higher and +DMI > -DMI or by other Trend Quali-
fiers (Chapter 3). The new high should be at least a two-month calendar
high (approximately 43 trading days).

WIDTH

The width is the number of bars since the last new high was made. For
instance, a four-bar pullback has gone four days since its last new high.
This is illustrated in Figure 5.5.



ener eee e eee
38 Chapter 5

FIGURE 5.5

The width should be wide enough so the market has enough time to cor-
rect but not too long as to negate the market's initial momentum.
Three-to-seven bars is a good rule of thumb here. Referring to Figure 5.6,
Emulex (EMLX), notice that after pulling back for eight days (a), the
stock begins to drift sideways (b).



Pullbacks

FIGURE 5.6

39

DEPTH

Depth is how much the market gives up during the correction. For in-
stance, if a stock rallies up to 100 (a new high) and then sells off to 90,
then it has pulled back 10% off its highs.

Shallow pullbacks tend to lead to longer-term, smoother continuation
moves. Deeper pullbacks tend to lead to much shorter-term and much
sharper “knee-jerk” reactions. In general, I consider pullbacks of 15% or
less shallow and those greater than 15% deep. Keep in mind that “shal-
low” and “deep” become somewhat arbitrary and depend on the volatility
of the stock.

RETRACEMENTS

Depth can also be measured in terms of how much of the underlying
trend has been retraced. For instance, if a stock rallies 20 points since its
last significant low and then gives up 2 points, that stock has retraced
10% of its prior trend. Referring to Figure 5.7, notice that if a stock rallies



40 Chapter 5

from (a) to (b) and then drops all the way back to (c), then 100% of that
trend has been retraced. Other commonly used retracement levels: 38.2%,
50% and 61.8% are shown in Figure 5.7.

FIGURE 5.7

(b)

—— 38.2%

(a) \

Let’s look at some examples of pullbacks.

50%

61.80%

100%

Here we have an example of a three-bar pullback.



Pullbacks 4]

FIGURE 5.8

Alexion Pharma Inc-Daily 02/16/2000 C=88.250 Te)

ia
2000 -DMI

1. Alexion Pharmaceuticals (ALXN) qualifies as a strongly trending stock
by having an ADX reading of 60 and +DMI > -DMI (a). Other Trend
Qualifiers include its having tripled in value over the two months and
wide-range bars (b) and strong closes (c) in the direction of the
uptrend.

2. The stock makes a new two-month high.

3. It pulls back three bars (width).

4. This is 13% off the prior new high (depth) creating a fairly shallow
pullback. This suggests that the stock has the potential to make a lon-

ger-term continuation move. Go long tomorrow at 53 1/16, 1/16
above today’s high.

5. The trend resumes as the stock trades at 53 1/16, 1/16 above the prior
day’s high and we go long.

6. A protective stop is placed at 50 15/16, 1/16 below the lowest bar in
the pullback.

7. After a slow start, the stock skyrockets over 40 points over the next
five days.



42 Chapter 5

Here’s an example on the short side.

FIGURE 5.9

Motorola (MOT) qualifies as being in a downtrend by having an ADX
reading of 32 and -DMI > +DMI (a). Other Trend Qualifiers include
its having lost over 40% of its value in less than two months and its
having wide-range bars lower (b) and a gap in the direction of the
downtrend (c).

The stock makes a two-month low.

The stock pulls back 17.9% (depth) in five bars (width). Go short to-
morrow at 38 1/16, 1/16 below today’s low.
