
THE ORGANIZED TRADER

243

It is a good idea to write down some background for each order.
My preferred format includes three lines: Weekly, Daily, and To Do.
For example:
Weekly: EMA rising, MACD-H ticked down, deteriorating
Daily:
MACD-H bearish divergence, pullback to the EMA in progress
To Do: Sell short at 71.30 with a stop at 73, target mid-60s
or
Weekly: EMA turning flat, MACD-H ticked up from a bullish divergence
Daily:
EMA up, MACD-H rising, all in gear to the upside
To Do: Buy on a pullback to the EMA at 23.25, stop 22, target high 20s
I keep these notes in an Excel spreadsheet. It has a line for every
stock that I track, with dates in vertical columns. Whenever I see a
trade, I click on the cell for that date and stock, go to the Insert menu,
and select Comment. Once I’ve written my three-line note, a tiny red
triangle appears in the right upper corner of the cell. Whenever you
move your cursor over it, the comment pops up on the screen. This
record-keeping system makes it easy to sweep horizontally and review
your entire analytic history of a stock or sweep vertically and review
all your comments for that day. I keep my records for the ABC rating
system, described below, in the same spreadsheet.
Remember to keep your notes descriptive. If you write something
like “weekly charts give a buy signal,” that does not tell you anything
specific about a stock and will be useless when you look at it a few
days later. Begin by describing what you see on the weekly charts,
move on to the dailies, and only after that write down your trading
ideas on the action line.
Keeping an action plan increases your load of paperwork, but it
makes trading more businesslike and less like a swing through a
casino. This reminds me of the time I took a group of mostly American
traders for a mock trading session on the floor of the Russian Exchange
in Moscow. Each person was assigned an interpreter and given a paper
bankroll. Everybody had a grand time, trading and taking pictures, except
for a lone Dutchman in our group. That market maker from Amsterdam
kept furiously scribbling on the back of an envelope as he watched
prices on the display panel above the floor. When the session ended
and we moved on to the executive dining room, they brought us

244

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

printouts with our results. It turned out that the group as a whole lost
a million rubles. The Dutchman made a little over 900,000 rubles, while
the rest went up in slippage and commissions—a pretty common
outcome. Good records help create good traders, which is why I
encourage you to invest time and energy in keeping and following
your action plan.

C H A P T E R
N I N E

TRADING FOR A LIVING

T

rading attracts us with its promise of freedom. If you can trade, you
can live and work anywhere in the world, be independent from
the routine, and not answer to anybody. You can trade from a beach
bungalow or a mountaintop chalet, as long as you have a good Internet connection. You have no boss, no customers, no alarm clock. You
are your own person.
People pay lip service to their dreams of freedom, but many feel
frightened by it. If I stop making money for any reason whatsoever, no
corporate parent will take care of me. This a frightening thought for
most people. No wonder so many of us have grown used to the security of our corporate cages.
Caged animals develop all sorts of neurotic behaviors. A common
neurosis is an addiction to the earn-and-spend cycle. We are taught
since childhood that our place in society is defined by what we consume. If you drive a $50,000 car, you are a better, more successful person than someone who drives a $15,000 auto, whereas a neighbor who
drives a $120,000 car is a very special winner altogether. The man who
dresses at an Armani boutique is a more refined individual than someone who buys his pants and shirts at the corner store. Society waves
countless carrots in our faces. The ads sell not food, shelter, or transportation, but a boost of self-esteem. An addict feels revived by a fix
for only a short time. People spend their entire lives straining to keep
up with the Joneses. Those dastardly Joneses do not have the decency
to stay in place, and as they climb the ladder, we must climb also.
Freedom begins in our minds, not in our bank accounts. To liberate
yourself, start becoming conscious of your spending. You are likely to
245

246

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

see that you need much less than you thought, making freedom that
much closer.
There was a Wall Street analyst by the name of Joe Dominguez who
saved enough money to retire at 31. He spent the rest of his life enjoying himself, doing volunteer work, and writing a book called Your
Money or Your Life.
We aren’t making a living, we are making a dying. Consider the
average American worker. The alarm rings at 6:45 and our working
man or woman is up and running. Shower. Dress in the professional
uniform—suits or dresses for some, overalls for others, whites for the
medical professionals, jeans and flannel shirts for construction workers.
Breakfast, if there’s time. Grab commuter mug and briefcase (or lunch
box) and hop in the car for the daily punishment called rush hour. On
the job from nine to five. Deal with the boss. Deal with the coworker
sent by the devil to rub you the wrong way. Deal with suppliers. Deal
with clients/customers/patients. Act busy. Hide mistakes. Smile when
handed impossible deadlines. Give a sigh of relief when the ax known
as ‘restructuring’ or ‘downsizing’—or just plain getting laid off—falls on
other heads. Shoulder the added workload. Watch the clock. Argue with
your conscience but agree with the boss. Smile again. Five o’clock.
Back in the car and onto the freeway for the evening commute. Home.
Act human with mates, kids or roommates. Eat. Watch TV. Bed. Eight
hours of blessed oblivion.
And they call this making a living? Think about it. How many
people have you seen who are more alive at the end of the work day
than they were at the beginning? . . . Aren’t we killing ourselves—our
health, our relationships, our sense of joy and wonder—for our jobs?
We are sacrificing our lives for money—but it’s happening so slowly
that we barely notice.

Pull out your old tax returns or cash income books and add up all
earnings since your first job. You’re likely to find that even a moderately successful person has earned a million dollars or more. And spent
it! Have you ever seen hamsters racing on a treadmill? Wouldn’t it be
nice to hop off, go for a walk, stop by some flowers and inhale? Most
people cannot relax because they are hooked on spending. When they
begin to trade, they set impossible goals. Fifty percent in the first year
is not enough when you crave a downpayment on a Ferrari.
There is nothing wrong with owning a Ferrari or any other luxury,
provided you have given it a lot of thought and are buying it for a true

TRADING FOR A LIVING

247

personal need rather than responding to advertising propaganda.
People keep buying things to shut out their feelings of emptiness and
dissatisfaction. A person who uses money to stuff up his sense of
emptiness can hardly focus on finding the best quality trades.
Find the minimal level of spending which feels comfortable to you.
To quote Dominguez again,
You have enough for your survival, enough for your comforts,
and even some special luxuries, with no excess to burden you unnecessarily. Enough is a powerful and free place. A confident and
flexible place.

Become conscious of your expenditures. Use cash instead of plastic
whenever possible. Stop trying to impress people with your possessions. They are not paying attention because they are too busy trying
to impress you. Pay off all your debts, including your mortgage. That’s
not too hard once you reduce your expenses. Set aside enough money
to live for 6 to 12 months and loosen the link between work and
income. Trading should be a high-paying, high-integrity self-employment. Once your living expenses are covered, start putting extra profits into tax-free bonds so that eventually you’ll have enough income to
take care of your normal needs in perpetuity. If tax-free municipals
yield 5%, then $1 million worth of them will bring you $50,000 a year,
free and clear. Will that be enough? Will you need twice that much?
Three times? Five? The sooner you lower your expenses, the sooner
you’ll reach the moment of liberation. Rationally managing your personal finances prepares you to rationally manage your trading account.
You probably did not expect a discussion of personal spending in a
book on trading. If it has caught your attention, follow up by reading
the Dominguez book. The key idea for traders is to approach the market in a sober and rational manner, maximizing gains, minimizing
losses, and being accountable for every step that they take.

DISCIPLINE AND HUMILITY
A friend started out as a floor clerk and struggled for eight years before
his trading took off. Now he is a world-famous money manager, and
many of those who knew him when he was a beginner like to reminisce about how he clerked on one of the smaller exchanges in New
York, taught classes, and struggled to make ends meet. An old trader

248

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

said to me, “I knew him then, and I thought he would succeed. He had
the right combination of being very careful and having this optimism
you need to get up in the morning and believe you’re going to make
money trading the markets.”
To succeed in trading, you need both confidence and caution.
Having only one is dangerous. If you’re confident but not cautious,
you’ll be arrogant, and that’s a deadly trait for traders. If, on the other
hand, you are cautious but have no confidence, you will not be able
to pull the trigger.
You need confidence to say, “This stock is going up, my indicators say
it will continue to rise, I am going to get long and ride this trend.” At the
same time, you need to be humble enough to put on trades whose size
will not endanger your account. You have to accept the uncertainty of
the markets and be ready to take a small loss without quibbling.
When you feel a surge of confidence in a new trade, it is hard to
think of the downside risk, but if you don’t do it, you cannot protect
yourself. When the market goes against you and hits your predefined
exit level, you have to humbly exit, no matter how confident you feel
about that trade. You need both confidence and humility. The ability
to be aware of two conflicting feelings at the same time is one of the
hallmarks of emotional maturity.
I have a client in New York who came to several seminars and
bought books and videos from my firm but kept struggling for years as
a trader. He’d get ahead, fall behind, get ahead again, then lose money
and get a job to make ends meet. He often seemed on the verge of
success, but kept bouncing around breakeven. Then one day, I ran
into him at a conference and saw a changed man. He was doing
supremely well, managing about $80 million, with terrific grades from
the rating agencies. A few weeks later I stopped by his office.
He had continued using the same trading system, developed years
ago and derived from Triple Screen. He had made only one change.
Instead of second-guessing the system, he came to see himself as a
clerk. He imagined he had a boss who went to Tahiti and left him to
trade the system. The boss will return and give him a bonus, depending not on profits, but on how faithfully he followed the system. My
client stopped trying to be a hot-shot trader and moved into a position
of humility and discipline. That’s when he rose to sweeping success.
Second-guessing a system is a terrible error that creates a huge level
of uncertainty. Tom Basso, a prominent money manager, says that it is

TRADING FOR A LIVING

249

hard enough to figure out what the market is going to do; if you do
not know what you’re going to do, the game is lost.
Choose your system, set up your money management rules, test
everything. Run the system each night, write down its signals, and read
those messages to your broker in the morning. Do not improvise when
quotes flash in front of your face because they hypnotize you and
prompt you to put on impulsive trades.
What if the markets change and your system starts missing good
moves or chewing up equity? Well, you should have tested it over a
long enough stretch of data to feel confident about its long-term performance. Your money management rules will help you ride out a rough
stretch. Be very conservative with an existing system. If you’re feeling
restless, design a new system and trade it in a different account—leave
what works alone.
Trading demands discipline, but, paradoxically, attracts impulsive
people. Trading requires practice, humility, and perseverance. Successful traders are strong but humble people, open to new ideas. Beginners
like to brag, experts like to listen.

Ten Points
When a beginner puts on a trade too big for his account, and it starts
to swing, it floods him with adrenaline. An upswing gives him enough
money to dream about moving to easy street. Feeling elated, he misses
the signals of a top and gets caught in a downside reversal. A downswing puts him into such a state of fear that he misses the signals of a
bottom and sells out right near the lows. Beginners pay more attention
to their emotions than to the reality of the markets.
Once you begin to develop discipline, you start seeing much more
clearly what happens outside of your little account and in the great big
market out there. When you see the market freeze in a flat trading
range or explode in a vertical rally, you know what the masses of
traders feel, because you have been there. When a market goes flat,
and amateurs lose interest, you know that a breakout is coming. You
were once that amateur, you overlooked breakouts because you got
bored and stopped watching the markets. Now, when the market goes
flat, you recognize the way you used to be, and are ready to act.
The market surges to a new high, pauses for a day, and goes vertical. The newspapers, radio, and TV are screaming about the new bull

250

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

market. If you are a disciplined trader, you remember how, years ago,
you bought within a few ticks of the top. This time is different. You
reach for the phone and start taking profits on positions acquired
when the market looked boring and flat. Understanding yourself and
the path you have traveled allows you to read the market and beat
your competitors.
How do you know that you are becoming a disciplined trader?
You keep accurate records. You maintain the minimum of four
records—a trader’s spreadsheet, an equity curve, a trader’s diary, and
an action plan. You scrupulously keep your records up to date and
study them to learn from your experiences.
Your equity curve shows a steady uptrend with shallow drawdowns.
The performance standard for professional money managers is 25%
annual gain on the account, with no drawdowns of more than 10%
from peak equity. If you can match or exceed that, you are far ahead
of the game.
You make your own trading plans. Even when you get a terrificsounding tip from a friend, you do not get swept up in the excitement.
You either ignore it or put it through your own decision-making screens.
You do not chat about your trading. You may discuss a technical
point or a closed trade with a trusted friend, but you never ask for advice on an open trade. You do not disclose your positions so as not to
expose yourself to unwanted advice or tie up your ego in the process.
You learn all you can about the market you’re trading. You have a
good grasp of the main technical, fundamental, intermarket, and political factors that may impact your stock or a future.
You grade yourself on the adherence to your written plan. Imagine
you are an employee, and the boss has left on an extended vacation,
leaving you to manage his money by following his plan. When he returns he will reward or punish you based on how faithfully you followed his plan.
You allot a certain amount of time to the markets each day. You
download data each day, put it through your battery of tests and
screens, and write down the results and plans for tomorrow. You allocate time in your daily schedule to make trading a regular activity and
not something you do catch as catch can.
You monitor selected markets daily, regardless of their activity. You
avoid the typical beginners’ error of monitoring markets only when

TRADING FOR A LIVING

251

they are active and “interesting.” You know that strong moves spring
from periods of relative inactivity.
You learn and are open to new ideas, but are skeptical of claims. You
read market books and magazines, attend conferences, participate in
online forums, but you do not accept any ideas without testing them on
your own data.
You follow your money management rules as if your life depended
on them—because your financial life does. If you have good money
management, most decent trading systems will make you money in the
long run.

HAVE YOU GOT THE TIME?
All traders pay attention to money but few are aware of the importance
of time. Time is just as crucial as money—the more you have, the more
likely you are to win.
Most people start out with too little money, and most traders do not
give themselves enough time to learn. Trading is very different from
physics or mathematics, where genius reveals itself early. In science, if
you’re not a star by the time you’re 25, you’ll never be one. Trading,
on the contrary, is an old man’s game, and now increasingly a woman’s.
Patience is a virtue and memory a great asset. If you slightly improve
each year, you can grow into a brilliant trader.
My friend Lou Taylor, to whom Trading for a Living was dedicated,
used to say, “if I become half a percent smarter each year, I’ll be a
genius by the time I die.” As always with him, there was a great deal of
wisdom in his joke.
Raise your eyes from the keyboard and think about two goals—to
learn to trade and to make money. Which comes first and which comes
second? Stop killing yourself trying to make a lot of money in a hurry.
Learn to trade, and the money will follow. An intelligent horse trainer
does not overload a young horse. Training comes first, pulling heavy
loads comes later.
You learn best by making many small trades and analyzing your performance. The more you trade, the more you learn. Play for small stakes
to reduce the pressure and concentrate on quality. You can always increase your size later. The goal is to acquire enough experience so that
most actions become nearly automatic. A trader whose experience has

252

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

taught him a lot of practical skills can focus on strategy—what he
wants to do—instead of worrying about his next step.
If you are serious about trading, you have got to put time into it.
Markets have to be studied, trading methods dissected and rated, systems designed and applied, decisions made and recorded. All of this
adds up to a fair bit of work. What is a fair bit? Two examples come
to mind, at opposite ends of the spectrum.
At the hard-working end, I think of a top-rated American futures
money manager in whose apartment I once stayed. We lived under the
same roof, but I hardly ever saw him. He would leave for the office
before 7 A.M., return after 10 P.M., and fall asleep in his clothes in the
living room. He worked like that six days a week, but on a Sunday he
took it easy. In the morning he would go for a game of squash at a
club before running back to the office to prepare for the opening on
Monday. No wife, no girlfriend, no pastimes, and no friends—but man,
was he raking in millions!
At the relaxed, but still very disciplined end, I think of a middleaged Chinese trader whom I visited in his mansion when the stock
markets were reeling throughout Asia. He had made a fortune in the
two bull markets of the previous 10 years and told me that he needed
just one more Asian bull market to make all the money he wanted. He
was prepared to wait for several years for the next one, but meanwhile looked after his family, collected art, and played a lot of golf.
He spent a few hours a week downloading the data and watching his
indicators.
How much time should you spend analyzing markets and doing
your homework? A beginner must spend every minute of his waking
hours learning the basics. How much time will you need at the next
stage, once you’ve become a competent semiprofessional trader? We
are talking about position trading and not day-trading, which forces
one to stay in front of the screen all day. The answer depends on how
fast you work and how many markets you trade.
You must dedicate a certain amount of time to the markets each day.
Amateurs and gamblers make a typical mistake. When markets are
inactive, they stop watching and lose touch. They wake up after hearing the news of a runaway move. By that time, the markets are running—the amateurs have missed yet another train and now they chase
it, hoping to hop aboard a runaway trend.

TRADING FOR A LIVING

253

An organized trader tracks his markets, whether he trades them at
the moment or not. He notices when a listless range starts rubbing
against a resistance, buys early, and when amateurs start piling into the
rally, he takes profits, selling to lazy latecomers. A serious trader is
ahead of the game because he does his homework day in and day out.
How much time will you need? For every stock you must get a handle
on its key fundamentals, including its industry group. For futures, there
are the additional factors of supply and demand, seasonals, and spreads
between delivery months. You need to make a calendar of events that
may impact your market, such as Federal Reserve announcements or
earnings reports. You need to study weekly charts for the past several
years and daily charts for at least a year. You need to apply indicators,
learn which work best with that market, and test their parameters.
Unless you are a genius or a speed demon, it is hard to accomplish
this in less than two hours. And that is just an entry fee into any trading vehicle. Afterward the daily grind begins. A serious trader reviews
weekly and daily charts each day. You have to compare your market
with other related ones. You have to make daily notes and write down
your plans for the day ahead. To do this properly, you’ll need at least
15 minutes per stock or future.
And this is in a fairly routine day. What about the day when your
market hits support or resistance, or breaks out of its trading range, and
a trade seems imminent? Then you might spend closer to an hour analyzing it, measuring risk and reward, and deciding on your entry points
and profit targets.
So let us turn the question around: If you have an hour a day for
analysis, how many markets should you follow? Three, maybe four. If
you have two hours, you may be able to follow six, eight, or even ten.
The ABC system for organizing homework may allow you to double
the number of markets. Whatever you do, remember, quality is more
important than quantity.
Before you add a stock to your list, decide whether you have enough
time to track it, day in and day out. You may skip a day once in a while,
but even then you should at least glance at your markets. Daily homework is essential, and the number of markets you may follow depends
on how much time you have each day. When we get out of touch, we
grow cold. Even professionals take a few days to get back in touch with
their markets after a vacation. These are the stages of development:
