
Introduction

21

qualify as a theory that can help to explain and predict the course
of events. The boomhust pattern I have established applies to
some developments but not to others. To try to fit every initially
self-reinforcing and eyentually self-defeating development into
its mold can give rise, to serious distortions. I feel like the early
astronomers who tried to describe the elliptical paths of the
planets in terms of circles and semicircles; the only difference is
that the path of reflexibe events is irregular to start with.
My fantasy was to present a general theory of reflexivity that
would explain the great bust of the 1980s in the same way that
Keynes's General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money explained the Great Depression sf ihz 1330s. As it tr;rns or;:, wa do
not have a great bust and I do not have a general theory. What I
have is an approach that can help to illuminate the present precarious state of our financial system. It cannot explain and predict
the course of events in the manner to which we have become
accustomed during our long love affair with natural science for
the simple reason that reflexive processes cannot be explained
and predicted in that Aanner. A different approach is needed and
this book is an attempt to develop one. It is best regarded as part
of a process of discoveky rather than the finished product.
All this makes for a difficult, dense book, although I can promise the reader that nothing in the rest of the book is quite as dense
as this introduction. I explore a complex subject. I bring a complex mind to bear on it. I can argue in my defensethat the complexity of my thinking mirrors the complexity of the financial
markets rather well, as demonstrated by the financial outcome
of the real-time experiment. There is, therefore, at least a prima
facie case fcrr giving me 3 hearicg. I shall t-ry ncii to abuse the pdvilege.
It may be helpful if I sketch out the structure of the book. Part I
propounds the theory, The first chapter deals with the concept of
reflexivity in general terms and explores the difficulties in understanding reflexive phenomena. In particular, it argues that the
symmetry between explanation and prediction that characterizes
the laws of natural science is not attainable. The next three chapters apply the theory to the financial markets: Chapter 2 to the
stock market and Chapter 3 to the currency market, with Chapter
4 outlining a credit and regulatory cycle.
Part I1 seeks to explain contemporary economic and financial
history using the hypotheses outlined in Chapter 4. The history

22
4

Introduction

is, of necessity, selective, concentrating on those developments
that are relevant to the concept of a credit and regulatory cycle.
My main topics are banking, international lending, and mergermania.
Part I11 consists of a real-time experiment which is both test and
prediction at the same time. As a test it does not qualify as a
scientific one by the standards of natural science; but it may serve
as an example of how theories about reflexive developments can
be tested.
Part IV evaluates the results of the real-time experiment. Chapter 15 explores the scope for what I provocatively call alchemy.
The real-time experiment can be regarded zs. sr,zxercisa in =nor?_
cia1 alchemy. Chapter 16 examines the limitations of social science.
Part V seeks to provide some prescriptions for economic policy.
Chapter 17 examines the relative merits of free markets and regulation, and Chapter 18 argues in favor of an international central
bank. Since both the market mechanism and the attempts to regulate it are inherently flawed, it may be argued that all attempts
at systemic reform are doomed to failure. I reject that argument in
Chapter 19.
In the Epilogue I explore the implications of the concept of
reflexivity outside the sphere of finance and in a final flight of
fancy I attempt to provide my own answers to some age-old metaphysical questions.
Since my thinking has evolved in the course of writing, it may
be helpful for the reader to know when the various chapters were
written. The first part of the book was completed before I embarked on the real-time experiment in, A u g ~ s t1985. Mcreovei,
Chapters 5-9, which deal with recent history, preceded in time
Chapter 4, which outlines the concept of the credit and regulatory
cycle. Chapter 4 incorporates discoveries I made in the course of
writing; that is why it is so tentative in character.
0.

t

I should like to emphasize that this book is not meant to provide a practical guide to getting rich in the stock market. Most of
what 1 know is in the book, at least in theoretical form. I have not
kept anything deliberately hidden. But the chain of reasoning
operates in the opposite direction: I am not trying to explain how
to use my approach to make money; rather, I am using my experiences in the financial markets to develop an approach to the

Introduction

23

study of historical processes in general and the present historical
moment in particulai. If I did not believe that my investment
activities can serve that purpose, I would not want to write about
them. As long as I am actively engaged in business, I would be
better off to keep theq a trade secret. But I would value it much
more highly than any'business success if I could contribute to an
understanding of the~worldin which we live or, better yet, if I
could help to preserve the economic and political system that has
allowed me to flourish as a participant.

I

PART ONE

THE THEORY OF REFLEXIVITY

Economic theory is devoted to the study of equilibrium positions.
The concept of an equilibrium is very useful. It allows us to focus
on the final outcome rather than on the process that leads up to
it. But the concept is also very deceptive. It has the aura of something empirical: since the adjustment process is supposed to lead
to an equilibrium, an equilibrium position seems somehow implicit in our observations. That is not true. Equilibrium itself has
rarely been observed in real life-market prices h w e a notorious
habit of fluctuating. The process that can be observed is supposed
to move toward an equilibrium. Why is it that the equilibrium is
never reached? It is true that market participants adjust to market
prices Llit they may be adjusting to a constaxitly moving talgei. In
that case, calling the participants' behavior an adjustment process
may be a misnomer and equilibrium theory becomes irrelevant to
the real world.
Equilibrium is the product of an axiomatic system. Economic
theory is constructed like logic or mathematics: it is based on
certain postulates and all of its conclusions are derived from them
by logical manipulation. The possibility that equilibrium is never
reached need not invalidate the logical construction, but when a
hypothetical equilibrium is presented as a model of reality a significant distortion is introduced. If we lived in a world in which
the angles of a triangle did not add up to 180 degrees, Euclidean
geometry would constitute such a misleading model.

28

Theory

The crowning achievement of the axiomatic approach is the
theory of perfect cgmpetition. Although it was first propounded
nearly two hundred years ago, it has never been superseded; only
the method of analysis has been refined. The theory holds that
under certain specified circumstances the unrestrained pursuit of
self-interest leads 40 the optimum allocation of resources. The
equilibrium point is reached when each firm produces at a level
where its margina1;cost equals the market price and each consumer buys an amount whose marginal "utility" equals the market price. Analysis shows that the equilibrium position
maximizes the benefit of all participants, provided no individual
buyer or seller can ihfluence market prices. It is this line of argument thaihas served as the theoretical underpinning for the laissez-faire policies of the nineteenth century, and it is also the basis
of the current belief in the "magic of the marketplace."
Let us examine the main assumptions of the theory of perfect
competition. Those that are spelled out include perfect knowledge; homogeneous ,and divisible products; and a large enough
number of participarjts so that no single participant can influence
the market price.
The assumption of perfect knowledge is suspect because understanding a situation i n which one participates cannot qualify as
knowledge. That was the assumption that I found so unacceptable
as a student. I have Lo doubt that classical economists used the
assumption in exactly that sense in which I found it objectionable
because nineteenth-century thinkers were less aware of the limitations of knowledge than we are today. As the epistemological
problems began to surface, exponents of the theory found that
they could get by using a more modest word: inforrrlction. In its
modern formulation the theory merely postulates perfect information.'
Unfortunately, this assumption is not quite sufficient to support
the construction of the theory. To make up for the deficiency,
modern economists resorted to an ingenious device: they insisted
that the demand and supply curves should be taken as given.
They did not present this as a postulate; rather, they based their
claim on methodological grounds. They argued that the task of
economics is to study the relationship between supply and demand and not either by itself. Demand may be a suitable subject
for psychologists, supply may be the province of engineers or
management scientists; both are beyond the scope of economic^.^
Therefore, both must be taken as given.

The Theory of Reflexivity
I

I

29

Yet, if we stop to ask what it means that the conditions of
supply and demand are independently given, it is clear that an
additional assumption has been introduced. Otherwise, where
would those curves come from? We are dealing with an assumption disguised as a methodological device. Participants
are supposed to choose between alternatives in accordance
with their scale of preferences. The unspoken assumption is that
the participants know what those preferences and alternatives
are.
As I shall try to show, this assumption is untenable. The shape
of the supply and demand curves cannot be taken as independently given, because both of them incorporate the participants'
expectations about events that are shaped by their own expectations.
Nowhere is the role of expectations more clearly visible than in
financial markets. Buy and sell decisions are based on expectations about future prices, and future prices, in turn, are contingent
on present buy and sell decisions. To speak of supply and demand as if they were determined by forces that are independent
of the market participants' expectations is quite misleading. The
situation is not quite so clear-cut in the case of commodities,
where supply is largely dependent on production and demand on
consumption. But the price that determines the amounts produced and consumed is not necessarily the present price. On the
contrary, market participants are more likely to be guided by future prices, either as expressed in futures marketg or as anticipated by themselves. In either case, it is inappropriate to speak of
independently given supply and demand curves because both
curves incorporate the participants' expectations about future
prices.
The very idea that events in the marketplace may affect the
shape of the demand and supply curves seems incongruous to
those who have been reared on classical economics. The demand
and supply curves are supposed to determine the market price. If
they were themselves subject to market influences, prices would
cease to be uniquely determined. Instead of equilibrium, we
would be left with fluctuating prices. This would be a devastating
state of affairs. All the conclusions of economic theory would lose
their relevance to the real world.
It is to prevent this outcome that the methodological device that
treats the supply and demand curves as independently given was
introduced. Yet there is something insidious about using a meth-

30

Theory

odological device to obscure an assumption that would be untenable if it were spelled out. To preserve the integrity of economic
theory as an axiomatic system, its assumptions ought to be explicitly stated. We may then conclude that economic theory is no
more relevant to the real world than non-Euclidean geometry, but
at least we would know where we stand. Instead, we have been
deceived by a methodological subterfuge. The demand and supply curves are prpsented in textbooks as though they were
grounded in empirical evidence. But there is scant evidence for
independently given demand and supply curves. Anyone who
trades in markets where prices are continuously changing knows
that participants are very much influenced by market developments. Rising prices ~jfteilditraci buyers and vice versa. How
could self-reinforcing trends persist if supply and demand curves
were independent of market prices? Yet, even a cursory look at
commodity, stock, and currency markets confirms that trends are
the rule rather than )he exception.
The theory of perfect competition could be defended by arguing
that the trends we can observe in commodity and financial markets are merely temporary aberrations which will be eliminated
in the long run by the "fundamental" forces of supply and demand. It should be remembered that the theory of perfect competition does not claim to define the path of adjustment; it merely
analyzes the situation after all the adjustments have taken place.
The trouble with the argument is that there can be no assurance
that "fundamental" forces will correct "speculative" excesses. It
is just as possible that speculation will alter the supposedly fundamental conditions of supply and demand.
In the normal course of events, a speculative price rise provokes
countervailing forcss: suppiy is increased and demand reduced,
and the temporary excess is corrected with the passage of time.
But there are exceptions. In foreign exchange, for example, a sustained price movement can be self-validating, because of its impact on domestic price levels. The same is true in the stock market
where the performance of a stock may affect the performance of
the company in question in a number of ways. And in examining
the recent history of international lending we shall find that excessive lending first increased the borrowing capacity of debtor
countries, as measured by their debt ratios, and then, when the
banks wanted to be repaid, the debtor countries' ability to do so
evaporated. Generally speaking, we shall find that the expansion

The Theory of Reflexivity
I

I

31

and contraction of credit can affect the debtors' ability and willingness to pay.
Are these exceptions that confirm the rule, or do they necessitate a revision of accepted theory? The answer depends on the
frequency and severity of their occurrence. If we are dealing with
an isolated instance, we can treat it as a paradox; but if one incident follows another, we must question the theory.
I contend that such paradoxical behavior is typical of all financial markets that serve as a discounting mechanism for future
developments, notably stock markets, foreign exchange markets,
banking, and all forms of credit. Microeconomic theory may
continue to ignore it, because there are large areas of economic
activity where it occurs only occasionally or not at all; b&-we
cannot expect to understand macroeconomic developments without taking the phenomenon into account. A world of fluctuating exchange rates and large-scale capital movements is
characterized by vicious and benign circles in which the "normal" pattern of causation, as defined by classical economics,
seems to be reversed: market developments dictate the evolution of the conditions of supply and demand, not the other way
around.
If the process of adjustment does not lead to an equilibrium,
what happens to the conclusions of economic theory? The answer
is that they remain valid as deductions but they lose their relevance to the real world. If we want to understand the real world,
we must divert our gaze from a hypothetical f i n s outcome and
concentrate our attention on the process of change that we can
observe all around us.
This will require a radical shift in our thinking. A process of
change is much more difficult to understand than a static equilibrium. We shall have to revise many of our preconceived ideas
about the kind of understanding that is attainable and satisfy ourselves with conclusions that are far less definite than those that
economic theory sought to provide.

The Problem of Imperfect Understanding
The understanding of the actual course of events, as distinct from
a hypothetical equilibrium, poses problems that have not been
properly appreciated. The problems arise because participants

32

4

Theory

base their decisions on an inherently imperfect understanding of
the situation in which they participate. There are two related sets
of problems to be considered: the imperfect understanding of the
participant and the imperfect understanding of the social scientist. We must be careful not to confuse the two.
In this section I shall try to explain why the participants' understanding is inherently imperfect. In the next section I shall
examine why the imperfect understanding of the participants
poses difficulties for the social sciences.
The imperfect understanding of the participant is a difficult
concept to define and an even more difficult one to work with. I
shall try to approach it by comparing the position of the participant vlth that of ;. naturdl scientist. (4 have to specify a natural
scientist, because social scientists are confronted with special
problems arising out of the imperfect understanding of participants. These will be dealt with in the next section.) The purpose
of the comparison is to establish a standard in terms of which the
understanding of the participant can be called imperfect. What
makes the comparison tricky is that the natural scientist is not
capable of perfect understanding either. Far from it. As Karl Popper has shown,3it is a cardinal principle of scientific method that
perfect knowledge is not attainable. Scientists work by constantly
testing plausible hypotheses and propounding new ones. If they
did not treat all conclusions as provisional and subject to improvement, natural science could not have reached its present
state of development and it could not progess any further. Although it is far from perfect, the knowledge attained by natural
scientists provides a standard in terms of which the participants'
understanding can be called imperfect.
Natural scie~tfstshave oue great advantage over participants:
they deal with phenomena that occur independently of what anybody says or thinks about them. The phenomena belong to one
universe, the scientists' statements to another. The phenomena
then serve as an independent, objective criterion by which the
truth or validity of scientific statements can be judged. Statements
that correspond to the facts are true; those that do not are false.
To the extent that the correspondence can be established, the
scientist's understanding qualifies as knowledge. We do not need
to go into the various difficulties that stand in the way of establishing the correspondence. The important point is that scientists
have an objective criterion at their disposal.

The Theory of Reflexivity

33

By contrast, the situation to which the participants' thinking
relates is not independently given: it is contingent on their own
decisions. As an objective criterion for establishing the truth or
validity of the participants' views, it is deficient. It does provide
a criterion of sorts: some expectations are validated by subsequent
events, others are not: But the process of validation leaves something to be desired: one can never be sure whether it is the expectation that corresponds to the subsequent event or the subsequent
event that conforms to the expectation. The segregation between
thoughts and events that prevails in natural science is simply
missing.
Thinking plays a dual role. On the one hand, participants seek
to understand the situation in which they participate; on the
other, their understanding serves as the basis of decisions which
influence the course of events. The two roles interfere with each
other. Neither role is 'performed as well as it could be if it were
performed separately. If the course of events were independent of
the participants' decisions, the participants' understanding could
equal that of a naturbl scientist; and if participants could base
their decisions on knowledge, however provisional, the results of
their actions would have a better chance of corresponding to their
intentions. As it is, participants act on the basis of imperfect understanding and the course of events bears the imprint of. that
imperfection.
In a milder form, the lack of separation betwmn the subject
matter and the act of thinking may also arise in natural science.
The most celebrated example is in quantum physics where the
act of observation interferes with the observed phenomenon. It
has given rSss to Heisenberg's uncertainty principle which, in
effect, establishes a limit to the scientist's ability to attain knowledge. But in natural science the problem occurs only at the limit,
whereas for the participant it is at the very center of his thinking.
For one thing, the scientist makes a deliberate attempt not to
interfere with his subject matter, whereas the participant's primary purpose is to mold the situation in which he participates to
his own satisfaction. More important, in quantum physics it is
only the act of observation which interferes with the subject matter, not the theory of uncertainty, whereas in the case of thinking
participants their own thoughts form part of the subject matter to
which they relate. The positive accomplishments of natural science are confined to the area where thinking and events are effec-

34

Theory

tively segregated. When events have thinking participants that
area shrinks to the vanishing point.

The Problem of the Social Sciences
We are now in a position to examine the problems of the social
sciences. Again, there are two distinct issues to be considered.
One relates to the subject matter, the other to the observer.
Scientific method is designed to deal with facts; but, as we have
seen, events which have thinking participants do not consist of
facts alone. The participant's thinking plays a causal r d a , ye; i1
does not correspond to the facts for the simple reason that it does
not relate to facts. Participants have to deal with a situation that
is contingent on their own decisions; their thinking constitutes
an indispensable ingredient in that situation. Whether we treat it
as a fact of a special kind or something other than a fact, the
participants' thinking introduces an element of uncertainty into
the subject matter. This element is absent in the natural sciences.
As we have seen, there is some similarity between the uncertainty
introduced by the participants' thinking and Heisenberg's uncertainty principle in quantum physics but, as we shall soon see, the
parallel is misleading.
Now for the role of the scientific observer: it is much easier to
maintain the required segregation between facts and statements
when the subject matter itself does not contain any statements,
observations, or thoughts of any kind.
Most discussions about the shortcomings of the social sciences
have focused on the second issue. Expressioris like "self-fulf lling
prophecies" or "self-defeating experiments" are widely used
but usually they relate to the would-be scientist. Yet it is the
self-influencing character of the participants' thinking that is responsible for the element of uncertainty (or indeterminacy) I mentioned before. The difficulties of scientific observation pale into
insignificance when compared with the indeterminacy of the subject matter. The indeterminacy would remain even if all the problems relating to the observer were resolved, whereas the problems
of the observer can be directly attributed to the indeterminacy of
the subject matter. Thus the problem of the social sciences is not
merely methodological but inherent in the subject matter.
The undue emphasis on the role of the scientific observer can
