
r 100% hedged using vanilla forwards
r 100% unhedged
r Option risk reversal
r Option call spread
r Option low-delta call

While such an approach to managing risk is extremely helpful in providing the cheapest hedging
structure for a given risk proﬁle, it is not perfect and relies on a discretionary exchange rate view.
Further research needs to be done in turning a corporation’s risk proﬁle into a mathematical
answer rather than a discretionary view. A starting point for this may be found in the type of
equity market proﬁle the corporation wants to create — value, income, defensive and so forth.
From this, it may be possible to suggest an optimal proﬁt stream the corporation should generate
according to this proﬁle and from this in turn we may be able to extrapolate a more exact hedging
strategy to maintain that proﬁt stream than simply a discretionary view might give.
As it is, optimization, using a corporate risk optimizer (CROP), can be undertaken for
transaction, translation or economic currency risk as long as one knows the risks entailed and
gives a speciﬁc currency view within that. For example, if a corporation is looking for the
best and most efﬁcient hedging strategy in emerging market currencies, a CROP model can
integrate the speciﬁc characteristics of those currencies together with the size of the exposure and hedging objectives (efﬁcient frontier, performance maximization, risk minimization).

Managing Currency Risk I

153

Performance can be measured as P&L, an effective hedging rate or a distance to a given budget
rate. The risk embedded in the hedge is expressed as a VaR number that will be consistent
with the performance measure. While most CROP models do not provide a hedging process
for basket currency hedging, they are very useful for ﬁnding the most efﬁcient hedge for individual currency exposures. A CROP model is thus a tool for optimizing hedging strategies for
currency-denominated cash ﬂows.
Users of a CROP model are able to deﬁne the nature of their speciﬁc exposure and hedging
objectives. The model also allows for scenario building, whether it be a neutral market view,
the incorporation of budget/benchmark rates or the jump risk associated with emerging market
currencies. If the objective is risk reduction, an efﬁcient frontier can be created to ﬁnd the
most efﬁcient hedge, which incorporates the cheapest hedge which offsets the most risk. Both
performance and VaR are measured as effective rates.
Emerging markets are an example where corporate hedging used to adopt a binary
approach — that is, to hedge or not to hedge. Options are a perfect tool for hedging, taking account of long periods when emerging market currencies do nothing and also capturing
dramatic moves when they occur. They are cheaper and leave the corporation less exposed to
an adverse exchange rate move. Furthermore, a CROP model can give the optimal hedging
strategy using options or forwards for a given currency view and a given currency exposure.
The way this works is as follows:

r Determine a possible exchange rate scenario over a speciﬁed time period, say six months.
r Run a random distribution within the scenario speciﬁed.
r Calculate the effective hedge rate for each hedging instrument used and the risk in local
currency points.

r Solve to ﬁnd the hedging strategy with the lowest possible effective hedge rate for various
accepted levels of uncertainty.
It should of course be noted that it is not possible to choose a single optimal hedging strategy
without deﬁning the risk one is allowed or willing to take. In scenarios reﬂecting a perception
of volatility or jump risk, options will always produce a better or similar effective hedge rate at
lower uncertainty than the unhedged position. Where the local currency has a relatively high
yield and low volatility, options will almost always produce a better effective hedging rate than
forward hedging.

7.11 HEDGING EMERGING MARKET CURRENCY RISK
Emerging market currencies have important characteristics which a corporation needs to take
account of with speciﬁc regard to a currency hedging programme:

r Liquidity risk,
r Convertibility risk,
r Event risk,
r Jump risk.
r Discontinuous price action.
r Implied volatility is a very poor guide to future spot price action.
r In emerging market currency crises, the exchange rate weakens in at least two waves after
an event, with the maximum devaluation usually found in the ﬁrst nine months (and this
period seems to be decreasing, that is the market “learns”).

154

Currency Strategy

r Interest rates often peak just prior to such an event unless a new exchange rate regime has
been attempted or the spot move is really large.

r Interest rates become an estimate of the size of the ﬁnal event, making short-term interest
rates the most volatile.

r Whenever the implied emerging market volatility is below the implied vol of a major (i.e.
when the Euro–zloty implied is below Euro–dollar) this has proven to be unsustainable in
the past and a very good level to buy.
r Besides range trading, emerging market implied vol tends to fall only when the emerging
market currency is strengthening.
r Implied vol always increases on emerging market currency weakness.

7.12 BENCHMARKS FOR CURRENCY RISK MANAGEMENT
Corporations can use a variety of hedging benchmarks to manage their hedging strategies
more rigorously. Aside from the hedging level as the benchmark (e.g. 75%), corporations
which want to limit ﬂuctuation in net equity use the reporting period as the benchmark for
forward hedging. Typically, US companies hedge quarterly whereas European corporations
use 12-month benchmarks given different disclosure requirements. Accounting rules have a
major impact on what hedging benchmarks corporations use. Budget rates are also used to
deﬁne the benchmark hedging performance and tenor of a hedge, as these would generally
match cash ﬂow requirements.
Using a benchmark enables the performance of an individual hedge to be measured against
the standard set for the company as a whole, which should be set out within the currency risk
management policy.

7.13 BUDGET RATES
The setting of budget rates is crucially important for a corporation as it can drive not only the
corporation’s hedging but also its pricing strategy as well. Budget exchange rates can be set in
several ways. The benchmark or budget rate for an investment in a foreign subsidiary should
normally be the exchange rate at the close of the previous ﬁscal period, often referred to as
the accounting rate. On the other hand, when dealing with forecasted cash ﬂows, the issue
becomes more complex. Theoretically, the budget exchange rate should be derived from the
domestic sales price, which is the operating cost plus the desired proﬁt margin, as an expression
of the foreign subsidiary sales price. Thus, if the parent sales price for a good is USD10 and
the Euro area sales price is EUR15, the budget rate should be 0.67. The actual exchange rate
for Euro–dollar may be some way away from that. Thus, the corporation needs to evaluate the
degree of demand for its product relative to changes in the product’s Euro price to see whether
or not it has leeway to cut its Euro price without also reducing margin substantially in order to
set a budget rate that is closer to the spot exchange rate. If there is a major difference between
the spot and budget exchange rates, either the hedging or the pricing strategy may have to be
reconsidered.
Corporations can also set the budget rate so as to link in with their sales calendar and thus
their hedging strategy. If a corporation has a quarterly sales calendar it may want to hedge in
such a way that its foreign currency sales in one quarter is no less than that of the same quarter
one year before, implying that it should make four hedges per year, each of one-year tenor.
Alternatively, instead of hedging at the end of a period, thus using the end-of-period exchange

Managing Currency Risk I

155

rate as its budget rate, the corporation may choose to set a daily average rate as its budget rate.
In this case, if the corporation chooses as its budget rate the daily average rate for the previous
ﬁscal year, it only needs to execute one hedge. It stands to reason that the best way of achieving
this in the market place is to use an average-based instrument such as an option or a synthetic
forward, entered into on the last day of the previous ﬁscal year, with its starting day being the
ﬁrst day of the new ﬁscal year. Of late, an option structure known as a double average rate option
(DARO) has become increasingly popular among multinational corporations. This allows a
corporation to protect the average value of a foreign currency cash ﬂow over a speciﬁed time
period relative to another period. This is a simple way of passive currency hedging, taking out
discretionary uncertainties and instead putting the hedging programme on auto pilot where it
can be more easily monitored.
Whether a corporation hedges currency risk passively or actively, once the budget rate is
set the Treasury is responsible for securing an appropriate hedge rate and ensuring there is
minimal slippage relative to that hedge rate. Timing and the instruments used are key to being
able to achieve that. The last point to make on budget rates is that they ﬂow naturally from
relative price differentials. This however is also the heart of the concept of PPP, which states
that exchange rates should adjust for relative price differentials of the same good between two
countries. While PPP models are of relatively little use in forecasting short-term exchange rate
moves, they have a substantially better record in forecasting exchange rates over the long term.
Thus, a corporation could do worse than setting the budget rate with a PPP model in mind,
albeit with the realization that tactical hedging may be necessary either side of that budget
rate over the short term in order to capture exchange rate deviation from where PPP suggests
it should be. Finally, it is important to underline that budget rates can provide companies
with one thing only: a level of reference. Set up randomly, they are of very little use. And at
some point, prolonged currency moves against the functional currency must be passed on, or
strategic positioning and hedging must be addressed; in any case two topics well beyond our
budget rates discussion. In the end, while the process of setting budget rates cannot resolve all
of a corporation’s issues, it can be dramatically improved by clearly deﬁning the company’s
sensitivities and benchmarking priorities. The hedging frequency as well as the choice of the
hedge instrument will naturally ﬂow from this process.

7.14 THE CORPORATION AND PREDICTING EXCHANGE RATES
A key aspect of corporate pricing strategy is forecasting future exchange rates. Aside from
using banks to help them do this, the internal models corporations use are typically one or
more of the following kinds:

r Political event analysis
r Fundamental
r Technical

For the reasons we have mentioned earlier in this chapter, it is not a good idea for corporations
to use the forward rate as a predictor of the future spot rate because of “forward rate bias” —
the idea that the unbiased forward rate theory does not in fact work. Academics argue that
markets are efﬁcient and therefore there is no point in corporations trying to “beat the market”
by forecasting future exchange rates. This supposition is premised on a falsehood — markets
may be efﬁcient over the long term, but they are inherently inefﬁcient over short time periods.
The latter can be substantial enough to make a material impact on the corporation’s income
@Team-FLY

156

Currency Strategy

statement were it to assume a perfectly efﬁcient market and use unbiased forward rate theory
accordingly.
The importance of market-based forecasts for the corporation is derived from comparing
these to anticipated net cash ﬂows. For the corporation, the crucial question is how will these
cash ﬂows respond if the future spot exchange rate is not equal to the forecast? The nature
of this kind of forecast is completely different from trying to outguess the foreign exchange
markets.

7.15 SUMMARY
In this chapter, we have taken a detailed look at some of the advanced approaches to corporate
strategy with regard to exchange rates. Managing currency risk is not a luxury but a necessity
for multinational corporations. That said, just realizing it is a necessity does not make the
practical reality of hedging any easier. The ﬁeld of how corporations hedge speciﬁc types
of currency risk has become increasingly sophisticated in the last few years. The issue of
transaction risk hedging is merely the tip of the iceberg! Below the water line, translation and
economic currency risk are real issues which ultimately can affect the proﬁtability and the
market’s valuation of the corporation. Boards ignore these issues at their peril.
Having taken a look at the corporate world, we switch now to that of the institutional
investor. Just as with corporations, there is a reluctance within some investors to hedge or
manage currency risk and for the same reasons, not least that participating in the currency
market is seen as being outside of the investor’s core competence. This may well be so, but
the reality is that the investor is a participant in the currency market whether they like it or not.
Moreover, currency risk can make up a signiﬁcant portion of the investor’s portfolio volatility
and return. It is to this world of the investor that we now turn.

8
Managing Currency Risk II — The
Investor: Currency Exposure within the
Investment Decision
Investors and corporations face similar types of risk on foreign currency exposure. For instance,
investors face transaction risk when they invest abroad. They also face translation risk on assets
and liabilities if they spread their operations overseas. For its part, the corporate sector clearly
seems to have moved to a view that currency risk is an unavoidable issue that has to be
managed independently from the underlying business. Within the investor world, the battle
for hearts and minds on this issue is ongoing. There remain speciﬁc types of investor who are
ideologically opposed to the idea of managing currency risk. However, here too, there are signs
of a gradual shift towards the view that currencies are an asset class in their own right and
therefore currency risk should be managed separately and independently from the underlying
assets, as the continuing rise in the number of currency overlay mandates would appear to
conﬁrm.

8.1 INVESTORS AND CURRENCY RISK
The relationship between institutional investors and the idea of currency risk has been an uneasy
one. For a start, there remain an overly large number of investors who are either unwilling or
unable, due to the speciﬁc regulations of their fund, to consider currency risk as separate and
independent from the underlying risk of their investment. Such a view is particularly prevalent
among equity, although it is also present to a smaller extent with ﬁxed income fund managers.
The aim of this chapter is to err on the practical, to take the ideological out of the equation and
seek to demonstrate empirically and theoretically that managing currency risk can consistently
boost a portfolio’s return.
On the face of it, this chapter may seem targeted at only those who manage currency risk
on an active basis. This is not the case. Rather, it is aimed at any institutional investor who
faces in the course of their “underlying business” exposure to a foreign currency, whether or
not they are in fact allowed to carry out some of the ideas and strategies presented herein. Let
us start then with two core principles on the issue of currency risk:
1. Investing in a country is not the same as investing in that country’s currency.
2. Currency is not the same as cash; the incentive for currency investment is primarily capital
gain rather than income.
Almost before we have started, some may view the above as controversial. In my career, I have
come up against not infrequent opposition to these principles, albeit for varying reasons. The
answer I have given back has always been the same:
The dynamics that drive a currency are not the same as those that drive asset markets

158

Currency Strategy

8.2 CURRENCY MARKETS ARE DIFFERENT
Throughout this book, we have looked, albeit from varying perspectives, at the governing
dynamics that drive the global currency markets. If we have learned one thing, it is surely this,
that the currency markets are by their nature predominantly “speculative”. That is to say, the
majority of currency market participants are what we would deﬁne as “speculators”, using the
deﬁnition of this book for currency speculation as the trading or investing in currencies without
any underlying, attached asset. The predominance of speculation within currency markets is
neither a good nor a bad thing. On the one hand, it provides needed liquidity for those aspects
of the economy deemed productive rather than speculative. On the other hand, it can and
frequently does lead to overshooting relative to perceived economic fundamentals.
The speculative nature of the currency markets may be an important reason why most longterm fundamental equilibrium models work poorly in trying to forecast exchange rates. At the
least, it serves as an excellent excuse for those who otherwise are unable to forecast exchange
rates using the traditional methods. All of this may be true, and all of it makes for a very different
world from those of the equity or ﬁxed income, markets. By necessity, these are not speculative
by nature since they are themselves underlying assets relating to the economy in some way.
This is not at all to suggest that speculation does not occur in equities or ﬁxed income, for any
such suggestion would clearly be foolish. The recent bubble in the NASDAQ should serve as
an excellent warning for any who think these markets are always fundamentally-driven and
incapable of speculative excess. That said, this same example is surely notable by its rarity.
Throughout history, there have indeed been examples of speculative excess across all markets.
In equity and ﬁxed income markets, relative to “normal” conditions however, these are the
exception rather than the rule. This is not the case in currency markets, where traditional
economic theory has all but given up trying to explain short-term moves and longer-term
exchange rate models have far from perfect results.
The dynamics of the asset and currency markets are “fundamentally” different. Therefore
these risks should be dealt with separately and independently from one another. For the international equity fund manager, investing in a country is not the same and should not be the same
decision as investing in a country’s currency. Eventually, they may have the same risk proﬁle
over a long period of time. However it is questionable whether the investor’s tracking error
and Sharpe ratio, not to say the investor themselves, should have to go through that degree of
stress!
Equally, currency is not the same as cash. An individual investor may treat currency as cash
from a relative performance perspective. Unfortunately, however, such a comparison provides a
false picture. Most currency market participants, and therefore the currency market as a whole,
do not buy or sell currencies for the income that a “cash” description would of necessity entail.
On the contrary, they do so for anticipated directional or capital gain. In other words, they are
seeking to proﬁt from precisely the risk that the investor is not hedging! It is a generalization,
but nevertheless true that the reluctance to manage currency risk is far more predominant
among equity fund managers than ﬁxed income fund managers. That may have something to
do with the intended tenor of the investment, suggesting ﬁxed income fund managers may be
more short-term in investment strategy than their equity counterparts. Any such view seems
greatly oversimplistic, and would require a study on its own to verify or otherwise. Many
cannot manage currency risk simply because the rules of their fund do not allow them so to do.
There remains however a substantial community of institutional investors who apparently have
yet to be convinced by either the merits or the need to manage currency risk separately. By

Managing Currency Risk II

159

the end of this chapter, it is my hope that I will have caused many within this community to at
least reconsider their view as regards currency risk. To summarize this part, the way currencies
and underlying assets are analysed and the way they trade are both different from each other.
Consequently, the way they should be managed should also be different.

8.3 TO HEDGE OR NOT TO HEDGE — THAT IS THE QUESTION!
Central to the idea of managing currency risk separately and independently from the risk
represented by the underlying asset is the issue of whether or not to hedge that currency risk.
Just as the idea of separating currency risk continues to attract much debate, so the more speciﬁc
issue of hedging out that currency risk remains a topic of much controversy and discussion, both
within the academic world and within the ﬁnancial markets themselves. Indeed, while there
may be some who take a pragmatic view of compromise, approaching this from the perspective
of a case-by-case basis, the majority seem polarized between two opposite and opposing camps.
Within the academic world, this is expressed at opposite ends of the spectrum by Perold and
Schulman (1988) and by Froot and Thaler (1990, 1993), who advocated on the one hand full
hedging of currency risk and on the other leaving currency risk unhedged.
There is a clear division of opinion within the ﬁnancial markets as well, if perhaps marginally
less pronounced and polarized. Within the institutional investor community, international equity funds are generally known for taking a view of either not hedging currency risk or adopting
an unhedged currency benchmark. Fixed income funds are clearly more tolerant of the idea of
hedging currency risk, frequently adopting a currency hedging benchmark that reﬂects such a
view. We will go through the range of possible currency hedging benchmarks shortly, but for
now sufﬁce to say that they vary at the most basic level, being hedged (partially or fully) and
unhedged. The “sell side”, which is used to selling foreign exchange-type products, is well
versed in the need for hedging availability. Conversely, the ﬁxed income sell side within the
ﬁnancial industry in general appears to focus more on selling the core product rather than on its
denomination, or the potential need to separate and hedge out that corresponding currency risk.
In response, the majority of rigorous studies have distilled this debate down to an elegant
compromise between risk and reward, focusing less on an absolute answer to the question
than the need to account for the individual investor’s requirements and the portfolio variance
across the spectrum of hedging strategies. The debate between hedging or not hedging thus
remains unresolved, and there appears little prospect on the horizon of that changing. There
is no one answer to the question of whether or not to hedge currency risk, nor perhaps should
there be. Any such answer depends crucially on the speciﬁcs of the investor’s portfolio aims
and constraints. The assumption might on the face of it be that one’s approach to managing
currency risk can be broken down simply into active or passive — or alternatively not to manage
currency risk! At a slightly more sophisticated level however, the focus should be on the type
of returns targeted; that is absolute vs. relative returns.
