
Take a Break

197

UNDERSTAND YOUR EMOTIONS
Fear, greed, doubt. These three emotions can hinder your trading. Every investor should analyze his or her own emotional makeup and the resources
available for trading. Many books have been written on this subject, but the
conclusions are mostly a matter of self-analysis that depend on each
trader’s personal characteristics.
Fear of losing can cause traders to make bad trading decisions, and
doubt can cause the same results. Greed can cause some traders to allow
good profits to erode back to breakeven levels or even losses as they hope for
even bigger gains. Putting on too many trades searching for the “big kahuna”
or “mother lode” also stems from greed. Sometimes it is best to just have a series of base hits rather than going for the grand slam. I certainly do not have
the patent on this cliché, but it has been said, “It is better to have a million
profitable trades rather than one profitable trade that makes a million.”
Understanding your emotions is a very important subject that needs to
be addressed and examined. Trading can produce an increase in your heart
rate and your blood pressure. Make sure you are physically fit to handle the
demands that trading in the markets may produce. You need to monitor
your trading behavior and actions while under stress or while dealing with
what I call the adrenaline rush. When you are wrong, do you freeze up and
get the feeling of butterflies in your stomach? Do you become unduly irritable or feel panicky? I hope that you are aware that these conditions are
not conducive for successful trading.
Lack of confidence and fear are your enemies. Avoid putting yourself in
a situation that will cause you to be skeptical or afraid before you trade.
Also, do not trade while going through major personal events such as buying or selling a house, moving, illness, a change in careers or loss of a job, a
breakup in a relationship or divorce, a death in the family, or loss of a friend.
Try to make educated decisions, and make sure you have the time to invest
in your work before putting on any trades.

TAKE A BREAK
Whatever your emotional makeup, trading can be a very emotionally draining experience, especially when you are wrong and lose money. There is
nothing more humbling and crushing to an ego or confidence level than getting beat up in the market. If it ever comes down to the point that you are
frustrated and not happy with your trading results and you lack desire or
the faith that you have the ability to succeed, stop trading immediately!

198

THE MENTAL GAME: Inside the Trader

Take a break. Maybe two weeks or sometimes a month or more will
help. Getting away from the trading action will give you a fresh perspective
on the markets and allow you to refocus your game plan once you return. To
attempt to be successful, you have to be prepared and in a confident frame of
mind. To be on top of their game, athletes train hard, work out, and are in fit
condition before competing. I don’t think Tiger Woods would play a round of
golf competitively if he pulled a muscle in his back. He would take time out
to let the injury heal and then get back into the swing of things. If you are
emotionally beaten or your confidence is down, you are not going to be in tiptop shape to trade. In that state of mind mistakes may easily be made. Remember, preservation of capital and equity growth are the most important
aspects of trading. If you are not in the right frame of mind and lose your confidence, you may increase your chances for losses.
If you have been on a losing streak, take time off to let your psyche heal.
Use the time off to reexamine how you feel and act under stressful situations. If you are wrong too often and do not see some profitable results or
you have the “eat like a bird and crap like an elephant” syndrome (when a
trader takes extremely small profits and lets devastating losers ride), stop
trading. Reexamine how you are doing when you are trading before you put
on another position.
On the golf course the thrill of hitting a 300-yard drive straight off the
tee and having the ball roll right down the middle of the fairway, skydiving,
surviving a high-tech roller-coaster ride, and trading futures and options
can generate major adrenaline rushes. That rush is what drives some people
to those events. Only the last one will be an expensive ride if you are wrong
too often. Reevaluate why you are in the game. Hopefully, it is to make
money and to have fun. If it is for the rush and you lose money, seek professional help. Only you can determine what it is that you are doing.

YOUR TRADING TO-DO LIST
Here are some techniques you can try that may help you stay on top of your
game and keep you in peak performance. Remember, if you continue to learn
in life, you will continue to grow, and your life may change as a direct result
of the effort you put forth. So try these physical and psychological exercises
to help improve your thinking and frame of mind. Do this so that you can
consistently try to make money and cope or accept things better if they do
go wrong. Hopefully, you will be able to identify what is not going right and
respond quickly to correct it. Following these suggestions may not lead to
success; not following them, however, may increase your chances of failure!
1. Write down your trading goals and identify your focus. Be realistic;
start with small goals. For example, resolve to commit 15 minutes a day to

Your Trading To-Do List

199

your analysis. Start by filling out the worksheet with the indicators that I
demonstrated or choose your own. You may want to start with chart pattern
recognition and focus on identifying those for a few commodities. Eliminate
tracking the futures products that you would not trade due to circumstances
such as margin requirements or liquidity concerns. If you do not have the
capital to trade Nasdaq futures, natural gas, or platinum, don’t waste your
time studying or analyzing those markets. Don’t bother looking at the euro/
yen spread or the Fed funds contract or fluid milk futures. Those are not
highly liquid markets that you are likely to day-trade or swing trade anyway
so stay away from those markets as well. Study the markets within your immediate financial grasp.
2. If you have the ability to be a good analyst but can’t pull the trigger,
then try this exercise with your broker or brokerage firm if you trade online.
When you are ready to trade, you should have formulated a game plan that includes your entry and exit points. The exit point should consider the risk as
well as the profit objectives. I write a weekly newsletter on Saturday or early
Sunday with my entry and exit points. The analysis is done in a calm state of
mind where I am not disturbed and can focus on work. On Monday mornings
I place open orders (GTC) for clients based on that research, both entry and
stop-loss orders. The next step is to sit back and wait.
The process is all mechanical; no emotions hinder me. Win, lose, or
draw, the orders are executed, and most times the hard part is contacting the
clients to find out where they want to take a profit on the winning trades. The
losers are stopped out, and the orders that are not hit or executed are canceled at the end of the week. You can use the same approach. Do your homework on a daily basis. Place your orders before the market opens with
instructions for your broker to call you once the orders are filled. Then monitor the trade. You should not get stage fright in placing the orders because
the market won’t be open yet.
3. Reward yourself once in a while. After achieving a goal—devoting 15
minutes a day for a week to some project or completing a successful trade,
for example—I will usually compliment or treat myself to something. It
could be as simple as telling myself, “That was a great job,” to maybe buying
a Godiva chocolate or a nice cigar. On really good times, it may be scheduling a vacation, especially where there are golf courses.
4. Positive affirmations are extremely important to help improve selfconfidence, especially in trading. This exercise requires physical exertion.
What you need to do is to pick up that 400-pound pen or pencil and write out
these words 10 times a day: “I am a positive, fearless, and a successful
trader” or “I am succeeding in making money trading the markets.” By
doing this activity, you are reaffirming your subconscious mind that you are
a successful trader. You are then only going to focus on the positive forces
and work on combating the destructive negative emotions that can and usu-

200

THE MENTAL GAME: Inside the Trader

ally do interfere with being successful in trading. This technique can be applied to other aspects of your life as well.
5. Utilize visualization techniques, taking quiet times during the day,
meditation, and other steps to achieve relaxation. All of these methods may
sound silly or absurd. However, they have all been proven methods to help
in different areas of different people’s lives. Practice them and apply them
in your trading life. Take a few moments a day to visualize yourself as a successful trader. Close your eyes and take a moment to project in your mind
the steps that you would take from doing your chart work and analysis to
entering your order and taking a profit. Get your mind prepared for being a
winner and making money. Sometimes people become what they think they
are. So tell yourself that you are a successful trader and practice these principles while you are trading. Take quiet times during the day to focus your
attention on the business at hand. Not everyone can be staring at a quote
screen all day—that is, unless you are a professional trader or a broker.
Even then, you need to walk away for a moment.
You will have daily distractions from your job. Take a few moments out
for yourself. Take a few deep breaths and tell your subconscious that you
are a “positive and fearless trader.” Try a meditation technique when you
feel unusual stress developing or just do it everyday on your way to work,
in an elevator, or sitting on the “throne.” Take a long, deep breath and hold
it for about 10 seconds. Then exhale slowly and at the same time concentrate on saying to yourself, “I am calm and relaxed” or “I am a successful
trader.” Repeat at least 10 times.
Stress can cause muscle fatigue and tense back muscles. Learn to relax.
Get a massage or take a hot bath or a long shower when you get home.
Treat yourself in moderation, maybe to some ice cream or your favorite
candy bar. Spend 15 to 30 minutes a day working out doing exercises.
These are ways to decrease the stress levels in your life as a trader.
6. Do not be too demanding of yourself and do not become obsessed.
Life is about balance. Another phrase applies here: Work hard and party
hard. I believe in self-rewards, serenity, and financial security. Getting the
most out of life is great. Going to extremes is a difficult way of life that generally catches up with you. Complete isolation and compulsive reclusive
studying are not the answer for me nor do I believe they are for most people. Be flexible and shoot for consistency. I believe in consistency and
progress rather than obsessive behavior and striving for perfection. Consistency is rewarded by confidence. Success is not measured by how much
you made in one trade but by being able to make money consistently over
time and keeping what you made.
The purpose of this chapter is not to entice the trader who is losing
money to think he or she will make money by following these techniques. I

Your Trading To-Do List

201

do not want to give you a false sense of hope. I just want to show you what
has worked for me through the years when I have gone through cold spells.
Other extremely successful traders that I have known and listened to have
gone through cold spells. They spent thousands of dollars seeking the advice of professional counselors or mentors or took time off from trading
just to improve their self-confidence and discipline levels. You are not alone
if you are going through a period of losing trades, and you certainly are not
unique. Many superior top-ranked traders have all suffered through their
times of bad trades.
If you have not had to experience any dramatic losses yet, knock on
wood! But there may come a day when nothing goes right and your “equity
keeps on slipping, slipping into the futures” (sung to the tune of the Steve
Miller song, “Time Keeps on Slipping”). If that day comes, do not panic.
Stop trading, reread this chapter and put it into action. Remember, it is all
right to be wrong; just don’t be wrong all the time and make the same mistakes over and over again.
Successful trading is all about diligence and hard work and having a
winning attitude! Keep that in mind and evaluate yourself in 30 days after
having tried some or all of these exercises to see if you are a better trader.

CHAPTER 12

The Tactical
Trader
Tips and Techniques
That Work

The harder you work, the luckier you get.
—Gary Player

want to introduce you to some of the techniques that professionals use
so you can incorporate and apply them in your trading plans. I have
done a casual survey in the industry by interviewing brokers over the
phone and in person. What I discovered was that some were not actual
brokers or traders but were “equity raisers” or licensed solicitors with little or no market knowledge or actual trading experiences. Clients of mine
have admitted that they thought they were more knowledgeable and experienced in the field of investing than their previous brokers.
That admission gives me two reasons to reinforce the fact that investors
need to read this book. First, at the end of Chapter 10, I explained why it is
important to ask questions so you can choose the right brokerage firm and
broker for you. Conducting a simple interview by asking a few select questions may save you money and, more important, aggravation. Your broker is
really your employee so make sure you get a qualified and experienced one.
You should be getting what you pay for. If you are using a full-service broker
who is charging a higher rate of commission for service and experience,
make sure he or she actually has experience and knowledge and can help
tutor or train you in tactical trading techniques.
If you are a seasoned trading veteran, you may be trading with a deepdiscount brokerage firm. What the firm will allow you to do during the openoutcry (day) session versus after-hours trading may be different from what

I

203

204

THE TACTICAL TRADER: Tips and Techniques That Work

you expect. Here are some things you might want to find out that could affect your trading style:
• What is the day-trading margin policy? Some firms have more flexibility in day-trading margin requirements than others, so day-trading multiple positions may offer you more leverage than you expect, which may
be good or bad depending on how you handle it.
• Can you margin your account with securities such as gold or silver
certificates?
• Will the firm allow you to trade if you have U.S. Treasury bills in your
margin account?
• Are services such as real-time quotes, research reports, newsletters,
and the like free or is there a charge?
• Can you place orders over the phone or online 24 hours a day, seven
days a week?
• How is the firm’s support staff when you need them?
• Does the firm even have a customer service department to answer
questions you may have regarding your account statements?
These questions illustrate what I mean by finding out what services a brokerage firm has to offer. You may be able to add other needs and questions,
but these are some things I think you want to know.
The second reason why I firmly believe traders with different levels of
experience can benefit from information in this book is because they can
learn—or at least refresh what they may already know—about practical
market strategies, trading tactics, or target trading techniques used by professional traders.
Previous chapters covered the basics of futures and the mechanics of
the markets as well as technical analysis techniques to identify potential
buy and sell signals. I also covered measuring techniques that chartists use
to gain insight on how far a market may move based on chart pattern recognition and mathematical formulas. I touched on the subject of measuring the
temperature of the market by using sentiment and consensus readings as
well as explaining different market conditions and dealing with emotions.
The focus in this chapter will be on how to apply different techniques
and tactics in your arsenal of trading tools and knowledge. To elaborate
on this subject, I would like to illustrate from the book, Technical Analysis
of the Futures Markets, written by John J. Murphy, the three important elements of successful futures trading. They are price forecasting, trading
tactics, and money management. I cannot put it any better so I will simply
quote from his explanation:

Pyramiding

205

Trading tactics, or timing, determines specific entry and exit points.
Timing is especially crucial in futures trading. Because of the low
margin requirements and the resulting high leverage, there isn’t
much room for error. It’s quite possible to be correct on the direction
of the market, but still lose money on a trade if the timing is off. Timing is almost entirely technical in nature. Therefore, even if the trader
is fundamentally oriented, technical tools must be employed at this
point to determine specific entry and exit points.
The simplest way to summarize the three different elements is
that price forecasting tells the trader what to do (buy or sell), trading
tactics or timing helps decide when to do it, and money management
determines how much to commit to the trade.
The techniques discussed in this chapter really have to do with the element of timing your entry and exit points and using different methods to
capitalize on price direction.

PYRAMIDING
How to build a market position is a popular topic. More experienced traders
have had success and acclaim the value of pyramiding. New investors inquire about this trading method because it has the get-rich-quick mystique
surrounding it. Writers have published articles about it, and there is information on the Internet advertising how the “smart money traders” use this
method and why investors should incorporate the secrets of this “timetested” method into their trading plan to “create wealth quickly.”
With all the attention that pyramid trading has gained, no wonder this
seemingly get-rich scheme attracts novice traders. I will explain only what
I have gained from my own experience after clients have asked about it. A
lot of new investors want to find out if there is a pyramiding opportunity. Of
course, there is always the chance for opportunity in futures anytime you
trade, but remember that there is always the opportunity for loss as well as
profit. Pyramiding can create massive profits when the market trend direction moves in your favor. However, massive losses can mount up as well if
the market price corrects against you.
I am only going to present hypothetical examples of what pyramid trading is in a perfect-world scenario. As we all know, this is not a perfect world.
The illustrations are for educational purposes only. I do not want you to go
out and start trading like this without further investigating. This is a technique that I consider to be leveraging leverage using more leverage.

206

THE TACTICAL TRADER: Tips and Techniques That Work

The following is an exact example of formulating a trading plan using a
specific trading tactic that incorporates a sound money management technique. However, every trader is responsible for his or her own actions and
finances. Do take the time to do your homework and work out the numbers
on any other futures contract before using this technique.
This example uses soybean futures. A long-term chart should paint the
picture as to the normal price range of the market (Figure 12.1). I chose soybeans for several reasons: (1) The margin requirement was relatively low
($1,000 per contract at the time of this analysis). (2) At $4.20 per bushel, the
price was near a historic low. (3) There was relatively little downside risk
and a lot of upside profit potential if the market moved higher. (Although
those conditions existed in early 2002, they have not existed since then so
that is why this must be labeled a hypothetical example.)
The total contract value of one soybean futures contract at the time
was $21,000 ($4.20 × 5,000 bushels.). If the price went to zero, that is all you
could lose if you could never exit the market for whatever circumstances.
I consider that position to have relatively little downside risk. Another factor
to keep in mind is that the lowest price for soybeans since 1973 was about

FIGURE 12.1

Base for a pyramid. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

207

Pyramiding

$3.45 per bushel, only 75 cents below the price on January 2, 2002, which is
the basis for this analysis.
Limit buy orders were used, and the concept is that you do not add orders if the market does not move higher. You add positions every 20 cents
higher. I used a 20-cent price swing mainly because the dollar value was
equal to the initial margin requirement. This tactic virtually trades using
money made from the market rather than your own capital. This example
does not account for slippage from trailing stops, commissions, or other
fees associated with trading. I used a standard minimum account balance
of $5,000.
This technique may seem complicated, but it really is simple if you just
write down the figures and do your math. Using professional money management techniques, I started with one contract, risking 20 percent of my
initial investment of $5,000, which is $1,000 or a 20-cent stop loss. The soybean chart seven months later (Figure 12.2) shows nearly a $1.80 advance
that would have made any pyramid trader happy. As you can see from Table
12.1, my risk shifted from loss to no risk to having positions on and stopping

Beans trade to nearly 6.00
from the 4.15 low in January.

FIGURE 12.2

Seven months and many dollars later. (Source: FutureSource.

Reprinted with permission.)

208
TABLE 12.1

THE TACTICAL TRADER: Tips and Techniques That Work

Soybean Pyramid Plan

Starting
Equity

Entry Level

Stop Loss
