
Stock-Option Warrants
Let us mince no words at the outset. We consider the recent
development of stock-option warrants as a near fraud, an existing
menace, and a potential disaster. They have created huge aggregate
dollar “values” out of thin air. They have no excuse for existence
except to the extent that they mislead speculators and investors.
They should be prohibited by law, or at least strictly limited to a
minor part of the total capitalization of a company.*
For an analogy in general history and in literature we refer the
reader to the section of Faust (part 2), in which Goethe describes
the invention of paper money. As an ominous precedent on Wall
Street history, we may mention the warrants of American & Foreign Power Co., which in 1929 had a quoted market value of over a
billion dollars, although they appeared only in a footnote to the
company’s balance sheet. By 1932 this billion dollars had shrunk to
$8 million, and in 1952 the warrants were wiped out in the
company’s recapitalization—even though it had remained solvent.
Originally, stock-option warrants were attached now and then
to bond issues, and were usually equivalent to a partial conversion
privilege. They were unimportant in amount, and hence did no
harm. Their use expanded in the late 1920s, along with many other
financial abuses, but they dropped from sight for long years thereafter. They were bound to turn up again, like the bad pennies they
are, and since 1967 they have become familiar “instruments of

* Warrants were an extremely widespread technique of corporate finance in
the nineteenth century and were fairly common even in Graham’s day. They
have since diminished in importance and popularity—one of the few recent
developments that would give Graham unreserved pleasure. As of year-end
2002, there were only seven remaining warrant issues on the New York
Stock Exchange—only the ghostly vestige of a market. Because warrants are
no longer commonly used by major companies, today’s investors should
read the rest of Graham’s chapter only to see how his logic works.

414

The Intelligent Investor

finance.” In fact a standard procedure has developed for raising
the capital for new real-estate ventures, affiliates of large banks, by
selling units of an equal number of common shares and warrants
to buy additional common shares at the same price. Example: In
1971 CleveTrust Realty Investors sold 2,500,000 of these combinations of common stock (or “shares of beneficial interest”) and warrants, for $20 per unit.
Let us consider for a moment what is really involved in this
financial setup. Ordinarily, a common-stock issue has the first right
to buy additional common shares when the company’s directors
find it desirable to raise capital in this manner. This so-called “preemptive right” is one of the elements of value entering into the
ownership of common stock—along with the right to receive dividends, to participate in the company’s growth, and to vote for
directors. When separate warrants are issued for the right to subscribe additional capital, that action takes away part of the value
inherent in an ordinary common share and transfers it to a separate
certificate. An analogous thing could be done by issuing separate
certificates for the right to receive dividends (for a limited or
unlimited period), or the right to share in the proceeds of sale or
liquidation of the enterprise, or the right to vote the shares. Why
then are these subscription warrants created as part of the original
capital structure? Simply because people are inexpert in financial
matters. They don’t realize that the common stock is worth less
with warrants outstanding than otherwise. Hence the package of
stock and warrants usually commands a better price in the market
than would the stock alone. Note that in the usual company reports
the per-share earnings are (or have been) computed without
proper allowance for the effect of outstanding warrants. The result
is, of course, to overstate the true relationship between the earnings
and the market value of the company’s capitalization.*

* Today, the last remnant of activity in warrants is in the cesspool of the
NASDAQ “bulletin board,” or over-the-counter market for tiny companies,
where common stock is often bundled with warrants into a “unit” (the contemporary equivalent of what Graham calls a “package”). If a stockbroker
ever offers to sell you “units” in any company, you can be 95% certain that
warrants are involved, and at least 90% certain that the broker is either a
thief or an idiot. Legitimate brokers and firms have no business in this area.

Convertible Issues and Warrants

415

The simplest and probably the best method of allowing for the
existence of warrants is to add the equivalent of their market value
to the common-share capitalization, thus increasing the “true”
market price per share. Where large amounts of warrants have
been issued in connection with the sale of senior securities, it is
customary to make the adjustment by assuming that the proceeds
of the stock payment are used to retire the related bonds or preferred shares. This method does not allow adequately for the usual
“premium value” of a warrant above exercisable value. In Table
16-4 we compare the effect of the two methods of calculation in the
case of National General Corp. for the year 1970.
Does the company itself derive an advantage from the creation
of these warrants, in the sense that they assure it in some way of
receiving additional capital when it needs some? Not at all. Ordinarily there is no way in which the company can require the warrant-holders to exercise their rights, and thus provide new capital
to the company, prior to the expiration date of the warrants. In the
meantime, if the company wants to raise additional common-stock
funds it must offer the shares to its shareholders in the usual way—
which means somewhat under the ruling market price. The warrants are no help in such an operation; they merely complicate the
situation by frequently requiring a downward revision in their
own subscription price. Once more we assert that large issues of
stock-option warrants serve no purpose, except to fabricate imaginary market values.
The paper money that Goethe was familiar with, when he wrote
his Faust, were the notorious French assignats that had been
greeted as a marvelous invention, and were destined ultimately to
lose all of their value—as did the billion dollars worth of American
& Foreign Power warrants.* Some of the poet’s remarks apply

* The “notorious French assignats” were issued during the Revolution of
1789. They were originally debts of the Revolutionary government, purportedly secured by the value of the real estate that the radicals had seized from
the Catholic church and the nobility. But the Revolutionaries were bad financial managers. In 1790, the interest rate on assignats was cut; soon they
stopped paying interest entirely and were reclassified as paper money. But
the government refused to redeem them for gold or silver and issued massive
amounts of new assignats. They were officially declared worthless in 1797.

416

The Intelligent Investor

TABLE 16-4 Calculation of “True Market Price” and Adjusted
Price/Earnings Ratio of a Common Stock with
Large Amounts of Warrants Outstanding
(Example: National General Corp. in June 1971)
1. Calculation of “True Market Price.”
Market value of 3 issues of warrants, June 30, 1971

$94,000,000

Value of warrants per share of common stock

$18.80

Price of common stock alone

24.50

Corrected price of common, adjusted for warrants

43.30

2. Calculation of P/E Ratio to Allow for Warrant Dilution
(1970 earnings)
A. Before Special Items.

Before
Warrant
Dilution

Earned per share

$ 2.33

After Warrant Dilution
Company’s
Our
Calculation
Calculation
$ 1.60

$ 2.33

Price of common

24.50

24.50

43.30 (adj.)

P/E ratio

10.5

15.3

18.5

$ .90

$ 1.33

$ .90

B. After Special Items.
Earned per share
Price of common

24.50

24.50

43.30 (adj.)

P/E ratio

27.2

18.4

48.1

Note that, after special charges, the effect of the company’s calculation is to
increase the earnings per share and reduce the P/E ratio. This is manifestly
absurd. By our suggested method the effect of the dilution is to increase the P/E
ratio substantially, as it should be.

equally well to one invention or another—such as the following (in
Bayard Taylor’s translation):
Faust: Imagination in its highest flight
Exerts itself but cannot grasp it quite.
Mephistopheles (the inventor): If one needs coin the brokers ready
stand.
The Fool (finally): The magic paper . . . !

Convertible Issues and Warrants

417

Practical Postscript
The crime of the warrants is in “having been born.”* Once born
they function as other security forms, and offer chances of profit as
well as of loss. Nearly all the newer warrants run for a limited
time—generally between five and ten years. The older warrants
were often perpetual, and they were likely to have fascinating price
histories over the years.
Example: The record books will show that Tri-Continental Corp.
warrants, which date from 1929, sold at a negligible 1/32 of a dollar each in the depth of the depression. From that lowly estate their
price rose to a magnificent 753⁄4 in 1969, an astronomical advance of
some 242,000%. (The warrants then sold considerably higher than
the shares themselves; this is the kind of thing that occurs on Wall
Street through technical developments, such as stock splits.) A
recent example is supplied by Ling-Temco-Vought warrants, which
in the first half of 1971 advanced from 21⁄2 to 121⁄2—and then fell
back to 4.
No doubt shrewd operations can be carried on in warrants from
time to time, but this is too technical a matter for discussion here.
We might say that warrants tend to sell relatively higher than the
corresponding market components related to the conversion privilege of bonds or preferred stocks. To that extent there is a valid
argument for selling bonds with warrants attached rather than creating an equivalent dilution factor by a convertible issue. If the
warrant total is relatively small there is no point in taking its theoretical aspect too seriously; if the warrant issue is large relative to
the outstanding stock, that would probably indicate that the company has a top-heavy senior capitalization. It should be selling
additional common stock instead. Thus the main objective of our
attack on warrants as a financial mechanism is not to condemn
their use in connection with moderate-size bond issues, but to
argue against the wanton creation of huge “paper-money” monstrosities of this genre.

* Graham, an enthusiastic reader of Spanish literature, is paraphrasing a line
from the play Life Is a Dream by Pedro Calderon de la Barca (1600–1681):
“The greatest crime of man is having been born.”

COMMENTARY ON CHAPTER 16

That which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die.
—I. Corinthians, XV:36.

THE ZEAL OF THE CONVERT
Although convertible bonds are called “bonds,” they behave like
stocks, work like options, and are cloaked in obscurity.
If you own a convertible, you also hold an option: You can either
keep the bond and continue to earn interest on it, or you can
exchange it for common stock of the issuing company at a predetermined ratio. (An option gives its owner the right to buy or sell another
security at a given price within a specific period of time.) Because they
are exchangeable into stock, convertibles pay lower rates of interest
than most comparable bonds. On the other hand, if a company’s stock
price soars, a convertible bond exchangeable into that stock will perform much better than a conventional bond. (Conversely, the typical
convertible—with its lower interest rate—will fare worse in a falling
bond market.)1

1

As a brief example of how convertible bonds work in practice, consider the
4.75% convertible subordinated notes issued by DoubleClick Inc. in 1999.
They pay $47.50 in interest per year and are each convertible into 24.24
shares of the company’s common stock, a “conversion ratio” of 24.24. As of
year-end 2002, DoubleClick’s stock was priced at $5.66 a share, giving
each bond a “conversion value” of $137.20 ($5.66  24.24). Yet the bonds
traded roughly six times higher, at $881.30—creating a “conversion premium,” or excess over their conversion value, of 542%. If you bought at that
price, your “break-even time,” or “payback period,” was very long. (You paid
roughly $750 more than the conversion value of the bond, so it will take
nearly 16 years of $47.50 interest payments for you to “earn back” that con418

Commentary on Chapter 16

419

From 1957 through 2002, according to Ibbotson Associates, convertible bonds earned an annual average return of 8.3%—only two percentage points below the total return on stocks, but with steadier
prices and shallower losses.2 More income, less risk than stocks: No
wonder Wall Street’s salespeople often describe convertibles as a
“best of both worlds” investment. But the intelligent investor will
quickly realize that convertibles offer less income and more risk than
most other bonds. So they could, by the same logic and with equal
justice, be called a “worst of both worlds” investment. Which side you
come down on depends on how you use them.
In truth, convertibles act more like stocks than bonds. The return on
convertibles is about 83% correlated to the Standard & Poor’s 500stock index—but only about 30% correlated to the performance of
Treasury bonds. Thus, “converts” zig when most bonds zag. For conservative investors with most or all of their assets in bonds, adding a
diversified bundle of converts is a sensible way to seek stock-like
returns without having to take the scary step of investing in stocks
directly. You could call convertible bonds “stocks for chickens.”
As convertibles expert F. Barry Nelson of Advent Capital Management points out, this roughly $200 billion market has blossomed since
Graham’s day. Most converts are now medium-term, in the seven-to10-year range; roughly half are investment-grade; and many issues
now carry some call protection (an assurance against early redemption). All these factors make them less risky than they used to be.3

version premium.) Since each DoubleClick bond is convertible to just over
24 common shares, the stock will have to rise from $5.66 to more than $36
if conversion is to become a practical option before the bonds mature in
2006. Such a stock return is not impossible, but it borders on the miraculous. The cash yield on this particular bond scarcely seems adequate, given
the low probability of conversion.
2
Like many of the track records commonly cited on Wall Street, this one is
hypothetical. It indicates the return you would have earned in an imaginary index fund that owned all major convertibles. It does not include any
management fees or trading costs (which are substantial for convertible
securities). In the real world, your returns would have been roughly two percentage points lower.
3
However, most convertible bonds remain junior to other long-term debt
and bank loans—so, in a bankruptcy, convertible holders do not have prior

420

Commentary on Chapter 16

It’s expensive to trade small lots of convertible bonds, and diversification is impractical unless you have well over $100,000 to invest in
this sector alone. Fortunately, today’s intelligent investor has the convenient recourse of buying a low-cost convertible bond fund. Fidelity
and Vanguard offer mutual funds with annual expenses comfortably
under 1%, while several closed-end funds are also available at a reasonable cost (and, occasionally, at discounts to net asset value).4
On Wall Street, cuteness and complexity go hand-in-hand—and
convertibles are no exception. Among the newer varieties are a jumble
of securities with acronymic nicknames like LYONS, ELKS, EYES,
PERCS, MIPS, CHIPS, and YEELDS. These intricate securities put a
“floor” under your potential losses, but also cap your potential profits
and often compel you to convert into common stock on a fixed date.
Like most investments that purport to ensure against loss (see sidebar
on p. 421), these things are generally more trouble than they are
worth. You can best shield yourself against loss not by buying one of
these quirky contraptions, but by intelligently diversifying your entire
portfolio across cash, bonds, and U.S. and foreign stocks.

claim to the company’s assets. And, while they are not nearly as dicey as
high-yield “junk” bonds, many converts are still issued by companies with
less than sterling credit ratings. Finally, a large portion of the convertible
market is held by hedge funds, whose rapid-fire trading can increase the
volatility of prices.
4
For more detail, see www.fidelity.com, www.vanguard.com, and www.
morningstar.com. The intelligent investor will never buy a convertible bond
fund with annual operating expenses exceeding 1.0%.

Commentary on Chapter 16

421

U N COVE R I N G COVE R E D CALLS
As the bear market clawed its way through 2003, it dug up an
old fad: writing covered call options. (A recent Google search
on “covered call writing” turned up more than 2,600 hits.) What
are covered calls, and how do they work? Imagine that you buy
100 shares of Ixnay Corp. at $95 apiece. You then sell (or
“write”) a call option on your shares. In exchange, you get a
cash payment known as a “call premium.” (Let’s say it’s $10 per
share.) The buyer of the option, meanwhile, has the contractual
right to buy your Ixnay shares at a mutually agreed-upon price—
say, $100. You get to keep the stock so long as it stays below
$100, and you earn a fat $1,000 in premium income, which will
cushion the fall if Ixnay’s stock crashes.
Less risk, more income. What’s not to like?
Well, now imagine that Ixnay’s stock price jumps overnight to
$110. Then your option buyer will exercise his rights, yanking
your shares away for $100 apiece. You’ve still got your $1,000
in income, but he’s got your Ixnay—and the more it goes up, the
harder you will kick yourself.1
Since the potential gain on a stock is unlimited, while no loss
can exceed 100%, the only person you will enrich with this strategy is your broker. You’ve put a floor under your losses, but
you’ve also slapped a ceiling over your gains. For individual
investors, covering your downside is never worth surrendering
most of your upside.
Alternatively, you could buy back the call option, but you would have to take
a loss on it—and options can have even higher trading costs than stocks.
1

CHAPTER 17

Four Extremely Instructive Case Histories

The word “extremely” in the title is a kind of pun, because the his-

tories represent extremes of various sorts that were manifest on
Wall Street in recent years. They hold instruction, and grave warnings, for everyone who has a serious connection with the world of
stocks and bonds—not only for ordinary investors and speculators
but for professionals, security analysts, fund managers, trustaccount administrators, and even for bankers who lend money to
corporations. The four companies to be reviewed, and the different
extremes that they illustrate are:
Penn Central (Railroad) Co. An extreme example of the neglect of
the most elementary warning signals of financial weakness, by all
those who had bonds or shares of this system under their supervision. A crazily high market price for the stock of a tottering giant.
Ling-Temco-Vought Inc. An extreme example of quick and
unsound “empire building,” with ultimate collapse practically
guaranteed; but helped by indiscriminate bank lending.
NVF Corp. An extreme example of one corporate acquisition, in
which a small company absorbed another seven times its size,
incurring a huge debt and employing some startling accounting
devices.
AAA Enterprises. An extreme example of public stock-financing
of a small company; its value based on the magic word “franchising,” and little else, sponsored by important stock-exchange
houses. Bankruptcy followed within two years of the stock sale
and the doubling of the initial inflated price in the heedless stock
market.

422

Four Extremely Instructive Case Histories

423

The Penn Central Case
This is the country’s largest railroad in assets and gross revenues. Its bankruptcy in 1970 shocked the financial world. It has
defaulted on most of its bond issues, and has been in danger of
abandoning its operations entirely. Its security issues fell drastically in price, the common stock collapsing from a high level of 861⁄2
as recently as 1968 to a low of 51⁄2 in 1970. (There seems little doubt
that these shares will be wiped out in reorganization.)*
Our basic point is that the application of the simplest rules of
security analysis and the simplest standards of sound investment
would have revealed the fundamental weakness of the Penn Central system long before its bankruptcy—certainly in 1968, when the
shares were selling at their post-1929 record, and when most of its
bond issues could have been exchanged at even prices for wellsecured public-utility obligations with the same coupon rates. The
following comments are in order:
1. In the S & P Bond Guide the interest charges of the system are
shown to have been earned 1.91 times in 1967 and 1.98 times in
1968. The minimum coverage prescribed for railroad bonds in our
textbook Security Analysis is 5 times before income taxes and 2.9
times after income taxes at regular rates. As far as we know the
validity of these standards has never been questioned by any
investment authority. On the basis of our requirements for earnings
after taxes, the Penn Central fell short of the requirements for safety.
But our after-tax requirement is based on a before-tax ratio of five
times, with regular income tax deducted after the bond interest. In
the case of Penn Central, it had been paying no income taxes to speak
of for the past 11 years! Hence the coverage of its interest charges
before taxes was less than two times—a totally inadequate figure
against our conservative requirement of 5 times.

* How “shocked” was the financial world by the Penn Central’s bankruptcy,
which was filed over the weekend of June 20–21, 1970? The closing trade
in Penn Central’s stock on Friday, June 19, was $11.25 per share—hardly a
going-out-of-business price. In more recent times, stocks like Enron and
WorldCom have also sold at relatively high prices shortly before filing for
bankruptcy protection.
