
THE MULTIPLE USES OF FIBONACCI TOOLS

Traders locate Fibonacci retracement prices not just for trade entries into prevailing uptrends or
downtrends, but to find a reasonable price to locate a stop-loss order. Standard retracements in price
should not retrace more than the 61.8 percent Fibonacci retracement price of a given swing, thus
traders often locate reasonable stops underneath the 61.8 percent retracement price of a downswing in
a prevailing uptrend, and above the 61.8 percent retracement of an upward swing in a prevailing
downtrend. Thus, the Fibonacci retracement tool helps you identify places to enter a trade and locate
a logical stop-loss order beyond a point where the market should not go.
Traders use Fibonacci to find the low of an expected bull or bear flag in this method, placing the
stop beyond the 61.8 percent retracement. We will also see how Fibonacci prices align with general
and specific retracement-style trade setups in Chapters 9 and 10, and also how to execute a trade with
additional precision, accounting for conservative or aggressive tactics, in Chapter 8.

CHAPTER 7
Following the Life Cycle of a Price Move
Abook on broad trading tactics in technical analysis cannot go far without mentioning the
contributions of founding father Charles Dow and how his ideas paved the way for the charting
methods we use today. In this chapter, we will compare the contributions of Charles Dow and Ralph
Elliott as they relate to the life cycle of a stock's price move over time.
Ralph Elliott's writings build upon the foundation established by Charles Dow in discussing how
stocks move from accumulation to distribution over time in more specific motions that he labeled as
waves instead of swings. This chapter illustrates how to identify a stock in an accumulation phase,
follow it through the mark-up in its realization phase, and lock-in your profits as the stock enters its
final stage of distribution just before a mark-down phase occurs.
From 1890 to 1900, Charles Dow published his writings on stock market phenomena that would
later form the foundation for technical analysis. We have already addressed some of Dow's work in
Chapter 1 when we discussed the Trend Continuity Principle. Dow also believed that trends, once
established, were more likely to continue than to reverse. In fact, Charles Dow separated the notion of
trend into three separate trends: primary, secondary (or intermediate), and minor. To modern day
traders, we often assess the primary trend of a stock by studying its monthly chart and use the weekly
chart to determine the secondary or intermediate trend.
To Charles Dow and his contemporaries, the minor trend was of no importance because trading in
the stock market had a completely different reality in 1900 than it did in 2000. Today, we would use
both daily and intraday charts to define the short-term or minor trend of a stock. Mr. Dow did not
have a computer to show him the charts of the stocks he wanted to analyze. Imagine a world not just
without computers, but without stock charts themselves! Keeping a stock chart meant the trader had to
write down the daily closing prices of the stocks and then draw individual charts laboriously by hand.
How many traders today would keep up that discipline! When you read the works of Charles Dow,
you should have a deeper appreciation for his insights, many of which still hold true today as the
foundation for simple and complex trading strategies. For reference, what we know today as Dow
Theory actually stems from the work of William Hamilton and Robert Rhea as they refined Dow's
writings posthumously.
While you can research all of Dow's writings for deeper insights, this chapter addresses only one
concept in Dow's teachings: that of the accumulation and distribution cycle in stocks.

THREE PHASES OF A LARGE-SCALE PRICE MOVE
Early market technicians focused on the larger picture on stock charts, concerned with identifying the
balance of supply and demand between buyers and sellers. While the markets of today offer far
superior opportunities for intraday traders, all traders can benefit from considering the larger cycles
or phases that a stock transitions through from a move from the lows to the highs. Larger cycles can

take years to form completely, and assessing the particular phase in which a stock trades greatly
enhances your ability to position yourself and profit accordingly.
Charles Dow and early technicians defined three distinct phases of a bull market, and we still use
these concepts today with advanced charting software packages that allow us to study price charts
instantly. You can identify these phases best on a monthly or weekly chart in your favorite software
charting program or web site. Also, it helps to think back to our discussion in Chapter 3 that
simplified the market into buyers and sellers—bulls and bears—for visualizing these phases on
higher timeframe price charts. Think of the market not in terms of indicators, but through the
perspective of buyers and sellers as they interact over time, either willingly putting on positions in
hopes of a future profit, willingly taking off positions to realize an actual profit, or being forced
unwillingly out of a position to realize losses. In doing so, you will be able to understand the cycles
of accumulation and distribution more accurately.
In addition to segmenting the market participants into buyers and sellers, you also need to visualize
two separate classes of market participants. On one hand, we have the big money investors, also
called smart money or the professionals. These funds or individuals are well-capitalized,
experienced investors or traders who have been perfecting their craft for years and have developed
time-tested strategies for long-term success in the market. They understand that strategy triumphs over
individual psychology and emotion, and have actually developed methods to take advantage of crowd
behavior or inefficiencies that arise from investors following their emotions as opposed to their
strategies. In our discussion, visualize these participants as the smart money that profits over time
from repeated psychological mistakes of newer or inexperienced traders with much smaller accounts.
On the opposite side of the big money investors, we have the small money investors, who you may
also have heard called retail money or, less professionally, the dumb money investors. That is not to
say that these investors are stupid, but that they are usually newer to the investment or trading
environment and are more likely to fall victim to psychological or emotional traps that the
professional traders exploit over time.
Examples include waiting on the sidelines during a steadily rising move in a stock and then buying
at the top of the move just prior to a reversal in trend. Though perhaps their strategy told them they
should have bought earlier, they doubted the chart signals and decided to buy only when the pain of
not making money by participating in the upside action was too great for them to bear. Alternately,
they may hold on to a losing position for weeks or months only to sell not when their strategies told
them to sell earlier such as when price broke down through rising trendlines or moving averages, but
when the emotional pain of losing money was too much to bear, which sometimes occurs ironically
near the exact bottom of a price trend prior to an upside reversal.
Our discussion of accumulation and distribution cycles will help you understand how new traders
consistently make the same mistakes when guided by emotion, and how professional traders exploit
these investing errors by separating themselves from the crowd mentality through relying on timetested price principles, strategies, and indicators.

First Phase: Accumulation
Let us begin our discussion on the life cycle of a price move at the end of a downward phase in the
market, often called a bear market. Price has been falling as sellers have been dominant over buyers,
and the price of the stock is treading continually to new 52-week lows. Recall from Chapter 3 that

price alternates between periods of range expansion and range contraction. Let us assume that we are
transitioning away from a range expansion sell-off phase into a range consolidation sideways phase in
price.
If we segment the investing public into professionals and new traders in terms of psychology, we
would notice that many traders would be psychologically unable to buy a position in a stock that
remained in a persistent, multi-month downtrend. Some traders remained long during the persistent
decline, hoping for an eventual reversal, and these traders remained stubbornly long with increasing
losses and eventually capitulate by selling their shares when they can no longer tolerate the pain of
financial loss. Over time, there will be far fewer traders who still hold shares long to liquidate.
On the other side of the transaction, professional traders with longer time horizons may decide to
engage in a campaign of buying shares that the general public no longer feels they can hold. In simple
terms, the accumulation stage occurs when the broader public sells shares unwillingly after a long
down-move and professional traders buy these shares willingly that the majority of sellers liquidate.
Shares transfer from the public (new traders) to professionals over a period of time.
The accumulation phase may last a long time, sometimes for a period of years. During an
accumulation phase, expect to see lower volume and flat stock prices in a sideways consolidation
move. Long-term investors and position traders want to identify phases of accumulation and establish
positions that might last years.
Traders, however, want to avoid trading during this phase because they wish to engage in many
transactions to capture the edge from short-term price movement. A trader seeks to play the edge in
many positions over a year, rather than remain committed to a single position for a long duration of
time. Traders seek to turn over their inventory (their trading capital) as a savvy store owner wishes to
sell and replenish the stock of goods as many times as possible in a year. A stock in an accumulation
phase will offer few opportunities for profit for most traders; instead, traders want to participate in
the second phase of the life cycle: Realization.

Second Phase: Realization
It is impossible to assess how long an accumulation phase will last in a stock, and it is difficult to
assess if professionals are actively accumulating shares over time or not. Remember, just because a
stock is in a sideways range does not mean that large investors are buying shares. There is no easy
way to distinguish whether the professionals are actively accumulating positions over time in a stock
in a trading range environment or whether they have turned their attention elsewhere. If you buy a
stock that is not in an accumulation phase, you may never see the stock transition into the second
phase.
The realization phase occurs when price firmly breaks upward from a lengthy trading range after a
downward move in price, usually in a clean breakout from the established trading range. Expect to
see volume increase as price rallies upward from the established range as a positive feedback loop
develops, which results from short sellers buying to cover their positions unwillingly with a loss as
eager buyers willingly purchasing stock on the initial breakout and beyond.
To recognize the realization phase, observe a price breakout from a lengthy price range. The
professional traders continue to buy shares over time, but eventually the price will begin to rise and
the smarter investors or traders will begin to buy shares in a newly rising uptrend at the earliest
stages possible.

Remember Martin Pring's definition of Technical Analysis as explained in Chapter 1: your goal is
to recognize a trend reversal at the earliest stage possible and then ride that trend (trade in the
direction of the trend) until the weight of the evidence has confirmed that the trend has reversed.
Experienced traders will begin purchasing shares or trading breakouts, and as this occurs, a stock
will begin to transition into the Realization Phase.
During the early realization phase, both the professional traders and experienced retail or nonprofessional traders buy shares, which pushes the price higher. As the price rises further, the stock
enters a positive feedback loop where those who have been short the stock will be forced to buy to
cover, as those who have no position in the stock will begin a campaign of buying shares.
Look for a steady, stable rise in prices that may take the form of a 45-degree or smaller angular
price rise in an uptrend. Also, observe that the moving average structure remains bullish with price
above the short-term average and the short-term average above the intermediate-term average.
Observe momentum and volume rising along with the stable price ascension. As long as these
conditions continue to persist, the stock remains in a realization phase and thus offers your best
chances for profit as a trader, mainly through buying retracements to moving average or trendline
support within the context of a developing uptrend.
Over time, more investors become aware of the steady rise in price and participate, either for shortterm swing trades that form from retracements to the rising moving averages, trendlines, or Fibonacci
retracement zones, or from price breakouts to new highs. Over time, as more individuals begin
buying, the professionals will either cease buying shares or will start to sell shares they have
purchased during the accumulation phase when the share price was much lower.
The realization phase begins with professionals buying shares, then intelligent retail (small)
investors begin buying shares, which attracts more attention from the public as more traders begin
buying shares over time to perpetuate the stable price rise. However as the price rises higher and
more individuals participate, the professional traders have accumulated their desired amount of
shares at lower prices and then cease buying. A professional trader who desires to acquire tens of
thousands of shares will not do so in a single transaction, but through smaller purchases over many
days, weeks, or even months. They will hold their shares in their accounts as the other traders
continue to drive price higher in the context of a rising uptrend, and will begin selling their shares as
the public eagerly continues buying shares. Notice the dynamic of the professional/amateur
relationship: during accumulation, calm professionals buy shares over time from panicked amateur
traders, then hold their shares as traders push price higher in an uptrend, and then eventually sell their
shares calmly for a profit as the amateur traders rush in emotionally to purchase shares in a stock that
seems to have no end to its rise.
Imagine a seesaw with professionals on one end and smaller, retail investors on the other end. At
the start of the realization phase, professionals will be on the upper seat and retail investors will be
on the lower seat in terms of activity. As the phase progresses, the seesaw eventually comes into
balance as professionals reduce their activity and retail traders increase their activity. The end of the
realization phase, and the start of the distribution phase, occurs when professionals completely stop
purchasing shares and then begin selling shares to the eager and enthusiastic retail public, who now
occupy the high seat on the seesaw. Eventually, realization gives way to distribution and the trend
reverses down.

Third Phase: Distribution
The accumulation phase occurs when professionals buy shares over time and the retail public either
sells shares or are not participating in a particular stock. In contrast the distribution phase begins
when professionals sell the shares they purchased at lower levels to the crowd of eager and
enthusiastic retail (small) investors and traders who only see the rising price and buy shares
aggressively. The market does not create shares out of thin air; instead, if you think of investors in
larger groups, when large groups of investors buy shares, there is another group of investors who are
selling shares to them. Likewise, if a large group of investors sell shares, another group of investors
buys these shares from them.
Unlike futures contracts or options, company shares are limited in supply, so shares are limited and
must transition from buyers to sellers, and from sellers back to buyers over time. Though it may seem
like a company has infinite shares for trading, they do not, and all shares must be owned by someone,
be it company insiders, mutual funds, hedge funds, endowments, retirement accounts, speculative
accounts, individual trading accounts, or other equity accounts.
During the distribution phase, one of two events can happen. The stable outcome occurs when price
forms a lengthy trading range similar to that of the accumulation phase as a negative feedback, range
consolidation phase occurs after a steep rise in price. The range occurs because the smaller number
of professionals continues selling shares to the more numerous retail public, who continue buying
shares. Keep in mind that professionals in the stock market tend to be fewer in number, but have
considerably larger funds or accounts than the more numerous retail trading or investing public, which
have much smaller accounts than full-time professional traders. You can often observe clean negative
divergences and other nonconfirmations in volume with price during a steady turnover of shares. This
transition either takes the form of a rectangle trading range or arc pattern on the chart that is called a
Rounded Reversal. The main idea is that price gives clear warnings of an impending reversal ahead
of the actual price reversal to a new downtrend.
The second, more volatile outcome occurs when a buying climax, or spike reversal occurs. Buyers
become blinded by their emotion and the good news of the stock along with the rapidly rising prices
that continue to push share prices to new highs in an almost vertical climb. Even professionals can be
blindsided by a rapidly rising market. Eventually, like gravity, what goes up must come down.
Principles of physics also apply to the stock market. Sometimes the fall in share prices can be much
more violent than the rise.
This was the case for many technology stocks in 2000 and for the broader NASDAQ Index; a
meteoric rise in price eventually gave way to a precipitous downtrend that wiped away the gains and
more of those who purchased shares during the height of the rally. Individuals quit their day jobs to
speculate on rising stock prices full-time; unfortunately, many were wiped out financially as they
continued to buy falling shares in the context of the sudden bear market collapse they never saw
coming. The nearly three-year NASDAQ collapse from a high of 5,100 to a low of 1,100 swept many
inexperienced traders out of the market completely, taking their previously earned gains and more
with them.
Whether the distribution phase ends with a stable turn-over of shares or a violent one, the life cycle
of a stock reveals that price will eventually fall to retrace a portion of the gains that the stock
achieved during the realization uptrend phase. Professionals will often sell stock short as the price
falls, as will experienced small traders. Inexperienced and emotional retail traders and investors

exist on the opposite end of the short-sale positions, and the damage comes to those individuals who
are blinded by their hope, greed, and then fear. They will have purchased shares near the peak of the
rally and sometimes will hold on to those shares for the entire downtrend until they can no longer
endure the pain of loss, and will sell those shares at the bottom, when a new cycle of accumulation
has begun.

VISUALIZING THE STAGES THROUGH CHARTS
Let us see these phases in an idealized chart and real-life examples. Figure 7.1 shows us the idealized
line progression through the three stages. Accumulation contains a sideways action of negative
feedback as professionals buy shares from the retail public who sell shares. It helps to conceptualize
this in simplest terms. Eventually, price breaks above the upper horizontal resistance line as
experienced retail traders begin to buy alongside the professional traders who continue buying shares.
FIGURE 7.1 Idealized Chart of the Three Life Cycle Stages

Over time, retail (small) investors and traders buy shares for a long-term investment and execute
trades for short-term profit, both of which drive the share price higher. Toward the later phases of the
realization stage, professional investors stop buying shares, hold on to their established position as
the price appreciates, and eventually begin selling shares ahead of the actual price peak. The retail
public, on the other hand, increases their participation as the price continues to rise. Eventually, price
will move into the final stage where the professional traders sell the shares, which they purchased at
lower prices, to the mass public who only hear good news about the stock and see the rising prices on
the charts. Shares transition from strong hands to weak hands during the distribution phase (from
professionals selling to eager amateur traders) and then transition back from weak hands to strong
hands (from distressed amateurs selling to professionals) during the accumulation phase, which will
occur again after price falls in the later stages of distribution.

A Stable Progression Example: Exxon-Mobil
Figure 7.2 gives us a real-world example of this concept as we see Exxon-Mobil (XOM) break out in
late 1995 after a multi-year trading range formed. Price travels up four years as we begin to see a

rounded reversal or stable distribution phase that began in 1999/2000. Price then fell during the later
stages of distribution that ended with a new phase of accumulation in 2002.
FIGURE 7.2 Real-world Example of the Three Phases as seen in Exxon-Mobil Weekly Chart

Beginning in 1991, we see a flat phase of negative feedback in the weekly chart of Exxon-Mobil.
This rectangle pattern in price actually formed after an up-move in price, so technically we should
label this a re-accumulation phase. Still, price broke to the upside above the upper resistance line at
the $17.00-per-share level and embarked on a continuation move to the upside in a stable realization
phase. Notice how I drew two trendlines during the realization phase to connect the respective price
lows. You can often gauge the phase of realization by measuring the angle of ascent in price. Lower
angles occur at the beginning of the phase while steeper angles occur at the later stage of realization,
prior to the onset of distribution.
From 1996 to 1999, both professionals and smaller investors pushed the price of Exxon-Mobil
higher to peak above $45.00 per share in 2000 as a clear arc pattern formed on the chart. Arc patterns
represent stable distribution or transfer of shares from the professional investors to the more
numerous retail public. During the distribution phase, which we can see began in late 1999 and early
2000, price stabilized between the $35.00-per-share and $45.00-per-share level. Instead of an arc,
you could also draw a rectangle pattern. The main idea is that buyers and sellers had established a
trading range at the highs, and when you add in the dynamic of professional investors versus amateur
investors and traders, you can visualize the transfer of shares from the professionals to the retail
investors. Shares fell from the $45.00 peak to bottom at $30.00 in the two years of the selling phase
of distribution.
Figure 7.3 picks up from here and shows the subsequent accumulation, realization, and then
distribution phases that occurred throughout the decade of the 2000s.
FIGURE 7.3 Large-Scale Phase Transition in Exxon-Mobil (XOM)
