BLOW-OFF — See Climactic Top.
BLUE CHIPS — The nickname given to high-priced companies with good
records of earnings and price stability. Also called gilt-edged securities.
Examples: IBM, AT&T, General Motors, and General Electric.
BLUE PARALLEL — A line drawn parallel to the trendline (Blue Trendline)
which connects at least two highs. The Blue Parallel is started off a low and
used to estimate the next low point.
BLUE TRENDLINE — A straight line connecting two or more Tops together.
To avoid confusion, Edwards and Magee use a blue line for Top Trendlines
and a red line for Bottom Trendlines.
BOLLINGER BANDS (BB) — An envelope, in the form of two lines, which
surrounds the price bars on a chart. Bollinger Bands are plotted two standard
deviations away from a Simple Moving Average. This is the primary difference between Bollinger Bands and other envelopes. Envelopes are plotted a
fixed percentage above and below a Moving Average. As standard deviation
is a measure of volatility, Bollinger Bands adjust themselves to differing
market conditions. The bands grow wider during volatile market periods
and narrower during less volatile periods.
Bollinger’s premise is to ask the market what it is doing, rather than tell
it what to do. He focused on volatility with the use of standard deviation to
set the band width. The bands are normally plotted two deviations away
from the standard deviation, which is effectively a 20-day Moving Average
Line. The plot is valid if an average acts as a Support Line on market
corrections. If the average is penetrated on corrections, it is too short. Bollinger recommends 10-day Moving Averages for short-term trading, 20-day
for intermediate-term trading, and 50-day for longer-term trading. Deviations also need to be adjusted: 10 days can use 1.5 deviations, 20 days use
two deviations, and 50 days use 2.5 deviations. The nature of the time periods
does not matter; the bands can be used on monthly, weekly, daily, and even
intraday figures.
Bollinger Bands do not usually generate buy and sell signals alone. Most
often they provide a framework within which price may be related to other
indicators. Bollinger recommends using the bands in relation to other buy
and sell signals. However, the bands can be an integral part of the signal. If
a price touches an upper band and indicator action confirms it, no sell signal
is generated (it is a continuation signal if a buy signal was in effect). If a
price touches an upper band and an indicator does not confirm (diverges),
it is a sell signal. If a Top Price Chart Formation is formed outside the bands
and is followed by a second Top inside the bands, a sell signal is generated.
The exact opposite is true on the buy side.
When combined with other indicators, such as the RSI, the Bollinger
Bands become quite powerful. RSI is an excellent indicator with respect to
overbought and oversold conditions. Generally, when price touches the

AU3772_book.fm Page 747 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary

747

upper Bollinger Band and RSI is below 70, it is an indication that the trend
will continue. Conversely, when price touches the lower Bollinger Band, and
RSI is above 30, it is an indication the trend should continue. If a situation
occurs where price touches the upper Bollinger Band and RSI is above 70
(possibly approaching 80), it is an indication that the trend may reverse itself
and move downward. On the other hand, if price touches the lower Bollinger
Band and RSI is below 30 (possibly approaching 20), the trend may reverse
itself and move upward. (See also Multicolincarity, Percent B, Wilder RSI.)
BOOK VALUE — The conventional accounting measure of what a stock is
worth based on the value of the company’s assets less the company’s debt.
Eminently manipulable.
BOTTOM — See Ascending Triangle, Dormant Bottom, Double Bottom,
Head-and-Shoulders Bottom, Rounding Bottom, and Selling Climax.
BOUNDARY — The edges of a pattern.
BOWL — See Rounding Bottom.
BRACKETING — A trading range market or a price area that is nontrending.
BREAKAWAY GAP — The hole or gap in the chart created when a stock or
commodity breaks out of an Area Pattern.
BREAKOUT — When a stock or commodity exits an area pattern.
BROADENING FORMATION — Sometimes called Inverted Triangles, these
are formations which start with narrow fluctuations that widen out between
diverging, rather than converging, boundary lines. (See also Right-Angled
Broadening Formations, Broadening Top, Head-and-Shoulders, and Diamond Patterns.)
BROADENING TOP — An Area Reversal Pattern which may evolve in any
one of three forms, comparable in shape, respectively, to inverted Symmetrical, Ascending, or Descending Triangles. Unlike Triangles, however, the
Tops and Bottoms of these patterns do not necessarily stop at clearly marked
diverging boundary lines. Volume, rather than diminishing in triangles,
tends to be unusually high and irregular throughout pattern construction.
No Measuring Formula is available.
BULL MARKET — A period when prices are primarily rising, normally for
an extended period. Usually, but not always, divisible into three phases. The
first phase is accumulation. The second phase is one of fairly steady advance
with increasing volume. The third phase is marked by considerable activity
as the public begins to recognize and attempt to profit from the rising market.
CALL OPTION — An option that gives the buyer the right to buy the
underlying contract at a specific price within a certain period, and that
obligates the seller to sell the contract for the premium received before
expiration of the designated time period.

AU3772_book.fm Page 748 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

748

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

CANDLESTICKS — A Japanese graphical representation of price action
using the same data as bar charts, but which adds color to the candlestick
(or data) to indicate the direction of prices from the opening. Cf. Nison,
Bibliography.
CATS AND DOGS — Low-priced stocks of no investment value.
CHANNEL — If the Tops of the rallies and Bottoms of the reactions develop
lines which are approximately parallel to one another, the area between these
lines is called a Channel. (See also Ascending Trend Channel, Descending
Trend Channel, and Horizontal Trend Channel.)
CHART — A graphic representation of a stock or commodity in terms of
price and/or volume. (See also Bar Chart and Point & Figure Chart.)
CLEAN-OUT DAY — See Selling Climax.
CLIMACTIC TOP — A sharp advance, accompanied by extraordinary volume, i.e., much larger volume than the normal increase, which signals the
final “blow-off” of the trend, followed by either a Reversal, or at least by a
period of stagnation, formation of Consolidation Pattern, or a Correction.
CLIMAX DAY — See One-Day Reversal.
CLIMAX, SELLING — See Selling Climax.
CLOSING PRICE — The last sale price of the trading session for a stock. In
a commodity, it represents an official price determined from a range of prices
deemed to have traded at or on the close; also called a settlement price.
CLOSING THE GAP — When a stock or commodity returns to a previous
gap and retraces the range of the gap. Also called covering the gap or filling
the gap. (See also Gap.)
COIL — Another term for a Symmetrical Triangle.
COMMISSION — The amount charged by a brokerage house to execute a
trade in a stock, option, or commodity. In a stock, option, or commodity, a
commission is charged for each purchase and each sale. In a commodity, a
commission is charged only when the original entry trade has been closed
with an offsetting trade. This is called a round turn commission.
COMMON GAP — Also called Area Gap. Any hole or gap in the chart
occurring within an Area Pattern. The forecasting significance of the Common Gap is nil. (See also Gap.)
COMPARATIVE RELATIVE STRENGTH — Compares the price movement
of a stock with that of its competitors, industry group, or the whole market.
COMPLEX HEAD-AND-SHOULDERS — Also called Multiple
Head-and-Shoulders. It is a Head-and-Shoulders Pattern with more than one
right and left shoulder and/or head. (See also Head-and-Shoulders.)

AU3772_book.fm Page 749 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary

749

COMPOSITE AVERAGE — A stock average composed of the 65 stocks
which make up the Dow–Jones Industrial Average and the Dow–Jones
Utility Average.
COMPOSITE LEVERAGE — In Edwards and Magee, it is a formula for
combining the principal factors affecting a given sum of capital used (i.e.,
sensitivity, price, and margin) into one index figure.
CONFIRMATION — In a pattern, it is the point at which a stock or commodity exits an Area Pattern in the expected direction by an amount of price
and volume sufficient to meet minimum pattern requirements for a bona fide
breakout. In the Dow Theory, it means both the Industrial Average and the
Transportation Average have registered new highs or lows during the same
advance or decline. If only one of the Averages establishes a new high (or
low) and the other one does not, it would be a nonconfirmation, or Divergence. This is also true of oscillators. To confirm a new high (or low) in a
stock or commodity, an oscillator needs to reach a new high (or low) as well.
Failure of the oscillator to confirm a new high (or low) is called a Divergence
and would be considered an early indication of a potential Reversal in
direction.
CONGESTION — The sideways trading from which Area Patterns evolve.
Not all Congestion periods produce a recognizable pattern, however.
CONSOLIDATION PATTERN — Also called a Continuation Pattern, it is an
Area Pattern which breaks out in the direction of the previous trend. (See
also Ascending Triangle, Descending Triangle, Hag, Head-and-Shoulders
Continuation, Pennant, Rectangle, Scallop, and Symmetrical Triangle.)
CONTINUATION GAP — See Runaway Gap.
CONTINUATION PATTERN — See Consolidation Pattern.
CONVERGENT PATTERN (TREND) — Those patterns with upper and
lower boundary lines which meet, or converge, at some point if extended to
the right. (See also Ascending Triangle, Descending Triangle, Symmetrical
Triangle, Wedges, and Pennants.)
CORRECTION — A move in a commodity or stock which is opposite to the
prevailing trend, but not sufficient to change that trend. Called a rally in a
downtrend and a reaction in an uptrend. In the Dow Theory, a Correction
is a Secondary Trend against the Primary Trend, which usually lasts from 3
weeks to 3 months and retraces from one third to two thirds of the preceding
swing in the Primary Direction.
COVERING THE GAP — See Closing the Gap.
CRADLE — The intersection of the two converging boundary lines of a
Symmetrical Triangle. (See also Apex.)

AU3772_book.fm Page 750 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

750

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

DAILY RANGE — The difference between the high and low price during
one trading day.
DEMAND — Buying interest for a stock at a given price.
DESCENDING (PARALLEL) TREND CHANNEL — When the Bottoms of
the reactions comprising a decline develop along a line (sometimes called a
Return Line), which is also parallel to the basic down trendlines (i.e., the line
which slopes down across the wave tops in a decline), the area between the
two lines is called a Descending or Down Channel.
DESCENDING TRENDLINE — The declining wave in a stock or commodity
is composed of a series of ripples. When the tops of these ripples form on,
or very close to, a downward slanting straight line, a basic Descending or
Down Trendline is formed.
DESCENDING TRIANGLE — One of a class of Area Patterns called
Right-Angle Triangles. The class is distinguished by the fact that one of the
two boundary lines is practically horizontal, while the other slants toward
it. If the bottom line is horizontal and the upper slants downward to an
intersection point to the right, the resulting Area Pattern is called a Descending Triangle. The implication is Bearish, with the expectant breakout through
the flat (horizontal) side. Minimum Measuring Formula: add the broadest
part of the Triangle to the breakout point.
DIAMOND — Usually a Reversal Pattern, but it will also be found as a
Continuation Pattern. It could be described as a Complex Head-and-Shoulders Pattern with a V-shaped (bent) Neckline, or a Broadening Pattern which,
after two or three swings, changes into a regular Triangle. The overall shape
is a four-point Diamond. Since it requires a fairly active market, it is more
often found at Major Tops. Many Complex Head-and-Shoulders Tops are
borderline Diamond Patterns. The major difference is in the right side of the
pattern. It should clearly show two converging lines with diminishing volume as in a Symmetrical Triangle. Minimum Measuring Formula: add the
greatest width of the pattern to the breakout point.
DISTRIBUTION — The first phase of a Bear Market, which really begins in
the last stage of a Bull Market. The period when farsighted investors sense
that the market has outrun its fundamentals and begin to unload their
holdings at an increasing pace. Trading volume is still high; however, it tends
to diminish on rallies. The public is still active, but beginning to show signs
of caution as hoped-for profits fade away.
DIVERGENCE — When new highs (or lows) in one indicator are not realized
in another comparable indicator. (See also Confirmation.)
DIVERGENT PATTERN (TREND) — Those patterns with upper and lower
boundary lines which meet at some point if extended to the left. (See also
Broadening Formation.)

AU3772_book.fm Page 751 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary

751

DIVERSIFICATION — The concept of placing your funds in different industry groups and investment vehicles to spread risk. Not to put all your
financial eggs in one basket.
DIVIDENDS — A share of the profits, in cash or stock equivalent, which is
paid to stockholders.
DORMANT BOTTOM — A variation of a Rounding (Bowl) Bottom, but in
an extended, flat-bottomed form. It usually appears in “thin” stocks, (i.e.,
those issues with a small number of shares outstanding) and characteristically will show lengthy periods during which no sales will be registered for
days at a time. The chart will appear “fly-specked” due to the missing days.
The technical implication is for an upside breakout.
DOUBLE BOTTOM — Reversal Pattern. A Bottom formed on relatively high
volume which is followed by a rally (of at least 15%), and then a second
Bottom (possibly rounded) at the same level (plus or minus 3%) as the first
Bottom on lower volume. A rally back though the apex of the intervening
rally confirms the Reversal. More than a month should separate the two
Bottoms. Minimum Measuring Formula: take the distance from the lowest
bottom to the apex of the intervening rally and add it to the apex.
DOUBLE TOP — A high-volume Top is formed, followed by a reaction (of
at least 15%) on diminishing activity. Another rally back to the previous high
(plus or minus 3%) is made, but on lower volume than the first high. A
decline through the low of the reaction confirms the Reversal. The two highs
should be more than a month apart. Minimum Measuring Formula: add to
the breakout point the distance from the highest peak to the low of the
reaction. Also called an “M” Formation.
DOUBLE TRENDLINE — When two relatively close Parallel Trendlines are
needed to define the true trend pattern. (See also Trendline.)
DOW–JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE — Developed by Charles Dow in
1885 to study market trends. Originally composed of 14 companies (12
railroads and 2 industrials), the rails, by 1897, were separated into their own
Average, and 12 industrial companies of the day were selected for the Industrial Average. The number was increased to 20 in 1916, and to 30 in 1928.
The stocks included in this Average have been changed from time to time
to keep the list up to date, or to accommodate a merger. The only original
issue still in the Average is General Electric.
DOW–JONES TRANSPORTATION AVERAGE — Established at the turn of
the century with the new Industrial Average, it was originally called the Rail
Average and was composed of 20 railroad companies. With the advent of
the airlines industry, the Average was updated in 1970 and the name changed
to Transportation Average.

AU3772_book.fm Page 752 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

752

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

DOW–JONES UTILITY AVERAGE — In 1929, utility companies were
dropped from the Industrial Average and a new Utility Average of 20 companies was created. In 1938, the number of issues was reduced to the present 15.
DOWNTICK — A securities transaction which is at a price that is lower than
the preceding transaction.
DOWNTREND — See Descending Trendline and Trend.
DRAWDOWN or RETRACEMENT — The ebb, or loss, of a portfolio’s equity
from a relative high to a relative low. Maximum drawdown equals retracement from maximum high point to minimum low point.
END RUN — When a breakout of a Symmetrical Triangle Pattern reverses
its direction and trades back through axis Support (if an upside breakout)
or Resistance (if a downside breakout), it is termed an end run around the
line, or end run for short. The term is sometimes used to denote breakout
failure in general.
EQUILIBRIUM MARKET — A price area that represents a balance between
demand and supply.
EX-DIVIDEND — The day when the dividend is subtracted from the price
of the stock.
EX-DIVIDEND GAP — The gap in price caused when the price of a stock
is adjusted downward after the dividend payment is deducted.
EXERCISE — The means by which the holder of an option purchases or sells
shares of the underlying security.
EXHAUSTION GAP — Relatively wide gap in the price of a stock or commodity which occurs near the end of a strong directional move in the price.
These gaps are quickly closed, most often within 2 to 5 days, which helps
to distinguish them from Runaway Gaps, which are not usually covered for
a considerable length of time. An Exhaustion Gap cannot be read as a Major
Reversal, or even necessarily a Reversal. It signals a halt in the prevailing
trend, which is ordinarily followed by some sort of area pattern development.
EXPIRATION — The last day on which an option can be exercised.
EXPONENTIAL SMOOTHING — A mathematical method of forecasting
which assumes future price action may be forecast by using a weighted
average of past periods; a mathematical series in which greater weight is
given to more recent price action. A method of trend identification.
FALLING WEDGE — An Area Pattern with two downward slanting, converging trendlines. Normally, it takes more than 3 weeks to complete, and
volume will diminish as prices move toward the apex of the pattern. The
anticipated direction of the breakout in a Falling Wedge is up. Minimum
Measuring Formula: a retracement of all the ground lost within the Wedge.
(See also Wedge.)

AU3772_book.fm Page 753 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary

753

FALSE BREAKOUT or FALSE SIGNAL— A breakout which is confirmed
but which quickly reverses and eventually leads the stock or commodity to
a breakout in the opposite direction. Indistinguishable from premature breakout or genuine breakout when it occurs.
FAN LINES — A set of three secondary trendlines drawn from the same
starting high or low, which spread out in a Fan shape. In a Primary Uptrend,
the fan would be along the tops of the Secondary (Intermediate) Reaction.
In a Primary Downtrend, the fan would be along the bottoms of the Secondary (Intermediate) Rally. When the third Fan Line is broken, it signals the
resumption of the Primary Trend.
50-DAY MOVING AVERAGE LINE — Is determined by taking the closing
price over the past 50 trading days and dividing by 50. EN: Simple moving
average for n days consists of summing prices for n days and dividing by n. On
n+1 drop the first day and add the new day to the formula, etc.
FIVE-POINT REVERSAL — See Broadening Pattern.
FLAG — A Continuation Pattern. A flag is a period of congestion, less than
4 weeks in duration, which forms after a sharp, near vertical, change in price.
The upper and lower boundary lines of the pattern are parallel, though both
may slant up, down, or sideways. In an uptrend, the pattern resembles a
Flag flying from a mast, hence the name. Flags are also called Measuring or
HalfMast Patterns because they tend to form at the midpoint of the rally or
reaction. Volume tends to diminish during the formation, and increase on
the breakout. Minimum Measuring Formula: add the distance from the
breakout point, which started the preceding “Mast” rally or reaction, to the
breakout point of the Flag.
FLOATING SUPPLY — The number of shares available for trading at any
given time. Generally, the outstanding number of shares less shares closely
held and likely to be unavailable to the public. Shares of a company held by
its employee pension fund, for example, would not generally enter the
trading stream and could be subtracted from the outstanding shares.
FORMATION — See Area Pattern.
FRONT-MONTH — The first expiration month in a series of months.
FUNDAMENTALS — Information on a stock pertaining to the business of
the company and how it relates to earnings and dividends. In a commodity,
it would be information on any factor which would affect supply or demand.
EN: Also, earnings, profits, profit margins, cash flow, sales, and other statistics
sometimes used to obfuscate the value of the issue.
GAP — A hole in the price range which occurs when either (1) the lowest
price at which a stock or commodity is traded during any time period is
higher than the highest price at which it was traded on the preceding time
period, or (2) the highest price of one time period is lower than the lowest

AU3772_book.fm Page 754 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

754

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

price of the preceding time period. When the ranges of the two time periods
are plotted, they will not overlap or touch the same horizontal level on the
chart — there will be a price gap between them. (See also Common or Area
Gap, Ex-Dividend Gap, Breakaway Gap, Runaway Gap, Exhaustion Gap,
and Island Reversal.)
GRAPH — See Chart.
HALF-MAST: — See Flag. Edwards said “The flag flies at half-mast” referring to the tendency of prices to consolidate half way through a surging
vertical run.
HEAD-AND-SHOULDERS PATTERN — Although occasionally an Inverted
Head-and-Shoulders Pattern (called a Consolidation Head-and-Shoulders)
will form, which is a Continuation Pattern, in its normal form, this pattern
is one of the more common and more reliable of the Major Reversal Patterns.
It consists of the following four elements (a Head-and-Shoulders Top will
be described for illustration): (1) a rally which ends a more or less extensive
advance on heavy volume, and which is then followed by a Minor Reaction
on less volume; this is the left shoulder; (2) another high-volume advance
which exceeds the high of the left shoulder, followed by another low-volume
reaction which takes prices down to near the bottom of the preceding reaction, and below the top of the left shoulder high; this is the head; (3) a third
rally, but on decidedly less volume than accompanied either of the first two
advances, and which fails to exceed the high established on the head; this
is the right shoulder; and (4) a decline through a line drawn across the
proceeding two reaction lows (the neckline), and a close below that line
equivalent to 3% of the stock’s market price. This is the confirmation of the
breakout. A Head-and-Shoulders Bottom, or any other combination
Headand-Shoulders Pattern, contains the same four elements. The main
difference between a Top Formation and a Bottom Formation is in the volume
patterns. The breakout in a Top can be on low volume. The breakout in a
Bottom must show a “conspicuous burst of activity.” Minimum Measuring
Formula: add the distance between the head and neckline to the breakout
point.
HEAD-AND-SHOULDERS BOTTOM — Area Pattern which reverses a
decline. (See also Head-and-Shoulders Pattern.) EN: An upside down name for
an upside down pattern. See Kilroy Bottom.
HEAD-AND-SHOULDERS CONSOLIDATION — Area Pattern which continues the previous trend. (See also Head-and-Shoulders Pattern.)
HEAD-AND-SHOULDERS TOP — Area Pattern which reverses an advance.
(See also Head-and-Shoulders Pattern.)
HEAVY VOLUME — The expression “heavy volume,” as used by Edwards
and Magee, means heavy only with respect to the recent volume of sales in
the stock you are watching.
