
The Signs of the Crosses: Divine Revelations about Currency Strength
The cross currency pairs, or crosses, are pairs of major currencies that don't include the USD. By
removing the USD's direct influence, the cross currencies reveal much about other currencies'
strength. Though most aren't as liquid as the majors, as Figure 2.5 shows, the most popular Euro
crosses are equally liquid. For example, below are more widely traded that some of the majors:
EUR/JPY
EUR/GBP
EUR/CHF
FIGURE 2.5 Currencies Traded Most Actively

Figure 2.5 shows a rough breakdown of forex trading volume by currency pair.

Revealed Truth from the Crosses: True Strength or Weakness of a
Currency
Studying the cross currency pairs of a given currency can provide insights about its real strength or
weakness. Because any given currency's most widely traded pair is usually the one including the
USD, the relative strength of the USD can obscure a currency's true health. Indeed, when trading the
major currencies, the basic choice is whether to be bullish or bearish on the USD, and then just
decide which other currency to best trade against it. Because the crosses don't directly involve the
USD, they:
Allow trades that are purer plays on a given currency with less interference from movements in
the USD.
Serve as a barometer for the true strength of a currency.

Purer Plays on Currency Strength
For example, if great news comes out that is bullish for the GBP, but the USD is strong that day, the
GBPUSD might not move much. Buying (going long) the GBPJPY or GBPNZD could be a more
profitable way to play GBP strength. The Internet is a good source for more information on currency
crosses. Also, see the article titled, “Make the Currency Cross Your Boss: from forex analyst Boris
Schlossberg at Investopedia.com.

Using EUR and USD Crosses to Better Assess EUR and USD Strength

Throughout much of the European Union (EU) debt crisis, the EUR managed to hold its value even
though its underlying fundamentals were terrible given the de facto insolvency of a number of the
Euro-zone (EZ) governments and many of the largest EZ banks that held the related sovereign bonds.
The entire existence of the Euro-zone, and thus the Euro, was in question, but that day of reckoning
wasn't believed to be a near-term threat during most of 2010–2011. However, for various reasons and
for much of this period, the USD's short-term prospects were actually even less appealing.
Because the EURUSD pair alone accounts for approximately 28 percent percent of all forex trade, a
weaker USD automatically drives up demand for the EUR and vice versa. That's because for every
three to four Euros bought, a USD is sold and vice versa. Thus, the EUR and USD push each other in
opposite directions like children on a seesaw. Its relative strength versus the USD helped it appear
steady.
However, if you looked at certain EUR crosses like the EURJPY or EURCHF, you'd have seen that:
In times of optimism, the EUR didn't rally as much as other risk currencies versus safer
currencies like the JPY and CHF.
In times of pessimism, the EUR was weaker versus these safe havens than other riskier
currencies that should have done worse.
Thus, the Euro's relative strength versus the USD made it look stronger than it actually was.
Similarly, when Greece appeared at risk of a default, which could have set off a chain reaction of
additional sovereign and bank insolvencies, the EUR tanked and the USD looked great versus the
EUR even though the Dollar's underlying fundamentals hadn't improved. However, those watching the
more trusted safe haven currencies like the JPY and CHF could see these gaining against the USD and
thus knew the USD's safe haven strength was only relative to the EUR.
In Chapter 9, we'll discuss how intermarket analysis, which is the observing and comparing of
different asset markets to currency pairs, can provide additional insights into how these pairs might
behave in the future.

Walk on the Wild Side: The Exotics
The exotic currency pairs are those comprised of at least one emerging market currency. Though these
can be profitable given the growth in some emerging market economies, they are less liquid and
should be avoided until one is profitable with the more liquid pairs and then is profitable with these
on practice accounts. Examples of the exotics include:
USDBRL: U.S Dollar versus the Brazilian Real
USD/ZAR: U.S. Dollar versus the South African Rand
USD/MXN: U.S. Dollar versus the Mexican Peso
USD/SGD: U.S. Dollar versus the Singapore Dollar
USD/TRY: U.S. Dollar versus the Turkish Lira
EUR/TRY: Euro versus the Turkish Lira

PIPS: THE UNIVERSAL CURRENCY OF CURRENCIES
Because the price in which currency pairs are denominated varies with the counter currency, traders

measure price changes in pips, which are universally recognized as the smallest unit of price
movement measured, roughly like a tick for stock prices or basis point for bonds. The value of a pip
varies depending on the currency pair and quantity traded
For currency pairs in which the JPY is the counter currency, like the USDJPY, EURJPY, or
GBPJPY, a pip is 0.01 yen. For all other pairs, a pip is 0.0001 of the counter currency.
You need to know how much each pip is worth so you know how many pips you can afford to lose
and can manage your risk and money accordingly. Serious traders generally don't risk more than 1 to 3
percent of their accounts on any one position, so they need to know how many pips equal that much
cash. Once they know this, they can set their stop loss orders (discussed below) on their trading
systems to automatically close their trades after losing that number of pips.
As we'll learn later, one of the primary criteria for choosing a trade is whether the likely maximum
move against your position, per your technical analysis, is one you can afford, meaning one that
doesn't exceed 1 to 3 percent of your account size. If it does, don't take the trade because it's too risky.

Calculating Pip Values
In practice, any decent trading platform will have a pip calculator to perform this function quickly and
easily. Still, it's helpful to know how to calculate a pip if you need to monitor a position when you are
away from your computer. See Appendix B for more information.

Three Ways to Limit Risk: Lot Size Usually the Easiest
There are three ways you can keep your maximum loss risked per trade to between 1 and 3 percent of
your total capital.
1. Increase the size of your account, so a given loss represents a smaller percent of your capital.
This is usually a function of your wealth, which is often beyond your control in the short-term.
2. Decrease the leverage used, so a given percentage move in price against you represents a
smaller loss for a given position size. This may or may not be within your control, depending on
your broker.
3. Limit your position size.
Position size is usually the easiest one of these to control and, at times, is the only one. So, let's
look at that first.

Lot Sizes Matter
Obsessive focus on risk and money management (RAMM), meaning keeping your risk per trade as
low as possible or avoiding relatively large losses, however you phrase it, is what separates the elite
long-term survivors from the majority that eventually drop out. The size of your positions is a key part
of risk management because the smaller the lots you trade, all else being equal (leverage, number of
lots, and more), the less each pip is worth. So, smaller lots mean that for each percentage move in
price, there's less profit, but more importantly, less loss. It's the losses that can wipe out your capital,
your confidence, and thus your trading career.
For a number of reasons based in the history of forex trading, currency pairs usually trade in
standard size lots of 100,000 units of the base currency. To make trading affordable to the individual

trader of average means, online retail brokers invented mini accounts with lot sizes of 10,000, and
micro accounts with lot sizes of only 1,000 units.
We don't just like these newfangled innovations. We love them.
Because smaller lot sizes reduce your risk per lot traded, they give you a number of important
advantages over standard lots.
They provide greater flexibility to adjust your position sizes with the circumstances:
When you're hot, you can increase position size by adding lots.
While you're learning, making the transition from practice to real accounts, or in a losing streak,
small lots help you keep losses down until your trading improves and is consistently profitable
most weeks or months.
When you want to enter or exit a position in stages with only part of your planned position
(another risk management technique), smaller lots make that easier to do while keeping the total
cash risked within 1 to 3 percent of your capital.
In sum, the smaller the lot size, the lower the risk because we reduce the following:
The value of each pip.
The cost of each 1 percent move against you.
The potential loss if your stop loss order is hit (see Order Types further on). We measure risk not
by the total position size but by the potential loss if your stop order is hit.
Yes, smaller position sizes mean lower profits when prices move in your favor, with lower interest
income from carry trades (discussed in Chapter 1). However the priority is to keep losses low.
Always. As we demonstrate in Chapter 5 and Appendix E, a given percent loss requires a larger
percent gain to recover your loss because you're trading from a reduced capital base.
Once you find the right combination of trading styles, instruments, and analysis that suits you, you
will have time to increase lot size, risk, and profit potential. Until you're consistently profitable over
many months (regardless of your percentage of winning trades), the priority is to keep risk and losses
on any given trade to within 1– to 3 percent of your account size. Profiting with only a minority of
winning trades is okay, because many profitable traders succeed that way, as we'll discuss later on.

LEVERAGE AND MARGIN: THEIR RELATIONSHIP
AND IMPACT ON RISK
In finance, leverage refers to the percentage of your total position that is from borrowed funds used to
magnify your returns. Margin is the actual cash portion of your position; it's a security deposit set
aside from your total account as a provision against loss and the need to repay the borrowed funds.
Leverage and margin are just two ways of viewing the amount of borrowed funds used to magnify
your gains or losses, your opportunities and risks.
For example, 100:1 leverage means you set aside a margin deposit equal to 1 percent, $100, of your
total $10,000 position. That $100 allows you to control $10,000 of the EURUSD or $10,000 worth of
Euros. Thus, a 1 percent price movement means a $100 or 100 percent gain or loss. Using a 50:1
leverage implies a 2 percent margin deposit of $100 that is set aside from your account to control
$5,000 of the EURUSD or $5,000 worth of Euros. A 1 percent price movement would bring a 50

percent gain or loss.

Leverage: Greater Risk and Reward
Leverage is a dual-edged sword that can work for or against you. The easy availability of leverage in
forex is what attracts the risk seekers and repels the risk-averse investor. Leverage is neither
inherently good nor bad by itself. Like a car or firearm, it is easy to learn how to use it safely and
effectively if you have enough training, self-control, and the common sense needed to wield it without
hurting yourself. Those lacking any of the above should avoid it until successful using practice
accounts; otherwise, the results will be gruesome. Even after that, when first trading real money, opt
for the lowest leverage settings possible.
Understanding and managing leverage is one of the primary characteristics that separate the winners
or future winners from the eternal losers and suckers on whom the others can feed. Therefore, we will
invest a lot of time in this book covering RAMM.

Permitted Leverage Varies with Place and Time
As of October 18, 2010, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) set the legal limit for
U.S. forex brokers at 50:1 (2 percent margin) for the major currency pairs, and 20:1 (5 percent
margin) for the less liquid and more volatile exotic pairs. The CFTC's definition of major currency
pairs is much broader than the generally accepted definition noted earlier; therefore, it includes a
wider variety of currency pairs than those mentioned above. See Appendix D for full details.
Forex brokers outside of the United States commonly offer 100:1 or 200:1 leverage, sometimes as
much as 400:1 or more, though other countries like Japan are moving toward reduced legal leverage
limits.
Some brokers like etoro.com allow you to adjust how much leverage you use. Some don't. Consider
avoiding those brokers when starting to trade live money.

How Margin, Lot Size, and Leverage Interact
Again, the margin is the minimum percentage of the cash value of your position that your broker
requires you to set aside for each trade. Margin and leverage are two different aspects of the same
feature, reflected in how little cash you need to control a standard, mini, or microsized lot.
For example, using 100:1 leverage or a 1 percent margin requirement means the same thing. You
need $100 to control $10,000 worth of a given currency pair, which is one mini lot. Every 1 percent
price move would bring a $100 gain or loss. You'd need $500 to control five lots, and each 1 percent
price move would bring a $500 gain or loss.
The higher the leverage or lower the margin, the greater the percent profit or loss for every 1
percent price movement and the greater the reward and risk.
Your margin deposit is not your maximum possible loss. Instead, it's the minimum amount you need
to open a position and keep it open. If the price moves against you, your broker will automatically set
aside more cash and increase your margin deposit to cover that drawdown to in your account
Your maximum loss on a trade depends on where you have set your stop loss order (described in
the section on order types later), the size of your position, and whether you had enough cash in your

account to cover that loss and any other you may be taking. If you didn't, your broker can terminate
some or all of your positions to keep your account from going below zero, via what's called a margin
call.

The Importance of Adequate Capital
One of the most common beginner mistakes is trading without enough cash to absorb normal
drawdowns.
It's possible to forecast the trend but still have a losing trade because asset prices typically gyrate
within a rising, falling, or horizontal channel. Even if you're right about price direction, you will need
to have enough cash on hand to absorb temporary drawdowns without having your account wiped out
and your position automatically closed by your broker via a margin call before price starts to move in
your favor.
For example, let's say you open a one mini lot (10,000 units of base currency) of the EURUSD at
100:1, which requires $100, and assume this is your only open position. The pair moves 2 percent
against you, causing a paper loss of $200. If you have that cash available, your broker will commit or
allocate another $200 to that position and leave the position open. If not, your brokers will issue a
margin call and close the position (to protect themselves and you from incurring losses beyond what
you've got in your account). Typically, they'll send you a warning so that you've time to add funds if
you want to keep the position open.
In sum, to avoid margin calls that can turn winning trades into losers, it's critical that you understand
how much cash you need to keep in your account. That means you must be clear about:
How much each 1 percent move costs you, based on your lot size and leverage.
How much loss you can typically expect to absorb from random price movements and the
maximum loss you'll allow via your stop loss (much more on this in Chapter 5).
How many positions you can, therefore, afford to have open at any one time.
The key point to understand is that if you don't keep enough cash in your account to cover a normal
price move against you, you risk having your position automatically closed by your broker before a
correct trend forecast can play out in your favor.
Again, beware—your margin deposit is not your maximum possible loss. Instead, it's a minimum
deposit to keep the position open.

Insure You Have Adequate Capital
The best way to avoid a margin call is to never risk more than 1 to 3 percent of your account in any
one trade before your stop loss order (see the following section) is hit. That way your account should
never take a big surprise loss, and you'll have the needed cash on hand. Unless you can absorb the
temporary losses from normal price fluctuations, you are virtually assured of a losing trade even you
were ultimately right about the trade.

Margin Calls: Your Account's Circuit Breaker
A circuit breaker is a safety device in your home's electrical system. When too much current is
flowing for the wires to bear without melting down or catching fire, it cuts off the flow of electricity.

Similarly, margin calls are a safety device for your account, preventing you from going into debt when
losses threaten to become greater than the cash in your account. Margin calls automatically close out
your position before you find yourself owing the broker money, possibly a lot of money in fast moving
markets.
When your electrical or account circuit breakers are tripped, it can be frustrating. You're stuck in
the dark, or you're stuck with a loss as you watch the price turn in your favor and become what would
have been winning trade if you'd had the cash needed to avoid the margin call.
However, they both serve as valuable protection against being fatally burned.
Margin calls serve another valuable function. Like tripped circuit breakers, they tell you something
needs to be fixed in your trade planning and risk and money management. That's a critical red flag
because good trade planning is another essential characteristic that separates the winners from the
losers.
Fortunately, trade planning is a key component of RAMM and is not rocket science, so even
beginners can know how to keep losses affordable so they live to fight another day with funds and
confidence intact.
Your first goal is to survive long enough to learn to be profitable. That means learning enough of the
four key skills that make a successful trader or investor in the forex market or any other market. First,
you'll need some background information on order types so that you can understand those skills and
their illustrations.

Order Types
Forex brokers offer the same kinds of entry and exit orders used in other major financial markets. So,
if you already trade in some kind of financial market then you'll be familiar with these and can skip
this section.
In this section, we'll give just enough information on these as needed to:
Reinforce what we've covered thus far in related topics.
Give you enough background on order types to understand what immediately follows.
In later chapters on risk, money management, and trade planning, we'll fill in the details about how
to use the different order types to your best advantage.

Entry Orders: Opening a Position
Unlike market orders (orders to buy or sell immediately at the current price), entry orders (or entry
limit orders) are pending orders entered in advance to enter or open a new position at some future
price that the trader deems more favorable than the current price. These will execute automatically
and don't require any action from the trader at that time. This ability to choose entry points in advance
is very valuable for two reasons:
1. You can enter these orders at your convenience, whenever you have time. That's important for
those with limited free time to trade, yet want to enter at a certain price level or better. This is an
essential feature even for full-time traders (never mind those with jobs and lives beyond trading)
because they can't be available 24 hours a day.
2. It removes emotion from entry decisions, and that, friends, is critical. Like drinking and

driving, trading and emotion don't mix. When they do, you risk becoming road kill. Few can
avoid the pull of fear or greed when trading in real time with money at stake. You want to do your
analysis and objectively choose entry points isolated from the pull of fear or greed that might
make one hesitate to seize an opportunity. You don't want to jump in when it's too late or too
early.
For example, I can't remember how many times I've left open orders to enter at some deep support
level, forgotten about them, then felt a wave of fear when notified weeks later that the order was
filled. There were so many reasons that price could fall further, and things seemed so bleak (which
was why, of course, long-term deep support was hit). Usually, the greater my fear when I find I've
“assumed the position,” the higher the profit because I bought near the point at which the bad news
had drained away the sellers and few were buying. I probably would not have entered the trade if I
were making the decision in real time instead of well in advance. But that was the time to buy.
These orders are supposed to execute when a certain price level is hit or breached. Usually, the
intention is to enter a position at a specific price. However, under certain conditions, prices can jump
or “gap” below (when opening long positions) or above (when opening short positions) the intended
price, so the order takes effect at better price than that which was entered.

Order Types for Buying or Going Long a Currency Pair
Buy Limit is an entry order to buy a currency pair at a future price below the current price, typically
used by bargain hunters seeking to buy on a pullback from the current price at what they believe is at
or near a level that has served as a floor or support in their chosen time frame, be it an hour, day,
week, month, year, or longer. They are seeking to buy low and sell high. They're comparable to value
buyers in equities markets.
Buy Stop is an entry order to buy at a future price above the current price, typically used by traders
who believe that once price breaks above a certain price level that has served as a ceiling or
resistance level in the past, the price should continue a sustained move higher. Their goal is to buy as
the price begins to make a sustained move higher. They're comparable to momentum buyers.

Order Types for Selling or Going Short a Currency Pair
In Chapter 2, we said that because currencies trade in pairs, you're always long one currency and
short another. When you sell or go short a currency pair, you're buying the counter currency (the one
on the right) and paying for it by selling the base currency. No restrictions exist against shorting a pair
because selling and buying a currency pair are essentially the same type of transaction. All forex
trades involve buying one half of the pair and selling the other to pay for it, regardless the currency in
which your accounted is denominated.
Sell Limit is an entry order to sell the pair short at a future price above the current price, typically
used by bargain hunters seeking to go short a currency pair at what they believe is at or near a price
level that has served as a ceiling or resistance in their chosen time frame. They believe that around
this price level the currency pair will start to drop. They are hoping to sell high and buy low. As we
learned earlier, really what they're doing is trying to buy the counter currency at a lower price
relative to the base currency, and then sell it for a profit at a higher price relative to the base
currency.
