
P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:39

20

Printer: Yet to come

P1: JYS
c02
JWBK299-Lein

October 3, 2008

18:17

Printer: Yet to come

CHAPTER 2

Historical Events
in the
FX Market

efore diving into the inner workings of currency trading, it is important for every trader to understand a few of the key milestones in the
foreign exchange market, since even to this day they still represent
events that are referenced repeatedly by professional forex traders.

B

BRETTON WOODS: ANOINTING
THE DOLLAR AS THE WORLD
CURRENCY (1944)
In July 1944, representatives of 44 nations met in Bretton Woods, New
Hampshire, to create a new institutional arrangement for governing the international economy in the years after World War II. After the war, most
agreed that international economic instability was one of the principal
causes of the war, and that such instability needed to be prevented in
the future. The agreement, which was developed by renowned economists
John Maynard Keynes and Harry Dexter White, was initially proposed to
Great Britain as a part of the Lend-Lease Act—an American act designed to
assist Great Britain in postwar redevelopment efforts. After various negotiations, the final form of the Bretton Woods Agreement consisted of several
key points:
1. The formation of key international authorities designed to promote fair

trade and international economic harmony.
21

P1: JYS
c02
JWBK299-Lein

22

October 3, 2008

18:17

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

2. The fixing of exchange rates among currencies.
3. The convertibility between gold and the U.S. dollar, thus empowering

the U.S. dollar as the reserve currency of choice for the world.
Of the three aforementioned parameters, only the first point is still in
existence today. The organizations formed as a direct result of Bretton
Woods include the International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, and
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which are still in existence today and play a crucial role in the development and regulation of
international economies. The IMF, for instance, initially enforced the price
of $35 per ounce of gold that was to be fixed under the Bretton Woods
system, as well as the fixing of exchange rates that occurred while Bretton
Woods was in operation (and the financing required to ensure that fixed exchange rates would not create fundamental distortions in the international
economy).
Since the demise of Bretton Woods, the IMF has worked closely with
another progeny of Bretton Woods: the World Bank. Together, the two institutions now regularly lend funds to developing nations, thus assisting
them in the development of a public infrastructure capable of supporting
a sound mercantile economy that can contribute in an international arena.
And, in order to ensure that these nations can actually enjoy equal and legitimate access to trade with their industrialized counterparts, the World
Bank and IMF must work closely with GATT. While GATT was initially
meant to be a temporary organization, it now operates to encourage the
dismantling of trade barriers—namely tariffs and quotas.
The Bretton Woods Agreement was in operation from 1944 to 1971,
when it was replaced with the Smithsonian Agreement, an international
contract of sorts pioneered by U.S. President Richard Nixon out of the necessity to accommodate for Bretton Woods’ shortcomings. Unfortunately,
the Smithsonian Agreement possessed the same critical weakness: while
it did not include gold/U.S. dollar convertibility, it did maintain fixed exchange rates—a facet that did not accommodate the ongoing U.S. trade
deficit and the international need for a weaker U.S. dollar. As a result, the
Smithsonian Agreement was short-lived.
Ultimately, the exchange rates of the world evolved into a free market, whereby supply and demand were the sole criteria that determined
the value of a currency. While this did and still does result in a number of
currency crises and greater volatility between currencies, it also allowed
the market to become self-regulating, and thus the market could dictate
the appropriate value of a currency without any hindrances.
As for Bretton Woods, perhaps its most memorable contribution to
the international economic arena was its role in changing the perception

P1: JYS
c02
JWBK299-Lein

October 3, 2008

18:17

Printer: Yet to come

Historical Events in the FX Market

23

regarding the U.S. dollar. While the British pound is still substantially
stronger, and while the euro is a revolutionary currency blazing new frontiers in both social behavior and international trade, the U.S. dollar remains
the world’s reserve currency of choice for the time being. This is undeniably due largely in part to the Bretton Woods Agreement: by establishing
dollar/gold convertibility, the dollar’s role as the world’s most accessible
and reliable currency was firmly cemented. And thus, while Bretton Woods
may be a doctrine of yesteryear, its impact on the U.S. dollar and international economics still resonates today.

END OF BRETTON WOODS: FREE
MARKET CAPITALISM IS BORN (1971)
On August 15, 1971, it became official: the Bretton Woods system, a system
used to fix the value of a currency to the value of gold, was abandoned
once and for all. While it had been exorcised before, only to subsequently
emerge in a new form, this final eradication of the Bretton Woods system
was truly its last stand: no longer would currencies be fixed in value to
gold, allowed to fluctuate only in a 1 percent range, but instead their fair
valuation could be determined by free market behavior such as trade flows
and foreign direct investment.
While U.S. President Nixon was confident that the end of the Bretton
Woods system would bring about better times for the international economy, he was not a believer that the free market could dictate a currency’s
true valuation in a fair and catastrophe-free manner. Nixon, as well as most
economists, reasoned that an entirely unstructured foreign exchange market would result in competing devaluations, which in turn would lead to the
breakdown of international trade and investment. The end result, Nixon
and his board of economic advisers reasoned, would be global depression.
Accordingly, a few months later, the Smithsonian Agreement was introduced. Hailed by President Nixon as the “greatest monetary agreement
in the history of the world,” the Smithsonian Agreement strived to maintain fixed exchange rates, but to do so without the backing of gold. Its key
difference from the Bretton Woods system was that the value of the dollar
could float in a range of 2.25 percent, as opposed to just 1 percent under
Bretton Woods.
Ultimately, the Smithsonian Agreement proved to be unfeasible as
well. Without exchange rates fixed to gold, the free market gold price shot
up to $215 per ounce. Moreover, the U.S. trade deficit continued to grow,
and from a fundamental standpoint, the U.S. dollar needed to be devalued beyond the 2.25 percent parameters established by the Smithsonian

P1: JYS
c02
JWBK299-Lein

24

October 3, 2008

18:17

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

Agreement. In light of these problems, the foreign exchange markets were
forced to close in February 1972.
The forex markets reopened in March 1973, and this time they were
not bound by a Smithsonian Agreement: the value of the U.S. dollar was
to be determined entirely by the market, as its value was not fixed to any
commodity, nor was its exchange rate fluctuation confined to certain parameters. While this did provide the U.S. dollar, and other currencies by
default, the agility required to adapt to a new and rapidly evolving international trading environment, it also set the stage for unprecedented inflation.
The end of Bretton Woods and the Smithsonian Agreement, as well as conflicts in the Middle East resulting in substantially higher oil prices, helped
to create stagflation—the synthesis of unemployment and inflation—in the
U.S. economy. It would not be until later in the decade, when Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker initiated new economic policies and President Ronald Reagan introduced a new fiscal agenda, that the U.S. dollar
would return to normal valuations. And by then, the foreign exchange
markets had thoroughly developed, and were now capable of serving a multitude of purposes: in addition to employing a laissez-faire style of regulation for international trade, they also were beginning to attract speculators
seeking to participate in a market with unrivaled liquidity and continued
growth. Ultimately, the death of Bretton Woods in 1971 marked the beginning of a new economic era, one that liberated international trading while
also proliferating speculative opportunities.

PLAZA ACCORD—DEVALUATION OF U.S.
DOLLAR (1985)
After the demise of all the various exchange rate regulatory mechanisms
that characterized the twentieth century—the gold standard, the Bretton
Woods standard, and the Smithsonian Agreement—the currency market
was left with virtually no regulation other than the mythical “invisible
hand” of free market capitalism, one that supposedly strived to create
economic balance through supply and demand. Unfortunately, due to
a number of unforeseen economic events—such as the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) oil crises, stagflation throughout the 1970s, and drastic changes in the U.S. Federal Reserve’s fiscal
policy—supply and demand, in and of themselves, became insufficient
means by which the currency markets could be regulated. A system of sorts
was needed, but not one that was inflexible. Fixation of currency values to
a commodity, such as gold, proved to be too rigid for economic development, as was also the notion of fixing maximum exchange rate fluctuations.

P1: JYS
c02
JWBK299-Lein

October 3, 2008

Historical Events in the FX Market

18:17

Printer: Yet to come

25

The balance between structure and rigidity was one that had plagued the
currency markets throughout the twentieth century, and while advancements had been made, a definitive solution was still greatly needed.
And hence in 1985, the respective ministers of finance and central bank
governors of the world’s leading economies—France, Germany, Japan, the
United Kingdom, and the United States—convened in New York City with
the hopes of arranging a diplomatic agreement of sorts that would work
to optimize the economic effectiveness of the foreign exchange markets.
Meeting at the Plaza Hotel, the international leaders came to certain agreements regarding specific economies and the international economy as a
whole.
Across the world, inflation was at very low levels. In contrast to
the stagflation of the 1970s—where inflation was high and real economic
growth was low—the global economy in 1985 had done a complete 180degree turn, as inflation was now low but growth was strong.
While low inflation, even when coupled with robust economic growth,
still allowed for low interest rates—a circumstance developing countries
particularly enjoyed—there was an imminent danger of protectionist policies like tariffs entering the economy. The United States was experiencing
a large and growing current account deficit, while Japan and Germany were
facing large and growing surpluses. An imbalance so fundamental in nature
could create serious economic disequilibrium, which in turn would result
in a distortion of the foreign exchange markets and thus the international
economy.
The results of current account imbalances, and the protectionist policies that ensued, required action. Ultimately, it was believed that the rapid
acceleration in the value of the U.S. dollar, which appreciated more than
80 percent against the currencies of its major trading partners, was the primary culprit. The rising value of the U.S. dollar helped to create enormous
trade deficits. A dollar with a lower valuation, on the other hand, would be
more conducive to stabilizing the international economy, as it would naturally bring about a greater balance between the exporting and importing
capabilities of all countries.
At the meeting in the Plaza Hotel, the United States persuaded the
other attendees to coordinate a multilateral intervention, and on September 22, 1985, the Plaza Accord was implemented. This agreement was designed to allow for a controlled decline of the dollar and the appreciation
of the main antidollar currencies. Each country agreed to changes to its
economic policies and to intervene in currency markets as necessary to
get the dollar down. The United States agreed to cut its budget deficit and
to lower interest rates. France, the United Kingdom, Germany, and Japan
all agreed to raise interest rates. Germany also agreed to institute tax cuts
while Japan agreed to let the value of the yen “fully reflect the underlying

P1: JYS
c02
JWBK299-Lein

26

October 3, 2008

18:17

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

strength of the Japanese economy.” However, the problem with the actual
implementation of the Plaza Accord was that not every country adhered
to its pledges. The United States in particular did not follow through with
its initial promise to cut the budget deficit. Japan was severely hurt by the
sharp rise in the yen, as its exporters were unable to remain competitive
overseas, and it is argued that this eventually triggered a 10-year recession
in Japan. The United States, in contrast, enjoyed considerable growth and
price stability as a result of the agreement.
The effects of the multilateral intervention were seen immediately, and
within two years the dollar had fallen 46 percent and 50 percent against the
deutsche mark (DEM) and the Japanese yen (JPY), respectively. Figure 2.1
shows this depreciation of the U.S. dollar against the DEM and the JPY. The
U.S. economy became far more export-oriented as a result, while other industrial countries like Germany and Japan assumed the role of importing.
This gradually resolved the current account deficits for the time being, and
also ensured that protectionist policies were minimal and nonthreatening.
But perhaps most importantly, the Plaza Accord cemented the role of the
central banks in regulating exchange rate movement: yes, the rates would
not be fixed, and hence would be determined primarily by supply and demand; but ultimately, such an invisible hand is insufficient, and it was the

FIGURE 2.1 Plaza Accord Price Action

P1: JYS
c02
JWBK299-Lein

October 3, 2008

18:17

Printer: Yet to come

Historical Events in the FX Market

27

right and responsibility of the world’s central banks to intervene on behalf
of the international economy when necessary.

GEORGE SOROS—THE MAN WHO BROKE
THE BANK OF ENGLAND
When George Soros placed a $10 billion speculative bet against the U.K.
pound and won, he became universally known as “the man who broke the
Bank of England.” Whether you love him or hate him, Soros led the charge
in one of the most fascinating events in currency trading history.

The United Kingdom Joins the Exchange
Rate Mechanism
In 1979, a Franco-German initiative set up the European Monetary System
(EMS) in order to stabilize exchange rates, reduce inflation, and prepare
for monetary integration. The Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM), one of
the EMS’s main components, gave each participatory currency a central
exchange rate against a basket of currencies, the European Currency Unit
(ECU). Participants (initially France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, Denmark, Ireland, and Luxembourg) were then required to maintain
their exchange rates within a 2.25 percent fluctuation band above or below
each bilateral central rate. The ERM was an adjustable-peg system, and
nine realignments would occur between 1979 and 1987. While the United
Kingdom was not one of the original members, it would eventually join in
1990 at a rate of 2.95 deutsche marks to the pound and with a fluctuation
band of +/– 6 percent.
Until mid-1992, the ERM appeared to be a success, as a disciplinary effect had reduced inflation throughout Europe under the leadership of the
German Bundesbank. The stability wouldn’t last, however, as international
investors started worrying that the exchange rate values of several
currencies within the ERM were inappropriate. Following German reunification in 1989, the nation’s government spending surged, forcing the
Bundesbank to print more money. This led to higher inflation and left the
German central bank with little choice but to increase interest rates. But
the rate hike had additional repercussions—because it placed upward pressure on the German mark. This forced other central banks to raise their interest rates as well, so as to maintain the pegged currency exchange rates
(a direct application of Irving Fisher’s interest rate parity theory). Realizing that the United Kingdom’s weak economy and high unemployment rate

P1: JYS
c02
JWBK299-Lein

28

October 3, 2008

18:17

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

would not permit the British government to maintain this policy for long,
George Soros stepped into action.

Soros Bets Against Success of U.K. Involvement
in ERM
The Quantum hedge fund manager essentially wanted to bet that the pound
would depreciate because the United Kingdom would either devalue the
pound or leave the ERM. Thanks to the progressive removal of capital controls during the EMS years, international investors at the time had more
freedom than ever to take advantage of perceived disequilibriums, so Soros
established short positions in pounds and long positions in marks by borrowing pounds and investing in mark-denominated assets. He also made
great use of options and futures. In all, his positions accounted for a gargantuan $10 billion. Soros was not the only one; many other investors soon followed suit. Everyone was selling pounds, placing tremendous downward
pressure on the currency.
At first, the Bank of England tried to defend the pegged rates by buying
15 billion pounds with its large reserve assets, but its sterilized interventions (whereby the monetary base is held constant thanks to open market
interventions) were limited in their effectiveness. The pound was trading
dangerously close to the lower levels of its fixed band. On September 16,
1992, a day that would later be known as Black Wednesday, the bank announced a 2 percent rise in interest rates (from 10 percent to 12 percent)
in an attempt to boost the pound’s appeal. A few hours later, it promised to
raise rates again, to 15 percent, but international investors such as Soros
could not be swayed, knowing that huge profits were right around the
corner. Traders kept selling pounds in huge volumes, and the Bank of
England kept buying them until, finally, at 7:00 p.m. that same day, Chancellor Norman Lamont announced Britain would leave the ERM and that
rates would return to their initial level of 10 percent. The chaotic Black
Wednesday marked the beginning of a steep depreciation in the pound’s
effective value.
Whether the return to a floating currency was due to the Soros-led attack on the pound or because of simple fundamental analysis is still debated today. What is certain, however, is that the pound’s depreciation of
almost 15 percent against the deutsche mark and 25 percent against the
dollar over the next five weeks (as seen in Figure 2.2 and Figure 2.3) resulted in tremendous profits for Soros and other traders. Within a month,
the Quantum Fund cashed in on approximately $2 billion by selling the now
more expensive deutsche marks and buying back the now cheaper pounds.
“The man who broke the Bank of England” showed how central banks can
still be vulnerable to speculative attacks.

P1: JYS
c02
JWBK299-Lein

October 3, 2008

18:17

Historical Events in the FX Market

FIGURE 2.2 GBP/DEM After Soros

FIGURE 2.3 GBP/USD After Soros

Printer: Yet to come

29

P1: JYS
c02
JWBK299-Lein

30

October 3, 2008

18:17

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

ASIAN FINANCIAL CRISIS (1997–1998)
Falling like a set of dominos on July 2, 1997, the relatively nascent Asian
tiger economies created a perfect example in showing the interdependence
of global capital markets and their subsequent effects throughout international currency forums. Based on several fundamental breakdowns, the
cause of the contagion stemmed largely from shrouded lending practices,
inflated trade deficits, and immature capital markets. Added together, the
factors contributed to a “perfect storm” that left major regional markets
incapacitated and once-prized currencies devalued to significantly lower
levels. With adverse effects easily seen in the equities markets, currency
market fluctuations were negatively impacted in much the same manner
during this time period.

The Bubble
Leading up to 1997, investors had become increasingly attracted to Asian
investment prospects, focusing on real estate development and domestic
equities. As a result, foreign investment capital flowed into the region as
economic growth rates climbed on improved production in countries like
Malaysia, the Philippines, Indonesia, and South Korea. Thailand, home of
the baht, experienced a 13 percent growth rate in 1988 (falling to 6.5 percent in 1996). Additional lending support for a stronger economy came
from the enactment of a fixed currency peg to the more formidable U.S.
dollar. With a fixed valuation to the greenback, countries like Thailand
could ensure financial stability in their own markets and a constant rate
for export trading purposes with the world’s largest economy. Ultimately,
the region’s national currencies appreciated as underlying fundamentals
were justified, and speculative positions in expectation of further climbs in
price mounted.

Ballooning Current Account Deficits and
Nonperforming Loans
However, in early 1997, a shift in sentiment had begun to occur as international account deficits became increasingly difficult for respective governments to handle and lending practices were revealed to be detrimental to the economic infrastructure. In particular, economists were alerted
to the fact that Thailand’s current account deficit had ballooned in 1996
to $14.7 billion (it had been climbing since 1992). Although comparatively
smaller than the U.S. deficit, the gap represented 8 percent of the country’s gross domestic product. Shrouded lending practices also contributed
