
452

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
Vision without action is a daydream; Action without vision is a nightmare.

JAPANESE PROVERB
Spoon feeding in the long run teaches us nothing but the shape of the spoon.

E. M . FORSTER

453

PART III

HEADING BACK INTO
THE REAL WORLD
OF TRADING

454

23
The Premarket Checklist—
Creating a Game Plan for
the Next Trading Day
In a calm sea, every man is a pilot.
SPANISH PROVERB
Moh ching, moh meng (no money, no life).
IAN DUNROSS, FROM THE BOOK Noble House,
WRITTEN BY J AMES CLAVELL

Like Running a Credit Check, to Understand What the Market Is
Going to Do in the Future, It Helps to Understand Its Past
Although I base many of my daily trading decisions on specific setups, I also like to analyze how the market has recently been behaving. M y goal in doing this is to be
constantly aware of the path of least resistance, since I want to set up the bulk of my trades directly along that path. To that end, I have developed a quick daily
checklist and, for Sundays, a more detailed and thorough checklist. The purpose of this is to prepare myself mentally for the trading day ahead. There will be times
when my analysis is totally off, but I’ve found that the act of mentally reviewing potential scenarios before the opening bell prepares me for just about anything. The
market can be easy to trade when the going is smooth, but there are plenty of times when the market will throw a curve ball. In these situations, it’s the prepared
traders who consistently come out on top.
The first thing I do in this regard is to look at the markets I’m trading from a top-down approach, starting with the monthly charts and working my way down to the
60-minute charts. In this example, I analyze the S&P 500, but I do this with every market that I’m following. I like to do this with the main indicators that I like to
watch, including the squeeze, reversion bands, waves, key moving averages, and so on. For purposes of illustration, all the charts I’m looking at here have the following
indicators placed on them:
1. The 8-, 21-, and 200-period exponential moving averages (EM A). In the charts shown in the pages that follow, the 8-period EM A is the thinnest line, and the 200period EM A is the thickest line. I will also look at the 50- and 100-period EM As, but they aren’t as important to me.
2. A slow stochastic with the default TradeStation settings of 14, 3, 3.
3. A M ACD with the default TradeStation settings of 12, 26, 9.
4. A TTM squeeze indicator—this is the same indicator discussed in Chapter 11. Of course, you can also include waves, reversion bands, and other indicators on these
charts. To keep this discussion simple, I’m going to keep the charts simple.

Monthly Chart Analysis
I always like to start off with the monthly charts. Even though I’m going to be doing most of my trading in the futures market, for the stock indexes, I will look at the
monthly charts of the cash index. This is because there is much more history here to view, as the cash index has been around a lot longer than the stock index futures
contracts.
The first things I look at are the stochastic and M ACD readings. These represent “pressures” on the market. Is the pressure more to the upside (buying pressure) or
to the downside (selling pressure)? In general, I want to establish positions that are on the same side as the current dominant pressures in the market I am trading. M y
rule of thumb for this is as follows:
The stochastic is the heads-up, and the M ACD is the confirmation.
This brings me to why I place little value on whether a stochastic is overbought or oversold. According to the stochastics in Figure 23.1, the S&P was overbought
starting in the middle of 1995, and it stayed overbought until the middle of 1998—three long years. During that time this “overbought” market rallied by more than 100
percent. To me, an overbought stochastic is actually a bullish sign—if the M ACD is also in a buy. This brings me to my next guideline:
What I’m looking for is M ACD crossovers.
The stochastics are valuable in that they will turn first, and therefore they can give me a heads-up that a M ACD cross might occur. That said, I don’t act on this
information unless and until a M ACD crossover actually does occur.
At point 1 in Figure 23.1, the monthly M ACD crossed over into a sell signal in M ay 2000, about two months after the stochastics crossed into a sell. Once this
happened, the path of least resistance on the monthly S&P chart officially switched from higher to lower. This means that, for longer-term swing and position trades, I
would start spending more time focusing on short setups and generally ignore long setups. I would do this until the monthly M ACD went back into a crossover buy,
and that happened at point 2, nearly three years later. Once this occurred, I started focusing more on long swing-trading setups and generally ignored most short trading
setups. Remember, I’m talking about swing and position trades here, not day trades.

455

456

Figure 23.1
The snapshot of this chart was taken on April 5, 2005. At point 3, I can see that the stochastics are trying to roll over into a sell. What does this mean to me? It
means that, potentially, the M ACD could roll over into a sell. However, at point 4 we can see that the M ACD is still in a buy. For me, this means that, for longer-term
swing and position plays, I will still continue to focus on the long side until the monthly MACD rolls over into a sell.
The next thing I like to look at is the key moving averages. First, I will look at the 200-period EM A just to see where it is in relation to the current market prices.
This is the strongest moving average, and it represents serious support or resistance—it was enough to stop the crash of 2000, as seen at point 5. In this current
snapshot of the S&P, the 200-period EM A is way down at 849.60 and isn’t much of a factor in the current market conditions. However, the fact that the market is
trading above this level is bullish.
What is more relevant in the short term is the relationship between the 8- and 21-period EM As. The first thing I’m looking for is to see which moving average is on
top of the other. If the 8-period EM A is on top of the 21-period EM A, this shows that the path of least resistance is higher. If the 8-period EM A is trading below the
21-period EM A, this shows that the path of least resistance is lower. This crossover is a confirming indicator for the M ACD, as the M ACD will fire off faster. I like
to use these moving averages in my entries. In this regard, I will use these moving averages on the monthly charts in the same way as I described for the daily charts in
Chapter 22, where I will buy pullbacks or short rallies to the 8-period EM A. In this current chart, at point 6, I can see that the S&Ps are trading right at their 8-period
EM A. Since the 8-period EM A is trading above the 21-period EM A, this is a buy zone.
I also like to look at where the 50- and 100-period EM As are located, but I don’t place as much importance on them in terms of establishing a trade. I will use these
more as targets than as entry points.
The last thing I look at is the squeeze. M ost of the time, the squeeze is not doing anything, so I just glance at it to see if it is in the process of setting up a move.
However, when it does fire off, as it did at point 8, this takes precedence over everything else. When the squeeze is on, then I’m in this trade until the squeeze is no
longer valid. At point 7, you can see that a long squeeze occurred in early 1995. This signal fired off at the beginning stages of one of the strongest and most enduring
rallies the S&P has ever seen. To that end, I like to know when a squeeze is in play. I never fight the squeeze.
For this current chart, there isn’t a squeeze play that has fired off or is even developing. M onthly squeezes are a rare occurrence, with only two of them in the last
10 years.

Weekly Chart Analysis
Once I am done with the monthly chart, I take a quick glance at the weekly chart (see Figure 23.2). Note that here I have switched back to the ES futures contract,
because with the weekly ES chart, there is enough data to get accurate information going back a few years. All the same guidelines apply. What I’m most interested in
here is what is happening as of today.

457

458

Figure 23.2
We can see at this point that the weekly chart has been in a M ACD sell for about a month, and during this time, the S&P has fallen by about 60 points. The
stochastics at point 3 have taken it on the chin and are oversold. Remember, however, that I couldn’t care less about that. What I’m interested in is the weekly M ACD
at point 2. Is it turning higher? No, it is still in a sell. In addition, the squeeze at point 3 has three black dots. This is not a signal, but it is a heads-up that a squeeze is
in progress, and I want to pay attention to the direction in which this eventually fires off. Finally, I look at the moving averages at point 4, and I can see that the 8period EM A has crossed below the 21-period EM A, a bearish development. We are right at the 21-period EM A.
What to do here? This is what I call a mixed market. The monthly chart is bullish, and the weekly chart is bearish. In this situation, the sell signals on the weekly
chart will create buying opportunities on the monthly chart. This is an important distinction to understand. Just because the weekly chart is in a sell doesn’t mean that
the world is coming to an end. Yes, it absolutely creates shorting opportunities, but the monthly charts are still indicating a buy, and this means that the longer-term
path of least resistance is higher. I want to point this out because this type of situation typically creates many bears and many negative attitudes, since a weekly sell
signal can generate a devastating beating for bulls. But, in the bigger scope of things, I’m looking for the weekly chart to turn higher and move back in line with the
monthly chart. The best trading opportunities occur when the weekly charts line back up with the monthly charts.
For setups, the weekly chart is still in a sell, meaning that short setups are appropriate. However, before I set anything up, I would want to first look at the daily
charts to see if the pressures on this time frame are lower or higher.

Daily Chart Analysis
Although I will use the monthly and weekly charts to help me determine the path of least resistance for swing and position trades, it is the daily chart that I drill down
to in order to get my specific entry levels. Figure 23.3 shows the daily chart of the S&Ps, and now it is time for me to set up a trade. The first thing I notice is that the
stochastics at point 1 are turning higher. I then, of course, look to the M ACD at point 2 to see what it is doing, and it is also trying to turn higher, although it hasn’t
quite done it yet. At point 3, I see that the S&Ps have held a test of support at the 200-period EM A. However, at point 4, the 8-period EM A is trading below the 21period EM A, which is negative. The squeeze also doesn’t help me out because there aren’t any signals on it at this time.
Okay, so now I have a bullish monthly chart, a bearish weekly chart, and a bearish daily chart that is trying to turn bullish. Can I do anything with this? There really
isn’t a clear answer here. It’s time to keep on drilling down. Let’s visit the 60-minute chart.

459

Figure 23.3

60-Minute Chart Analysis
The 60-minute chart reveals a bullish stochastic at point 1, and when I check the M ACD at point 2, I can see that the M ACD is also pointing higher, which is bullish
(see Figure 23.4). In looking at the moving averages at point 3, I can see that the 8-period EM A is trading above the 21-period EM A, which is bullish, but the market is
below its 200-period EM A, which is bearish. Is there a trade here? Take a moment before reading on and figure out what you would do in this situation. I want you to
take a trade based on what we’ve just talked about. Would you go long or short? What’s your entry level? What’s your stop? What’s your target? Spend a few
minutes on this before moving on to the next paragraph.
Today is Tuesday, April 5, 2005. Here is what I’m going to set up for tomorrow, Wednesday, April 6, 2005. I’m going to set up a buy order at 1183.50, right above
the 8-period EM A. Since this is a 60-minute chart, I’m going to use a target of ½ of 1 percent, which is 5.9175. I will round this up to 6.00, which would make the
target 1189.50. This is right below the 200-period EM A, which is a good place for a target. If the 200-period EM A had been below my target, then I would not take
the trade. M y stop will be 2.95875 (¼ of 1 percent), which I will round up to 3.00. This makes my stop 1180.50. This is just below the 21-period EM A. If we get up
¼ of 1 percent in the play (three points to 1186.50), I will move my stop up to the 21-period EM A and trail it from there. If this looks familiar, this is the propulsion
play described in Chapter 22.
For my swing plays, I want to play them in the direction of the path of least resistance according to the M ACD. The monthly charts are higher, and the daily chart
is about to turn higher. Two of the three time frames are pointing higher. Then when I drill down to the 60-minute chart, I see one of the setups that I utilize staring me
right in the face, so I set it up. It’s as simple as that.

460

461

Figure 23.4
However, before we get too excited about a potential play, let’s double-check the path of least resistance by looking at two more charts.

Daily RSI Chart Analysis
While the previous charts give me an idea of the overall buying or selling pressure and give me an indication of key levels that I need to be watching out for during the
next trading day, there is still a piece missing. What I want to see next is whether there are any bullish or bearish divergences in the seven-period relative strength index
(RSI). These are a heads-up for a pending market reversal.
In Figure 23.5, we can see that at point 1 at the top of the chart, the S&P made a nice rally into the end of 2004. However, if we look at point 1 at the bottom of the
chart, we can see that the seven-period RSI was making lower lows, while the S&P was making higher highs. This is a massive bearish divergence; essentially, it is a
heads-up that the current rally is not going to last.
That’s great, but how does a person enter that trade? That is a great question. Think a minute before you go on to the next paragraph and decide what you would do
in this situation with the tools you’ve learned so far in this book. The market is rallying, but there is a bearish divergence. I’m looking for the market to fall—how do I
enter?
There are a couple of different ways to enter. Plays described in this book that have worked well in this situation are discussed in Chapters 14 (Scalper Buys and
Sells), 15 (Bricks), 19 (HOLP and LOHP), and 22 (Propulsion Plays). This comes back to the fundamental basis of my whole trading plan: even if I feel 100 percent
sure that the market is going to roll over, I will not establish a short position until one of my setups generates a short signal.

Figure 23.5
Now if we go to point 2 in the upper right-hand portion of the chart, we can see that prices made lower lows. Then if we look at point 2 in the lower right-hand
portion of the chart, we can see that the RSI made higher lows, creating a bullish divergence. This sets up a potential reversal in the markets, meaning that I want to

462

focus on the long side. This confirms that the play we just set up in the last section with the 60-minute charts is the right way to go.

60-Minute RSI Chart Analysis
On this 60-minute chart (see Figure 23.6), there are two bullish divergences in place within the current market action. I’ve marked one of them—can you find the other
one?
The one I’ve marked shows the RSI making higher highs, yet prices have not made higher highs. This is bullish. The RSI is essentially leading the market higher. The
second divergence takes place when the ES made lower lows on April 1, yet the RSI made higher lows. This is a bullish divergence and is also positive. After looking at
both these RSI charts, we can clearly see that the long side is the path of least resistance in the short term.

Figure 23.6
What if I’m wrong? What if news about oil hits tomorrow, driving it higher by $5 a barrel, and that kills the stock market? Then I’m stopped out. Next trade. This is
about getting the odds in your favor, not about getting guarantees.

Index Radar Screen Alert
Looking at one index in a couple of different time frames can be a handful to track. But what happens if you are looking at all these different charts and time frames for
three or four different indexes, a couple of sectors, and a handful of stocks? It can get confusing. However, knowing what’s going on across multiple trading
instruments and multiple time frames gives a trader a much better feel for the overall markets. To that end, I’ve put together the following table to help me keep it all
straight (see Figure 23.7).
This table gives me the opportunity to write down my chart interpretations in an easy-to-read, take-it-all-in-at-a-glance worksheet. With the key indexes that I’m
viewing on the far left, I can then go through the stochastics, M ACD, RSI, and the squeeze on all the different indexes in all the different time frames. For stochastics
and M ACD, I have M , W, and D as headings for the monthly chart, the weekly chart, and the daily chart. For the RSI and the squeeze I have W, D, and S as headings
for the weekly chart, the daily chart, and the sixty-minute chart. I can then go through and see at a glance that the monthly and daily M ACDs are in buys across the
board, and that the 60-minute RSIs are also in buys (as they are showing bullish divergences), as are some of the daily RSIs. For the squeezes, I have N, R, S, and B,
463

representing neutral, red dot, sell, and buy. Neutral just means that there currently isn’t a signal in place, nor is a squeeze even in a heads-up. The red dot (which is the
black dot in this book because the charts are black and white) means that a squeeze play is setting up, but it hasn’t yet fired. Whenever I see a market that is in R
mode, I start paying close attention because I want to see when it fires off. Finally, after it does fire off, if it’s a long squeeze, that is a B for buy, and if it is a short
squeeze, that is an S for sell.

Figure 23.7
This may seem like a lot of work, but it doesn’t take long to do. The monthly and weekly charts do not change very often—most of the attention is spent on the
daily and 60-minute charts. I update this table each evening after the stock markets are closed, and I post the results in my daily newsletters. One of the reasons I
started sending out newsletters in 1999 was that it forced me to keep these tables updated each and every day, no matter what else was going on in my life.
By having everything in place, I can see when one index is breaking down before all the others, as the Nasdaq did in early 2005. When one index starts to buck an
overall trend, that is a heads-up that the rest are setting up to roll over as well.

Sectors and Key Stocks Radar Screen Alert
This radar screen alert is the same as that for the indexes, except that it will have key sectors and key stocks that I’m watching (see Figure 23.8). It is set up in just the
same way and works in just the same way. When markets turn, you can see it first in the key sectors and stocks that make up the index. Also, if I’m looking for trading
ideas and I see that the semiconductors, for example, have just fired off a short squeeze, it is fairly easy to figure out where I should go looking for short plays.

464

Figure 23.8
Both these radar screens are included in the daily newsletter I write. Traders who want to prepare these themselves will benefit from the exercise. Traders who
simply don’t have time or who like to have a second opinion can get these daily readings from my research.

The Key to Reading Daily Volume
I like to watch the daily volume in the cash indexes to see how much activity there is going on behind the moves. Each day I take the volume and key it into an Excel
spreadsheet like the one shown in Figure 23.9.

Figure 23.9
What I’m looking for is the strength or lack of strength behind the move. If the markets push higher, I’ve got to see two things in order to validate the move: first, the
volume has to be greater than it was the day before, and second, the volume has to be greater than the 50-day average volume. The bigger the difference in these
numbers, the better the odds that the move is the real deal and the start of something big. Conversely, if the markets have a big day to the upside, but the volume is
lighter than that of the previous day and lighter than the 50-day average volume, then I have more trouble believing in the move. The lower the actual volume in relation
to these other numbers, the greater the chance that the move was a mere probe and is going to reverse violently at the drop of a hat.
Think of it this way—a car that is going uphill on a full tank of gas has a much better shot at making it than a car that is running on fumes. High-volume days show
the markets riding on a full tank of gas, while low-volume days show the markets riding on fumes.

The Key Price Levels to Know Each and Every Trading Day
There is a specific set of numbers that I want to be aware of every day, because these are critical in helping me to establish trades and stay on the right side of the
market (see Figure 23.10).
I like to follow most of these price levels in the S&P futures, just because it is the biggest and broadest index and tells me a lot about what is going on in the market.
However, I also like to do the same for the Dow, Nasdaq, and Russell futures. For the sake of this example, we focus mostly on the S&Ps, but we bring in the other
indexes for part of it as well.
The first thing I want to look at is today’s close in relation to the prior three days’ highs and lows. Did today’s price eclipse either of these levels, or was it
contained within these levels? If it eclipsed either of these levels, then we have a trending market. If it stayed contained within these levels, then we have a trading
range. It is very important that you always understand what type of market environment you’re currently in, and this is one of the easiest and most accurate ways to
tell. If today is Thursday and the close is 1050.50, then you just look at a daily chart and review the highs and lows for Wednesday, Tuesday, and M onday. Did
Thursday’s close make it past these levels, or was it contained within these levels?
