
22

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

on the front page of The Wall Street Journal after he lost 20 years’
worth of profits in a single bad day of writing naked puts.
There are two types of option writers. Covered writers buy a stock
and write an option against it. Naked writers write calls and puts on
stocks they don’t own, backing their writes with cash in their accounts.
Writing naked options feels like taking money out of thin air, but a violent move can put you out of business. Writing options is a serious
game, suitable only for disciplined and well-capitalized traders.
Markets are like pumps that suck money out of the pockets of the
poorly informed majority and pump it into the pockets of a savvy
minority. People who service those pumps, such as brokers, vendors,
regulators, and even janitors who sweep exchange floors, are paid
from the stream of money flowing through the markets. Since markets
take money from the majority, pay help, and give what’s left to the
savvy minority, the majority, by definition, must lose. You can be sure
that whatever the majority of traders does, believes, and says, is not
worth doing, believing, and saying. You have to stand apart from the
crowd in order to succeed. Smart traders look for situations where a
large majority does something one way, while a small, moneyed
minority goes the opposite way.
In options the majority buys calls and, to a lesser degree, puts. The
insiders almost exclusively write options. Professionals use their heads,
while amateurs are driven by greed and fear. Options take full advantage of those feelings.
Greed is the engine of option-selling propaganda. You must have
heard the slogan: “Control a large block of stock with just a few dollars!” An amateur may be bullish on a $60 stock, but doesn’t have
$6,000 to buy 100 shares. He buys some $70 calls with two months of
life left in them for $500 each. If that stock rises to 75, those options
will acquire $500 of intrinsic value, while maintaining some time value,
and a speculator can double his stake in a month! The amateur buys
calls and sits back to watch his money double.
Strange things begin to happen. Whenever the stock rises two points,
his calls go up only one, but when the stock falls or even pauses, his
calls fall briskly. Instead of seeing his money double in a hurry, the
amateur is soon staring at a 50% paper loss, while the clock starts ticking louder and louder. The expiration date is nearing, and even though
the stock is higher than it was when he bought his calls, they are now
cheaper, showing a paper loss. Should he sell and salvage some money

WHAT MARKETS TO TRADE?

23

or hold and wait for a rally? Even if he knows the right thing to do,
he’s not going to do it. His greed does him in. He hangs on until his
options expire worthless.
Another great motivator for buying options is fear, especially in
options on futures. A loser takes a few painful hits—his analysis was
wet and money management nonexistent. He sees an attractive trade
but fears losing. He hears the siren song—“unlimited gains with limited risk”—and buys options on futures. Speculators buy options like
poor people buy lottery tickets. A person who buys a lottery ticket
risks 100% of what he paid. Any situation where you risk 100% looks
like an odd case of limited risk. Limited to 100%!?! Most speculators
ignore this ominous figure.
Option buyers have a dismal track record. They may make a few
dollars on a few trades, but I’ve never seen anyone build equity buying options. The odds in this game are so bad that after a few trades
they are sure to kick in and destroy a buyer. At the same time, options
have a high entertainment value. They provide a cheap ticket to the
game, an inexpensive dream, just like a lottery ticket.
You need a minimum of one year of successful trading experience in
stocks or futures before touching options. If you are new to the markets,
do not even dream of using options in lieu of stocks. No matter how
small your account, find some stocks and learn to trade them.
WHERE DO I GO FROM HERE?

The all-time bestseller on options, and
deservedly so, is Lawrence MacMillan’s Options as a Strategic Investment. It is a veritable mini-encyclopedia that covers all aspects of
options trading, better than his other book.

C H A P T E R
T H R E E

THE FIRST STEPS

T

rading lures us with its promise of freedom. If you know how to
trade, you can live and work anywhere in the world, be independent from the routine, and not answer to anybody. Trading attracts
people of above-average intelligence who enjoy games and aren’t
afraid of risks. Before you rush into this exciting venture, keep in mind
that in addition to your enthusiasm you will need to bring a sober
understanding of the realities of trading.
Trading will stress your feelings. To survive and succeed, you will
need to develop a sound trading psychology.
Trading will challenge your mind. To gain an edge in the markets,
you will need to master good analytic methods.
Trading will demand good mathematical skills. A math illiterate who
can’t manage risks is guaranteed to bust out.
Trading psychology, technical analysis, money management—if you
learn all three, you can make it in trading. But first, let us look at the
external obstacles to your success.
The markets are set up to separate the maximum number of people from their money. Stealing is not permitted, but markets are
heavily slanted in favor of insiders and against outsiders. Let us explore
the barriers that prevent many traders from succeeding and try to
lower them.

THE EXTERNAL BARRIERS TO SUCCESS
An investor can start with practically nothing, buying a few thousand
dollars worth of shares. If he buys and holds, his commissions and
other expenses will be minor factors in his success or failure. Traders
25

26

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

have a harder task. Seemingly trivial expenses can break them, and the
smaller the account, the greater the danger. Transaction costs can raise
an impassable barrier to winning.
Transaction costs?!
Beginners hardly think of them, yet transaction costs are a leading
cause of trader mortality. Adjusting your plans to reduce those costs
gives you an advantage over the market crowd.
I have a friend whose 12-year-old daughter recently came up with a
brilliant idea for a new business, which she called The Guinea Pig
Factory. She ran off promotional flyers on her mom’s copy machine
and stuffed them into neighbors’ mailboxes. Guinea pigs, popular
among kids in her neighborhood, cost $6, but she could buy them
at the central market for only $4. The girl dreamed of profits when
her mother, who is a trader, asked how she was going to get from
the Sydney suburb where they lived to the central market and back.
Someone will give me a ride, answered the girl.
A child may get a free ride, but the market will not give it to you. If
you buy a stock at $4 and sell it at $6, you won’t make a $2 profit. A
big chunk of it will go for transaction costs. Amateurs tend to ignore
them, while professionals focus on them and do everything in their
power to reduce them—unless they’re collecting them from you, in
which case they try to blow them up. Beginners get into their Guinea
Pig Factories and cannot understand why they keep buying at 4, selling at 6, and are still losing money.
A new trader is like a little lamb walking into a dark forest. He is
likely to be killed, and his skin—his trading capital—divided three
ways, between brokers, professional traders, and service providers.
Each will try to grab a piece of that poor lamb’s skin. Don’t be that
lamb—think of transaction costs. There are three kinds of them: commissions, slippage, and expenses.

Commissions
Commissions may appear to be a minuscule expense. Most traders
neglect them, but if you add them up, you’re likely to find that your
broker ends up with much of your profit.
A brokerage firm may charge about $20 to buy or sell up to 5,000
shares. If you have a $20,000 account and buy 200 shares of a $100
stock, the commission of $20 comes to one-tenth of one percent. When

THE FIRST STEPS

27

you sell those shares and pay another commission, the cost of brokerage rises to approximately two-tenths of one percent of your equity.
Trade like that once a week, and at the end of the month your broker
will have earned one percent of your account, regardless of whether you
made money. Keep going like that for a year, and your commission cost
will rise to 12% of your equity. That’s a lot of money. Professional money
managers are happy with 25% annual returns, year after year. They could
not generate them if they had to pay 12% annually in commissions.
But wait, it gets worse.
Look at a small trader who can afford only 100 shares of a $20 stock.
His purchase price is $2,000, but he pays the same $20 commission, which
eats up a whopping 1 percent of his equity. When he closes that trade and
pays another commission, he is 2 percent behind the game. If he trades
like that once a week, by the end of the month his commissions will
come to 10% of his account, more than 100% on annualized basis. The
great George Soros averages 29% annual gain. He could have never
accomplished that if he had to jump over a 100% commission barrier.
The bigger your account, the smaller the percentage eaten by commissions and the lower your barrier to winning. Having a large account
is a great advantage, but whatever your size, do not be hyperactive.
Each trade and each seemingly cheap commission raise the barrier to
your success. Design a system that doesn’t trade very often.
I’ve met futures traders who paid $80 roundtrip commissions to fullservice brokers. That was the price of allegedly sage advice, but any disinterested professional will tell you that a futures trader who pays $80
roundtrip has no chance of winning. Why do people pay such exorbitant rates? Because the little lamb who ventures into a dark forest is so
afraid of the big bad wolf, the professional trader, that he hires himself
a protector to guide him, a full-service broker. Once you do the math,
it becomes clear that you’re better off taking your chances on the wolf
than signing up for a guaranteed skinning by your protector.
There are full-service brokers whose advice is worth the money.
They bring good tips, get good fills, and their commissions are not
exorbitant. The catch is that they only accept very large accounts that
generate a high volume of business. Bring them a million-dollar account
with a history of active trading, and you may get their attention.
If you have an account in five or six figures and trade only a couple of times a week, do not waste your time and money looking for
false security of an expensive broker. Get a cheap, reliable, no-frills

28

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

broker that you can easily reach via the Internet or on the phone—and
start looking for good trades.

Slippage
Slippage is the difference between the price at the time you placed
your order and the price at which that order got filled. You may place
an order to buy when a guinea pig is trading at $4, but your bill comes
to $4.25. How come? Then the guinea pig goes up to $6 and you place
an order to sell at the market, only to receive $5.75. Why? In our daily
lives we are used to paying posted prices. Here, at the grown-up
Guinea Pig Factory, they clip you for a quarter buying and another selling. It could get worse. Those quarters and halves can add up to a
small fortune for a moderately active trader. Who gets that money?
Slippage is one of the key sources of income for market professionals,
which is why they tend to be very hush-hush about it.
No stock, future, or option has a set price, but it does have two rapidly changing prices—a bid and an ask. A bid is what a buyer is offering to pay, whereas an ask is what a seller is asking. A professional is
happy to accommodate an eager buyer, selling to him instantly, on the
spot—at a price slightly higher than the latest trade in that market. A
greedy trader who’s afraid that the bullish train is leaving the station
overpays a pro who lets him have his stock right away. That pro offers
a similar service to sellers. If you want to sell without waiting, afraid
that prices may collapse, a professional will buy from you on the
spot—at a price slightly lower than the latest trade in that market.
Anxious sellers accept ridiculously low prices. Slippage depends on the
emotional state of market participants.
The professional who sells to buyers and buys from sellers is not a
social worker. He is running a business, not a charitable operation.
Slippage is the price he charges for rapid action. He has paid a high
price for his spot at the crossroads of buy and sell orders, buying or
leasing an exchange seat or installing expensive equipment.
Some orders are slippage-proof, while others invite slippage. The
three most popular types of orders are limit, market, and stop. A limit
order specifies the price; that is, “Buy 100 shares of Guinea Pig Factory
at $4.” If the market is quiet and you’re willing to wait, you’ll get that
price. If GPF dips below $4 by the time your order hits the market, you
may get it a little cheaper, but don’t count on it. If the market rises

THE FIRST STEPS

29

above $4, your limit order will not be filled. A limit order lets you control the price at which you buy or sell, but doesn’t guarantee you a fill.
A market order lets you buy or sell immediately, at whatever price
you can get at the moment. The execution is guaranteed, but not the
price. If you want to buy or sell right away, this very moment, you cannot expect to get the best price—you give up control and suffer slippage. Market orders placed by anxious traders are the bread and butter
of the pros.
A stop order becomes a market order when the market touches that
level. Suppose you buy 100 shares of Guinea Pig Factory at $4.25,
expect it to rise to $7, but protect your position with a stop at $3.75.
If the price slides to $3.75, your stop becomes a market order, executed
as soon as possible. You’ll get out, but expect to suffer slippage in a
fast-moving market.
You can choose what you want to control when you place an
order—the price or the time. A limit order lets you control the price,
with no assurance of a fill. When you place a market order, a fill is
assured, but not the price. A calm and patient trader prefers to use limit
orders, since those who use market orders keep losing slivers of capital in slippage.
Slippage tends to be a much bigger expense than commissions. I estimated the size of both in Trading for a Living and thought this was one
of the most explosive parts of the book, but very few noticed. People in
the grip of greed or fear want to trade at any price, rather than focus on
their long-term financial interests. So much for the efficient market theory.
There are day-trading firms promising to teach traders to take advantage of slippage by trading inside the bid-ask spreads. Their technology does not guarantee success, while commissions from active trading
negate any advantage. People pay a lot of money for Level 2 quotes,
but I haven’t noticed any great increase in performance among those
who use them.
Getting into a trade is like jumping into a fast-moving river. The
opportunity as well as the danger is in the water. You are safe standing on the bank and can control where and when to jump, but getting
out of the water can be more tricky. You may see a spot where you
want to get out—a profit target, where you can place a limit order.
You may want to let the river carry you as long as the current allows,
protecting your position with a trailing stop. That may increase your
profits, but it also will increase slippage.

30

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

Limit orders work best for entering trades. You’ll miss a trade once
in a while, but there will be many others. That river has been flowing
for hundreds of years. A serious trader uses limit orders to get in and
to take profits, and protects his positions with stops. Anything we can
do to reduce slippage goes directly to our bottom line and improves
our odds of long-term success.

Expenses
Some expenses are unavoidable, especially in the beginning—you’ll have
to buy a few books, download trading software, sign up with a data service, and so on. It is important to keep your expenses as low as possible.
Amateurs have a charming habit of paying for their trading-related
expenses, such as computers, subscriptions, and advisory services, with
credit cards, without taking money out of their trading accounts. That
protects them from seeing the true rate at which they are going downhill.
Good traders add to profitable positions and reduce the size of their
trades during losing streaks. We can apply the same sound principle
to expenditures. Losers like to throw money at problems, while winners
invest a fraction of their profits in their operations. Successful traders
treat themselves to a new computer or software package only after
they have enough profit to pay for it.
Even the best tools can blow you out of the water. At a recent seminar in Frankfurt, a trader was excited about a powerful analytic package for which he was going to sign up the following week. It cost 2,000
marks a month (almost $1,000), but it was going to give him a tremendous analytic advantage. “How much money do you have in your
trading account?” I asked. 50,000 marks. “Then you can’t afford it. This
software will cost you 24,000 marks a year, and you’ll have to generate almost 50% profit simply to pay for your signals. No matter how
good the software, at this rate you’ll lose money. Look for a cheaper
package, something that’ll cost no more than 1,000 marks per year, or
about 2% of your account.”
Institutional traders get support from their managers, peers, and staff,
but private traders tend to feel lonely and isolated. Vendors prey on them
by promising to help lead them out of the wilderness. The more overloaded you feel, the more likely you are to listen to vendors. Nine out
of ten professionals in any field, be they lawyers, auto mechanics, or
doctors, are not good enough. You don’t trust an average auto mechanic

THE FIRST STEPS

31

or a doctor, but rather ask for referrals from friends you respect. Most
private traders do not know who to ask and respond to advisors with
the loudest advertisements, who are rarely the best trading experts.
An advisor I’ve known for years was recently indicted by the Feds
for stealing hundreds of millions of dollars from Japanese clients. Prior
to that, he cultivated a reputation as one of the most prominent market experts in the United States, constantly quoted by the media. We
were introduced at a conference, where people paid thousands of dollars to listen to him. He asked me what I thought of his presentation,
and I said it sounded amazingly interesting but I could not understand
much of it. “That’s the point,” he beamed. “If my clients believe I know
something they don’t, I’ve got them for life!” I knew right away the
man was dishonest, and was surprised only by the size of his loot.
Some trading advice can be amazingly good. A few dollars will buy you
a book that holds the experience of a lifetime. A few hundred dollars will
get you a subscription to a newsletter with original and helpful advice. But
gems are few and far between, while legions of hucksters prey on insecure traders. I have two rules for filtering out the worst offenders: avoid
services you don’t understand and avoid expensive services.
If you don’t understand an advisor, stay away from him. Trading
attracts people of above-average intelligence, which probably applies
to you. If you cannot understand something after an honest effort, it’s
probably because the other guy is giving you double-talk. When it
comes to books, I avoid those written in bad English. Language is a
reflection of thought, and if a guy cannot write clearly, his thinking
probably isn’t too clear either. I also avoid books with no bibliography.
We all borrow from our predecessors, and an author who doesn’t
acknowledge his debts is either arrogant, lazy, or both. Those are terrible traits in a trader, and if he writes like that, I don’t want his advice.
And of course, I have zero respect for thieves. Book titles are not copyrighted, and in recent years a bunch of people have lifted the title of
my first book, Trading for a Living, usually with slight variations. I am
sure that some clown will steal the title of the book you’re now reading. Will you want to learn from a poacher who cannot think for himself?
My second rule is to avoid very expensive services, be they books,
advisory letters, or seminars. A $200 newsletter is likely to be a better
value than a $2,000 one, and a $500 seminar a better value than a
$5,000 one. Merchants of super-expensive products sell an implicit
promise of “the keys to the kingdom.” Their customers are usually

32

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

desperate to dig out from under abysmal losses. Football players call
this a “Hail Mary” play—when a losing team in the last seconds of the
game desperately tosses the ball forward, hoping to score. They’ve
already lost the game on skill, and now try to come back in a single
desperate gamble. When a trader who lost more than half of his
account buys a $3,000 trading system, he is doing the same thing.
Helpful advisors tend to be modest, and price their services accordingly. An obscene price is a marketing gimmick that conveys a subliminal message that the service is magic. There is no magic—no one
can deliver on that promise. A relatively inexpensive service is a bargain when it’s good, and a cheap loss when it isn’t.
Someone once asked Sigmund Freud what he thought the best attitude
for a patient was. “Benign skepticism,” answered the great psychiatrist,
and that’s good advice for financial traders. Maintain an attitude of healthy
skepticism. If you find something you don’t understand, try it again, and
if you still do not get it, it is probably not worth having. Run, do not walk,
from those who offer to sell you the keys to the kingdom. Keep your
expenses low and remember, any information you receive becomes valuable to you only after you’ve tested it on your data, making it your own.

GETTING YOUR GEAR
A successful trader is like a fish swimming upstream, against the
current. Commissions, slippage, and expenses keep pushing you back.
You must make enough money to overshoot these three barriers before
making a dime.
There is no shame in deciding trading is too hard and walking away,
just as there is no shame in being unable to dance or play the piano.
Many beginners jump in without thinking and get financially and emotionally hurt. It is a great game, but if you leave, better do it early.
If you decide to trade, read on, because in the following sections we
will look into psychology, trading tactics, and money management. But
first, we must talk about the practical aspects of trading—how to open
an account, choose a computer, and start collecting data.
