creates a new price and momentum high serves as a catalyst to expect potential higher price highs yet
to come, and the expected retracement back to either a moving average, trendline, or Fibonacci
retracement price serves as the specific entry for your trade execution. The retracement down to
support in the context of a bull flag is called the flag portion, while the initial impulse up is called the
pole. Your trade target is an exact measured move or equal swing of the pole, which is then added to
the low of the flag as price tests and bounces upward off the expected support zone.
Again, aggressive traders would purchase shares as price tested the expected support zone while a
conservative trader would purchase shares after price broke to the upside above the declining flag
trendline, or broke a high off a classic reversal candle that formed off support. A trader would place
a stop-loss order under the moving average support, trendline, or 61.8 percent Fibonacci retracement
to play for a much larger, specific price pattern projection target.

Bull Flag Retracement Example: Visa Inc. (V)
Figure 9.7 shows an intraday bull flag retracement trade setup on the 15-minute chart of Visa Inc (V),
complete with new momentum highs and a confluence support buy opportunity at the rising 50-period
exponential moving average and 50 percent Fibonacci retracement.
In Figure 9.7 we see the intraday chart of Visa during early June 2010 as price forms a classic bull
flag example. Bull flags are inherently retracement style trade set-ups that build upon an initial
impulse that leads to a second impulse high after an initial retracement. Your opportunity is to trade
the retracement into expected support to take advantage of the momentum concept as a leading
indicator on price.
FIGURE 9.7 Bull Flag Retracement Trade Setup with Confluence Support in Visa 15-minute Chart—
June 2010

Price forms a sharp impulse swing higher during June 9, 2010, peaking mid-day at the $75.50 level.
Notice that the 3/10 MACD Momentum Oscillator actually registered two new momentum highs
during this time, which served as a confirmation of the recent price swing highs and suggested that
higher price highs were yet to come after an immediate retracement. The retracement, in the form of
stable profit-taking, occurred into the close of the session as price moved lower to test the rising
support of both the 50-period EMA and the 50 percent Fibonacci Retracement price as drawn at the
$73.50 level. For aggressive traders, this was the entry opportunity for a specific bull flag trade
setup, or a more generic retracement trade opportunity.
While the aggressive trader established a position on the test of confluence support, a conservative
trader would have demanded to see a bullish candle or the break of the declining trendline at the
$74.00-per-share level before executing a position, and thus went home without a position on the
close of the session. Visa gapped strongly overnight, gapping through the $74.00 level where the
conservative trader anticipated executing a trade; this sometimes happens and is a consequence of
waiting for confirmation before establishing a trade.
In terms of stop-loss and target, the aggressive trader purchased shares before the close on July 9 at
the $73.50 level and placed a stop under both the 50-period EMA and 61.8 percent lower Fibonacci
retracement at $73.00, which was also round-number support. Thus, the risk in the position totaled
roughly 50 cents. How does a trader set a price target for a bull flag? It's easier than you might expect.
Measure the vertical distance from the immediate swing low price of the pole to the high of the pole,
which is where I drew the Fibonacci retracement.

This will often be the case when drawing a Fibonacci retracement grid from an impulse—the grid
will be the distance from the pole low to the high. In this case, the measurement from $71.50 to
$75.50 was $4.00 per share. Taking that figure, we then add $4.00 per share to the bottom of the flag,
or the retracement swing into support. Because we established a position at the expected confluence
support at $73.50, this is then the bottom of the flag. In the event that the price breaks through the
confluence support and under $73.00 per share, then it is no longer a bull flag retracement setup and
we want to be out of the position to limit further losses. When we add $4.00 to our entry at the flag
low at $73.50, we arrive at an upside target of $77.50 per share.
From a reward-to-risk standpoint, this opportunity gives us a 50-cent risk to play for a $4.00 upside
target, or an eight-to-one reward-to-risk opportunity. Such outsized reward-to-risk opportunities are
only available to the aggressive trader who is willing to purchase shares as close to the expected
confluence support level, which he can discern in advance. In contrast, a conservative trader who
hoped to enter as price crossed above the declining trendline at the $74.00-per-share level, if given
the opportunity, would also locate a stop under $73.00 per share and thus risk $1.00 in the position to
play for a $3.50 upside target.
Notice how waiting for proof, or more specifically a higher probability of a successful outcome,
cost the conservative trader in terms of the reward-to-risk relationship. Instead of a 50-cent risk and
$4.00 reward potential that the aggressive trader enjoys, with a lower probability of a successful
outcome, the conservative trader degrades the monetary edge to a $1.00 risk for a $3.50 reward. The
difference in an additional 50-cent risk and decreased 50-cent target degrades the overall edge from
the eight-to-one relationship enjoyed by the aggressive trader to a three-and-a-half-to-one reward-torisk ratio obtained by the conservative trader.
This is not to make a criticism of the conservative trader, because the break above $74.00 per share
officially triggers the bull flag setup and increases the odds of a move higher to the target that an
aggressive trader cannot realize when price simply tests the rising confluence support at $73.50.
For all trades that you take, you will have to balance the accuracy edge with the monetary edge,
which usually means the longer you wait for additional favorable chart evidence to develop,
increasing the odds of a successful outcome, you decrease your reward-to-risk ratio or monetary
edge. This bull flag trade setup helps explain that concept. You should think of all trades in terms of
an interaction of accuracy and monetary edge, and how that plays out over time within the context of
your broader goals and trading strategy, which you develop in advance of the setups you take as a
trader.

WHERE TRADES FIT IN THE LIFE CYCLE
Think back to Chapter 7 on the accumulation/distribution cycles and Elliott Wave Principle, and
incorporate that into the broader perspective of the trend continuity principle, momentum principle,
and price alternation principle. Using the life cycle of a price move as a background, we can thus
highlight where these four basic setups apply best, as seen in Figure 9.8.
FIGURE 9.8 Categories of Trade Setups within the Life Cycle of a Price Move

Let us take this same figure and overlay the accumulation/distribution cycle. The range contraction
phase at the left side reflects the Accumulation phase, while the move up out of the breakout highlights
the Realization phase, and the final consolidation at the highs prior to a downside reversal labels the
Distribution phase. If we overlay Elliott Wave characteristics, Waves 1 and 2 occur during the
Accumulation Phase, waves 3 and 4 occur during the Realization phase, and the final 5th wave and
transition into the ABC Corrective phase occur during the Distribution phase at the highs.
Adding Wyckoff's terms to the structure, Realization is also known as Mark-up, and the downward
move in price after the Distribution phase is the Mark-down additional phase. Eventually price will
move so low as to attract buying from the professionals and thus create a new Accumulation phase,
and the cycle will repeat.
With that information as a guide, let us now overlay our four categories of trade setups to the
structure. During the accumulation phase, the best strategies to use include fade setups, which take
advantage of fading strength and weakness by purchasing shares when price tests the lower horizontal
support trendline of the range and then selling, then perhaps short-selling, shares as price returns to
the upper horizontal resistance line. As long as price remains in a Negative Feedback Loop (see
Chapter 3) of a consolidation phase, then fade strategies will work best.

Fade Trades in Accumulation
Fade trades work best by using the Bollinger Band indicators along with hand-drawn price trendlines
as price boundaries that the market should not break. Thus, you would enter a fade trade as price tests
a support or resistance level, place a stop outside the boundary where you expect price to inflect up
or down, and then play for a target of the opposite Bollinger Band or trendline. Oscillators such as the
Stochastic or RSI can be helpful in assessing overbought or oversold levels, but often price levels
work better than oscillators, particularly in allowing you to identify a price level to enter, place your
stop, and then target for a profit. Due to the price consolidation, moving averages are useless in
assessing support or resistance, as price moves up and down through the averages as if they were not
even there.

Breakout Trades out of the Range
As the life cycle informs us, price cannot remain bound within the confines of a trading range forever.
According to the Price Alternation Principle (Chapter 3), price will break out one way or the other
from the consolidation into a range expansion impulse phase, which gives rise to Breakout trading
strategies. Though price may give false breakouts, called traps, price will eventually eject to a
positive feedback loop above the upper boundary, which often begins with an initial buy impulse
from the bulls that leads to a sudden short-covering phase of bears buying back shares to cover their
short positions. A similar positive feedback loop begins when bears push price down through the
lower support trendline in an impulse that forces buyers to liquidate (sell) their positions and take
their stop-loss executions, further extending the downside breakout in price.
Traders who employ breakout strategies enter positions as soon as they believe price has officially
penetrated the support or resistance boundary, and thus will experience a potentially strong positive
feedback loop that will carry price up to a higher level or down to a lower level in a sustained range
breakout expansion mode. To the extent that price remains in the impulse trend breakout, these
breakout traders will profit from the expected move.

Retracement Trades in Realization
Price does not move straight up or straight down during its range expansion phase, nor does any trend
in price travel straight up or straight down. Instead, price moves in action and reaction cycles that
form waves or swings on the chart as price travels through time up or down in a steady trend. These
steady swings in price in the context of a market in a trend mode give rise to retracement strategies,
which is where most traders find it easiest to profit from trading.
The highest probability, lowest risk trades come from buying pullbacks to support, such as a
trendline, moving average, or Fibonacci retracement price (or confluence Fibonacci level) in the
context of a rising uptrend, or short selling pullbacks higher to a resistance level in the context of a
confirmed downtrend in price.
Retracement traders seek to buy shares as price retraces to a known support level, with aggressive
traders buying shares immediately as price trades at the support level while conservative traders
demand that price form a reversal candle or show some official sign of rising off of the expected
support level before buying shares. Traders place stops under the expected support level and play for
a minimum target of the retest of the prior swing high in the context of an uptrend, or for a push higher
beyond the prior swing high when some other sell signal, such as a divergence, short-term trendline
break, or break under a reversal candle occurs. Retracement traders want to buy the first pullback in
price to support after a new price and momentum high form, as the momentum principle states that
new price highs are expected after an initial pullback when both price and momentum form new
swing highs together.

Fade Trades in a Prevailing Trend
Though not as high probability due to the positioning against the established trend, some traders seek
to use fade strategies in the context of rising uptrends by short-selling shares as price reaches an
overextended condition away from the 20-period moving average or other average or rising trendline.
Fade traders take advantage of the mean reversion principle, which states that the more price

stretches above or beneath the 20-period (or other short-term) moving average, the greater the odds
are for a snap-back move to that average price. Thus, fade traders want to short overextended swings
higher that pop outside the upper Bollinger Band particularly as a reversal candle such as a shooting
star forms, or buy overextended swings to the downside also as price trades outside the lower
Bollinger Band with a reversal candle such as a hammer.
Fade traders who trade in the context of overbought or oversold levels in the context of a trend wish
to enter a position when price begins traveling back toward the mean, perhaps on the break of a shortterm trendline or price break under the high or low of a reversal candle that forms with a momentum
divergence. They will place stops just above the most recent swing high in an uptrend or just beneath
the most recent swing low in a downtrend to play for a mean reversion swing, most likely to the 20period moving average.
Fade traders must understand their positioning is for a very short-term scalp play only—trying to
capture a quick swing in price—and should use tight stops. They must be prepared to exit ahead of the
full target in the event that the trend reasserts itself, or else they could face very large losses by
fighting the trend. Of all the common trading strategies, this type of counter-trend mean reversion
fading strategy can be the most difficult for new traders to profit consistently over time, as they may
have a string of numerous very small winners but be exposed to one or more large losing trades that
overcome the small string of profits from prior trades.

