
How has the stock responded to all this? When the first edition was
written it was at 16.16, after allowing for the various stock dividends
that have been paid since. Today it is at 26%, a gain of 64 per cent.

A few other companies, with which I am somewhat less familiar but
which I believe have management, trade position, growth prospects, and
other characteristics which easily qualify them as good examples of this
B group are Foote Minerals Company, Friden Calculating Machine


142 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

Co., Inc., and Sprague Electric Company. Each of these companies has
proven a highly desirable investment for those who have held the shares
for a period of years. Sprague Electric roughly quadrupled in value dur-
ing the 1947-1957 period. Friden stock was first offered to the public
in 1954, but in less than three years it had increased about two and a half
times in market value. By 1957 it was selling at better than four times
the price at which blocks of stock are believed to have changed hands
privately about a year prior to this public offering. These price increases,
satisfactory as they might appear to most investors, were relatively
minor compared to what has happened to the shares of the Foote
Minerals Company. This stock was listed on the New York Stock
Exchange early in 1957. Prior to that time the stock was traded over the
counter and was first available to the public in 1947. At that time the
stock was selling at about $40 per share. Due to stock dividends and
split-ups the investor who purchased 100 shares at the time of the orig-
inal financing in 1947 and held on now has over 2400 shares. The stock
recently sold at approximately $50.

C. Finally there are the small companies with staggering possibili-
ties of gain for the successful, but complete or almost complete loss of
investment for the unsuccessful. I have already pointed out elsewhere
why I believe the amount, if any, of such securities in an investment list
should vary according to the circumstances and goals of the particular
investor. However, there are two good rules to follow in regard to
investments of this type. One has already been mentioned. Never put
any funds into them that you cannot afford to lose. The other is that
larger investors should never at the time of the original investment put
over 5 per cent of available funds into any one such company. As point-
ed out elsewhere, one of the risks of the small investor is that he may be
too small to obtain the spectacular prospects of this type of investment
and still get the benefits of proper diversification.

In the original edition, I referred to Ampex as it was in 1953 and
Elox in 1956 as examples of the huge-potential but high-risk compa-
nies that fall into the C classification. How have these companies done
since? Elox, which was at 10 when the first edition was completed, is
at 7% today. In contrast, Ampex’s market performance continues bril-
liant and demonstrates why once an outstanding management has
proven itself and fundamental conditions have not changed, shares
should never be sold just because the stock has had a huge rise and may
seem temporarily high priced. In the discussion on research in Chapter


Five More Don’ts for Investors 143

Three, I mentioned that in the first four years following the offering
of dhis stock to the public in 1953, ic had risen 700 per cent. When |
finished the original edition, it was at 20.” Today with sales and earn-
ings up dramatically year after year and with 80 per cent of today’s
sales in products that were not in existence only four years ago, it is at
107’. This is a gain of 437 per cent in just over two years. It is a gain
of over 3500 per cent in six years. In other words, $10,000 placed in
Ampex in 1953 would have a market value of over $350,000 today in
a company with a proven ability to score one technical and business
triumph after another.

Other situations with which I am less familiar but which might well
fall in this category were Litton Industries, Inc., when its shares were
first offered to the public, and Metal Hydrides. However, one charac-
teristic of this type of company should be kept in mind from the stand-
point of diversification. They entail so much risk and offer such prom-
ising prospects that, in time, one of two things usually happens. Either
they fail, or else they grow in trade position, management depth, and
competitive strength to a point where they can be classified in the B
rather than the C group.

When this has happened, the shares held in them usually have
advanced so spectacularly in market price that, depending on what has
happened to the value of an investor's other holdings during the period,
they may then represent a considerably greater per cent of the total
portfolio than they formerly did. However, B stocks are so much safer
than C stocks that they may he retained in greater volume without sac-
rificing proper diversification. Therefore, if the company has changed in
this way, there is seldom reason to sell stock—at least not on the ground
that the market rise has resulted in this company representing too great
a percentage of total holdings.

This change from a C to a B company is, for example, exactly what
happened during the 1956-1957 period in the case of Ampex. As the
company tripled in size and profits rose even faster, and as the market
for its magnetic recorders and the components thereof broadened into
more and more growth industries, this company grew in intrinsic
strength to a point where it could be classified in the B group. It no
longer carried with it the element of extreme investment risk. When
this point had been reached, a considerably larger percentage of total

*After allowing for the 2'4-to-I stock split that has since occurred.


144 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

investment might be held in Ampex without violating principles of
prudent diversification.

All the above percentages represent merely a minimum or prudent
standard of diversification. Going below this limit is a bit like driving an
automobile above normal speeds’A driver doing this may get where he
wants to go sooner than he otherwise would. However, he should keep
in mind that he is driving at a rate requiring extra alertness and vigi-
lance. Forgetting this, he may not only fail to arrive at his destination
more quickly—he may never get there at all.

How about the other side of the coin? Is there any reason an
investor should not have more diversification than something resem-
bling the minimum amounts mentioned? There is no reason whatsoever,
as long as the additional holdings are ones which appear equivalent in
attractiveness to this minimum number of holdings in regard to two
matters. These additional securities should be equivalent to the other
holdings in regard to the degree of growth which appears attainable in
relation to the risks involved. They should also be equivalent in regard
to the investor's ability to keep in touch with and follow his investment,
once he has made it. However, practical investors usually learn their
problem is finding enough outstanding investments, rather than choos-
ing among too many. The occasional investor who does find more such
unusual companies than he really needs seldom has the time to keep in
close enough touch with all additional corporations.

Usually a very long list of securities is not a sign of the brilliant
investor, but of one who is unsure of himself. If the investor owns stock
in so many companies that he cannot keep in touch with their man-
agements directly or indirectly, he is rather sure to end up in worse
shape than if he had owned stock in too few companies. An investor
should always realize that some mistakes are going to be made and that
he should have sufficient diversification so that an occasional mistake
will not prove crippling. However, beyond this point he should take
extreme care to own not the most, but the best. In the field of common
stocks, a little bit of a great many can never be more than a poor sub-
stitute for a few of the outstanding.

2. Don’t be afraid of buying on a war scare.

Common stocks are usually of greatest interest to people with imagina-
tion. Our imagination is staggered by the utter horror of modern war.


Five More Don'ts for Investors 145

The result is that every time the international stresses of our world pro-
duce either a war scare or an actual war, common stocks reflect it. This
is a psychological phenomenon which makes little sense financially.

Any decent human being becomes appalled at the slaughter and
suffering caused by the mass killings of war. In today’s atomic age,
there is added a deep personal fear for the safety of those closest to us
and for ourselves. This worry, fear, and distaste for what lics ahcad can
often distort any appraisal of purely economic factors. The fears of
mass destruction of property, almost confiscatory higher taxes, and
government interference with business dominate what thinking we
try to do on financial matters. People operating in such a mental cli-
mate are inclined to overlook some even more fundamental economic
influences.

The results are always the same. Through the entire twentieth cen-
tury, with a single exception, every time major war has broken out any-
where in the world or whenever American forces have become involved
in any fighting whatever, the American stock market has always plunged
sharply downward. This one exception was the outbreak of World
War II in September 1939. At that time, after an abortive rally on
thoughts of fat war contracts to a ncutral nation, the market soon was
following the typical downward course, a course which some months
later resembled panic as news of German victories began piling up.
Nevertheless, at the conclusion of all actual fighting—regardless of
whether it was World War I, World War II, or Korea—most stocks were
selling at levels vastly higher than prevailed before there was any thought
of war at all. Furthermore, at least ten times in the last twenty-two years,
news has come of other international crises which gave threat of major
war. In every instance, stocks dipped sharply on the fear of war and
rebounded sharply as the war scare subsided.

What do investors overlook that causes them to dump stocks both
on the fear of war and on the arrival of war itself, even though by the
end of the war stocks have always gone much higher than lower? They
forget that stock priccs are quotations expressed in money. Modern war
always causes governments to spend far more than they can possibly col-
lect from their taxpayers while the war is being waged. This causes a vast
increase in the amount of money, so that each individual unit of money,
such as a dollar, becomes worth less than it was before. It takes lots more
dollars to buy the same number of shares of stock. This, of course, is the
classic form of inflation.


146 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

In other words, war is always bearish on money. To sell stock at the
threatened or actual outbreak of hostilities so as to get into cash is
extreme financial lunacy. Actually just the opposite should be done. If an
investor has about decided to buy a particular common stock and the
arrival of a full-blown war scare starts knocking down the price, he
should ignore the scare psychology of the moment and definitely begin
buying. This is the time when having surplus cash for investment
becomes least, not most, desirable. However, here a problem presents
itself. How fast should he buy? How far down will the stock go? As long
as the downward influence is a war scare and not war, there is no way
of knowing. If actual hostilities break out, the price would undoubted-
ly go still lower, perhaps a lot lower. Therefore, the thing to do is to buy
but buy slowly and at a scale-down on just a threat of war. If war occurs,
then increase the tempo of buying significantly. Just be sure to buy into
companies either with products or services the demand for which will
continue in wartime, or which can convert their facilities to wartime
operations. The great majority of companies can so qualify under today’s
conditions of total war and manufacturing flexibility.

Do stocks actually become more valuable in war time, or is it just
money which declines in valuc? That depends on circumstances. By the
grace of God, our country has never been defeated in any war in which
it has engaged. In war, particularly modern war, the money of the
defeated side is likely to become completely or almost worthless, and
common stocks would lose most of their value. Certainly, if the United
States were to be defeated by Communist Russia, both our moncy and
our stocks would become valueless. It would then make little difference
what investors might have done.

On the other hand, if a war is won or stalemated, what happens to
the real value of stocks will vary with the individual war and the indi-
vidual stock. In World War I, when the enormous prewar savings of
England and France were pouring into this country, most stocks prob-
ably increased their real worth even more than might have been the case
if the same years had been a period of peace. This, however, was a one-
time condition that will not be repeated. Expressed in constant dollars—
that is, in real value—American stocks in both ‘World War II and the
Korean period undoubtedly did fare less well than if the same period
had been one of peace. Aside from the crushing taxes, there was too
great a diversion of effort from the more profitable peace-time lines to
abnormally narrow-margin defense work. If the magnificent research


Five More Don’ts for Investors 147

effort spent on these narrow-margin defense projects could have been
channelled to normal peace-time lines, stockholders’ profits would have
been far greater—assuming, of course, that there would still have been
a free America in which any profits could have been enjoyed at all. The
reason for buying stocks on war or fear of war is not that war, in itself,
is ever again likely to be profitable to American stockholders. It is just
that money becomes even less desirable, so that stock prices, which are
expressed in units of money, always go up.

3. Don’t forget your Gilbert and Sullivan.

Gilbert and Sullivan are hardly considered authorities on the stock mar-
ket. Nevertheless, we might keep in mind their “flowers that bloom in
the spring, tra-la” which, they tell us, have “nothing to do with the
case.” There are certain superficial financial statistics which are fre-
quently given an undeserved degree of attention by many investors.
Possibly it is an exaggeration to say that they completely parallel Gilbert
and Sullivan's flowers that bloom in the spring. Instead of saying they
have nothing to do with the case, we might say they have very little to
do with it.

Foremost among such statistics are the price ranges at which a stock
has sold in former years. For some reason, the first thing many investors
want to see when they are considering buying a particular stock is a
table giving the highest and lowest price at which that stock has sold in
each of the past five or ten years. They go through a sort of mental
mumbo-jumbo, and come up with a nice round figure which is the
price they are willing to pay for the particular stock.

Is this illogical? Is it financially dangerous? The answer to both
questions is emphatically yes. It is dangerous because it puts the empha-
sis on what does not particularly matter, and diverts attention from what
does matter. This frequently causes investors to pass up a situation in
which they would make big profits in order to go into one where the
profits will be much smaller. To understand this we must see why the
mental process is so illogical.

What makes the price at which a stock sells? It is the composite esti-
mate af that moment of what all those interested think the corrective
value of such shares may be. It is the composite appraisal of the outlook
for this company by all potential buyers and sellers, weighted by the
number of shares each buyer or seller is disposed to bid for or offer, in


148 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

relation to a similar appraisal, at the same moment, of the outlook for
other companies with their individual prospects. Occasionally, some-
thing like forced liquidation will produce a moderate deviation from
this figure. This happens when a large holder presses stock on the mar-
ket for reasons—such as liquidating an estate or paying off a loan—
which may not be directly related to the seller’s view of the real value
of the shares. However, such pressures usually cause only moderate vari-
ation from the composite appraisal of the prevailing price of the shares,
since bargain hunters normally step in to take advantage of the situation,
which thereby adjusts itself.

The point which is of real significance is that the price is based on
the current appraisal of the situation. As changes in the affairs of the com-
pany become known, these appraisals become correspondingly more or
less favorable. In relation to other stocks, these particular shares then
move up or down. If the factors appraised were judged correctly, the
stock becomes permanently more or less valuable in relation to other
stocks. The shares then stay up or down. If more of these same factors
continue to develop, they in turn are recognized by the financial com-
munity. The stock then goes and stays either further up or down, as the
case may be.

Therefore, the price at which the stock sold four years ago may have
little or no real relationship to the price at which it sells today. The
company may have developed a host of able new executives, a series of
new and highly profitable products, or any number of similar desirable
attributes that make the stock intrinsically worth four times as much in
relation to the price of other stocks as it was worth four years ago. The
company might have fallen into the hands of an inefficient management
and slipped so badly in relation to competition that the only way recov-
ery could occur would be through the raising of much new capital. This
might force such a dilution of the shares that the stock today could not
possibly be worth more than a quarter of the price of four years ago.

Against this background, it can be seen why investors so frequently
pass up stocks which would have brought them huge future gains, for
ones where the gain is very much smaller. By giving heavy emphasis to
the “stock that hasn’t gone up yet” they are unconsciously subscribing
to the delusion that all stocks go up about the same amount and that
the one that has already risen a lot will not climb further, while the
one that has not yet gone up has something “due” it. Nothing could
be further from the truth. The fact that a stock has or has not risen in


Five More Don’ts for Investors 149

the last several years is of no significance whatsoever in determining
whether it should be bought now. What docs matter is whether cnough
improvement has taken place or is likely to take place in the future to
justify importantly higher prices than those now prevailing.

Similarly, many investors will give heavy weight to the per-share
earnings of the past five years in trying to decide whether a stock should
be bought. To look at the per-share earnings by themselves and give the
earnings of four or five years ago any significance is like trying to get
useful work from an engine which is unconnected to any device to
which that engine's power is supposed to be applied. Just knowing, by
itself, that four or five years ago a company’s per-share earnings were
either four times or a quarter of this year’s earnings has almost no sig-
nificance in indicating whether a particular stock should be bought or
sold. Again, what counts is knowledge of background conditions. An
understanding of what probably will happen over the next several years
is of overriding importance.

The investor is constantly being fed a diet of reports and so-called
analyses largely centered around these price figures for the past five
years. He should keep in mind that it is the next five years’ earnings, not
those of the past five years, that now matter to him. One reason he is
fed such a diet of back statistics is that if this type of material is put in a
report it is not hard to be sure it is correct. If more important matters
are gone into, subsequent events may make the report look quite silly.
Therefore, there is a strong temptation to fill up as much space as pos-
sible with indisputable facts, whether or not the facts are significant.
However, many people in the financial community place emphasis on
this type of prior years’ statistics for a different set of reasons. They seem
to be unable to grasp how great can be the change in just a few years’
time in the real value of certain types of modern corporations. There-
fore they emphasize these past earnings records in a sincere belief that
detailed accounting descriptions of what happened last year will give a
true picture of what will happen next year. This may be true for certain
classes of regulated companies such as public utilities. For the type of
enterprise which I believe should interest an investor desiring the best
results for his money, it can be completely false.

A striking example of this centers around events with which I had
the good fortune to be quite familiar. In the summer of 1956, an oppor-
tunity arose to buy a fair-sized block of shares in Texas Instruments, Inc.,
from its principal officers who were also its largest stockholders. Careful


150 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

study of this company revealed that it rated not just well but magnifi-
cently in regard to our fifteen point test. Reason for the officers to sell
appeared entirely legitimate; this occurs frequently in true growth com-
panies. Their holdings had already advanced so much that several of
them had become millionaires so far as their holdings in their own
company were concerned. In contrast, their other assets were relatively
negligible. Therefore, particularly since they were selling but a tiny part
of the shares they owned, some diversification seemed entirely in order.
The ever-present possibility of estate tax liability alone would be suffi-
cient to make such a course prudent from the standpoint of these key
executives, regardless of the future of their company.

At any rate, negotiations were completed to acquire these shares at
a price of 14. This represented twenty times the anticipated 1956 per-
share earnings of about 70¢. To anyone who gave particular weight to
past statistics, this seemed well beyond the bounds of prudence. Per-
share earnings had been reported at 39¢, 40¢, 48¢, and 50¢ for the prior
four years of 1952 to 1955 respectively—hardly an exciting growth
record. Even more depressing to those who subordinate the more
important factors of management and current business trends to super-
ficial statistical comparisons, the company, through a corporate acquisi-
tion, had obtained the benefits of some loss carry-forward, which had
made possible subnormal income tax charges during much of this period.
This made any price calculated on the basis of past statistics seem even
higher. Finally, even if 1956 earnings were included in an evaluation, a
superficial study of this situation might still have produced grave fore-
bodings. True, the company was currently doing remarkably well in the
promising field of transistors. But regardless of the obviously glowing
future for the semi-conductor industry as a whole, how long could a
company of this size be expected to maintain its strong trade position
against the larger and older companies, with much stronger balance
sheets, which were sure to make a major competitive effort to partici-
pate in the great growth that lay ahead for transistors?
