degrees in increments of 10 degrees. Only the best solutions are shown.
It is interesting that, overall, the cycle model performed rather poorly. This
model was not as bad, on a dollars-per-trade basis, as many of the other systems tested, but it was nowhere near as good as the best. In-sample, the loss per trade was
$1,329 with entry at open, $1,037 with entry on limit, and $1,245 with entry on stop.
The limit order had the highest percentage of wins and the smallest average loss per

Portfolio Performance with Best In-Sample Parameters on Both InSample and Out-of-Sample Data

trade. The long side was slightly profitable with entry at open, was somewhat more
profitable with entry on limit, and lost with entry on stop. The behavior out-of-sam
ple, with entry at open and on limit, was a lot worse than the behavior of the model
in-sample. The loss per trade grew to $3,741 for entry at open and to $3,551 for
entry on limit. The percentage of winning trades also declined, to 34%. The performance of the cycle model on the verification sample was among the worst
observed of the various models tested. The deterioration cannot be attributed to
optimization: Several other parameter sets were examined, and regardless of
which was chosen, the cycle model still performed much worse out-of-sample.
With entry on stop, the out-of-sample performance did not deteriorate. In this case,
the loss ($944) was not too different from the in-sample loss. Although the stop
order appears to have prevented the deterioration of the model that was seen with
the other orders, in more recent times the system is a loser.
The decline of system performance in recent years was unusually severe, as
observed from the results of the other models tested. One possible reason may be
the recent proliferation of sophisticated cycle trading tools. Another explanation
might be that major trading firms are conducting research using sophisticated
techniques, including wavelets of the kind studied here. These factors may have
contributed to making the markets relatively efficient to basic cycle trading.
Table 10-2 shows the in-sample and out-of-sample behavior of the cycle
model broken down by market and entry order (test). The SYM column represents
the market being studied. The center and rightmost columns (COUhrr, contain the
number of profitable tests for a given market. The numbers in the first row represent test identifiers: 01, 02, and 03 represent entry at open, on limit, and on stop,
respectively. The last row (COUNT) contains the number of markets on which a
given model was profitable. The data in this table provides relatively detailed
information about which markets are and are not profitable when traded by each
of the models: One dash (-) indicates a moderate loss per trade, i.e., $2,000 to
$4,000; two dashes (--) represent a large loss per trade, i.e., $4,000 or more; one
plus sign (+) means a moderate profit per trade, i.e., $1,000 to $2,000; two pluses (++) indicate a large gain per trade, i.e., $2,000 or more; and a blank cell
means that the loss was between $0 and $1,999 or the profit was between $0 and
$1,000 per trade. (For information about the various markets and their symbols,
see Table 11-l in the “Introduction” to Part II.)
Only the IO-Year Notes and Cotton showed strong profits across all three
entry orders in-sample. Out-of-sample, performance on these markets was miserable. The S&P 500, a market that, in our experience, has many clear and tradable
cycles, demonstrated strong profitability on the in-sample data when entry was at
open or on limit. This market was strongly profitable out-of-sample with entry on
limit and on stop, but somewhat less profitable with entry at open. Interestingly,
the NYFE, although evidencing strong in-sample profits with entry at open and on
limit, had losses out-of-sample across all three orders. There are a few other prof-

CHAPTER 10

Cycle-Based Entries

TAELE

223

10-2

Performance Data Broken Down by Market and Test
. .

”
I +. +
++

-...
r.-

In2
I+4
++

03
I-.
-

1 count
I
91 I
I
91

, __. _. --ample
I01
102
103
I&
I** I&+
I-_
_
_

1
1 count
I
7
I
n

224

itable in-sample market-order combinations, as well as out-of-sample marketorder combinations, However, very little correspondence between the two was
observed. Perhaps markets that have not had cycles in the past (in-sample) have
cycles in the present (out-of-sample), and vice versa. At least the S&P 500
behaved as expected on the basis of prior research and may be one of the few markets consistently amenable to cycle trading in this crude form.
Figure 10-4 depicts the equity for the portfolio with entry at open. Equity
declined slowly and then became rather flat until about August 1992, at which
time it began a steady and rapid decline.

CONCLUSION
In our May 1997 study, the filter bank method appeared to have potential as the
basis for an effective trading strategy. At times it worked incredibly well, and was
almost completely insensitive to large variations in its parameters, whereas at
other times it performed poorly. The results may simply have been due to the fact
that the implementation was “quick and dirty.” Back then, the focus was on the
S&P 500, a market that continued to trade well in the present study.
The results of the current study are disappointing, all the more given the theoretical elegance of the filters. It may be that other approaches to the analysis of
cycles, e.g., the use of maximum entropy, might have provided better performance; then again, maybe not. Other traders have also experienced similar disappointments using a variety of techniques when trading cycles in a simple,
buy-the-bottom/sell-the-top manner. It may be that cycles are too obvious and
detectable by any of a number of methods, and may be traded away very quickly
whenever they develop in the market. This especially seems the case in recent
years with the proliferation of cycle analysis software. The suggestion is not that
cycles should be abandoned as a concept, but that a more sophisticated use of
detected cycles must be made. Perhaps better results would ensue if cycles were
combined with other kinds of entry criteria, e.g., taking trades only if a cycle top
corresponds to an expected seasonal turning-point top.
Further studies are needed to determine whether the cycle model does indeed
have the characteristic of giving precise entries when it works, but failing miserably when it does not work. Looking over a chart of the S&P 500 suggests this is
the case. There are frequentiy strings of four or five trades in a row, with entries
that occur precisely at market tops and bottoms, as if predicted with perfect hindsight. At other times, entries occur exactly where they should not. With a system
that behaves this way, our experience indicates that, combined with a proper exit,
sometimes great profits can be achieved. More specifically, losses have to be cut
very quickly when the model fails, but trades should not be prematurely terminated when the model is correct in its predictions. Because of the precision of the
model when the predictions are correct, an extremely tight stop could perhaps

F I G U R E

1

O - 4

Portfolio Equity Growth for Count&rend Cycle Trading

In-samola eauilv

226

accomplish the goal. When an exact cycle top or bottom is caught, the market
begins to move immediately in the favored direction, with hardly any adverse
excursion, and the stop is never hit. When the model fails, the stop is hit very
quickly, resulting in only a small loss. Given the fairly loose stop of the standard
exit, the benefits of sophisticated cycle trading may not have been realized.
WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED?
Models that are theoretically sound, elegant, and appealing do not necessarily work well when trading real markets.
n Exception to Rule 1: The S&P 500 may respond to such methods; it did
so both in our earlier study and in the current one.
. When the model does work, it does so remarkably well. As stated earlier,
when examining its behavior on the S&P 500 and several other markets,
one can quickly and easily find strings of signals that pick off tops and
bottoms with the precision of hindsight.
. The previous point suggests that exits specifically designed for a system
that yields high precision when correct, but fails badly when incorrect,
may he required.
. The markets appear to have become more efficient relative to cycle
models, as they have to breakout models. Obvious market behavior
(such as clear, tradable cycles) are traded away before most traders can
capitalize on them. The lesson: Anything too theoretically appealing or
obvious will tend not to work.

n

Neural Networks

N eural network technology, a form of artificial intelligence (or AI), arose from
endeavors to emulate the kind of information processing and decision making
that occurs in living organisms. The goal was to model the behavior of neural tissue in living systems by using a computer to implement structures composed of
simulated neurons and neural interconnections (synapses). Research on neural
networks began in the 1940s on a theoretical level. When computer technology
became sophisticated enough to accommodate such research, the study of neural
networks and their applications began in earnest. It was not, however, until the
mid-to-late 1980s that neural network technology became of interest to the financial community. By 1989, a few vendors of neural network development tools
were available, and there was one commercial S&P 500 forecasting system based
on this technology (Scientific Consultant Services’ NexTurn). In the early 199Os,
interest peaked, more development tools appeared, but the fervor then waned for
reasons discussed later.
While it is not within the scope of this book to present a full tutorial on neural network technology, below is a brief discussion to provide basic understanding.
Those interested in exploring this subject in greater depth should read our contrbutions to the books Virtual Trading (Lederman and Klein, 1995) and
Computerized Trading (Jurik, 1999), in which we also present detailed information on system development using neural networks, as well as our articles in
Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities (Katz, April 1992; Katz and
McCormick, November 1996, November 1997). Neural Networks in Finance and
Znvesting (Trippi and Turban, 1993) should also be of interest.

WHAT ARE NEURAL NETWORKS?
Neural nerworks (or “nets”) are basically building blocks that learn and are useful
for pattern recognition, classification, and prediction. They hold special appeal to
traders because nets are capable of coping both with probability estimates in
uncertain situations and with “fuzzy” patterns, i.e., those recognizable by eye but
difficult to define in software using precise rules; and they have the potential to
recognize almost any pattern that exists. Nets can also integrate large amounts of
information without becoming stifled by detail and can be made to adapt to changing markets and market conditions.
A variety of neural networks are available, differing in terms of their “architecture,” i.e., the ways in which the simulated neurons are interconnected, the
details of how these neurons behave (signal processing behavior or “transfer functions”), and the process through which learning takes place. There are a number of
popular kinds of neural networks that are of some use to traders: the Kohonen and
the Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ) networks, various adaptive resonance networks, and recurrent networks. In this chapter, the most popular and, in many
respects, the most useful kind of network is discussed: the “feed-forward” network.
As mentioned above, nets differ in the ways they learn. The system developer plays the role of the neural network’s teacher, providing the net with examples
to learn from. Some nets employ “supervised learning” and others “unsupervised
learning.” Supervised learning occurs when the network is taught to produce a correct solution by being shown instances of correct solutions. This is a form of
paired-associate learning: The network is presented with pairs of inputs and a
desired output; for every set of inputs, it is the task of the net to learn to produce
the desired output. Unsupervised learning, on the other hand, involves nets that
take the sets of inputs they are given and organize them as they see tit, according
to patterns they lind therein. Regardless of the form of learning employed, the
main difficulty in developing successful neural network models is in finding and
“massaging” historical data into training examples or “facts” that highlight relevant patterns so that the nets can learn efficiently and not be put astray or confused; “preprocessing” the data is an art in itself.
The actual process of learning usually involves some mechanism for updating the neural connection weights in response to the training examples. With feedforward architectures, back-propagation, a form of steepest-descent optimization,
is often used. Genetic algorithms are also effective. These are very computationally intensive and time-consuming, but generally produce better final results.
Feed-Forward Neural Networks
A feed-forward network consists of layers of neurons. The input layer, the tirst
layer, receives data or inputs from the outside world. The inputs consist of independent variables (e.g., market or indicator variables upon which the system is to

be based) from which some inference is to be drawn or a prediction is to be made.
The input layer is massively connected to tire next layer, which is often called the
hidden layer because it has no connections to tire outside world. The outputs of the
hidden layer are fed to the next layer, which may be another hidden layer (if it is,
the process repeats), or it may be the output layer. Each neuron in the output layer
produces an output composed of the predictions, classifications, or decisions made
by the network. Networks are usually identified by the number of neurons in each
layer: For example, a 10-3-l network is one that has 10 neurons in its first or input
layer, 3 neurons in its middle layer, and 1 neuron in its output layer. Networks vary
in size, from only a few neurons to thousands, from only three layers to dozens;
the size depends on the complexity of the problem. Almost always, a three- or
four-layer network suffices.
Feed-forward networks (the kind being used in this chapter) implement a particular form of nonlinear multiple regression. The net takes a number of input variables and uses them to predict a target, exactly as in regression. In a standard linear
multiple regression, if the goal is to predict cholesterol (the dependent variable or
target) on the basis of dietary fat intake and exercise (the independent variables or
inputs), the data would be modeled as follows: predicted cholesterol = a + b * fat
intake + c * exercise: where a, b, and c represent parameters that would be determined by a statistical procedure. In a least-squares sense, a line, plane, or hyperplane (depending on the number of independent variables) is being fitted to the
points in a data space. In the example above, a plane is being fit: The x-axis represents fat intake, tire y-axis is exercise, and the height of the plane at each xy coordinate pair represents predicted cholesterol.
When using neural network technology, the two-dimensional plane or ndimensional hyperplane of linear multiple regression is replaced by a smooth ndimensional curved surface characterized by peaks and valleys, ridges and troughs.
As an example, let us say there is a given number of input variables and a goal of
finding a nonlinear mapping that will provide an output from the network that best
fits the target. In the neural network, the goal is achieved via the “neurons,” the nonlinear elements that are connected to one another. The weights of the comrections are
adjusted to fit the surface to the data. The learning algorithm adjusts the weights to
get a particular curved surface that best fits the data points. As in a standard multiple regression model, in which the coefficients of the regression are needed to define
the slope of the plane or hyperplane, a neural model requires that parameters, in the
form of connection weights, be determined so that the particular surface generated
(in this case a curved surface with hills and dales) will best fit the data.
NEURAL NETWORKS IN TRADING
Neural networks had their heyday in the late 1980 and early 1990s. Then the honeymoon ended. What happened? Basically, disillusionment set in among traders

PART I, The study of Entries

who believed that this new technology could, with little or no effort on the trader’s
part, magically provide the needed edge. System developers would “train” their
nets on raw or mildly preprocessed data, hoping the neural networks themselves
would discover something useful. This approach was naive; nothing is ever so simple, especially when trading the markets. Not only was this “neural newbie”
approach an ineffective way to use neural networks, but so many people were
attempting to use nets that whatever edge was originally gained was nullified by
the response of the markets, which was to become more efficient with regard to
the technology. The technology itself was blamed and discarded with little consideration to the thought that it was being inappropriately applied. A more sophisticated, reasoned approach was needed if success was going to be achieved.
Most attempts to develop neural network forecasting models, whether in a
simplistic manner or more elaborately, have focused on individual markets. A serious problem with the use of individual markets, however, is the limited number of
data points available on which to train the net. This situation leads to grand opportunities for curve-fitting (the bad kind)--something that can contribute greatly to
the likelihood of failure with a neural network, especially with less than ideal data
preprocessing and targets. In this chapter, however, neural networks will be trained
on a whole portfolio of tradables, resulting in the availability of many tens of thousands of data points (facts), and a reduction in curve-fitting for small to moderatesized networks. Perhaps, in this context, a fairly straightforward attempt to have a
neural network predict current or near-future market behavior might be successful. In essence, such a network could be considered a universal market forecaster,
in that, trained across an entire portfolio of tradables, it might be able to predict
on all markets, in a non-market-specific fashion.
FORECASTING WITH NEURAL NETWORKS
Neural networks will be developed to predict (1) where the market is in terms of
its near-future range and (2) whether tomorrow’s open represents a turning point.
Consider, first, the goal of predicting where the market is relative to its near-future
range. An attempt will be made to build a network to predict a time-reversed
Stochastic, specifically the time-reversed Slow %K. This is the usual Stochastic,
except that it is computed with time running backward. The time-reversed Slow
%K reflects where the current close lies with respect to the price range over the
next several bars. If something could predict this, it would be useful to the trader:
Knowing that today’s close, and probably tomorrow’s open, lies near the bottom of
the range of the next several days’ prices would suggest a good buy point; and
knowing that today’s close, or tomorrow’s open, lies near the top of the range
would be useful in deciding to sell. Consider, second, the goal of predicting whether
tomorrow’s open is a top, a bottom, or neither. Two neural networks will be trained.
One will predict whether tomorrow’s open represents a bottom turning point, i.e.,

has a price that is lower than the prices on earlier and later bars. The other will predict whether tomorrow’s open represents a top turning point, i.e., has a price that is
higher than the prices on earlier or later bars. Being able to predict whether a bottom or a top will occur at tomorrow’s open is also useful for the trader trying to
decide when to enter the market and whether to go long or short. The goal in this
study is to achieve such predictions in any market to which the model is applied.

GENERATING ENTRIES WITH NEURAL
PREDICTIONS
Three nets will be trained, yielding three entry models. no models will be constmcted for turning points. One model will be designed to detect bottoms, the other
model to detect tops. For the bottom detection model, if the neural net indicates that
the probability that tomorrow’s open will be a bottom is greater than some threshold, then a buy order will be posted. For the top detection model, if the neural net
indicates that the probability that tomorrow’s open will be a top is greater than
some other threshold, then a sell order will be posted. Neither model will post an
order under any other cicumstances. These rules amount to nothing mom than a
simple strategy of selling predicted tops and buying predicted bottoms. If, with better than chance accuracy, the locations of bottoms and tops can be detected in time
to trade them, trading should be profitable. The detection system does not have to
be perfect, just sufficiently better than chance so as to overcome transaction costs.
For the model that predicts the time-reversed Slow %K, a similar strategy will
be used. If the prediction indicates that the time-reversed Slow %K is likely to be
less than some lower threshold, a buy will be posted; the market is near the bottom
of its near-future range and so a profit should quickly develop. Likewise, if the predicted reverse Slow %K is high, above an upper threshold, a sell will be posted.
These entries share the characteristics of other entries based on predictive, rather
than responsive, analysis. The entries lend themselves to countertrend trading and, if
the predictions are accurate, can dramatically limit transaction costs in the form of slippage, and provide good fills since the trader will be buying when others are selling and
vice versa. A good predictive model is the trader’s Holy Grail, providing the ability to
sell near tops and buy near bottoms. As with other predictive-based entries, if the predictions are not sufficiently accurate, the benefits will be outweighed by the costs of
bad trades when the predictions go wrong, as they often do.
