TRADING THE NEWS
If you are considering trading the news, subscribing to a timely news feed
is paramount. There are several free services around and many public
media that announce the economic results almost as soon as they are
released. However, obtaining the data exactly at the moment they are issued
is of great importance in determining the success or failure of a news trading strategy.
Usually, the main financial media will offer both free and paid news
services, with some differences as to the timing of the release. It is also crucial to select a trustable news source because sometimes the media tend to
be slanted toward one side or the other, thus influencing the public through
rumors or distorted expectations previous to the releases, especially in what
concerns forecast figures.
The continuous operability of the FOREX market and the fact that economic data are always being released throughout the day from any of its
participant countries constitute a great advantage. Besides, the currency
markets not only will react to economic data coming from a single source
but also to any financial or political news coming from every corner of the
world. Usually there are always at least six or seven important releases
daily that will affect any of the eight major currencies from the countries
that traders follow more closely. This adds up to many opportunities to
trade the news.
The following are the eight major currencies: U.S. dollar (USD), euro
(EUR), British pound (GBP), Japanese yen (JPY), Swiss franc (CHF),
Canadian dollar (CAD), Australian dollar (AUD), and New Zealand dollar
(NZD). Some of the derivatives with the greatest liquidity, based on those
currencies, are the following currency pairs: EUR/USD, USD/JPY,
AUD/USD, GBP/JPY, EUR/CHF, and CHF/JPY.
When trading the news, you can easily choose which currency and
economic releases you will be paying attention to. However, since the
U.S. dollar is mostly present as counterpart of all currency trades, U.S.
economic releases usually have the heaviest impact on the behavior of
the markets.
Trading news is not as easy as it may seem. There are the actual figures
reported, but the previous forecasts and rumors have to be taken into
account, and revisions to previous releases may change the picture completely. Extreme volatility at news time makes the trades harder to achieve.
One has to be very careful not to be stopped out before the move has been
given a chance to progress.

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

144

There is a saying, “Buy the rumor; sell the fact.” You have to keep up
with what is getting the focus of the market at any moment. The effects of
economic releases can last for hours and even days after they have been
issued.
The most common way to trade the news is to examine the charts previous to a particular big number to be released and look for periods of consolidation in preparation for that release. You then trade the breakout that
ensues after the figures have been made public. Since the effects usually
last for more than one day, you can either trade news intraday or based on
the daily charts in a more conservative way.

WHEN ARE THE NEWS RELEASES ISSUED?
If you are planning to trade news releases, you should pay extra attention to
the following times based on each market involved. The following list
shows the approximate times (Eastern Time) when the most important economic releases are usually published.
Market Hours
Country
United States
Japan
Canada
United Kingdom
Italy
Germany
France
Switzerland
New Zealand
Australia

Currency

Time (EST)

USD
JPY
CAD
GBP
EUR
EUR
EUR
CHF
NZD
AUD

8:30–10:00
18:50–23:30
7:00–8:30
2:00–4:30
3:45–5:00
2:00–6:00
2:45–4:00
1:45–5:30
16:45–21:00
17:30–19:30

APPROXIMATE VARIATION IN PIPS BASED ON THE NEWS
In the following 20 minutes after the news is released:
Unemployment (non-farm payrolls)
Interest rates (rate decisions from the Fed)
Trade balance

124 pips
74 pips
64 pips

CHAPTER 9

ECONOMICS

Inflation (CPI)
Retail sales
GDP
Current account balance
Durable goods
TIC report or foreign acquisitions of U.S. assets

145

44 pips
43 pips
43 pips
43 pips
39 pips
33 pips

In the continuation of the day when the news is released:
Unemployment (nonfarm payrolls)
Interest rates (rate decisions from the Fed)
TIC report or foreign acquisitions of U.S. assets
Trade balance
Current account balance
Durable goods
Retail sales
Inflation (CPI)
GDP

193 pips
140 pips
132 pips
129 pips
27 pips
126 pips
125 pips
123 pips
110 pips

WHAT ARE CONTRARIAN INDICATORS?
You may have heard the saying, “Buy the rumor; sell the fact.” Contrarian
indicators are news, data, and opinions that imply a certain path and direction for any given currency pair, whereas, in reality, the result is totally
opposite. They are very important when you are timing market moves
because they can provide warning signs of possible market reversals.
It has been noted in some research in experimental psychology that
people usually tend to overreact to news events, especially when the events
are unexpected and/or of a dramatic nature. The most recent information
has more weight than previous data.
When this reflects on the markets, you will see that extreme movements in prices will be followed almost immediately by strong movements
in the exact opposite direction; the stronger the first move, the greater will
be the reversal. This is caused by the panic that overcomes investors in the
face of new information, and this expands to the rest of the market. As a
conclusion, you could deduct that when the market is most bearish and
everybody is selling, there is a good opportunity for buying, and inversely,
when other investors are buying and the market shows a strong bullish
impulse, there is a good opportunity for selling. If your estimation about

146

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

the overreaction of the market is correct, you will profit because the markets always make a correction over time.
A contrarian indicator is one that indicates that a currency or stock
actually will do the opposite of what the indicator says. When a particular
currency pair or stock starts to get a huge amount of press coverage or
advertising, it is time to pay attention for the imminent reversal. In the case
of a currency pair, the more it is advertised that the pair will be rising (or
falling), the more it is the time to go in the opposite direction. When everybody is long or short, it’s time to get out and go the other way.

P

5
A

R

T

TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

This page intentionally left blank

C

10
H

A

P

T

E

R

TECHNICAL
INDICATORS
TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
In a technical analysis, you look at the price and volume data to be able to
predict future movements. The basis for a technical analysis was given by
Charles H. Dow, whose methods were based on the behavior of investors,
on psychology, and on the movements of prices. When an analysis is made
based on the movement of prices, you will be doing a technical analysis.
As you can see in charts that are not more than a compilation of movements in the market price of a particular currency, the beginning of a technical analysis is that any market moves in trends and in the statements of
encouragement of traders. Therefore, all the information necessary to conduct a technical analysis is in the chart of a particular currency.
The analysis of trends is necessary for trading in the FOREX because
in the FOREX you can gain in a bull market and a bear market as you buy
one currency and sell the other. The trend lines are a simple reference that
will be useful in confirming the direction of the trend in a currency.
The advantage of technical analysis is that all the factors that affect
the prices of currency, both rational or irrational (e.g., economic data,
hopes, and feelings), are expressed in a single element that represents the
agreement between buyers and sellers at a given time. This element is the
quotation, which synthesizes the future expectations and estimates that
investors have about each currency and that determine the price.

149

150

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

With a technical analysis, you can detect when a trend is about to
change or continue, and you can determine areas that can serve as starting
points for an operation. However, as stated previously, it is necessary to
operate with coldness and discipline, not being influenced by feelings,
euphoria, or discouragement and not being carried away by the atmosphere
in the market.
In order to make a technical analysis, your approach will be based first
on the tendency in the market, which can be primary, secondary, or tertiary.
A primary tendency can last for years, and a secondary tendency can last
for months. Tertiary tendencies are variations within a secondary tendency.
Technical analysis uses indicators and patterns. Indicators are mathematical operations on the range of prices that exist in a chart, whereas patterns are forms that are often repeated over time.
The second important point of a technical analysis is the resistance
and support levels because some levels remain constant over time and are
difficult to break upward (resistance) and can break downward (support).
Certain resistance or support levels are difficult to break because traders
determine whether it is good to break them or not. But when a rupture of
a support or a resistance level takes place, the prices tend to go toward the
following level of support or resistance. However, there can be false
breaks in a given level, and this occurs because traders are not attracted to
break this particular level.
What you find in the charts that your broker gives you will be
explained in the next section, and that information can be displayed in different ways.

TYPES OF CHARTS SHOWING PRICE ACTION
PRICE ACTION
What Is Price Action?
Price action is the direct result of order flow: buyers and sellers in the market at a given moment and at a certain price level. Price action will show
you the particular bias (more buyers than sellers, or vice versa), the speed
at which operations are being performed, and where the buying and selling
are occurring (the levels of support and resistance). You can gauge when a
breakout is real and where a reversal is probably going to happen. Indicators are born from the continuous flow of this price action and thus depend
on it. The indicators only can show what is happening or has happened a
few moments ago. For this reason, your understanding of and ability to

CHAPTER 10

TECHNICAL INDICATORS

151

interpret price action become an essential component of your trading. They
are a way to get to the core that lies behind the origin of indicators and of
most of the technical signals in the market.
Basic elements are the condition of the bars or candles themselves. You
will have up bars, down bars, inside and outside bars, and pin bars or Pinocchio bars. How they relate to one another and form patterns is also taken
into account, as in double highs or double lows.
Here are some of the basic definitions of price-action patterns:
A Pinocchio or pin bar (PB) has a very long nose pointing in one
direction, but it is lying about the direction it will take thereafter
(thus the name). Its close has to be lower than the open and its
direction down, nose pointing up, for a bearish pin bar The
inverse, nose pointing down, direction up, close higher than the
open, is the case for a bullish pin bar.
pinbar

pinbar
pinbar

A double-high lower close (DBHLC) shows two sequential bars with
the same high, the second bar closes lower than the first bar’s low,
and the direction is down, or bearish. Inversely, a bullish doublelow higher close (DBLHC) will show two sequential bars with the
same low, the close of the second bar is higher than the close of
the first bar, and the direction is up.
Outside bars can be bearish or bullish, a bearish outside bar (BEOB)
will engulf the first bar, its close being lower than its open and the
close of the first bar, with the direction down. The bullish outside
bar (BUOB) has an upward direction, also engulfs the previous
bar, and its close is higher than its open and than the open of the
previous bar.

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

152

inside bar

The inside bar setup needs three candles or bars for confirmation.
The previous bar is bigger, the inside bar is contained within the
length of the previous bar, and the third bar must break both of
the first two bars for validity, as you can see in the figure above.
The direction will be up or down depending on which side
breaks first.

exact test = failure = change of trend

AUD/USD 4 hours - PRICE ACTION

UPTREND

Higher Highs (HH)
Higher Lows (HL)

LH

LL
Outside Bar (OB)
LL

HH
HH

LH

HH
OB

LL

HL

LH
HH
IB
LL

HL

DOWNTREND

OB

Lower Highs (LH)
Lower Lows (LL)

HL
LL

Inside Bar (IB)

CHAPTER 10

TECHNICAL INDICATORS

153

The price on any given time frame is in an uptrend if it continuously
makes higher highs (HHs) and higher lows (HLs) and in a
downtrend if it continuously makes lower highs (LHs) and lower
lows (LLs). Any other behavior will give consolidation patterns
such as ranges, triangles, pennants, rectangles, etc. The trend
continues until the behavior remains in place and is broken as
soon as there are no higher highs and higher lows occurring for
an uptrend or lower highs and lower lows occurring for a
downtrend. After a trend is broken, there is usually a period of
consolidation until the trend resumes or reverses.
Different time frames can have different trends, so it is important to be
able to differentiate uptrends and downtrends as well as consolidation patterns. Price can be rising on a daily chart but meanwhile can be performing a
correction or retracement over shorter periods. You have to train your eye to
spot the movements, and a good exercise to do is to take a chart and mark the
lows and highs as in the figure above (with LL or HL for lows and HH and
LH for highs). First take a higher time frame, such as 4 hours, and mark the
trendlines that result from the union of higher or lower highs and higher or
lower lows. Then switch and do the same on a shorter time frame, such as 30
minutes. Identify the new highs and lows, and draw the corresponding trendlines. Now you are able to see the trend in both time frames. You can decide
to trade based on the shorter time-frame trend or wait until both align and the
price starts moving in the same direction as the higher time-frame trend.

ADVANCE AND RETREAT
The two essential moves that can be seen on a chart are impulsive moves
and corrective moves. An impulsive move is a strong advance in the direction of the trend, usually fast and long, followed by several candles in the
same direction. Corrective moves are the inverse and usually follow an
impulsive move. The price action retreats, but the strength is very low.
Small bars or candles show with no particular alignment. They usually prepare the next impulsive move.
An impulsive move is the result of a large amount of capital entering
the market, where buyers or sellers come in at a particular level and with a
specific direction in mind. It also can be triggered by a price cascade, such
as by reaching a huge amount of pending stop-loss orders (exiting contrarian positions or entering new positions in the same direction as the move).
These are the moves with the most consistency because the order flow is
heavily biased in one direction. Being able to identify impulsive moves provides us with great trading opportunities.

154

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Corrective moves, on the other hand, are usually the result of two possible situations: profit taking after an impulsive move or a mixed number
of buyers and sellers sitting at a certain level, which could become a reversal point. Very often the next move after a correction is a continuation of
the previous impulsive move. This type of move has a much lower and
unstable order flow and offers a much smaller number of opportunities for
good trades.
Gauging the time elapsed between moves is useful in order to have an
idea of how much time you will have to wait for the next continuation
move. Although not exactly accurate, the price wave usually has a particular frequency (different in every time frame) that can be measured and
help you to identify impulses and corrections and give you a rough idea
about the possibilities of success for a particular entry. Counting the bars
when a pattern is formed is also important in verifying the consistency and
potential of the given pattern. For example, wedges and triangles usually
complete or exit their patterns at between two-thirds and three-quarters of
the move. It is quite rare that they go all the way to completion. Finally,
observing the time variable in a consolidation pattern will give you an idea
of the potential breakout that has to come later. The longer this time is, the
greater is the possibility that the following breakout is a legitimate one.
Also, it will break with more strength after a long period of ranging.

LINE CHARTS

EUR/USD 15 minutes Line Chart

CHAPTER 10

TECHNICAL INDICATORS

155

In line charts, the closing price is displayed as a point, which is then connected to all the other points through a line, called the price line. This line
offers very little information but can show the general trend in the price of
a particular currency. Every different time scale will show the closing price
point for that specific time frame. In some trading platforms, you are able
to plot the chart based on a different price (e.g., open, high, or close), but
the standard is usually the close because the fluctuation in price during that
time frame is not as important as the point in time where the pair closes for
most traders.
Other possible settings are an average price between the open (O),
close (C), high (H), and low (L), or (O ⫹ H ⫹ L ⫹ C)/4, or other less common settings such as the average of high, low, and close, or (H ⫹ L ⫹ C)/3,
or (H ⫹ L ⫹ 2 ⫻ C)/4, or (H ⫹ L)/2, etc. The average of the four prices is
best because it is easier to work with and takes out most of the noise.
The line chart is much harder to interpret, especially for beginners,
and some chart patterns are not as easier to spot. It can be of general use
to have an overview of the price movement, but I would not recommend it
for hands-on trading because other types of charts can give much stronger
signals and indications.

BAR CHARTS

EUR/USD 15 minutes Bar Chart

156

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

A bar chart can show three or four types of prices, the opening and closing
price and the high and low on OHLC bars or simply the high, low, and close
prices on HLC bars. The top indicates the highest price for the period, the
bottom shows the lowest price, and the vertical bar indicates the trading
range for the given period. The horizontal dash on the left side is the open
price, and the dash on the right side is the close price. On HLC bars, only
the right dash is seen.
The bar chart is one of the most popular charts, and it offers a fair
amount of information about the price movement of the currency pair. High
and low prices are united by the vertical bar showing the trading range, and
visualization of market movements is much better than on line charts
because you can see where the price has closed with respect to the opening
price and thus see if the market is going up or down.

CANDLESTICK CHARTS

EUR/USD 15 minutes Candlesticks Chart

Candlestick charts are very similar to bar charts in the type of information
they offer, also containing price direction information. However, the
graphic display is easier to interpret.
Opening and closing prices make the body of the candlestick. When
the opening price is lower than the closing price (up candle), the body is
left blank or white. When the opening price is higher than the closing
price (down candle), the body is filled with color or black (this can be

CHAPTER 10

TECHNICAL INDICATORS

157

interpreted as “void” and “filled” because a void candlestick will be
lightly weighted and will “float up” and a filled candlestick will be heavy
and “fall down”).
Upper shadows or wicks show the high of the price and lower shadows show the low of the price for the time period selected. There is a
series of patterns that are considered to have prediction qualities. The
names of the patterns make it easier to remember what a particular pattern means; in addition, some of the patterns are good for identifying
market reversal points.
These are the most commonly used charts. However, there are also
other ways to represent price action graphically.

HEIKEN-ASHI CHARTS
Heiken-Ashi charts were invented by the Japanese and look like candlestick charts, but they use a different method to calculate and plot the
candles.

EUR/USD - Heiken-Ashi - 1 hour Chart

Unlike candlestick charts, in which each candlestick shows four different values of the open, close, high, and low prices (independent of each
other), Heiken-Ashi candles use the preceding candle and are calculated
based on their relationship:

158

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Close: This is the average of the open, close, high, and low prices
(OHLC/4).
Open: This is the average of the open and close of the preceding
candle.
High: This is the highest value among the high, open, and close
prices.
Low: This is the lowest value among the high, open, and close prices.
In this way, they are related to each other. When calculating the open
and close prices of every candle, you need to know the preceding open and
close prices, and the high and the low are affected in the same way by the
preceding candle. For this reason, the candles appear on the chart with a
certain delay. This can be a good feature when you are trading very volatile
currency pairs and also when you engage in scalping very short time
frames such as the 1-minute chart because it prevents you from entering too
early and making mistakes by trading against the market. However, trading
with Heiken-Ashi candles by themselves is not the best option, especially
in higher time frames, because the action is delayed, and you could be
entering too late. You should have another chart open to see the normal candlesticks or bars along with this indicator.
When the market is bullish, Heikin-Ashi candles have big bodies and
long upper shadows but no lower shadow. When the market is bearish,
Heikin-Ashi candles have big bodies and long lower shadows but no upper
shadow. Reversal candles are similar to doji candlesticks, with a very small
body and long upper and lower shadows.
There are five primary signals that identify trends and buying opportunities:
●
