
1 78

Chapter 7

Skipping Trades and Trading Breaks for Failure

1 : Trading against a strong trend or an otherwise dominant pres­
sure.
2: Trading with the pressure but into resistance overhead or under­
foot.
3: Perceiving a trend to be in place when the market is actually
rangmg.
4: Choosing entries too far removed from the 25ema, or with little
regard for the adverse round number magnet.
) 5: Picking entries in a frantic environment in which the majority of
bars exceed their average span.
6: Aiming to trade a reversal of a pullback that shows aggressive
powerbars or clusters within.
7: Front-running a break or turn of the market with too little buildup
to warrant such action.
Ultimately, knowing when to skip or trade a break is a matter of trading
experience, no doubt, but there are quite a few pointers to pick up that
even the novice should have little trouble putting into practice straight­
away. As stated, most of these essentials have already been addressed,
but with our focus mainly on the timing aspect for trade acceptance.
Let us now take a slightly different approach by discussing some clas­
sic tricks and traps that should give us fair warning as to when to stay
out; and while we're at it, why not explore also if there are ways to take
advantage of some of these treacherous breakouts, by trading them for
failure in the opposite direction.

1 79

Understanding Price Action
I Fig 7.11

WWW'. ProRealTlme.com

eur/usd 5-minute

1 .365

3

2
'"'00

11:00

12:00

Figure 7.1 Trending sessions are easy to spot. Unless we are dealing

with a lengthy flag we need only to follow the direction of the 25ema to
understand who is currently in charge. And nine times out of ten, that
is the line also to follow for our trades. This information is so easy to
obtain, so unambiguous in nature, and such an excellent filter that it's
hard to believe that anyone would willingly discard it. But many do by
mistake.
Beyond question, one of the main causes for traders to get tricked
into rebellion is the appearance of a so-called "reversal pattern". The
bull trend in Figure 7. 1 shows three such patterns (above the dotted
lines), each with reversal features of its own. What these patterns share
in common, though, is the typical horizontal barrier below them and the
fact that all three were broken towards the 2 5ema. In contrast, bull-flag
1 -2 , was broken away from the average (hence it being referred to as a
"continuation pattern") .
More often than not, trading a break of a reversal pattern straight
into a trending 25ema is a gamble more than a trade, and a poor one at
that. But here's the interesting part: when such a break indeed harbors
all the makings of a trap, we may soon have an excellent shot at trading

the event for failure.
In a way, the tactics involved are not far removed from pullback
reversal technique, but we do have to consider a specific signal bar re­
quirement. This is best explained with some practical examples.
Let's start out with the break at bar 4. First off, there's no need for
close scrutiny to see why this event was a trade-for-failure candidate:

180

Chapter 7

Skipping Trades and Trading Breaks for Failure

bears had shorted straight into a bullish triple of the 25ema, the round
number and the 50 percent retracement of the 2-3 bull swing.
When aiming to trade for failure, it is vital not to run ahead of things
but to calmly monitor the way the market handles the break first. In a
bear break situation, special attention should go out to a bullish turn­
around bar; the first to come along could already set up the re-break
entry (5).
Of critical importance, though, is the high of this turnaround bar.
Since we are looking to trade the break below the dotted barrier for
failure, we have to make sure that our entry is back above it (failure
confirmation). This implies that the high of our signal bar should reside
either at the exact level of the broken barrier or slightly above it. Under
no circumstances should we enter on a break of this bar below the bar­
rier.
As long as we keep this requirement in mind, the situation can in­
deed be traded like a regular pullback reversal. A bullish bonus here
was to see the 4-5 cluster take on the features of a mini W -pattern mid­
dIe-part, or, if you wish, a thicker version of the morning-star pattern.
Another favorable element was to see bar 5 set up a flag break entry as
well. All told, this represented a trade-for-failure setup of the high-odds
category (enter long above bar 5).
lt may not be so obvious at first sight, but the break below the 6-7-8
block is almost an exact copy of the situation on the left. Once again
bears had shown little regard for the bullish conditions. And again they
had shorted straight into a trending average and into a 50/60 percent
retracement of a foregoing swing (5-7) ; and while doing so, they had
totally neglected the technical support of a ceiling test with our former
signal bar (low of 9 tests high of 5).
What may have inspired this bearish bravery? Maybe these players
had perceived the lower top at 7 to be a sign of bullish weakness. Maybe
they were only gunning for the round number magnet about 1 5 pip
below; who is to say what these bears were thinking. But we can form
ourselves a pretty good idea of what they failed to consider: the hazards

of defying the tide.

Of course, all this is not to suggest that you cannot trade against

181

Understanding Price Action
dominance with decent odds attached, but if you insist on going the
obstinate route, seldom a smart idea is to pull the rebellious trigger
straight into a trending 25ema.
Note: An interesting element within of the trade-for-failure concept

is that due to the faltering breakout, we often see the blocky features of
the perceived reversal pattern take on the more angular characteristics
of a flag formation, which is a continuation pattern. In the 6-7-8 situ­
ation, it had taken just two extra bars to produce this transformation
(combi 9 added). By the way, the entry here was offered above the inside
bar of the combi, as in a regular combi breakout.
This was already the third pattern breakout of the session, but the
bullish enthusiasm was no less powerful. Granted, bull parties did have
a very nice 50-level magnet to shoot for. But what about the second leg
of this breakout, the near vertical swing 1 0- 1 1 . Were bulls overdoing it?
It is a common observation that when prices accelerate in an already
mature rally, say, in the third or fourth leg of it, this often indicates the
final burst of the trending environment; while this principle by itself is
rather fickle and not easy to exploit, it can serve as an excellent remind­
er not to be too eager in regard to the next continuation offer.
Aside from the acceleration issue, the break of bar 1 2 was an easy
skip for several reasons. For starters, trading for continuation in the
highs of a bull rally on such a shallow correction cannot be regarded as
a high-odds play. And the entry was offered far away from the 25ema.
Plus there was the issue of the broken 50-level magnet.
This brings us to the third reversal block of the session, the 1 1 - 1 3
situation. With prices run up well over 1 00 pip since the start of the UK
Open at 09:00, the market had now entered what is often referred to
as the "lunch-hour doldrums" ( 12 :00- 1 4 :00) . Indeed, in the majority of
sessions there isn't much firework going on in this low-volume environ­
ment; but with an uncontested rally on the board, and plenty of profits
yet to be pocketed by the bulls, it is certainly not unthinkable for the
lunch hours to put in their fair bit of action, too.
Recalling our discussions on the reversal exit in Chapter 6, the 1 01 3 progression is a perfect example of an M-pattern reversal in the

182

Chapter 7

Skipping Trades and Trading Breaks for Failure

making. Notice also how the right side of the middle-part had tried to
break out on the bull side before spinning around bearishly in powerbar
fashion ( 1 3) . A bull in position could not have wished for a better hint to
get the bearish message (reversal exit option below bar 13).
Was the break below bar 1 3 a shortable event as well? Frankly, when
compared to the earlier reversal attempts, this offer definitely had more
merit; but let us not forget that the session itself was still in bullish
mode (higher lows throughout, trending 25ema). Thus, conservatively
seen, the break is a skip. But it is hard to argue with a nimble scalper
for taking his chances on a quick short into the double magnet of the
round number and the 25ema.
With the average still trending up nicely, why not trade long again
above bar 14? Apart from the fact that the M-pattern block already
hindered the bullish outlook most considerably, the chart offers an in­
disputable clue that the time was not right for a buy-side wager: the
bear break below the dotted line had not yet been proven false. Even
if bar 14 had set up more powerfully as a turnaround bar (or perhaps
was seen as part of a morning-star variant with its neighbors left and
right) , still the entry was offered below the barrier of the overhanging
resistance. And that's a definite skip.

183

Understanding Price Action
1Fig 7.21 www. ProR••lTime.com

7

eur/usd 5-minut.

2

-1 .445

8

',

I

1Q'OO

1200

13:00

14:00

15;00

Figure 7.2 Now here is a reversal pattern truly worthy of acknowledge­

ment (big head-and-shoulders variant 3 - 1 4) . But do note that it had
taken no less than three hours since the high at 7 was put in for the
bullish dominance to fully drain out.
Within the total pattern there were several smaller patterns of in­
terest to be detected. The first notable development was bull-flag 2-4,
hanging from the pole 1-2. This correction had started out as a tiny
M-pattern reversal (above the little horizontal line) , but with four doji
bars added (3-4) , the pattern had taken on the shape of a flag, thereby
turning itself into a continuation candidate.
The break above combi 3 is an easy skip: prices still resided below
the mini barrier of the bearish breakout. But the break above bar 4 does
not qualify as a high-odds wager either. At that point the flag was still
rather small in relation to its pole and there was the adverse magnet of
the average to consider. Unpleasant also was the total absence of sup­
port beneath this flag in case of a faltering start.
Next up was another flag formation (5-6) , decent in shape but hang­
ing a bit awkwardly from the rather short pole 4-5. Perhaps we could
say that it related to a larger pole, the two-legged swing 1-5. More in­
teresting, this flag had found solid footing in the 2 5ema, the round
number and a technical test with the flag on the left (favorable triple) .
Notice also that the last three bars had formed a three-bar combi (6).
With no room for another bar in the squeeze to get printed, something
had to give. We can look upon this as a flag break setup, but since a
bull break would confirm the failure of the bear break in the low of the

184

. ...

Chapter 7

Skipping Trades and Trading Breaks for Failure

flag, this was a trade-for-failure setup as well. (Not that it matters how
we label our breaks. )
As we know, accelerations in the highs o r lows o f a mature rally can
be a gift as well as a curse (6-7) . Surely there was no denying the bullish
supremacy here, but it remained to be seen how this dominance would
hold up in the often tricky lunch-hour doldrums ( 1 2: 00- 14:00) .
In the first hour of consolidation (box) , bulls stood their ground well,
with prices calmly drifting sideways a little above the 25ema. No trouble
on the bullish horizon yet. Things took an interesting turn, though,
when new bulls came to attack the session high with a break in bar 8,
but then were forced to retreat from it.
Just like a failed reversal can swing things around in favor of con­
tinuation, so too can a failed continuation trigger a reaction in favor of a
reversal (think double top or bottom). Such failure may not have imme­
diate consequences upon occurrence, but it will not go unnoticed, and
could trigger demoralization further down the line. Or put differently,
if you were a bull in position and you saw that M-pattern block take
shape on your screen (box) , would you not be at least a little concerned?
The box break at T was a bit thinly built up, hence the tease annota­
tion, but the incident did give fair warning of weakening support. If not
yet on target in the 6-7 breakout, this may have called for a reversal
exit.
A few bars later, the box barrier skirmish (T -9) got "resolved" in favor
of the bears with a break below bar 9. With now more buildup showing,
was this a signal to play short?
Shorting below bar 9 does make sense in some respects; for starters,
this second break confirmed the failure of the bulls to undo the first
break at T. Taking into account also that the M-pattern was already the
third corrective block to show up, and the most prominent one at that,
it makes sense to at least consider our sell-side options-if only with the
intention to exploit the pull of the round number magnet about 1 5 pip
below.
But before we put our precious capital at risk, let us not forget to
examine the obstructive elements that may have kept our short from
reaching target. How about the earlier lows of 3 and 6 (pattern line ex-

185

Understanding Price Action
tension); how about the cluster progression in the flag on the left; how
about the fact that the chart had been very bullish from the UK Open
on, which may have left quite a few bulls lurking for lower prices still. As
we can see, as much as there was pressure to be detected that favored
the sell side, the situation wasn't exactly hopeless for the bulls. And all
the while the 25ema was still trending up.
As it turned out, bears indeed were unable to push through the pat­
tern line defense. This printed yet another higher low in the chart, but
definitely not something to pursue. After all, the break above bar 10 was
offered below the broken box, and that simply rules out the trade-for­
failure option.
But how about the break above combi 1 1 ; if we visualize the box to
be extended a little to the right, we can see that prices were now push­
ing up against the bottom barrier of it, meaning a break above combi 1 1
would now technically confirm, if somewhat belatedly, the failure of the
reversal break below bar 9 . All true, but not every such re-break calls
for action.
Note: Without putting a strict rule on it, trading for failure is best
done in response to the first reversal attempt in a fresh dominant swing.
That is when the market is most likely to reject the reversal breakout
in favor of continuation. The later in the trend a reversal pattern shows
up, and the blockier its features, the harder it will be for the dominant
parties to dismantle the reversal implications.
In this particular instance, brave bulls did manage to eat themselves
back through the contents of the 7-8 block, but this left them extremely
vulnerable upon reaching the highs ( 12). When the selling then started,
they had no ammo left to fight back.
On their subsequent retreat, bulls not only left a triple top in their
wake (7-8- 1 2) , they inadvertently helped to complete the final arch of
the big head-and-shoulders formation. As is often seen, though, they
took it upon themselves not to give up on their cause without a good
fight first. This resulted in yet another element of interest: a squeeze in
pattern line support that ended with a bearish combi ( 1 3- 14).
When measured against the total span of the big head-and-shoul­
ders pattern, this pre-breakout tension wasn't very extensive-a few

186

Chapter 7

Skipping Trades and Trading Breaks for Failure

more bars of buildup would have been nice; on the other hand, the
odds for follow-through certainly weren't poor. In most such "border­
line" cases it is probably best to just bite the bullet and fire along (enter
short on the break of combi 14).
Note: A round number not far from entry-or any other magnet, for
that matter-could provide a trade with an excellent start. Upon arrival,
however, the bounce effect could instantly reclaim all of the current
gains. In fact, this type of response is so notoriously commonplace that
it has led many traders to adopt a routine of raking in some, if not all of
the profits in a danger zone with the intention to reposition after a "fa­
vorable" bounce (basically a variant of the resistance exit). In theory this
makes perfect sense, but in reality, this practice harbors some dangers
of its own: it is easy to miss out on a lot of follow-through in all cases
where the market simply refuses to bounce (sufficiently) .
Alas, sticking to the bracket, although largely recommended, is
no guarantee for a successful wager either. In the session above, the
bounce up from the round number may very well have shaken out our
short in the high of bar 1 5. If so, it is crucial to accept such mishap
with grace and above all, not to lose track of the action! Recalling our
discussions on the pattern break pullback setup in Chapter 5, when a
post-breakout correction puts in a ceiling test back inside the broken
pattern, this could easily set up a second break in line with the first.
Thus, rather than walking away from a shake in an act of disgust, it
may pay to stay alert for another try (re-enter short below bar 1 5) .

187

Understanding Price Aaion
IFig 7.31

WHW.ProRealTime.com

1 .43

eur/usd 5-minute

C ProReaITime .com
06:00

0000

09:00

'0:00

11:00

12:00

Figure 7.3 Around the EU Open at 08:00, a small but gracious flag hung

harmoniously from its pole. The last three bars in it were jammed tight
in a squeeze between the 25ema and the flag line ( 1) ; looking closely,
we can detect within the latter element the up/down motions of an
evening-star, which is a mini three-bar M-pattern with reversal implica­
tions of its own. A nice flag. On the downside, if we consider the hours
prior to 08:00, this set up as a continuation trade in the lows of the
Asian session. As we know, the first volume of the EU /UK session is
never so keen on immediately following up on the Asian pressure, par­
ticularly in the lows or highs of it-but that is no reason to skip a trade
per se. We could even say that this flag harbored a jailed attempt of
the bulls to counter the Asian pressure, which basically turned it into
a trade-for-failure setup. But let us not overanalyze the situation: this
was a decent short setup with decent odds attached.
Shortly after the UK Open, bulls had tried to hammer in a double­
bottom with combi 2 , but their efforts were quickly undone. Bears,
however, despite the backup of powerbar 3, proved wholly unable to
capitalize on their advantage. Another fine example of how tricky this
opening hour can be (09:00- 1 0:00) .
Whenever a sideways cluster of bars halts an advance or decline,
there are basically two options of interest. Either this cluster builds up
towards another leg in line with the dominant pressure (continuation) ,
or it is getting ready to defy it (reversal). While the market's verdict will
only be known after the fact, in plenty of cases the attentive obselVer
may already pick up some cues that favor one outcome more than the

188

Chapter 7

Skipping Trades and Trading Breaks for Failure

other. Plotting a box around the clustering action will certainly help to
keep good track of the pressures in play (pullback 4-5 provided the box
boundaries).
As already stated, when a sideways progression shows up as part of
a first pullback to the 25ema, its reversal implications are usually not
that potent. The bear-flag at 08:00 is a good example: a failed reversal
that played out in favor of bearish continuation. In the later stages of
a rally, the contrarian prospects naturally improve. Especially when a
sideways cluster shows up at quite some distance from the trending
25ema (as was the case with the box), and then gets broken towards it,
contrarian parties stand to benefit from a very powerful ally: the magnet
of the 25ema.
When not in position, all this is just information; we would neither
use such a box for shorting purposes, nor go long above it. Of course,
when already in position, the adverse break of a box could have serious
consequences.
So let us examine this situation as if still in short position. To begin,
the 4-6 double bottom showed signs of contrarian effort, but not of ma­
jor concern yet. More indicative was the break of the box in powerbar

7. Perhaps we could already exit our short at this point, but in strict
technical terms, the bar had only just stuck its head through the top of
the box without being broken itself (no technical confirmation yet).
In this instance, the break was quickly confirmed when bar 8 took
out the high of bar 7 (reversal exit). If still not convinced of the bullish
implications, bears would have done well not to ignore the subsequent
break of bar 8 also, which was now a combi breakout.
As prices were reeled in by the 25ema magnet, but then started to
struggle in it, this may have prompted some eager bears to consider
their sell-side options. But before doing so ourselves, let us not forget
to check the conditions first. As discussed in Chapter 5, an important
aspect in pullback reversal technique is to see a correction of interest
travel diagonally and orderly against the dominant swing, with little
signs of aggression within. With this in mind, hopefully it isn't hard
to see why the short below bar 9 is annotated as a skip: although di­
agonally shaped and guided along by a decent pullback line, the 6-9

189

Understanding Price Action
correction was part of a box pattern and contained some powerful bull­
ish bars as well. In fact, we could look upon this bull swing as the
right leg of a W-pattern reversal; and that puts a short against it in the
low-odds corner. Mter all, to get to target, prices would now have to
plow themselves a way through the contents of the middle-part section
below; not only will this keep many bears from hopping along, there will
be plenty of contrarians on the lurk to buy themselves in from the base
of that very same cluster. (All this in terms of probability.)
W and M-patterns in the lows or highs of a rally are a very common
occurrence. By themselves they may not possess the power to fully flip a
trending session around, but it will certainly pay to at least respect the
implications attached to their presence.
As it turned out, the supportive powers of the box progression were
not even tested on first go; but if we extend the level to the right (dotted
line) , it is plain to see that the market had not forgotten about its techni­
cal significance (sharp bounce in the low of bar 1 0) .
WYfW ProReamme com
