
141

142

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

The Magnet Effect
One of the greatest experiences with the Harmonic Trading techniques is the first time that you
identify a potential pattern, observe the price action, test the PRZ, and reverse precisely from
that projected area. For many people, this type of experience is when the harmonic lightbulb
turns on. I’ve received numerous e-mails from many people who describe this exact sequence
of events. From that point forward, people tend to never look at the financial markets the same
way again.
But, what is this experience? I remember when I first started to differentiate the various
M- and W-type structures, I became excited the more I was able to differentiate various
harmonic setups. In most cases, I was able to recognize these situations well in advance. For
example, pattern developments in the various major indices in my advisory reports, especially
the S&P 500, were identified months if not more than a year in advance. How was this
possible? Time and time again, there were distinct harmonic patterns forming on many longterm charts that eventually came to fruition. As I tracked these situations, I realized in all
patterns there was a distinct point where the potential completion of a harmonic pattern would
be triggered. Regardless of the pattern, the price action frequently was drawn to the distinct
harmonic zone. In my opinion, this technical phenomenon was defined by the relative structure
of the overall price action as it entered the final CD leg of the pattern.
Although this phenomenon did not occur in every situation, a majority of these
circumstances where distinct harmonic patterns would develop, enter into the final CD leg, and
ultimately test all of the numbers in the PRZ. Regardless of whether the pattern completion was
valid, the zone from the point the CD leg is triggered until it tests the completion point of the
pattern continually presented a fantastic trading opportunity to capitalize on the predominant
trend and the magnet effect of the harmonic price action.

Harmonic Breakouts and Breakdowns
I soon realized that these situations were unique technical breakouts and breakdowns that
were defined by their relative harmonic ratio alignments. In the same fashion as harmonic
patterns, these structures possessed precise technical conditions to define these unique
situations. Also, these specific harmonic breakouts or breakdowns enabled me to develop
pattern-specific rules for each trading opportunity. After refining the details for these setups, the
execution and the management of these trades became easier to handle.

Chapter 5 BAMM Theory

143

Depending upon the ratio alignment, the trigger of the final leg of the structure occurs when
the price action of the CD segment exceeds the prior B point. Whether the price action is a
breakout or a breakdown, the extent of this move can be projected with a large degree of
certainty as long as the entire structure satisfies all of the necessary elements to validate the
pattern. This classification creates a unique technical situation that requires many conditions to
be valid before triggering a potential trade opportunity. Furthermore, these breakout and
breakdown strategies attempt to capture a small segment of the price action relative to the
larger pattern. Unlike many general technical strategies that attempt to capitalize on breakouts
and breakdowns, this approach employs the advanced pattern identification techniques to
differentiate these situations as unique. It is important to realize that these are special breakout
and breakdown trading strategies that rely on many technical conditions to be present to
validate the opportunity. Therefore, the technical considerations and price parameters are
precisely defined, providing a more detailed framework to assess the trade opportunity.
As I mentioned previously, within the context of Harmonic Trading, the Bat pattern
possessed these technical traits more clearly than any other setup. Time and time again,
I was able to differentiate Bat versus Gartley patterns well in advance. As soon as the CD leg
exceeded the B point, the final segment represented a fantastic opportunity to capitalize on the
predominant trend—at least capturing the segment to the pattern’s completion point. Of course,
the Bat presented a larger zone, as the CD leg extended further beyond the B point, which was
typically a 50% retracement or less, in this pattern and completed at the 0.886. Unlike the
Gartley pattern, which utilized a 0.618 retracement and offered a smaller zone between the B
point and the D point, the Bat became a reliable structure to employ these strategies. Hence,
BAMM—Bat Action Magnet Move—best described this technical phenomenon. Harmonic
breakout or breakdown might be a more appropriate technical term to describe this type of
price action. However, the entire concept is encompassed within the dynamics of the Bat
pattern.

144

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

Bullish BAMM Breakout
The illustration of the Bearish Bat pattern in Figure 5.1 shows the point where the BAMM is
triggered. Utilizing the Bat pattern illustration, when the B point of a pattern is at a 50% level or
less, the CD leg typically experiences a greater retracement of the XA move to the 0.886 level.

X

D
0.886

0.3

8

;

82

;0

.50

B

8
.61

1
6
.
2

1

0.382;
0.886

BAMM
TRIGGER

C

A
Figure 5.1

In the case of the Bearish Bat pattern, when the price action exceeds the B point in a
breakout move, the segment of the CD leg typically extends toward the 0.886 retracement,
which is usually complemented by other harmonic measurements. As a side note, it is
important to point out that the Bearish Bat is utilized in the Bullish BAMM because the
opportunity to get long on the breakout of the B point is striving to capture the segment to the
completion of the pattern at the 0.886 retracement. Also, it is important to note that this
technique typically employs shorter-term trading strategies within the context of a longer-term
pattern. The ultimate goal is to capitalize on those smaller yet higher-probability price moves
within the completion of a much larger pattern.

Chapter 5 BAMM Theory

145

Standard & Poor’s 500 Continuous Contract (ES_#F):
Daily Bullish BAMM Breakout
In May 2006, the continuous mini-contract of the S&P 500 formed a distinct Bearish Bat pattern
that was triggered when the CD leg exceeded the prior B point on its way to test all of the
numbers in the PRZ (see Figure 5.2).

Figure 5.2

As the index rallied above the B point resistance, the price action triggered the BAMM, as
the index decidedly rallied 40 points to close this gap. Clearly, the predominant trend of the
daily action dictated the short-term bullish bias until the pattern was completed. Any intra-day
trades during this time should have favored the long side until the BAMM completed. In this
case, the larger daily trend clearly defined the short-term upside within the constraints of the
pattern. This daily scenario clearly illustrates the BAMM concept and the ability of these
“magnet moves” to decipher price action and define trading opportunities.

146

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

Bullish BAMM Breakout in the CD Leg
The BAMM phenomenon can be clearly witnessed upon close inspection of the CD leg. As the
price action rallies above the B point, the “magnet effect” begins (see Figure 5.3).

D

0.886
BAMM
TRIGGER

B
0.50
C
Figure 5.3

The most important technical aspect of this breakout is the clear continuation to the upside
after the price action exceeds the B point. The breakout should continue convincingly until it
tests the PRZ. Although not all price action rallies straight to the completion point of the pattern,
the most valid situations exhibit decisive continuation. If not, it is best to cover those positions
that tend to stall after the BAMM is triggered.

Chapter 5 BAMM Theory

147

Standard & Poor’s 500 Continuous Contract (ES_#F):
Daily Bullish BAMM Breakout in the CD Leg
The enlarged chart in Figure 5.4 shows the price action in the CD leg of the Bearish Bat that
exemplifies the ideal bullish continuation necessary to validate these trading opportunities. In
this case, the ES rallied sharply on the harmonic breakout above the prior B point and
proceeded to test the PRZ in a direct “magnet move.”

Figure 5.4

Although the ES experienced a few down days along the way, the price action climbed
steadily in this BAMM zone until all of the numbers in the pattern’s PRZ were tested. This
BAMM breakout defined a precise 40-point zone that was “under the magnet effect of the
pattern.” This clearly identified a bullish bias in this area until the pattern was completed.
Technical information like this can immensely improve trading results, as the understanding of
such harmonic phenomena will consistently identify the predominant market bias and identify
those trades that seek to benefit from the established trend.

148

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

Bearish BAMM Breakdown
Figure 5.5 illustrates a Bullish Bat pattern that outlines the point where the BAMM is triggered.
Utilizing the Bat pattern illustration, when a B point of a pattern is at a 50% level or less, the
CD leg typically experiences a greater retracement of the XA move to the 0.886 level.

X
C

0.382;
0.886

;

2
8
.3

0
5
.
0

B

1.6

18

BAMM
TRIGGE R

;2

.61

8

0

0.886

A

D
Figure 5.5

In the case of the Bullish Bat pattern, when the price action exceeds the B point in a
breakdown move, the segment of the CD leg typically extends toward the 0.886 retracement.
The 0.886 retracement is usually complemented by other harmonic measurements that help
define the immediate PRZ. Again, it is important to point out that the Bullish Bat is utilized in
the Bearish BAMM. The opportunity to sell on the breakdown of the B point is striving to
capture the final segment that represents the completion of the pattern at the 0.886
retracement. Also, it is important to note that this technique typically employs shorter-term
trading strategies within the context of a longer-term pattern. The ultimate goal is to capitalize
on those smaller yet higher-probability price moves within the completion of a much larger
pattern.

Chapter 5 BAMM Theory

149

Eurodollar (EUR_A0-FX): Weekly
Bearish BAMM Breakdown
For more than a year, the Euro formed this distinct Bullish Bat that started to break down
sharply after violating the prior B point (see Figure 5.6). The BAMM was triggered when the CD
leg exceeded the prior B point at 1.2750 on its way to test all of the numbers in the PRZ.

Figure 5.6

As the Euro broke down under the B point support, the price action triggered the BAMM.
The index fell another 700 pips to close this gap and test the PRZ. Clearly, the predominant
trend of the daily action dictated the short-term bearish bias until the pattern was completed.
Any trades—intra-day or daily swing positions—during this time should have favored the short
side until the BAMM completed. In this case, the larger weekly trend defined the short-term
downside within the constraints of the pattern. This long-term weekly scenario clearly illustrates
the BAMM concept, and the ability of these “magnet moves” to decipher price action and to
define trading opportunities.

150

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

Bearish BAMM Breakdown in the CD Leg
The BAMM phenomenon can be clearly witnessed upon close inspection of the CD leg. As the
price action declines below the B point, the “magnet effect” begins, as illustrated in Figure 5.7.

C
0.50

B

BAMM
TRIGGER

D 0.886
Figure 5.7

The most important technical aspect of this breakdown is the clear continuation to the
downside after the price action exceeds the B point. The breakdown should continue
convincingly until it tests the PRZ. Although not all price action declines straight to the
completion point of the pattern, the most valid situations will exhibit decisive continuation. If not,
it is best to cover those positions that tend to stall after the BAMM is triggered.

Chapter 5 BAMM Theory

151

EuroDollar (EUR_A0-FX): Weekly
Bearish BAMM Breakdown in the CD Leg
The chart in Figure 5.8 shows the price action in the CD leg of the Bullish Bat.

Figure 5.8

This chart shows the ideal continuation to the downside necessary to validate these trading
opportunities. In this case, the Euro sank sharply on the breakdown below the prior B point at
1.2750.
The Euro exhibited the ideal price action in this example, and it clearly illustrates the
“magnet effect” of the BAMM concept. In the case of the Euro, it sold off sharply through this
BAMM zone until all of the numbers in the pattern’s PRZ were tested. This BAMM breakdown
defined a substantial 750-pip zone that was “under the magnet effect of the pattern” and
accurately identified the predominant bearish bias until the pattern was completed. Again,
technical information like this can immensely improve trading results, as the understanding of
such harmonic phenomena will consistently identify the predominant market bias and identify
those trades that seek to benefit from the established trend.

152

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

AB=CD BAMM
As outlined previously, the CD leg is the most powerful price segment that possesses
substantial implications for trading opportunities within the BAMM framework. When analyzing
the completion of an AB=CD pattern, the determination of the pattern’s completion point cannot
be assessed until the CD leg has violated the B point of the structure. Although this may not
seem to be that significant of a technical phenomenon on smaller patterns, larger patterns in
price and time can offer tremendous opportunities to execute trades within this AB=CD BAMM
window with the profit objective clearly defined by the PRZ. Although the AB=CD BAMM
technical phenomenon might be more appropriately called AB=CD Magnet Move or AB=CD
MM, the principles embodied within the BAMM theory best describe the entire concept. Hence,
the term is AB=CD BAMM.
In much the same manner that the BAMM principles apply to the Bat pattern when the
mid-point retracement level is exceeded, the AB=CD BAMM capitalizes on the “harmonic
breakout/breakdown” in distinct structures. Once the price action exceeds the B point, the
segment of the CD leg typically extends toward the completion point of the pattern. The BC
projection usually complements the setup, as the exact completion point of the pattern is most
important in this situation.
As a side note, it is important to point out that the Bearish AB=CD is utilized in the Bullish
BAMM because the opportunity to get long on the breakout of the prior B point is striving to
capture the remaining CD segment to the completion of the pattern. The inverse is true for the
Bearish BAMM. Also, it is important to note that this technique typically employs shorter-term
trading strategies within the context of a longer-term pattern.
Again, the ultimate goal is to capitalize on those smaller yet high-probability price moves
within the completion of a much larger pattern. Therefore, the point at which the CD leg
exceeds the prior B point provides a gap that represents a highly probable area of acceleration.
Like a magnet, the price action is pulled toward the completion point of the larger AB=CD
pattern. Although complex harmonic patterns provide even greater confirmation of the
completion of the structure, the important focus is on the area where the CD leg exceeds the
prior B point to the completion zone.

Chapter 5 BAMM Theory

153

Bullish AB=CD BAMM
In the case of the Bearish AB=CD pattern, the price action will typically accelerate on the
breakout of the resistance level at the B-point, as illustrated in Figure 5.9.

D
B

C
A
Figure 5.9

The most important technical aspect of this breakout is the clear continuation to the upside
after the price action exceeds the B point. The breakout should continue convincingly until it
tests the PRZ. Although not all price action rallies straight to the completion point of the pattern,
the most valid situations will exhibit decisive continuation. If not, it is best to cover those
positions that tend to stall after the AB=CD BAMM is triggered.

154

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

Home Depot (HD): Daily
Bullish AB=CD BAMM
The weekly chart in Figure 5.10 shows a distinct Bearish AB=CD pattern that formed over the
course of six months. The structure rallied above the prior B point and accelerated to the
completion point of the pattern.

Figure 5.10

It is important to underscore the degree of confidence in the overall trend bias that these
situations instill. Although this technical understanding does not dismiss effective trade
management strategies to capitalize on these potential opportunities, the BAMM phenomenon
offers a great deal of evidence about the state of the predominant trend and a reliable
completion target for the price move. Defining these price constraints based from the BAMM
conditions instills a great deal of confidence in the position, as all parameters are outlined in
advance. In essence, these high-probability BAMM zones create tradable “windows” of price
segments.

Chapter 5 BAMM Theory

155

Home Depot (HD): Weekly
Bullish AB=CD BAMM Breakout in the CD Leg
The enlarged chart in Figure 5.11 shows the weekly price action in the CD leg of the Bearish
AB=CD. This chart shows the ideal upside continuation necessary to validate these harmonic
breakout trading opportunities. In this case, Home Depot rallied decisively as it broke above the
prior B point resistance just above $38.

Figure 5.11

Although a 3-point breakout might not seem like a big deal, the true beauty of this concept is
the understanding of the “magnet effect” of the price action as it completes the pattern and the
high probability bias that this technical phenomenon engenders. In this case, the “harmonic
breakout” on the weekly chart confirmed that the predominant trend would continue to the
completion point of the pattern. Situations such as these create a reliable bias of the primary
trend, which can optimize trading decisions by staying on the right side of the market.

156

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

Bearish AB=CD BAMM
In the case of the Bullish AB=CD, the price action will typically accelerate on the breakdown of
the support level at the prior B-point, triggering a trade opportunity to sell on this continuation
with a target completion at the pattern’s PRZ (see Figure 5.12).

A
C

B

D
Figure 5.12

After the B point is violated, the trend should continue decidedly lower toward the
completion of the pattern. Although the price action may not decline straight to the PRZ, the
overall trend should maintain a steady descent to the harmonic numbers.

Chapter 5 BAMM Theory

157

Disney (DIS): Daily
Bullish AB=CD BAMM
The daily chart in Figure 5.13 shows the distinct AB=CD pattern that formed over the course of
nine months. The structure broke down under the prior B point and accelerated to the
completion point of the pattern.

Figure 5.13

Although the price action bounced about halfway to the ultimate completion of the pattern,
the eventual bearish continuation and overall negative bias dictated the predominant trend until
the harmonic support was tested.

158

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

Disney (DIS): Daily
Bullish AB=CD BAMM
The enlarged chart in Figure 5.14 shows the price action in the CD leg of the Bullish AB=CD
and the ideal continuation to the downside necessary to validate this trading opportunity. In the
case of Disney, the stock accelerated to the downside after violating the B point.

Figure 5.14

The AB=CD BAMM is most effective when utilizing larger time frames to define the bias for
a shorter-term move. In the case of Disney, the daily downtrend after the BAMM was triggered
would have indicated that the predominant bearish bias would be maintained until the pattern
was completed at a minimum. Therefore, the BAMM trigger would have dictated short positions
at this time until the harmonic support was tested.

Chapter 5 BAMM Theory

159

BAMM Conclusion
There are many situations where distinct structures seem to indicate their completion long
before the reality. The ability to recognize harmonic price action within distinct structures is one
of the greatest advantages of this methodology. Although not all harmonic patterns complete as
expected, there are an overwhelming number of situations where this phenomenon reveals a
great deal about the future potential price action well in advance.
There are many types of BAMM or “magnet move” phenomena that occur within many of the
structures of harmonic patterns. The BAMM and AB=CD BAMM are two examples of special
technical situations where the potential completion of a particular pattern is first recognized and
effective strategies can be employed to capitalize on obvious harmonic price action. Other
types of BAMM phenomena—such as “morphing” situations—can materialize where failed
retracement patterns evolve into extension patterns. For example, there are many situations
where a failed Bearish Bat turns into a Bearish Crab. Although these situations are not as
precise as the BAMM and AB=CD BAMM, they represent another type of phenomenon that
involves the acceleration of price action from one harmonic level to the next. Again, it is within
these “windows of harmonic levels of support and resistance” where a great deal of technical
information can be garnered and high-probability trade opportunities defined.

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter 6

RSI BAMM

As the bear markets of 2000 and 2008 demonstrated, the need for strategies that determine
the overall bias is essential to develop a relative perspective on the position of any trade. For
example, there is a significant difference between a long position, representing a continuation
of the predominant bullish trend, as opposed to a brief correction within the overall downtrend.
Despite the prevalence of distinct patterns that favor one side of the market or the other, the
larger time frame and predominant trend will always dictate the extent of any move and the
possibility for profit.

Technical Indicators
Larger trend considerations such as these were not the only new factors that helped determine
the overall bias during these challenging bear markets. Other technical measures such as
Relative Strength helped to confirm the extent of the predominant trend. Furthermore, these
considerations have become increasingly more vital to the Harmonic Trading approach and in
the determination of the overall validity of patterns as reliable structural signals.
Although indicators were not new to my analysis, as I frequently employed these studies and
others such as Volume and Price Gap strategies, I must admit that I was not always as openminded regarding their importance. When I initially started to define the Harmonic Trading
approach, I employed simple trend lines, Volume, and a few other technical studies to
complement my existing price pattern analysis. The main focus of this approach was always on
the completion of price patterns. As I examined other complementary strategies to filter the
pattern completions, I realized that indicators and oscillators provided significant technical
signals that helped gauge the overall state of the price action.
Actually, I first discussed the dynamics of harmonic price action as it relates to the Trend,
Volume, and Price Gap studies in The Harmonic Trader. In this book, I outlined trading
strategies that analyzed patterns within the context of well-established trend channels, as well.
In recent years, I investigated a variety of technical indicators, including Stochastics, Volatility
Bands, MACD, and Relative Strength. Of all these measures, I have been looking for the
technical measure that would reveal the extent of buying and selling relative to the predominant
161
