
Know When to Fold ’Em
We would be remiss in our discussion of a trading plan if we didn’t
take a few moments to delve into the trader-cum-gambler personality.
In 1997, we had a trader who came into our day-trading office with a
single trading objective. He had noticed that a particular stock had
repeated the same cycle for the previous several years (see Figure 1.3).
The stock would dip at the end of the year and then rise through the
first part of the following year. Toward the end of the year, the stock
would drop downward, only to rise again in the first quarter of the
following year. His plan was to short the stock before the dip and ride
the falling wave through the end of the year. He didn’t have a what-if
plan at all. If the stock failed to perform as he expected, there was
no risk management. In essence, he was laying his fortune on “RedOne”—the highest payout slot on the roulette wheel.
Since his story made it into this chapter of the book, you’ve
already guessed that the ball didn’t land on Red-One. As the year

c01.indd 11

11/2/07 12:13:54 PM

12

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 1.3 A Cycling Stock that Failed to Cycle

came to a close, not only did the stock fail to drop, but it was trending upward, which put him into a maintenance call. That’s when
the value of your equity drops to the point that any purchases or
shorts made on margin (borrowed money) must either be covered
or more money must be deposited into the account to protect the
broker against the trader’s defaulting on the loan. So the trader
went for the double-or-nothing move. He collected more funds and
shorted more of the same stock. His reasoning was the same that
afflicts many traders who find themselves in losing positions. If the
stock was a good buy a month ago, it’s a great buy today. The problem, though, was that he was shoveling funds into shorting a stock
that was on a clear uptrend. Not long afterward, he was in another
maintenance call. What was different about this maintenance call
was that he didn’t have any more funds to feed the fire that was
roaring from his positions that had crashed and burned. He was
forced to close his positions at a substantial loss. The saddest part
of the story is that all of this trading was done without his wife’s
knowledge. He had made the initial trade and, when the troubles
mounted, he drew funds from his family’s other accounts without
telling anyone else. His gambling tendencies were too shameful
to admit, and he hoped that he could recover without anyone’s
becoming aware of his follies. Unfortunately, he wasn’t the only
trader who came into our trading floor primarily because it was
closer than the riverboats.

c01.indd 12

11/2/07 12:13:55 PM

Blueprint for Success

13

How do you know if you or someone close to you has a trading
problem? The following behaviors can signal the need for help:
Preoccupation. Problem traders spend a lot of mental energy thinking about the next time they will trade, planning their strategy, or thinking of ways to get money for trading. This will
begin to impact their health, their ability to sleep, and their
ability to focus on other issues. The problem trader will be
distracted at work or appear distant to family and friends.
Inability to stop or control trading. Problem traders find that they
cannot stop trading when they want to. Maybe they decide to
quit altogether, but then they still trade anyway. When they
trade, they may try to control the amount of time or money
they spend, but they are unable to stick to the limits they set.
They often trade until their last dollar is gone. These traders
will see trades that no one else sees because they need the
miracle trade to make up for their losses.
“Chasing” losses. Problem traders get a strong urge or idea to win
back money that they have lost in the past. They may say, “If
only I could win back what I’ve lost, I wouldn’t have to trade
anymore.” More and more, they feel trapped. They start
thinking that the hole they have dug is so deep that only a
big trading win can get them out of it. Their best hope is to
hit a home run, and they’ll keep swinging until they do so.
Trading to escape negative emotions. Problem traders may trade in
order to feel better temporarily or to change their mood.
They may feel angry, lonely, bored, anxious, or depressed,
and they trade to escape these emotions. Trading feels like
an escape from their problems. After trading, the negative
feelings return, as bad as ever. Because the act of trading
gives them temporary relief from the negative emotions, they
must trade more frequently and assume greater risks with
each trade.
Lying to conceal trading. The problem trader has lied to his spouse,
family, friends, or employer in order to hide or to minimize
his trading losses. These lies range from concealment to
outright lying. The trader feels a growing shame for his lack
of discipline and hopes that if he can win back his losses,
he’ll be able to avoid confronting the issue altogether.

c01.indd 13

11/2/07 12:13:55 PM

14

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Borrowing to pay for trading. Debts grow because of trading. Bills
are unpaid. Money that could be used to pay bills is used for
trading. Problem traders may have borrowed money from
family or friends because of trading losses. They may have
sold possessions, stocks, or bonds; borrowed from retirement
accounts or savings; or gotten a second mortgage because of
trading losses.
Allowing trading to jeopardize other parts of life. Trading can ruin
marriages, friendships, careers, school performance, and
reputations. Divorce, bankruptcy, or legal problems are all
closely associated with compulsive trading. Compulsive traders act very much like someone with a drug habit. Former
activities and social gatherings are shunned when the trader
is experiencing mounting losses.
Ambivalence about quitting or controlling trading. A problem trader
may say things like:
“I know I should stop but I love to trade.”
“My wife/husband/partner/parents/children want me to
quit but I’m not sure I do.”
“Maybe I can slow my trading to the point where it is
manageable.”
“I want to quit but don’t think I can.”
Now that you’ve read through the list of symptoms, you should
know that this list is a compulsive gambling checklist. The only change
that we’ve made is to replace the word gambling with the word trading. Nevertheless, you can see the patterns emerge in the trader we
described. He was borrowing money to pay for trading, concealing his
trading from his family, jeopardizing his entire financial well-being, and
he was most certainly preoccupied with his trades. Toward the end of
his short-lived trading career, he would enter the trading floor early in
the morning and sit and stare at the stock chart all day. He was becoming physically drained from the mental and emotional energy that he
was investing daily in a losing account. If we’ve cut too close to the truth
about your trading habits with this discussion, then we encourage you
to seek a helping hand. Sure, every trade involves risk and to a certain
degree is a gamble. But there is a significant difference between taking
a calculated gamble and being an out-of-control gambler. The former
knows where the limits are and is disciplined to operate within those

c01.indd 14

11/2/07 12:13:55 PM

Blueprint for Success

15

limits. The latter may or may not understand the importance of limits
but disregards them in any case.

Shucking Right Down to the Cob
Chatter Box—Rick
The Deep South has a lot to offer, but one of my favorites is the collection of homespun sayings that captures the essence of a thought
better than most. When you’re upset, you get your feathers ruffled; if
something is hard to find, it’s as scarce as hen’s teeth; and if you’re
really worried, someone might say you’re as nervous as a long-tailed
cat in a room full of rocking chairs. I have a good friend who often
talks about “shuckin’ right down to the cob.” It’s his way of saying,
“Let’s strip the extras off and talk about what’s really important.”
Now it’s time to take a look at the cob of your trading plan. What
do you really need to make sure this plan is going to work for you?

1. Education

Before you enter the trading waters, you must first prepare yourself
through education and training. As we’ve mentioned, the markets
will let anyone onto the playing field, but that doesn’t mean you’re
necessarily qualified. The only requirement for admission is a funded
account. There are many willing players to take your account from
you, one trade at a time.
The Market Guys have a basic rule: KISS—Keep it Super Simple. That should apply to your education, too. We’ve watched people
who have listened to every podcast show we’ve produced, read every
article we’ve written, participated in every web seminar we’ve conducted, and attended as many live events as they could. They’ve
taken copious notes and requested copies of every presentation. Yet
they still haven’t placed a trade. Don’t let yourself get caught in the
paralysis-by-analysis trap. You need to be adequately prepared before
you begin trading, but there is no virtue or benefit in creating your
own trading PhD program. That said, what are the important areas
of preparation?

c01.indd 15

11/2/07 12:13:55 PM

16

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

First of all, you should be thoroughly familiar with the software
that you plan to use for trading. Almost every brokerage firm offers
a basic execution and analysis platform via the web. These are generally the simplest and most foolproof. They are usually designed
for the beginner or part-time trader. You should take advantage of
opportunities to learn the software, through either online tutorials
or customer service assistance. Some of the deeply discounted brokerage firms offer little or no support when it comes to using the software. Stay away from these operations unless you are already familiar
with the mechanics of trading and are confident that you’re ready
to use the software without assistance. We’ll discuss the process of
selecting a broker and software later in the book. If you decide to
trade with one of the advanced trading platforms, make sure that
there is a valid reason for moving up the technology chain besides the
fact that the advanced systems look great on your computer monitor
and draws the attention of your administrative assistant. Advanced
trading software has more ways to get you in trouble if you don’t
know what you’re doing. Hopefully, your parents didn’t give you the
keys to a Ferrari when you first learned to drive. The Ford Fiesta
didn’t have all the power and speed, but there was a time when that
was actually a benefit. The same principle applies to trading software.
The Level 2 screen is mesmerizing to a new trader. You can watch as
market makers and ECNs jockey for position on the bid and offer,
changing their share size and price every few seconds. The numbers
stream like the prices on a gas pump when you’re filling your car.
It makes for fun eye candy, but the distraction often turns out to be
pricey entertainment for many traders who use it as the basis for
their buy and sell decisions.
You also need a solid initial education on the product that
you’re trading. If you decide to trade equities first—as many traders
do—then ground yourself in the basics. Do you know the difference
between a dividend-paying stock and one that doesn’t pay dividends?
The first time you see your position trading ex-dividend you will!
When a company declares a dividend, it sets a record date when you
must be on the company’s books as a shareholder to receive the dividend. Once the company sets the record date, the stock exchanges
assign the ex-dividend date. The ex-dividend date is normally set for
stocks two business days before the record date. If you purchase a
stock on its ex-dividend date or after, you will not receive the next dividend payment. Instead, the seller gets the dividend. If you purchase

c01.indd 16

11/2/07 12:13:56 PM

Blueprint for Success

17

before the ex-dividend date, you get the dividend. Here’s the kicker:
The stock price will often fall by the dollar amount of the dividend
if the dividend is significant. If you didn’t know this, you might be
shocked to see your stock drop several dollars for no apparent reason and, consequently, you exit a good trade due to ignorance. With
options, there are many more factors to consider than with stocks.
When you trade stocks, you’re looking at the trend and making a
decision about whether the trend is up, down, or sideways. If you
buy stocks, you want the trend to go up. If you short stocks, you want
the trend to go down. Sounds easy enough, right? If you’re trading options, you may want the trend to go up, but you also need it
to go up within a certain time frame (before the option expires!).
Of course, you may choose an option strategy that requires that the
stock go neither up nor down but continue in a sideways channel in
order for you to profit. Futures have a different type of account funding requirement than stocks or options and impact your account
equity differently. This isn’t the forum for explaining these nuances
in detail, but you can start to see how your choice of trading product
affects your training and education. Just because you’re a successful
stock trader doesn’t mean you can walk onto the currency field and
enjoy the same success.
Your education and training must include a proper foundation
for understanding the psychology of trading. We cover this in more
detail in Chapter 2, “Are You Out of Your Mind?” Keep in mind that
since trading is not a proper science in the sense that there is not a
quantifiable cause-and-effect relationship between stock prices and
events, you need to understand and control the emotional part of the
process. If you don’t think that dealing with money is an emotional
activity, then you probably have ice water flowing through your veins.
For the rest of us mortals, we’ll spend the remainder of our lives
keeping in check the overwhelming urge to do dumb things when it
comes to our money.
Part of your initial education and training may include some
form of paper trading. The term paper trading comes from the days
when you would simulate real trading by writing the trades on a
paper trading log and make note of your profits and losses as well as
any comments on the trade itself. Today, many trading software packages include a simulation mode, which will look and feel like the real
thing with real market data. The only difference is that when you log
off and log back on, you start with a clean slate. Paper trading gives

c01.indd 17

11/2/07 12:13:57 PM

18

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

you the opportunity to analyze setups and buy and sell without actually putting your money at risk. You can begin to feel the emotional
roller coaster that accompanies trading when you first get started.
The criticism of paper trading is that it doesn’t adequately prepare
you for real trading because there is no substitute for actually putting
your money on the line. It’s like the old joke about a fellow who
was asked about the difference between a recession and a depression. “A recession,” he replied, “is when my neighbor loses his job.
A depression is when I lose my job.” We agree that paper trading
may not tell you when you’re ready to trade but it does a good job of
telling you when you’re not ready to trade. As we’ve said many times
in our seminars, if you’re losing money while you’re paper trading,
please don’t start trading live!
Pilots often use a flight simulator to practice certain maneuvers
that they may not want to replicate in actual flying. For instance,
you can practice taking off and losing an engine on climbout. These
exercises are useful to sharpen your skills and prepare you for the
actual event, should it ever occur. However, a flight instructor would
never stick a new student in a simulator for 20 hours and then bid
him good luck on his first real solo flight. There is a distinct benefit
of learning alongside an instructor who can help you through the
actual maneuvers in real flight. The same thought applies to paper
trading. Use it to refine your skills, learn the basics and prepare for
the real thing, but understand that your first trade that places thousands of dollars on the line will affect you quite differently.
Your trading plan should provide at least a basic guide toward
your continuing education. Many traders will be drawn toward trading clubs but approach them with care. Some trading clubs will sell
you their preferred trading products or require that you pool your
money with other club members for club trades. Pooled funds are
traded as club trades and are often decided by the membership
through a consensus vote. It would be difficult to think of a worse
approach for deciding on trades. In our experience, the consensus
is usually arrived at by one of two means. The first is the influence
exerted by the most outspoken members. This is nothing more than
putting your money into a nonregulated mutual fund with amateur
managers who get their authority from the silent acquiescence of
the rest of the club. The second way to reach club consensus is
to take the path of least resistance in order not to offend anyone.
Since the goal is to minimize risk, these trades will track the indices

c01.indd 18

11/2/07 12:13:57 PM

Blueprint for Success

19

or slightly lag. The club thinks the market will be rising so they buy
a position in the DIAs (the Dow Jones Industrial Average tracking
stock). Do you really need a club to help you decide to invest in the
broad market? The better choice is to find reputable education on
your own and continue to invest in your personal development.
2. Funding

Deciding how much to trade with and where the funds will come
from are critical decisions as you start trading. As a general rule,
most people should not trade with more than about 20 percent of
their overall investment portfolio. This is a very broad statement and
should be adjusted for such factors as age, time to retirement, risk
tolerance, and total net worth. Most brokerage firms have a minimum account balance that is required for a trading account. However, some of these minimums are as low as $500. It’s difficult to
assign a threshold for funding your first trading account but $5000
to $10,000 is the minimum that we generally recommend. To apply a
baseball analogy, successful trading is about hitting singles and doubles. When a trader starts out with an underfunded account, the
tendency is toward either extreme of (1) not swinging at all for fear
of striking out or (2) swinging for the home run in order to grow
the account as quickly as possible. The first extreme manifests itself
in the trader who is afraid to trade. When they finally place a trade,
they’re unable to take a loss if the trade moves against them. They use
the reasoning that they have to hold on and hope the stock recovers,
because they can’t afford to lose money in the account. The second
extreme is the trader who decides to buy 50 out-of-the-money option
contracts because they’re so cheap. A better choice might be to buy
50 lottery tickets. The odds of making money on a single trade aren’t
too far apart, but the lottery payout is higher.
Don’t take lightly the decision of when to add money to the
account or when to transfer money out of the account. The rules for
this decision should be clearly started in your trading plan in order to
avoid being driven by your emotions. There is a strong temptation for
traders to prop up their trading account when they’re losing money
because they can afford to. This is especially true for high-net-worth
traders. They don’t experience the same proportional pain of loss
that others do, so they’ll continually transfer funds into their trading account in order to hold on to a losing trade or to speculate on

c01.indd 19

11/2/07 12:13:57 PM

20

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

high-risk trades. In Las Vegas, these characters are referred to as
“whales.” They’re the ones who will continue placing bets, even
though they lose money, for the sheer entertainment of the bet.
Hoteliers love these people and will provide free rooms, escorts,
meals, and entertainment as long as they play. Wall Street provides
the same type of venue for masses of traders who feed the market in
spite of their inability to profit. And they don’t even offer you a good
meal in return—go figure.
There comes a time when you’ve diligently applied yourself to
this endeavor called trading and you’re making a profit. You should
also have rules for transferring funds out of your trading account
into other investments. If you’re more successful in your trading
account than your other investments, your trading account will eventually grow beyond the 20 percent rule we discussed earlier. Does
this mean you should trade your entire portfolio? The answer is no,
because trading carries a different type and level of risk. You may be
outperforming the market and tempted to trade your entire portfolio, but resist the urge. Most traders go through swings between
outperforming the broad market and underperforming the broad
market. Sometimes this is due to market forces such as a shift into
a sideways market when your trading skills work best in a trending
market. Other times, this may be due to personal forces such as family stress or health issues. Having a portion of your portfolio in such
investments as bonds, index funds, or real estate will serve to balance
the risks and returns through various market conditions.
3. Goals and Objectives

Why do you trade? This needs to be specifically addressed in your
trading plan. There is no right or wrong answer to this question as
long as you’re honest with yourself. Is your goal to be a full-time
trader? What’s your plan for transitioning from your current income
source to trading? Have you talked to others who trade full time or
have made the attempt and failed? You are not the first person to
enter this field. Many have tried, with varying degrees of success.
Learn as much as you can from the experiences of others. One of
the key considerations in trading full time is the need to generate a
profit consistently. Many traders are profitable when they trade parttime but begin to lose money when they start trading full-time. The
reason is quite simple: The pressure that comes from using your
