
402

Commentary on Chapter 15

have in common; by reading the managers’ commentary, you may get
ideas on how to improve your own approach.3
No matter which techniques they use in picking stocks, successful
investing professionals have two things in common: First, they are disciplined and consistent, refusing to change their approach even when
it is unfashionable. Second, they think a great deal about what they do
and how to do it, but they pay very little attention to what the market is
doing.

3

There are also many newsletters dedicated to analyzing professional portfolios, but most of them are a waste of time and money for even the most
enterprising investor. A shining exception for people who can spare the
cash is Outstanding Investor Digest (www.oid.com).

CHAPTER 16

Convertible Issues and Warrants

C

onvertible bonds and preferred stocks have been taking on a
predominant importance in recent years in the field of senior
financing. As a parallel development, stock-option warrants—
which are long-term rights to buy common shares at stipulated
prices—have become more and more numerous. More than half
the preferred issues now quoted in the Standard & Poor’s Stock
Guide have conversion privileges, and this has been true also of a
major part of the corporate bond financing in 1968–1970. There are
at least 60 different series of stock-option warrants dealt in on the
American Stock Exchange. In 1970, for the first time in its history,
the New York Stock Exchange listed an issue of long-term warrants, giving rights to buy 31,400,000 American Tel. & Tel. shares at
$52 each. With “Mother Bell” now leading that procession, it is
bound to be augmented by many new fabricators of warrants. (As
we shall point out later, they are a fabrication in more than one
sense.)*
In the overall picture the convertible issues rank as much more
important than the warrants, and we shall discuss them first. There
are two main aspects to be considered from the standpoint of the
investor. First, how do they rank as investment opportunities and
risks? Second, how does their existence affect the value of the
related common-stock issues?
Convertible issues are claimed to be especially advantageous to
both the investor and the issuing corporation. The investor receives
the superior protection of a bond or preferred stock, plus the
opportunity to participate in any substantial rise in the value of the

* Graham detested warrants, as he makes clear on pp. 413–416.
403

404

The Intelligent Investor

common stock. The issuer is able to raise capital at a moderate
interest or preferred dividend cost, and if the expected prosperity
materializes the issuer will get rid of the senior obligation by having it exchanged into common stock. Thus both sides to the bargain
will fare unusually well.
Obviously the foregoing paragraph must overstate the case
somewhere, for you cannot by a mere ingenious device make a bargain much better for both sides. In exchange for the conversion
privilege the investor usually gives up something important in
quality or yield, or both.1 Conversely, if the company gets its
money at lower cost because of the conversion feature, it is surrendering in return part of the common shareholders’ claim to future
enhancement. On this subject there are a number of tricky arguments to be advanced both pro and con. The safest conclusion that
can be reached is that convertible issues are like any other form of
security, in that their form itself guarantees neither attractiveness
nor unattractiveness. That question will depend on all the facts
surrounding the individual issue.*
We do know, however, that the group of convertible issues
floated during the latter part of a bull market are bound to yield
unsatisfactory results as a whole. (It is at such optimistic periods,
unfortunately, that most of the convertible financing has been done
in the past.) The poor consequences must be inevitable, from the
timing itself, since a wide decline in the stock market must invariably make the conversion privilege much less attractive—and
often, also, call into question the underlying safety of the issue
itself.† As a group illustration we shall retain the example used in

* Graham is pointing out that, despite the promotional rhetoric that investors
usually hear, convertible bonds do not automatically offer “the best of both
worlds.” Higher yield and lower risk do not always go hand in hand. What
Wall Street gives with one hand, it usually takes away with the other. An
investment may offer the best of one world, or the worst of another; but the
best of both worlds seldom becomes available in a single package.
† According to Goldman Sachs and Ibbotson Associates, from 1998
through 2002, convertibles generated an average annual return of 4.8%.
That was considerably better than the 0.6% annual loss on U.S. stocks, but
substantially worse than the returns of medium-term corporate bonds (a

Convertible Issues and Warrants

405

TABLE 16-1 Price Record of New Preferred-Stock Issues
Offered in 1946

Price Change from Issue Price
to Low up to July 1947
No decline
Declined 0–10%
10–20%
20–40%
40% or more
Average decline

Convertible and
Participating
“Straight”
Issues
Issues
(number of issues)
7
16
11
3
0
37
About 9%

0
2
6
22
12
42
About 30%

our first edition of the relative price behavior of convertible and
straight (nonconvertible) preferreds offered in 1946, the closing
year of the bull market preceding the extraordinary one that began
in 1949.
A comparable presentation is difficult to make for the years
1967–1970, because there were virtually no new offerings of nonconvertibles in those years. But it is easy to demonstrate that the
average price decline of convertible preferred stocks from December 1967 to December 1970 was greater than that for common
stocks as a whole (which lost only 5%). Also the convertibles seem
to have done quite a bit worse than the older straight preferred
shares during the period December 1968 to December 1970, as is
shown by the sample of 20 issues of each kind in Table 16-2. These

7.5% annual gain) and long-term corporate bonds (an 8.3% annual gain). In
the mid-1990s, according to Merrill Lynch, roughly $15 billion in convertibles were issued annually; by 1999, issuance had more than doubled to
$39 billion. In 2000, $58 billion in convertibles were issued, and in 2001,
another $105 billion emerged. As Graham warns, convertible securities
always come out of the woodwork near the end of a bull market—largely
because even poor-quality companies then have stock returns high enough
to make the conversion feature seem attractive.

406

The Intelligent Investor

TABLE 16-2 Price Record of Preferred Stocks, Common Stocks,
and Warrants, December 1970 versus December 1968
(Based on Random Samples of 20 Issues Each)
Straight Preferred Stocks
Rated A
Rated
Below A
or Better
Advances
Declines:
0–10%
10–20%
20–40%
40% or more
Average declines

Convertible
Preferred
Stocks

Listed
Listed
Common
Warrants
Stocks

2

0

1

2

1

3
14
1
0
10%

3
10
5
0
17%

3
2
5
9
29%

4
1
6
7
33%

0
0
1
18
65%

(Standard & Poor’s composite index of 500 common stocks declined 11.3%.)

comparisons would demonstrate that convertible securities as a
whole have relatively poor quality as senior issues and also are tied
to common stocks that do worse than the general market except
during a speculative upsurge. These observations do not apply to
all convertible issues, of course. In the 1968 and 1969 particularly, a
fair number of strong companies used convertible issues to combat
the inordinately high interest rates for even first-quality bonds. But
it is noteworthy that in our 20-stock sample of convertible preferreds only one showed an advance and 14 suffered bad declines.*

* Recent structural changes in the convertible market have negated some of
these criticisms. Convertible preferred stock, which made up roughly half
the total convertible market in Graham’s day, now accounts for only an
eighth of the market. Maturities are shorter, making convertible bonds less
volatile, and many now carry “call protection,” or assurances against early
redemption. And more than half of all convertibles are now investment
grade, a significant improvement in credit quality from Graham’s time. Thus,
in 2002, the Merrill Lynch All U.S. Convertible Index lost 8.6%—versus the
22.1% loss of the S & P 500-stock index and the 31.3% decline in the
NASDAQ Composite stock index.

Convertible Issues and Warrants

407

The conclusion to be drawn from these figures is not that convertible issues are in themselves less desirable than nonconvertible
or “straight” securities. Other things being equal, the opposite is
true. But we clearly see that other things are not equal in practice
and that the addition of the conversion privilege often—perhaps
generally—betrays an absence of genuine investment quality for
the issue.
It is true, of course, that a convertible preferred is safer than the
common stock of the same company—that is to say, it carries
smaller risk of eventual loss of principal. Consequently those who
buy new convertibles instead of the corresponding common stock
are logical to that extent. But in most cases the common would not
have been an intelligent purchase to begin with, at the ruling price,
and the substitution of the convertible preferred did not improve
the picture sufficiently. Furthermore, a good deal of the buying of
convertibles was done by investors who had no special interest or
confidence in the common stock—that is, they would never have
thought of buying the common at the time—but who were
tempted by what seemed an ideal combination of a prior claim
plus a conversion privilege close to the current market. In a number of instances this combination has worked out well, but the statistics seem to show that it is more likely to prove a pitfall.
In connection with the ownership of convertibles there is a special problem which most investors fail to realize. Even when a
profit appears it brings a dilemma with it. Should the holder sell on
a small rise; should he hold for a much bigger advance; if the issue
is called—as often happens when the common has gone up considerably—should he sell out then or convert into and retain the common stock?*
Let us talk in concrete terms. You buy a 6% bond at 100, convertible into stock at 25—that is, at the rate of 40 shares for each $1,000
bond. The stock goes to 30, which makes the bond worth at least
120, and so it sells at 125. You either sell or hold. If you hold, hoping for a higher price, you are pretty much in the position of a com-

* A bond is “called” when the issuing corporation forcibly pays it off ahead
of the stated maturity date, or final due date for interest payments. For a
brief summary of how convertible bonds work, see Note 1 in the commentary on this chapter (p. 418).

408

The Intelligent Investor

mon shareholder, since if the stock goes down your bond will go
down too. A conservative person is likely to say that beyond 125
his position has become too speculative, and therefore he sells and
makes a gratifying 25% profit.
So far, so good. But pursue the matter a bit. In many cases where
the holder sells at 125 the common stock continues to advance, carrying the convertible with it, and the investor experiences that
peculiar pain that comes to the man who has sold out much too
soon. The next time, he decides to hold for 150 or 200. The issue
goes up to 140 and he does not sell. Then the market breaks and his
bond slides down to 80. Again he has done the wrong thing.
Aside from the mental anguish involved in making these bad
guesses—and they seem to be almost inevitable—there is a real
arithmetical drawback to operations in convertible issues. It may
be assumed that a stern and uniform policy of selling at 25% or
30% profit will work out best as applied to many holdings. This
would then mark the upper limit of profit and would be realized
only on the issues that worked out well. But, if—as appears to be
true—these issues often lack adequate underlying security and
tend to be floated and purchased in the latter stages of a bull market, then a goodly proportion of them will fail to rise to 125 but will
not fail to collapse when the market turns downward. Thus the
spectacular opportunities in convertibles prove to be illusory in
practice, and the overall experience is marked by fully as many
substantial losses—at least of a temporary kind—as there are gains
of similar magnitude.
Because of the extraordinary length of the 1950–1968 bull market,
convertible issues as a whole gave a good account of themselves for
some 18 years. But this meant only that the great majority of common
stocks enjoyed large advances, in which most convertible issues were
able to share. The soundness of investment in convertible issues can
only be tested by their performance in a declining stock market—and
this has always proved disappointing as a whole.*
In our first edition (1949) we gave an illustration of this special

* In recent years, convertibles have tended to outperform the Standard &
Poor’s 500-stock index during declining stock markets, but they have typically underperformed other bonds—which weakens, but does not fully
negate, the criticism Graham makes here.

Convertible Issues and Warrants

409

problem of “what to do” with a convertible when it goes up. We
believe it still merits inclusion here. Like several of our references it
is based on our own investment operations. We were members of a
“select group,” mainly of investment funds, who participated in a
private offering of convertible 41⁄2% debentures of Eversharp Co. at
par, convertible into common stock at $40 per share. The stock
advanced rapidly to 651⁄2, and then (after a three-for-two split) to the
equivalent of 88. The latter price made the convertible debentures
worth no less than 220. During this period the two issues were
called at a small premium; hence they were practically all converted
into common stock, which was retained by a number of the original
investment-fund buyers of the debentures. The price promptly
began a severe decline, and in March 1948 the stock sold as low as
73⁄8. This represented a value of only 27 for the debenture issues, or a
loss of 75% of the original price instead of a profit of over 100%.
The real point of this story is that some of the original purchasers
converted their bonds into the stock and held the stock through its
great decline. In so doing they ran counter to an old maxim of Wall
Street, which runs: “Never convert a convertible bond.” Why this
advice? Because once you convert you have lost your strategic combination of prior claimant to interest plus a chance for an attractive
profit. You have probably turned from investor into speculator, and
quite often at an unpropitious time (because the stock has already
had a large advance). If “Never convert a convertible” is a good
rule, how came it that these experienced fund managers exchanged
their Eversharp bonds for stock, to their subsequent embarrassing
loss? The answer, no doubt, is that they let themselves be carried
away by enthusiasm for the company’s prospects as well as by the
“favorable market action” of the shares. Wall Street has a few prudent principles; the trouble is that they are always forgotten when
they are most needed.* Hence that other famous dictum of the oldtimers: “Do as I say, not as I do.”
Our general attitude toward new convertible issues is thus a
mistrustful one. We mean here, as in other similar observations,

* This sentence could serve as the epitaph for the bull market of the 1990s.
Among the “few prudent principles” that investors forgot were such market
clichés as “Trees don’t grow to the sky” and “Bulls make money, bears make
money, but pigs get slaughtered.”

410

The Intelligent Investor

that the investor should look more than twice before he buys them.
After such hostile scrutiny he may find some exceptional offerings
that are too good to refuse. The ideal combination, of course, is a
strongly secured convertible, exchangeable for a common stock
which itself is attractive, and at a price only slightly higher than the
current market. Every now and then a new offering appears that
meets these requirements. By the nature of the securities markets,
however, you are more likely to find such an opportunity in some
older issue which has developed into a favorable position rather
than in a new flotation. (If a new issue is a really strong one, it is
not likely to have a good conversion privilege.)
The fine balance between what is given and what is withheld in
a standard-type convertible issue is well illustrated by the extensive use of this type of security in the financing of American Telephone & Telegraph Company. Between 1913 and 1957 the company
sold at least nine separate issues of convertible bonds, most of
them through subscription rights to shareholders. The convertible
bonds had the important advantage to the company of bringing in
a much wider class of buyers than would have been available for a
stock offering, since the bonds were popular with many financial
institutions which possess huge resources but some of which were
not permitted to buy stocks. The interest return on the bonds has
generally been less than half the corresponding dividend yield on
the stock—a factor that was calculated to offset the prior claim of
the bondholders. Since the company maintained its $9 dividend
rate for 40 years (from 1919 to the stock split in 1959) the result was
the eventual conversion of virtually all the convertible issues into
common stock. Thus the buyers of these convertibles have fared
well through the years—but not quite so well as if they had bought
the capital stock in the first place. This example establishes the
soundness of American Telephone & Telegraph, but not the intrinsic attractiveness of convertible bonds. To prove them sound in
practice we should need to have a number of instances in which
the convertible worked out well even though the common stock
proved disappointing. Such instances are not easy to find.*

* AT&T Corp. no longer is a significant issuer of convertible bonds. Among
the largest issuers of convertibles today are General Motors, Merrill Lynch,
Tyco International, and Roche.

Convertible Issues and Warrants

411

Effect of Convertible Issues on the Status of
the Common Stock
In a large number of cases convertibles have been issued in connection with mergers or new acquisitions. Perhaps the most striking example of this financial operation was the issuance by the
NVF Corp. of nearly $100,000,000 of its 5% convertible bonds (plus
warrants) in exchange for most of the common stock of Sharon
Steel Co. This extraordinary deal is discussed below pp. 429–433.
Typically the transaction results in a pro forma increase in the
reported earnings per share of common stock; the shares advance
in response to their larger earnings, so-called, but also because the
management has given evidence of its energy, enterprise, and ability to make more money for the shareholders.* But there are two
offsetting factors, one of which is practically ignored and the other
entirely so in optimistic markets. The first is the actual dilution of
the current and future earnings on the common stock that flows
arithmetically from the new conversion rights. This dilution can be
quantified by taking the recent earnings, or assuming some other
figures, and calculating the adjusted earnings per share if all the
convertible shares or bonds were actually converted. In the majority of companies the resulting reduction in per-share figures is not
significant. But there are numerous exceptions to this statement,
and there is danger that they will grow at an uncomfortable rate.
The fast-expanding “conglomerates” have been the chief practitioners of convertible legerdemain. In Table 16-3 we list seven companies with large amounts of stock issuable on conversions or
against warrants.†

Indicated Switches from Common into Preferred Stocks
For decades before, say, 1956, common stocks yielded more than
the preferred stocks of the same companies; this was particularly

* For a further discussion of “pro forma” financial results, see the commentary on Chapter 12.
† In recent years, convertible bonds have been heavily issued by companies
in the financial, health-care, and technology industries.

412

The Intelligent Investor

TABLE 16-3 Companies with Large Amounts of Convertible Issues
and Warrants at the End of 1969 (Shares in Thousands)
Additional Common Stock Issuable
On Conversion of
Total
Additional
Common
Preferred Against Common
Stock
Stock Warrants
Stock
Outstanding Bonds
Avco Corp.
Gulf & Western Inc.
International Tel. & Tel.
Ling-Temco-Vought
National General
Northwest Industriesb
Rapid American
a
b

11,470
14,964
67,393
4,410 a
4,910
7,433
3,591

1,750
9,671
190
1,180
4,530
426

10.436
5,632
48,115
685
11,467
1,503

3,085
6,951
7,564
12,170
1,513
8,000

15,271
22,260
48,305
9,429
16,700
12,980
9,929

Includes “special stock.”
At end of 1970.

true if the preferred stock had a conversion privilege close to the
market. The reverse is generally true at present. As a result there
are a considerable number of convertible preferred stocks which
are clearly more attractive than the related common shares. Owners of the common have nothing to lose and important advantages
to gain by switching from their junior shares into the senior issue.
Example: A typical example was presented by StudebakerWorthington Corp. at the close of 1970. The common sold at 57,
while the $5 convertible preferred finished at 871⁄2. Each preferred
share is exchangeable for 11⁄2 shares of common, then worth 851⁄2.
This would indicate a small money difference against the buyer of
the preferred. But dividends are being paid on the common at the
annual rate of $1.20 (or $1.80 for the 11⁄2 shares), against the $5
obtainable on one share of preferred. Thus the original adverse difference in price would probably be made up in less than a year,
after which the preferred would probably return an appreciably
higher dividend yield than the common for some time to come. But
most important, of course, would be the senior position that the
common shareholder would gain from the switch. At the low prices

Convertible Issues and Warrants

413

of 1968 and again in 1970 the preferred sold 15 points higher than
11⁄2 shares of common. Its conversion privilege guarantees that it
could never sell lower than the common package.2
