
Hedging for currency options
The currency option market is a massive counterpart to the spot market and can heavily influence
day-to-day spot trading. Currency option traders are typically trading a portfolio of option
positions. To maximize their returns, options traders regularly engage in delta hedging and gamma
trading. Without getting into a major options discussion here, option portfolios generate a
synthetic, or hypothetical, spot position based on spot price movements.
To maximize the return on their options portfolios, they regularly trade the synthetic spot position
as though it were a real spot position. Trading the synthetic positions generated by options is
called delta hedging or gamma trading.

Option hedgers are frequently found selling at technical resistance levels or buying on
support levels. When a currency pair stays in a range, it can do quite nicely. But when range
breakouts occur, options traders frequently need to rush to cover those range bets, adding to
the force of the directional breakout. Keep an eye out for reports of option-related buying and
selling as technical levels are tested.

Another daily feature of the spot market is the 10 a.m. ET option expiry, also known as the
New York cut, when options due to expire that day cease to exist. Any related hedging that
was done for the option then needs to be unwound, though this is likely to have been done
prior to the expiry if the option is well out of the money. Traders need to follow market
commentaries to see if large option interest is set to expire on any given day and generally
anticipate a flurry of option-related buying/selling that may suddenly reverse course after the
10 a.m. expiry.

Global investment flows
One of the reasons forex markets remain as lightly regulated as they are is that no developed nation
wants to impose restrictions on the flow of global capital. International capital is the lifeblood of
the developed economies and the principal factor behind the rapid rise of developing economies
like China, Brazil, Russia, and India. The forex market is central to the smooth functioning of
international debt and equity markets, allowing investors to easily obtain the currency of the nation
they want to invest in.
Financial investors are the other main group of nonspeculative players in the forex market. As far
as the forex market is concerned, financial investors are mostly just passing through on their way
to another investment. More often than not, financial investors look at currencies as an afterthought
because they’re more focused on the ultimate investment target, be it Japanese equities, German
government bonds, or French real estate.

Crossing borders with mergers and acquisitions
Mergers and acquisitions (M&A) activity is becoming increasingly international and shows no
sign of abating. International firms are now involved in a global race to gain and expand market
share, and cross-border acquisitions are frequently the easiest and fastest way to do that.

When a company seeks to buy a foreign business, there can be a substantial foreign
exchange implication from the trade. When large M&A deals are announced, note the
answers to the following two questions:

Which countries and which currencies are involved? If a French electrical utility buys
an Austrian power company, there are no currency implications because both countries
use the euro (EUR). But if a Swiss pharmaceutical company announces a takeover of a
Dutch chemical firm, the Swiss company may need to buy EUR and sell Swiss francs
(CHF) to pay for the deal.
How much of the transaction will be in cash? Again, if it’s an all stock deal, then there
are no forex market implications. But if the cash portion is large, forex markets will take
note and begin to speculate on the currency pair involved.

Speculators
Speculators are market participants who are involved in the market for one reason only — to make
money off directional price movements. In contrast to hedgers, who have some form of existing
currency market risk, speculators have no currency risk until they enter the market. Hedgers enter
the market to neutralize or reduce risk. Speculators embrace risk taking as a means of profiting
from long-term or short-term price movements.
Speculators (specs for short) are what really make a market efficient. They add liquidity to the
market by bringing their views and, most important, their capital into the market. That liquidity is
what smoothes out price movements, keeps trading spreads narrow, and allows a market to
expand.
In the forex market, speculators are running the show. The latest BIS survey indicates that nearly
90 percent of daily trading volume is speculative in nature. If you’re trading currencies for your
own account, welcome to the club. If you’re trading currencies to hedge a financial risk, you can
thank the specs for giving you a liquid market and reducing your transaction costs.
Speculators come in all types and sizes and pursue all different manner of trading strategies. In this
section, I take a look at some of the main types of speculators to give you an idea of who they are
and how they go about their business. Along the way, you may pick up some ideas to improve your
own approach to the market. At the minimum, I hope this information will allow you to better
understand market commentaries about who’s buying and who’s selling.

Hedge funds
Hedge funds are a type of leveraged fund, which refers to any number of different forms of
speculative asset management funds that borrow money for speculation based on real assets under
management. For instance, a hedge fund with $100 million under management can leverage those
assets (through margin agreements with their trading counterparties) to give them trading limits of
anywhere from $500 million to $2 billion. Hedge funds are subject to the same type of margin

requirements as you or me, just with a whole lot more zeroes involved.
The other main type of leveraged fund is known as a Commodity Trading Advisor (CTA). A CTA
is principally active in the futures markets. But because the forex market operates around the
clock, CTAs frequently trade spot FX as well.
The major difference between the two types of leveraged funds comes down to regulation and
oversight. CTAs are regulated by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), the same
governmental body that regulates retail FX firms. As a result, CTAs are subject to a raft of
regulatory and reporting requirements. Hedge funds, on the other hand, remain largely unregulated.
What’s important is that they all pursue similarly aggressive trading strategies in the forex market,
treating currencies as a separate asset class, like stock or commodities.

In the forex market, leveraged funds can hold positions anywhere from a few hours to days
or weeks. When you hear that leveraged names are buying or selling, it’s an indication of
short-term speculative interest that can provide clues as to where prices are going in the near
future.

Speculating with algorithms, models, and systems
Many leveraged funds have opted for a quantitative approach to trading financial markets. A
quantitative approach is one that uses mathematical formulas and models to come up with buy and
sell decisions. Algorithms refer to the proprietary quantitative formulas used to generate the
trading decisions. Data goes in, trading signals come out, and what’s inside the system, no one
knows. Such quantitative funds are interchangeably referred to as algorithmic, model, or systems
funds. Concrete numbers are hard to come by, but conventional estimates are that between 25 and
30 percent of daily FX volume is generated by algorithmic trading systems.
Some models are based on statistical relationships between various currencies, commodities, and
fixed income securities. Others are based on macroeconomic data, such as relative growth rates,
inflation rates, and geopolitical risk models. Still others are based on technical indicators and
price studies of the underlying currency pair. These are frequently referred to as rules-based
trading systems, because the system will employ defined rules to enter and exit trades.

Retail FX traders are also increasingly utilizing algorithmic trading systems. Many trading
platforms allow you to easily develop your own trading systems based on any number of
inputs, such as moving average or momentum oscillator crossovers. These systems can be set
up to automatically enter and exit trades, or they might require you to approve each trade
signal, depending on your level of discretion (see “Trading with discretion” later in this
chapter). Some traders opt for off-the-shelf trading systems that have been developed by third
parties. One of the more popular platforms for system traders is the MetaTrader software,

provided by Metaquotes, and many retail FX brokers offer the MetaTrader platform in
addition to their proprietary trading platforms. (I look at system trading in greater detail in
Chapter 10.)

I would caution that using a trading system offers no guarantees of success, no matter what
back-testing or historical results would suggest.

Trading with discretion
The opposite of an algorithmic trading system is a discretionary trading fund. The discretion, in
this case, refers to the fund manager’s judgment and overall market view. The fund manager may
follow a technical or rules-based approach but prefer to have a human make the final decision on
whether a trade is initiated. A more refined version of this approach accepts the trade signals but
leaves the execution up to the discretionary fund manager’s trading staff, who try to maximize
position entry/exit based on short-term market dynamics.
Still another variation of discretionary funds is those that base their trading strategies on
macroeconomic and political analysis, known as global-macro funds. This type of discretionary
fund manager is typically playing with a longer-time horizon in mind. The fund may be betting on a
peak in an interest rate cycle or the prospect that an economy will slip into recession. Shorter-term
variations on this theme may take positions based on a specific event risk, such as the outcome of
the next central bank meeting or national election.

Day traders, big and small
This is where you and I fit into the big picture of the forex market. If the vast majority of currency
trading volume is speculative in nature, then most of that speculation is short-term in nature. Shortterm can be minute-to-minute or hour-to-hour, but rarely is it longer than a day or two. From the
interbank traders who are scalping EUR/USD (high frequency in-and-out trading for few pips) to
the online trader looking for the next move in USD/JPY, short-term day traders are the backbone
of the market.
Intraday trading was always the primary source of interbank market liquidity, providing fluid
prices and an outlet for any institutional flows that hit the market. Day traders tend to be focused
on the next 20 to 30 pips in the market, which makes them the source of most short-term price
fluctuations.
When you’re looking at the market, look in the mirror and imagine several thousand similar faces
looking back, all trying to capture the same currency trading gains that you’re shooting for. It helps
to imagine this so you know you’re not alone and also so you know who you’re up against.
The rise of online currency trading has thrust individual retail traders into the mainstream of the

forex market. Daily retail FX trading volumes have increased from around $10 billion in 2001 to
$125 billion in 2009, according to a study by Aite Group, a financial market consultancy, and are
estimated to be around 10 percent of daily spot volume. By the way, that’s a compound annual
growth rate of 37 percent.

Governments and Central Banks
National governments are routinely active in the forex market, but typically not to realign or shift
the values of the major currencies. (I discuss those currency policies in greater depth in Chapter
5.)
Instead, national governments are active in the forex market for routine funding of government
operations, making transfer payments, and managing foreign currency reserves. The first two
functions generally have little impact on the day-to-day forex market, so I won’t bore you with the
details. But the last one has taken on increased prominence in recent years, and all indications are
that it will continue to play a major role in the years ahead.

Currency reserve management
Currency reserve management refers to how national governments develop and invest their
foreign currency reserves. Foreign currency reserves are accumulated through international trade.
Countries with large trade surpluses will accumulate reserves of foreign currency over time.
Trade surpluses arise when a nation exports more than it imports. Because it is receiving more
foreign currency for its exports than it is spending to buy imports, foreign currency balances
accumulate.
The USD has historically been the primary currency for international reserve holdings of most
countries. International Monetary Fund (IMF) data from early 2010 showed that the USD
accounted for about 62 percent of global currency reserve holdings, with EUR (27 percent), GBP
and JPY (both 3 to 4 percent) as the next most widely held currencies.
In recent years, however, the United States has run up massive trade and current account deficits
with the rest of the world. The flip side has been the accumulation of large trade surpluses in other
countries, most clearly in Asia. The U.S. deficits essentially amount to the United States
borrowing money from the countries with trade surpluses, while those other countries buy IOUs in
the form of U.S. Treasury debt securities.
The problem is one of perception and also of prudent portfolio management.
The perception problem stems from the continuing growth of U.S. deficits, which
equates to your continually borrowing money from a bank. At a certain point, no matter

how good your credit is, the bank will stop lending you money because you’ve already
borrowed so much in the first place. In the case of the United States, no one is sure exactly
where that point is, but let’s just say we don’t want to find out.
The portfolio-management problem arises from the need to diversify assets in the
name of prudence. This point has taken on added importance since the U.S. dollar began
to weaken more significantly against other major currencies starting in 2002. Not only had
emerging market governments allowed their foreign currency reserves to reach massive
levels and kept the proportion of USDs in them very high, but now the U.S. dollar was
starting to weaken as well.
The result has been an effort by many national governments to begin to diversify their reserves
away from the USD and into other major currencies. The euro, the Japanese yen, and, to a lesser
extent, the British pound have been the principal beneficiaries of this shift. But before you think the
sky is falling, the USD remains the primary reserve currency globally and most reserve
diversification efforts are focused on new reserves being generated.
The sovereign debt crisis plaguing Eurozone countries in the aftermath of the Great Financial
Crisis of 2008–09 (GFC) has also cast the EUR in a less-than-flattering light. As of spring 2011,
European officials appear to have forestalled the worst of the crisis, but Eurozone debt concerns
will likely color the EUR’s outlook for years to come.

Currency reserve management has taken on a market prominence in recent years that never
existed before. Market talk of reserve managers buying or selling has become almost a daily
occurrence. The impact of this in the market varies, but it can frequently lead to multiday
highs and lows being maintained in the face of an otherwise compelling trend. At other times,
such as in the case of the Eurozone debt crisis, reserve managers may go with the market flow
and add strength to the unfolding trend.

Traders need to closely follow real-time market commentaries for signs of reserve
management activity. You should also be aware of developments involving long-term
outlooks for major currencies, like an expansion in U.S. trade deficits or the risk of a default
in the Eurozone, as key drivers of currency reserve managers’ decisions.

The Bank for International Settlements
The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) is the central bank for central banks. Located in
Basel, Switzerland, the BIS also acts as the quasigovernment regulator of the international banking
system. It was the BIS, in consultation with major national governments, that established the
capital adequacy requirements for banks (known as Basel I, II, and, coming soon in the wake of the
Great Financial Crisis, Basel III), which are intended to underpin the international banking system.

As the bank to national governments and central banks, the BIS frequently acts as the market
intermediary of those nations seeking to diversify their currency reserves. By going through the
BIS, those countries can remain relatively anonymous and prevent speculation from driving the
market against them.

Market talk of the BIS being active in the market is frequently interpreted as significant
reserve management interest to buy or sell. Keep an eye out for market rumors of the BIS, but
also keep in mind that the BIS performs more routine and smaller trade execution on behalf of
its clients.

The G-7 and the G-20
The Group of Seven, or G7, is composed of the seven largest developed economies in the world:
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Together they
account for a little over half of global GDP, down from nearly two-thirds in 2000. The fall in their
relative share of global GDP is the result of economic weakness following the GFC and the
coincident outperformance of major emerging economies in the subsequent recovery.
The G7 used to be the primary venue for the major global powers to express their collective will
on currency values and the need for any adjustments, and past G7 statements frequently triggered
major realignments. In 2008, the G7 ostensibly ceded control over currency matters to a larger
grouping of economies, the G-20, in recognition of globalization and the rise of economies like
Brazil, Russia, India, and China.
However, following the devastating earthquake/tsunami in Japan in March 2011, and an
unwelcome surge higher in the JPY, which would further destabilize the Japanese economy, the
G7 convened an emergency meeting. In support of the Japanese government, the G7 opted for
concerted intervention to prevent a further rise in the JPY (see Chapter 5 for more on
intervention).

The reemergence of the G7 in the forex markets was in response to an historic crisis in
Japan. But it also underscored the G7’s ability to act quickly, whereas the more cumbersome
G20 might not have been able to reach agreement. The G7 still remains a potent force, and
traders would be well advised to pay attention to the quarterly gatherings of G7 finance
ministers and central bank chiefs and indications that currencies may be on the agenda.
The G-20 consists of the G-7 plus Australia, Turkey, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Indonesia, India, South
Korea, China, Brazil, Argentina, Mexico, and South Africa, as well as representation from the
European Union. Together those economies represent about 85 percent of global GDP and twothirds of global population.

The G-20 is new as a global forum and its two-year track record suggests it will be less of a
pivotal force for currency markets than the G7 was. The reason is that they operate on consensus,
and it’s much more difficult to get 20 members to agree on the need for currency adjustments. The
problem is highlighted when G-20 member China is seen to be actively intervening to prevent its
currency from strengthening. Still, G-20 meetings and statements bear watching because the group
would be a much more formidable force in markets should they ever seek major currency
adjustments.

Chapter 4

The Mechanics of Currency Trading
In This Chapter
Understanding currency pairs
Calculating profit and loss
Executing a trade
Using different types of orders
The forex market has its own set of trading conventions, like how prices are quoted and orders
executed, just like any other financial market. Then there’s the forex lingo and some FX-specific
transactions. If you’re new to currency trading, the mechanics and terminology may take some
getting used to. But at the end of the day, you’ll see that most currency trade conventions are pretty
straightforward.
In this chapter, I take you through the basic mechanics of forex trading, starting with how currency
prices are quoted, what it means to buy and sell, and how leverage works in margin trading. I also
show how to execute trades and how your trading results translate into dollars and cents. Last but
not least, I run through the various types of orders forex traders use to implement a trading strategy
and how orders work in the real world.

Buying and Selling Simultaneously
The biggest mental hurdle facing newcomers to currencies, especially traders familiar with other
markets, is getting their head around the idea that each currency trade consists of a simultaneous
purchase and sale. In the stock market, for instance, if you buy 100 shares of Google, it’s pretty
clear that you now own 100 shares and hope to see the price go up. When you want to exit that
position, you simply sell what you bought earlier. Easy, right?
But in currencies, the purchase of one currency involves the simultaneous sale of another currency.
This is the exchange in foreign exchange. To put it another way, if you’re looking for the dollar to
go higher, the question is “Higher against what?” The answer has to be another currency. In
relative terms, if the dollar goes up against another currency, it also means that the other currency
has gone down against the dollar. To think of it in stock-market terms, when you buy a stock,
you’re selling cash, and when you sell a stock, you’re buying cash.

Currencies come in pairs
To make matters easier, forex markets refer to trading currencies by pairs, with names that
combine the two different currencies being traded against each other, or exchanged for one
another. Additionally, forex markets have given most currency pairs nicknames or abbreviations,
which reference the pair and not necessarily the individual currencies involved.
The U.S. dollar is the central currency against which other currencies are traded. In its most recent
triennial survey of the global foreign exchange market in 2010, the Bank for International
Settlements (BIS) found that the U.S. dollar was on one side of about 85 percent of all reported
forex market transactions.
The U.S. dollar’s central role in the forex markets stems from a few basic factors:
The U.S. economy is the largest national economy in the world.
The U.S. dollar is the primary international reserve currency.
The U.S. dollar is the medium of exchange for many cross-border transactions. For
example, oil is priced in U.S. dollars. So even if you’re a Japanese oil importer buying
crude from Saudi Arabia, you’re going to pay in U.S. dollars.
The United States has the largest and most liquid government debt markets in the world.
The United States is a global military superpower, with a stable political system.
The U.S. dollar remains the primary reserve currency, but recent years have increasingly seen
calls for an alternative to a single global reserve currency. The euro is frequently cited as a
potential replacement for the greenback, and some are calling for a basket of currencies to serve
as the global reserve standard. The U.S. dollar’s role as the primary reserve currency is likely to
diminish in coming years, but it will be a very long-term process, likely spanning decades. As
long as the United States has the largest government bond market, which is what international
reserve managers ultimately seek to invest in, the U.S. dollar should remain the primary reserve
currency.
