
OCO orders are highly recommended for every open position.
Contingent orders

A contingent order is a fancy term for combining several types of orders to create a
complete currency trade strategy. You’ll use contingent orders to put on a trade while you’re
asleep, or otherwise indisposed, knowing that you’re contingent order has got all the bases
covered and your risks are defined. Contingent orders are also referred to as if/then orders.
If/then orders require the If order to be done first, and then the second part of the order
becomes active, so they’re sometimes called If done/then orders.
Let’s look at a trade idea and see how a contingent order works. Say NZD/USD has been trading
in a range between 0.6700 and 0.6800 and is currently sitting in the middle at 0.6750/53. You
think it’s going to go higher, but you don’t want to jump in at the middle of the range and risk
watching it go down before it goes up. So you use a contingent order to implement your strategy,
even if you’re not watching the market.
Because you’re ultimately looking to buy on a dip toward 0.6700 to get long, you would place an
if/then limit order to buy at 0.6710, the if part of the order. The contingent, or then, part of the
order only becomes active if the if part is triggered and you enter a position.
The then part consists of either a stop order or a take-profit order, or preferably both in the form
of an OCO order.
Continuing with this example, your contingent order may be to place a stop order below 0.6700, in
case the range breaks and you’re wrong. So you may place your stop-loss order at 0.6690 to sell
what you bought in the if part. This type of contingent order is called an if/then stop loss. You may

opt for only an if/then stop-loss order if you want to limit your downside risk, but let your upside
gains run.
If you think the upside is limited to the range highs at 0.6800, you may want to add a contingent
take-profit order at 0.6790 to sell what you bought at 0.6710, in addition to your stop-loss order.
Now if your position is opened at 0.6710, you have an OCO order to stop sell at 0.6690 or take
profit sell at 0.6790. Now you have a complete trade strategy with defined risk parameters.
If the market continues to trade in the range, it may drop from the level you saw (0.6750/53)
before you went to bed. If it hits 0.6710, then your long position is established and your OCO
orders are activated. If the range holds and the price moves back up to the range highs, your take
profit at 0.6790 might be triggered. If the range fails to hold, your stop-loss order will limit your
losses and close out your trade for you.

Be careful about using if/then orders with only a contingent take-profit order. Not using a
stop loss to protect your downside is always very risky. At the minimum, always use an
if/then stop loss to limit your risks.
If you use an if/then OCO order and the market behaves as you expect, you could awaken to find
that you bought at 0.6710 and took profit (sold) at 0.6790, all while you slumbered through the
night. Or you could awaken to find that your if order to buy was done, but the market has yet to hit
your stop-loss or take-profit levels. But at least your open position is protected by the activated
OCO order. Worst-case scenario in this example: You wake up and find that your if limit order
was filled and your stop was triggered on a break through the bottom of the range, giving you a
loss. The key is that you effectively managed your risk.

Spreads and orders in online currency trading
Now that I’ve covered the different order types, I think it’s important for you to be aware of how
online trading platforms typically handle traders’ orders. I spent some time earlier in this chapter
discussing forex market spreads. There was a good reason for that: Online forex brokers accept
your orders according to their trading policies, which are spelled out in detail in the contract
you’ll have to sign to open up an online trading account. Make sure you read that section to be
absolutely certain what your broker’s order execution policies are. Ideally, brokers should publish
their order execution policies on their website. Either way, it should be clear and easy to
understand.

The key feature of most brokers’ order policies is that your orders will be executed based
on the price spread of the trading platform. That means that your limit order to buy will only
be filled if the trading platform’s offer price (where they sell) reaches your buy rate. A limit
order to sell will only be triggered if the trading platform’s bid price (where they buy)

reaches your sell rate.
In practical terms, let’s say you have an order to buy EUR/USD at 1.2855 and the broker’s
EUR/USD spread is around 3 pips. Your buy order will only be filled if the platform’s price deals
1.2852/55. If the lowest price is 1.2853/56, no cigar, because the broker’s lowest offer of 56
never reached your buying rate of 55. The same thing happens with limit orders to sell.

Stop-loss execution policies are typically different than limit order executions. To prevent
filling your stop order at a worse rate than you requested, most forex brokers utilize the
spread to trigger the stop.
Stop orders to sell are triggered if the broker’s bid price reaches your stop order rate. In
concrete terms, if your stop-loss order to sell is at 1.2820 and the broker’s lowest price
quote is 1.2820/23, your stop will be filled at 1.2820.
Stop-loss orders to buy are triggered if the platform’s offer price reaches your stop-loss
rate. If your stop order to buy is at 1.2875 and the broker’s high quote is 1.2872/75, your
stop will be filled at 1.2875.
The benefit of this practice is that some firms will guarantee against slippage on your stop-loss
orders in normal trading conditions. (Rarely, if ever, will a broker guarantee stop losses around
the release of economic reports or other volatile events.)
Nuances and strategies of trading with orders are explored further in Chapters 13 and 14.

Part II

Driving Forces behind Currencies

In this part . . .
I start out by looking at the main macroeconomic drivers that move currency markets. If you slept
through Econ 101, don’t worry — I take a mercifully brief (yet thorough) look at the economic and
structural forces that drive currency rates. Then I shift gears a bit and explore how market
psychology and sentiment filter those economics and dictate day-to-day price movements. Next, I
look at the key individual economic reports — both U.S. and foreign — to give you a trader’s
insight into what they mean and how you can profit from them. I wrap up by providing our insights
into the fundamental trading behavior of the major and minor currency pairs and crosses.

Chapter 5

Looking at the Big Picture
In This Chapter
Getting to know the main drivers of currency rates
Monitoring monetary policy and interest rates
Understanding official currency policies and intervention
Gauging risk sentiment and financial stability
The forex market is inherently a big-picture market. FX traders focus on
Interest rates and monetary policy developments.
Economic growth and inflation data.
Political elections and economic policies in major economies.
Geopolitical risks, trade conflicts, and terror attacks.
Major movements in other financial markets.
On a daily basis, currency traders have to sort through myriad economic reports, interpret the
comments of political and financial officials from around the world, take stock of geopolitical
developments, and assess movements in other financial markets. They do all this to help them
determine what direction major currencies are likely to move.
Unfortunately, there is no set recipe for absorbing the daily flow of data and news to produce a
clear-cut answer. Even if there were, many different market actors are pursuing their own
interests, which may not be profit maximizing (see Chapter 3). Throw in market sentiment and
future expectations, and you’re looking at market participants interpreting the same data and
reaching different conclusions, or maybe reaching the same conclusions but at different times. In
this chapter, I lay the foundation for building the framework to make sense of the many policy,
data, and news inputs that affect the forex markets every day.
The first step in laying the foundation is to get a handle on interest rates and monetary policy,
because they’re the final product of most of the other inputs. Unless you’re an economist or banker,
following monetary policy developments probably is not one of your favorite hobbies. But if
you’re going to actively trade in the forex market, you need to get a handle on monetary policy and
interest rates. I’m not trying to turn you into an economist or an interest-rate analyst — I just want
to give you the lowdown on how interest rates affect currencies.

In this chapter, I lay it all out so you can make sense of how it works, what goes into it, and how
it’s communicated to the market. Later in the chapter, I get into the key elements of official
currency policies and what happens when governments intervene in forex markets. Lastly, I take a
look at the Great Financial Crisis of 2008–2009 (GFC) to see what lessons it holds for currency
traders.

Currencies and Interest Rates
If the guiding principle in real estate is “location, location, location,” in currency trading it’s
“interest rates, interest rates, interest rates.” The most significant overall determinant of a
currency’s value relative to other currencies is the nature and direction of monetary policy set by a
country’s central bank. This is because monetary policy is aimed at influencing domestic interest
rates, which drive currency rates relative to other currencies with different interest rates.
Domestic interest rates also influence overall economic activity, with lower interest rates
typically stimulating borrowing, investment, and consumption, while higher interest rates tend to
reduce borrowing and increase saving over consumption.
Interest rates are important to currencies because they influence the direction of global capital
flows and serve as benchmarks for what investors expect to earn investing in a particular country.
This situation applies most directly to fixed income investing (bonds), which comprise the lion’s
share of investments, but it also influences equity and other investment flows. All other things
being equal, if you could invest in a government-backed bond that yields 6 percent or one that
yields 2 percent, which would you choose? The one with the higher yield, of course. And that’s
exactly what happens with currencies. Currencies with higher yields (higher interest rates) tend to
go up, and currencies with lower yields (lower interest rates) tend to weaken.

Although I’ve stressed interest rates as one of the primary drivers of currency rates, interest
rates are not the only determinant of currency values. Plenty of other elements come into play,
affecting currency rates both in short-term trading and in long-term trends. To use an analogy,
think of the stage in a theater. Now think of interest rates as being the backdrop and the
lighting on that stage. Various actors come and go; sets and props are changed between acts;
but all the action on the stage takes place against the backdrop and under the lights. Interest
rates provide the backdrop and set the lighting for most major currency movements, even if
they’re not always the center of attention.

The future is now: Interest rate expectations
It’s not just the current level of interest rates that matter. Markets are always adjusting to

changing circumstances and anticipating future developments. When it comes to currencies
and interest rates, forex markets are focused more on the direction of future interest rate
moves (higher or lower) than they are on the current levels because they’re already priced in
by the market. So even though a currency may have a low interest rate, market expectations of
higher interest rates in the future frequently will cause the currency to appreciate.
And what drives interest rate expectations? The evolving economic outlook based on incoming
data (I look at understanding and interpreting economic data in Chapters 6 and 7), economic
assessments and guidance by monetary policymakers (see “Watching the central bankers” section
later in this chapter), and a host of other economic, fiscal, and political developments (some of
which I look at later in this chapter).

Keep an eye on various interest rate futures markets, such as the Fed Funds futures contract
for U.S. rates, to see what expectations markets are pricing in. These can be found on
financial websites like Bloomberg.com, Reuters.com, and Marketwatch.com. The
commentary will usually note that markets have priced in, say, 18 bps of tightening by the
next FOMC meeting, meaning the market is expecting a 72 percent chance of a 25 bp rate hike
(18 bps/25 bps ?= 72 percent).
The outlook period, or the time frame in which markets are expecting interest rates to change, can
span several months or quarters into the future. Depending on the economic circumstances and the
outlook, markets may price-in interest rate changes a full year in advance, driving short term
yields and currency levels in the process. Subsequent currency and yield fluctuations are based on
incoming data and official guidance relative to the expectations markets have priced-in.

Relative interest rates
It’s important to remember that currencies always come in pairs. Rather than focusing solely on a
particular currency’s interest rate level or outlook, forex markets tend to focus on the potential
difference between two currencies’ prospective interest rate changes. If two major currencies’
central banks are both expected to be raising rates by the same amount in the future, there’s little
reason for one to outperform the other. But if one is expected to raise rates higher or faster, there
are grounds for one currency to strengthen relative to the other.

Interest-rate differentials
The difference between the interest rates of the two currencies, known as the interest-rate
differential or spread, is the key rate to watch. An increasing or widening interest-rate differential
will generally favor the higher-yielding currency, whereas a falling or narrowing interest-rate
differential will tend to favor the lower-yielding currency.

Some of the largest currency swings occur when two countries’ interest rate cycles are
moving, or are thought to be set to move, in opposite directions. And they don’t necessarily
have to both be moving — one currency could see expectations of higher/lower rates,
whereas the other’s rates are set to stay on hold. By focusing on the interest-rate differential,
you can detect such changes more readily than by focusing on the rates of any individual
currency.
Traders should monitor the interest-rate differentials among the major currencies by looking at the
spreads between short-term government debt yields to spot shifts that may not otherwise be
evident. For example, U.S. 2-year yields may decline by 5 bps (basis points, or a hundredth of 1
percent) — not an unusual daily development. Around the same time, Australian 2-year yields may
move 5 bps higher — again, nothing earth shattering there viewed on its own. But add the two
together, and you’re looking at a 10 bps move between the two, and that’s something to pay
attention to. If the same thing happens again the following day, now you’re looking at a 20 bps
change in the differential, which is nearly equivalent to a typical 25 bps interest rate change from a
central bank. You can be sure that if the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) unexpectedly raised
interest rates by 1⁄4 percent, or the Fed surprised everyone by cutting rates by 1⁄4 percent, there
would be some sharp swings in AUD/USD. The same holds true for changes in the interest-rate
differentials, and they occur on a daily basis rather than the monthly meetings of most central
banks.

Nominal and real interest rates
The interest rate to focus on is not always just the nominal interest rate (the base interest rates
you see, such as the yield on a bond). Markets focus on real interest rates (inflation-adjusted
rates, which is the nominal interest rate minus the rate of inflation [usually consumer price index]).
So even though a bond may carry a nominal yield of, say, 8.5 percent, if the annual rate of inflation
in the country is 4.5 percent, the real yield on the bond is closer to 4 percent.
This phenomenon is most evident in emerging market economies facing hyperinflation. Even
though nominal interest rates may be 20 percent, if the annual rate of inflation is 25 percent, the
real yield is –5 percent. Hyperinflation and negative yields lead to capital flight. The result is
extreme weakness in the domestic currency, even though nominal interest rates may be extremely
high.
The same can be true with very low interest rates and deflation (negative inflation), such as what
happened in Japan over the past decade. With interest rates at very low levels, eventually zero,
and facing deflation, real Japanese yields were significantly higher than the nominal zero rates on
offer. (Remember: If you subtract a negative number, it’s the same as adding that positive
number.) As a result, the JPY experienced overall appreciation in this period despite very low
nominal rates and abysmal economic prospects.

In the following sections, I introduce the key objectives of monetary policy, take you through the
tool kits of monetary policymakers, and show you how to stay on top of the evolving interest rate
picture.

Monetary Policy 101
Monetary policy is the set of policy actions that central banks use to achieve their legal mandates.
Most central banks function under legislative mandates that focus on two basic objectives:
Promoting price stability (a.k.a. restraining inflation)
Promoting sustainable economic growth, sometimes with an explicit goal of promoting
maximum employment

Although it’s a no-brainer that promoting economic growth is more important to those of us
who work for a living, central bankers like to focus primarily on inflation. Low inflation
fosters stable business and investment environments, so central bankers see it as the best way
to promote long-run economic growth. Low inflation is also an end in itself because high
inflation erodes assets and undermines capital accumulation. Some central banks, such as the
European Central Bank (ECB), have only one mandate — to ensure price stability — with
other policy objectives (growth and employment) explicitly relegated to secondary status.
Still other central banks — the Swiss National Bank, for example — have a mandate to
ensure a stable currency, though most countries have delegated that responsibility to the
national finance ministry/treasury department.

Looking at benchmark interest rates
The primary lever of monetary policy is changes to benchmark interest rates, such as the federal
funds rate in the United States or the refinance rate in the Eurozone. Changes in interest rates
effectively amount to changes in the cost of money, where higher interest rates increase the cost of
borrowing and lower interest rates reduce the cost of borrowing. The benchmark rates set by
central banks apply to the nation’s banking system and determine the cost of borrowing between
banks. Banks in turn adjust the interest rates they charge to firms and individual borrowers based
on these benchmark rates, affecting domestic retail borrowing costs. Other tools in the monetary
policy toolkit used by central bankers are
Changes to money supply: The overall amount of money in circulation, or the greater the
money supply, the lower the cost
Reserve requirements: The amount of capital required to be set aside by the banking

system; money that cannot be used for lending

Easy money, tight money
The main thrust (or bias, as markets call it) of monetary policy generally falls into two categories:
expansionary or restrictive. An expansionary monetary policy aims to expand or stimulate
economic growth, while a restrictive bias aims to slow economic growth, usually to fight off
inflation.

Expansionary monetary policy
Expansionary monetary policy (also known as accommodative or stimulative monetary policy) is
typically achieved through lowering interest rates (that is, reducing the costs of borrowing in the
hope of spurring investment and consumer spending). Cutting interest rates is also known as
easing interest rates and is frequently summed up in the term easy monetary policy. Central banks
can also increase the money supply — the overall quantity of money in the economy — which also
works to lower borrowing costs. A reduction in the reserve requirement of banks frees up capital
for lending, adding to the money supply and reducing borrowing costs as well.
An expansionary monetary policy is typically employed when economic growth is low, stagnant,
or contracting, and unemployment is rising. Central banks of the major economies reacted to the
fallout from the GFC and the global recession by slashing interest rates to historically low levels,
near zero in the case of the United States, Switzerland, and Japan.

Restrictive monetary policy
Restrictive monetary policy (also known as contractionary or tighter monetary policy) is
achieved by raising, or “tightening,” interest rates. Higher interest rates increase the cost of
borrowing, and work to reduce spending and investment with the aim of slowing economic growth
and lowering inflation.
Central banks typically employ a tighter monetary policy when an economy is believed to be
expanding too rapidly. The fear from the central banker’s perspective is that heightened demand
coupled with the low cost of borrowing may lead to inflation beyond levels considered acceptable
to the long-run health of an economy. With too much money chasing the same or too few goods,
prices begin to rise, and inflation rears its ugly head. Rapid wage gains, for example, may lead to
increased personal consumption, driving up the cost of all manner of retail products.

Changing rates incrementally
Changes in monetary policy usually involve many small shifts in interest rates, because central
bankers are generally reluctant to shock an economy by adjusting interest rates too drastically.

Even the potential for large interest rate changes could contribute to uncertainty among investors
and businesses, potentially disrupting or delaying well-laid business plans, thereby harming the
overall economy in the process. Typical interest rate changes among the major central banks
center on 1⁄4 percent or 25 basis points (a basis point is 1/100th of 1 percent, or 0.01 percent),
with 50 bps (or 1⁄2 percent) as the next most frequent rate adjustment.
The GFC and the accompanying global recession caused key central banks to slash rates rapidly,
with cuts of 75 to 100 bps coming in rapid succession in some cases. Having cut benchmark rates
to near zero, several major central banks felt compelled to undertake additional unconventional
easing measures to support their economies.
