
took refuge in any of their dominions. The King at once agreed, and messengers were
despatched to all parts of the Continent the same night.
Among the directors taken into custody, was Sir John Blunt, the man whom popular
opinion has generally accused of having been the original author and father of the
scheme. This man, we are informed by Pope, in his epistle to Allen, Lord Bathurst, was a
dissenter, of a most religious deportment, and professed to be a great believer. He
constantly declaimed against the luxury and corruption of the age, the partiality of
parliaments, and the misery of party spirit. He was particularly eloquent against avarice
in great and noble persons. He was originally a scrivener, and afterwards became, not
only a director, but the most active manager of the South Sea Company. Whether it was
during his career in this capacity that he first began to declaim against the avarice of the
great, we are not informed. He certainly must have seen enough of it to justify his
severest anathema; but if the preacher had himself been free from the vice he condemned,
his declamations would have had a better effect. He was brought up in custody to the bar
of the House of Lords, and underwent a long examination. He refused to answer several
important questions. He said he had been examined already by a committee of the House
of Commons, and as he did not remember his answers, and might contradict himself, he
refused to answer before another tribunal. This declaration, in itself an indirect proof of
guilt, occasioned some commotion in the House. He was again asked peremptorily
whether he had ever sold any portion of the stock to any member of the administration, or
any member of either House of Parliament, to facilitate the passing of the hill. He again
declined to answer. He was anxious, he said, to treat the House with all possible respect,
but he thought it hard to be compelled to accuse himself. After several ineffectual
attempts to refresh his memory, he was directed to withdraw. A violent discussion ensued
between the friends and opponents of the ministry. It was asserted that the administration
were no strangers to the convenient taciturnity of Sir John Blunt. The Duke of Wharton
made a reflection upon the Earl Stanhope, which the latter warmly resented. He spoke
under great excitement, and with such vehemence as to cause a sudden determination of
blood to the head. He felt himself so ill that he was obliged to leave the House and retire
to his chamber. He was cupped immediately, and also let blood on the following
morning, but with slight relief. The fatal result was not anticipated. Towards evening he
became drowsy, and turning himself on his face, expired. The sudden death of this
statesman caused great grief to the nation. George I was exceedingly affected, and shut
himself up for some hours in his closet, inconsolable for his loss.
Knight, the treasurer of the company, was apprehended at Tirlemont, near Liege, by one
of the secretaries of Mr. Leathes, the British resident at Brussels, and lodged in the citadel
of Antwerp. Repeated applications were made to the court of Austria to deliver him up,
but in vain. Knight threw himself upon the protection of the states of Brabant, and
demanded to be tried in that country. It was a privilege granted to the states of Brabant by
one of the articles of the Joyeuse Entree, that every criminal apprehended in that country
should be tried in that country. The states insisted on their privilege, and refused to
deliver Knight to the British authorities. The latter did not cease their solicitations; but in
the mean time, Knight escaped from the citadel.

On the 16th of February the Committee of Secrecy made their first report to the House.
They stated that their inquiry had been attended with numerous difficulties and
embarrassments; every one they had examined had endeavoured, as far as in him lay, to
defeat the ends of justice. In some of the books produced before them, false and fictitious
entries had been made; in others, there were entries of money, with blanks for the name
of the stockholders. There were frequent erasures and alterations, and in some of the
books leaves were torn out. They also found that some books of great importance had
been destroyed altogether, and that some had been taken away or secreted. At the very
entrance into their inquiry, they had observed that the matters referred to them were of
great variety and extent. Many persons had been intrusted with various parts in the
execution of the law, and under colour thereof had acted in an unwarrantable manner, in
disposing of the properties of many thousands of persons, amounting to many millions of
money. They discovered that, before the South Sea Act was passed, there was an entry in
the Company's books of the sum of 1,259,325 pounds, upon account of stock stated to
have been sold to the amount of 574,500 pounds. This stock was all fictitious, and had
been disposed of with a view to promote the passing of the bill. It was noted as sold at
various days, and at various prices, from 150 to 325 per cent. Being surprised to see so
large an account disposed of, at a time when the Company were not empowered to
increase their capital, the committee determined to investigate most carefully the whole
transaction. The governor, sub-governor, and several directors were brought before them,
and examined rigidly. They found that, at the time these entries were made, the Company
was not in possession of such a quantity of stock, having in their own right only a small
quantity, not exceeding thirty thousand pounds at the utmost. Pursuing the inquiry, they
found that this amount of stock, was to be esteemed as taken in or holden by the
Company, for the benefit of the pretended purchasers, although no mutual agreement was
made for its delivery or acceptance at any certain time. No money was paid down, nor
any deposit or security whatever given to the Company by the supposed purchasers; so
that if the stock had fallen, as might have been expected, had the act not passed, they
would have sustained no loss. If, on the contrary, the price of stock advanced (as it
actually did by the success of the scheme), the difference by the advanced price was to be
made good to them. Accordingly, after the passing of the act, the account of stock was
made up and adjusted with Mr. Knight, and the pretended purchasers were paid the
difference out of the Company's cash. This fictitious stock, which had been chiefly at the
disposal of Sir John Blunt, Mr. Gibbon, and Mr. Knight, was distributed among several
members of the government and their connexions, by way of bribe, to facilitate the
passing of the bill. To the Earl of Sunderland was assigned 50,000 pounds of this stock;
to the Duchess of Kendal 10,000 pounds; to the Countess of Platen 10,000 pounds; to her
two nieces 10,000 pounds; to Mr. Secretary Craggs 30,000 pounds; to Mr. Charles
Stanhope (one of the Secretaries of the Treasury) 10,000 pounds; to the Swordblade
Company 50,000 pounds. It also appeared that Mr. Stanhope had received the enormous
sum of 250,000 pounds as the difference in the price of some stock, through the hands of
Turner, Caswall, and Co., but that his name had been partly erased from their books, and
altered to Stangape. Aislabie, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, had made profits still
more abominable. He had an account with the same firm, who were also South Sea
directors, to the amount of 794,451 pounds. He had, besides, advised the Company to
make their second subscription one million and a half, instead of a million, by their own

authority, and without any warrant. The third subscription had been conducted in a
manner as disgraceful. Mr. Aislabie's name was down for 70,000 pounds; Mr. Craggs,
senior, for 659,000 pounds; the Earl of Sunderland's for 160,000 pounds; and Mr.
Stanhope for 47,000 pounds. This report was succeeded by six others, less important. At
the end of the last, the committee declared that the absence of Knight, who had been
principally intrusted, prevented them from carrying on their inquiries.
The first report was ordered to be printed, and taken into consideration on the next day
but one succeeding. After a very angry and animated debate, a series of resolutions were
agreed to, condemnatory of the conduct of the directors, of the members of the
Parliament and of the administration concerned with them; and declaring that they ought,
each and all, to make satisfaction out of their own estates for the injury they had done the
public. Their practices were declared to be corrupt, infamous, and dangerous; and a bill
was ordered to be brought in for the relief of the unhappy sufferers.
Mr. Charles Stanhope was the first person brought to account for his share in these
transactions. He urged in his defence that, for some years past, he had lodged all the
money he was possessed of in Mr. Knight's hands, and whatever stock Mr. Knight had
taken in for him, he had paid a valuable consideration for it. As to the stock that had been
bought for him by Turner, Caswall, and Co. he knew nothing about it. Whatever had been
done in that matter was done without his authority, and he could not be responsible for it.
Turner and Co. took the latter charge upon themselves, but it was notorious to every
unbiassed and unprejudiced person that Mr. Stanhope was a gainer of the 250,000 pounds
which lay in the hands of that firm to his credit. He was, however, acquitted by a majority
of three only. The greatest exertions were made to screen him. Lord Stanhope, the son of
the Earl of Chesterfield, went round to the wavering members, using all the eloquence he
was possessed of to induce them either to vote for the acquittal or to absent themselves
from the house. Many weak-headed country-gentlemen were led astray by his
persuasions, and the result was as already stated. The acquittal caused the greatest
discontent throughout the country. Mobs of a menacing character assembled in different
parts of London; fears of riots were generally entertained, especially as the examination
of a still greater delinquent was expected by many to have a similar termination. Mr.
Aislabie, whose high office and deep responsibilities should have kept him honest, even
had native principle been insufficient, was very justly regarded as perhaps the greatest
criminal of all. His case was entered into on the day succeeding the acquittal of Mr.
Starthope. Great excitement prevailed, and the lobbies and avenues of the house were
beset by crowds, impatient to know the result. The debate lasted the whole day. Mr.
Aislabie found few friends: his guilt was so apparent and so heinous that nobody had
courage to stand up in his favour. It was finally resolved, without a dissentient voice, that
Mr. Aislabie had encouraged and promoted the destructive execution of the South Sea
scheme with a view to his own exorbitant profit, and had combined with the directors in
their pernicious practices to the ruin of the public trade and credit of the kingdom: that he
should for his offences be ignominiously expelled from the House of Commons, and
committed a close prisoner to the Tower of London; that he should be restrained from
going out of the kingdom for a whole year, or till the end of the next session of

Parliament; and that he should make out a correct account of all his estate, in order that it
might be applied to the relief of those who had suffered by his malpractices.
This verdict caused the greatest joy. Though it was delivered at half-past twelve at night,
it soon spread over the city. Several persons illuminated their houses in token of their joy.
On the following day, when Mr. Aislabie was conveyed to the Tower, the mob assembled
on Tower-hill with the intention of hooting and pelting him. Not succeeding in this, they
kindled a large bonfire, and danced around it in the exuberance of their delight. Several
bonfires were made in other places; London presented the appearance of a holiday, and
people congratulated one another as if they had just escaped from some great calamity.
The rage upon the acquittal of Mr. Stanhope had grown to such a height that none could
tell where it would have ended, had Mr. Aislabie met with the like indulgence.
To increase the public satisfaction, Sir George Caswall, of the firm of Turner, Caswall, &
Co. was expelled the House on the following day, and ordered to refund the sum of
250,000 pounds.
That part of the report of the Committee of Secrecy which related to the Earl of
Sunderland was next taken into consideration. Every effort was made to clear his
Lordship from the imputation. As the case against him rested chiefly on the evidence
extorted from Sir John Blunt, great pains were taken to make it appear that Sir John's
word was not to be believed, especially in a matter affecting the honour of a peer and
privy councillor. All the friends of the ministry rallied around the Earl, it being generally
reported that a verdict of guilty against him would bring a Tory ministry into power. He
was eventually acquitted, by a majority of 233 against 172; but the country was
convinced of his guilt. The greatest indignation was everywhere expressed, and menacing
mobs again assembled in London. Happily no disturbances took place.
This was the day on which Mr. Craggs, the elder, expired. The morrow had been
appointed for the consideration of his case. It was very generally believed that he had
poisoned himself. It appeared, however, that grief for the loss of his son, one of the
Secretaries of the Treasury, who had died five weeks previously of the small-pox, preyed
much on his mind. For this son, dearly beloved, he had been amassing vast heaps of
riches: he had been getting money, but not honestly; and he for whose sake he had
bartered his honour and sullied his fame, was now no more. The dread of further
exposure increased his trouble of mind, and ultimately brought on an apoplectic fit, in
which he expired. He left a fortune of a million and a half, which was afterwards
confiscated for the benefit of the sufferers by the unhappy delusion he had been so
mainly instrumental in raising.
One by one the case of every director of the Company was taken into consideration. A
sum amounting to two millions and fourteen thousand pounds was confiscated from their
estates towards repairing the mischief they had done, each man being allowed a certain
residue, in proportion to his conduct and circumstances, with which he might begin the
world anew. Sir John Blunt was only allowed 5,000 pounds out of his fortune of upwards
of 183,000 pounds; Sir John Fellows was allowed 10,000 pounds out of 243,000 pounds;

Sir Theodore Janssen, 50,000 pounds out of 243,000 pounds; Mr. Edward Gibbon,
10,000 pounds out of 106,000 pounds.; Sir John Lambert, 5000 pounds out of 72,000
pounds. Others, less deeply involved, were treated with greater liberality. Gibbon, the
historian, whose grandfather was the Mr. Edward Gibbon so severely mulcted, has given,
in the Memoirs of his Life and Writings, an interesting account of the proceedings in
Parliament at this time. He owns that he is not an unprejudiced witness; but, as all the
writers from which it is possible to extract any notice of the proceedings of these
disastrous years, were prejudiced on the other side, the statements of the great historian
become of additional value. If only on the principle of audi alteram partem, his opinion is
entitled to consideration. "In the year 1716," he says, "my grandfather was elected one of
the directors of the South Sea Company, and his books exhibited the proof that before his
acceptance of that fatal office, he had acquired an independent fortune of 60,000 pounds.
But his fortune was overwhelmed in the shipwreck of the year twenty, and the labours of
thirty years were blasted in a single day. Of the use or abuse of the South Sea scheme, of
the guilt or innocence of my grandfather and his brother directors, I am neither a
competent nor a disinterested judge. Yet the equity of modern times must condemn the
violent and arbitrary proceedings, which would have disgraced the cause of justice, and
rendered injustice still more odious. No sooner had the nation awakened from its golden
dream, than a popular, and even a Parliamentary clamour, demanded its victims; but it
was acknowledged on all sides, that the directors, however guilty, could not be touched
by any known laws of the land. The intemperate notions of Lord Molesworth were not
literally acted on; but a bill of pains and penalties was introduced -- a retro-active statute,
to punish the offences which did not exist at the time they were committed. The
Legislature restrained the persons of the directors, imposed an exorbitant security for
their appearance, and marked their character with a previous note of ignominy. They
were compelled to deliver, upon oath, the strict value of their estates, and were disabled
from making any transfer or alienation of any part of their property. Against a bill of
pains and penalties, it is the common right of every subject to be heard by his counsel at
the bar. They prayed to be heard. Their prayer was refused, and their oppressors, who
required no evidence, would listen to no defence. It had been at first proposed, that one
eighth of their respective estates should be allowed for the future support of the directors;
but it was speciously urged, that in the various shades of opulence and guilt, such a
proportion would be too light for many, and for some might possibly be too heavy. The
character and conduct of each man were separately weighed; but, instead of the calm
solemnity of a judicial inquiry, the fortune and honour of thirty-three Englishmen were
made the topics of hasty conversation, the sport of a lawless majority; and the basest
member of the committee, by a malicious word, or a silent vote, might indulge his
general spleen or personal animosity. Injury was aggravated by insult, and insult was
embittered by pleasantry. Allowances of 20 pounds or 1 shilling were facetiously moved.
A vague report that a director had formerly been concerned in another project, by which
some unknown persons had lost their money, was admitted as a proof of his actual guilt.
One man was ruined because he had dropped a foolish speech, that his horses should feed
upon gold; another, because he was grown so proud, that one day, at the Treasury, he had
refused a civil answer to persons much above him. All were condemned, absent and
unheard, in arbitrary fines and forfeitures, which swept away the greatest part of their
substance. Such bold oppression can scarcely be shielded by the omnipotence of

Parliament. My grandfather could not expect to be treated with more lenity than his
companions. His Tory principles and connexions rendered him obnoxious to the ruling
powers. His name was reported in a suspicious secret. His well-known abilities could not
plead the excuse of ignorance or error. In the first proceedings against the South Sea
directors, Mr. Gibbon was one of the first taken into custody, and in the final sentence the
measure of his fine proclaimed him eminently guilty. The total estimate, which he
delivered on oath to the House of Commons, amounted to 106,543 pounds 5 shillings 6
pence, exclusive of antecedent settlements. Two different allowances of 15,000 pounds
and of 10,000 pounds were moved for Mr. Gibbon; but, on the question being put, it was
carried without a division for the smaller sum. On these ruins, with the skill and credit of
which Parliament had not been able to despoil him, my grandfather, at a mature age,
erected the edifice of a new fortune. The labours of sixteen years were amply rewarded;
and I have reason to believe that the second structure was not much inferior to the first."
The next consideration of the Legislature, after the punishment of the directors, was to
restore public credit. The scheme of Walpole had been found insufficient, and had fallen
into disrepute. A computation was made of the whole capital stock of the South Sea
Company at the end of the year 1720. It was found to amount to thirty-seven millions
eight hundred thousand pounds, of which the stock allotted to all the proprietors only
amounted to twenty-four millions five hundred thousand pounds. The remainder of
thirteen millions three hundred thousand pounds belonged to the Company in their
corporate capacity, and was the profit they had made by the national delusion. Upwards
of eight millions of this were taken from the Company, and divided among the
proprietors and subscribers generally, making a dividend of about 33 pounds 6 shillings 8
pence per cent. This was a great relief. It was further ordered, that such persons as had
borrowed money from the South Sea Company upon stock actually transferred and
pledged at the time of borrowing to or for the use of the Company, should be free from
all demands, upon payment of ten per cent. of the sums so borrowed. They had lent about
eleven millions in this manner, at a time when prices were unnaturally raised; and they
now received back one million one hundred thousand, when prices had sunk to their
ordinary level.
But it was a long time before public credit was thoroughly restored. Enterprise, like
Icarus, had soared too high, and melted the wax of her wings; like Icarus, she had fallen
into a sea, and learned, while floundering in its waves, that her proper element was the
solid ground. She has never since attempted so high a flight.
In times of great commercial prosperity there has been a tendency to over-speculation on
several occasions since then. The success of one project generally produces others of a
similar kind. Popular imitativeness will always, in a trading nation, seize hold of such
successes, and drag a community too anxious for profits into an abyss from which
extrication is difficult. Bubble companies, of a kind similar to those engendered by the
South Sea project, lived their little day in the famous year of the panic, 1825. On that
occasion, as in 1720, knavery gathered a rich harvest from cupidity, but both suffered
when the day of reckoning came. The schemes of the year 1836 threatened, at one time,
results as disastrous; but they were happily averted before it was too late. The South Sea

project thus remains, and, it is to be hoped, always will remain, the greatest example in
British history, of the infatuation of the people for commercial gambling. From the bitter
experience of that period, posterity may learn how dangerous it is to let speculation riot
unrestrained, and to hope for enormous profits from inadequate causes. Degrading as
were the circumstances, there is wisdom to be gained from the lesson which they teach.
