
Rising Inequality
Quite apart from the effect of the general fear people have of losing out in the
economy of the future, there is a related effect of the rising inequality that may
be directly connected to rising asset prices. The current trend, which started
in the United States and other countries around the time of the Ronald Reagan
presidency in 1981 and of the beginning of the Millennium Bubble in 1982,
is that of a steady increase in labor income inequality. As shown by Thomas
Piketty in his 2014 book Capital in the Twenty-First Century, there was a clear
turning point upward at that time in the earnings of the top 1% of incomes
in the United States, and the trend was closely related to an uptrend in the
share of the top wage percentile in the total wage bill.54 According to Piketty’s
data, the last time such an increase occurred in the share of income going to

PREC I P I TAT I N G FA C TO RS

67

the top 1% was in the 1920s, which corresponded roughly to the bull market
of the Roaring Twenties, and inequality of total income and of labor income
peaked around the peak of the market in 1929.
There are a number of mechanisms by which a rise in the share of income
going to the top 1% could give an upward impulse to asset prices. Higher
income people tend to save more, as Piketty emphasized, and if there are
not enough available opportunities for new investments, then as time goes
on and there are more and more such people, they could bid up the value of
the existing capital stock. The advent of a new rich class could change the
politics—or the perceived politics—of the future, to incent regulators to favor
business, making the outlook for after-tax profit higher. The higher inequality
may be related to lower business moral standards and greater willingness of
businesses to play games with their earnings statements. The perceptions of
inequality may favor people with modest incomes “reaching for yield” with
a wishful-thinking bias in their investments.
But the effect of income inequality on asset prices is not entirely clear. Public
awareness of rising inequality increased dramatically during the New-Normal
Boom after 2009. Notably, the Occupy Wall Street movement of 2011–13, in the
United States and other countries, with its slogan “We are the ninety-nine percent,” may mark the beginning of a time when the repugnance toward inequality
is more important in politics, and when government policy will be less favorable to investors. The prospect of government policy hurting asset values in the
future may adversely affect their prices today. On the other hand—surprisingly
to some—the capture of both houses of the U.S. Congress by Republicans seems
to suggest a shift in public policy against redistributive policies and toward a
policy of protecting wealth and thus supporting asset prices.

The Rise of Nationalism and War Stirrings
A final precipitating factor for the New-Normal Boom should also be mentioned, though it too has ambiguous effects on the pricing of asset markets.
To the alarm of many people, we see now, in a number of countries, the rise
of nationalistic and xenophobic political parties. In some cases exaggerated
stories of abuses of nationals in foreign countries is a new source of anger
and conflict, and in other cases weakly controlled immigration is increasingly resented.
This change may be indirectly caused by the effects on popular psychology
of some of the precipitating factors listed above: the 2007–9 financial crisis with
the economic crisis that has continued after it, the end-of-career fears associated with globalization and advancing technology, and the rising inequality.
As Benjamin Friedman documented in his 2005 book The Moral Consequences
of Economic Growth, prolonged periods of disappointing economic growth

68

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

seem to be periods of public anger and increasing intolerance toward minority groups or other countries. These periods can then descend into unrest,
terrorism, or war. Rising inequality associated with rapid economic growth
may be bearable, he argues, but may become unbearable as growth slows.
At the time of this writing we have now recently seen an outbreak of wars
in Gaza, Iraq, Israel, Syria, and Ukraine, the establishment of a terrorist Islamic
State, and an associated rise in terrorist threats around the world. We can only
hope that we do not see more of these events in the future.
Such events have already created anxieties that may have propelled asset
prices up even further, as people have tried to find a safety net for themselves,
bidding prices of existing assets up rather than successfully saving. But it is
also possible that this sense of unrest may have had the net effect of encouraging people to hold their assets in more liquid form. Some may even have
feared confiscation or wartime taxation, and long-term asset prices might
have been adversely affected.
The stock markets of the world collapsed in the summer of 1914, when
World War I broke out in Europe. In contrast, some of the world stock markets
soared on the day when World War II officially began.55 On Sunday, September
3, 1939, Great Britain, France, India (which included today’s Bangladesh and
Pakistan), Australia, and New Zealand declared war on Germany, which
was defying demands to evacuate its forces from Poland. When U.S. markets
opened after Labor Day, on Tuesday, September 5, the S&P Composite Stock
Price Index rose 9.63%, one of its biggest one-trading-day increases in history.
We can only hope that nothing as dramatic as those events is in store for us.
But we will have just to wait and see how evolving conflicts develop and play
out in public imagination and then later, through amplification mechanisms,
have their effects on markets.

Summing Up
Looking back at the list of potential precipitating factors for the three recent
booms, in the stock market, bond market, and real estate, one may be struck
by the sheer multiplicity of factors that appear to have been at work. It is worth
remembering that there is no air‑tight science of speculative market pricing.
We have certainly made progress in understanding these markets, but the
complexity of real life continues to prevail.
Many of the factors that led to these booms had a self‑fulfilling aspect to
them, and they are thus difficult, if not impossible, to capture in predictive
scientific explanations. Yet many of them also have indisputable markers. The
Internet boom, the rise of online trading, the Republican Congress, and the
proposed capital gains tax cuts occurred just as the stock market started its
most breathtaking ascent in the 1990s. Other factors—including the rise of

PREC I P I TAT I N G FA C TO RS

69

defined contribution pension plans, the growth of mutual funds, the decline
of inflation, and the expansion of the volume of trade—were clearly associated with events that had unfolded since the bottom of the market in 1982.
Beyond these, our culture clearly reflects further developments that accompanied the surge in stocks and in real estate. For example, studies reveal that
the degree of materialism rose steadily in the past generation, that the belief
in markets following the demise of communism contributed to confidence in
the capitalist system, and perhaps most interestingly, that gambling was on
the rise around the world. Many of these factors were present in Europe and
in other countries as well as the United States, and so a theory that they are
responsible for the stock market and real estate market booms in the United
States is not inconsistent with the fact that the boom is shared substantially
by these other countries.56
But it was never my intent to argue that one can explain the ups and downs
of the markets in terms of the precipitating factors alone. The markets have
lives of their own due to feedback, the amplification mechanism that spreads
the actions of the precipitating factors through time and that sometimes makes
the effects of these factors so big and so important as to take our breath away.
It is to these amplifying mechanisms that we turn in the next chapter.

Five

Amplification Mechanisms:
Naturally Occurring Ponzi Processes

I

n the previous chapter, we examined a
number of precipitating factors that have
helped drive the stock market and the market for homes. In this chapter, we
consider how the effect of these factors is amplified by mechanisms involving
investor confidence, investor expectations for future market performance, and
related influences on investor demand. To provide context and concreteness,
we shall first examine evidence about investor confidence and expectations.
The amplification mechanisms work through a sort of feedback loop; later in
this chapter, they will also be described as a type of naturally occurring Ponzi
process. Investors, their confidence and expectations buoyed by past price
increases, bid up speculative prices further, thereby enticing more investors to
do the same, so that the cycle repeats again and again, resulting in an amplified response to the original precipitating factors. The feedback mechanism
is widely suggested in popular discourse and is one of the oldest financial
theories.1 But it is not usually mentioned in contemporary finance textbooks.
The feedback theory is often described as merely a hypothesis, unproven.
In fact, there is some evidence in support of such a feedback mechanism, as
we shall see.

Changes in Investor Confidence
A striking feature of the bull stock market of the 1990s and the bear stock
market after 2000 has been their relation to changes in investor confidence in
stocks. It appears that by the late 1990s a very simple notion had taken over
70

71

A M P L I F I C AT I O N M ECH AN IS MS

2000

2500

Agree stocks are best investment

95

2005

2007

2000

Percent agreeing

90
85

1500

80
Stock price

75

1000

2003
2009

70

2011
500

Real S&P 500 Stock Price Index

100

65
60
1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

0
2015

Figure 5.1
Stocks as Best Investment, 1996–2014
Percentage of U.S. high-income individuals who said they agreed with the statement, “The stock market is the best investment for long‑term holders, who can
just buy and hold through the ups and downs of the market,” along with the real
S&P 500 Stock Price Index. Source: Author’s calculations using surveys conducted
at Yale International Center for Finance, Standard & Poor’s, U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics.

investors’ thinking: the notion that stocks are the “best investment” and investors cannot go wrong with them over the long run. This idea appears in sharp
contrast to the notion that seemed to prevail in the late 1970s, after the stock
market crash of 1973–74, when most people appear to have thought that real
estate was the “best investment.” But I was not doing questionnaire surveys
then, so I do not have evidence of what they thought then.
Starting in 1996, after concluding that the belief that stocks are the best
investment and cannot fail had become a real staple of popular culture, it
occurred to me that I ought to tabulate how belief in this simple notion has
changed through time. I added a question to my high-income individual
investor questionnaire, asking whether the respondent agreed with the statement, “The stock market is the best investment for long‑term holders, who
can just buy and hold through the ups and downs of the market.” The data I
collected, and that are now being updated by the Yale School of Management,
are shown in Figure 5.1.

72

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

250

85

200

Percent agreeing

80
Home price

150

75
100
70
Agree real estate is best investment
50

65

60
2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

Real S&P Case-Shiller Home Price Index

90

0
2014

Figure 5.2
Real Estate as Best Investment, 2003–2013
Percentage of recent U.S. homebuyers who said they agreed with the statement,
“Real estate is the best investment for long‑term holders, who can just buy and hold
through the ups and downs of the market,” along with the real Case-Shiller/S&P
Home Price Indices. Source: Author’s calculations using surveys conducted at Yale
International Center for Finance, Standard & Poor’s, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Agreement that stocks are the best investment during the boom years
leading to 2000 was obviously very strong. Fully 97% of the respondents
agreed in the peak year of the market, 2000. A 97% level of agreement with
just about any statement put forth in a survey question is remarkable, and
it is all the more so when the statement is about something as personal as
investing strategy.2 After the market started to sag, the strength of agreement with this statement also started to sag. The percentage of respondents
who agreed fell from 97% in 2000 to 72% in 2011. Belief in the stock market
is still strong (I would conclude that irrational exuberance is still here),
though it is eroding. But the point here that stock price changes feed back
into corresponding changes in long-term optimism is well supported by
this evidence.
During the recent housing boom, my colleague Karl Case and I asked
essentially the same question about real estate as we had about stocks as a
part of a survey of a random sample of recent homebuyers in each of four
cities—Boston, Los Angeles, Milwaukee, and San Francisco.

73

A M P L I F I C AT I O N M ECH AN IS MS

100

2500
1999

Agree if crash, market will be back up

80

2000

2007

Percent agreeing

70
1500

60
50

2012

Stock price
2003

40

1000
2009

30

500

20

Real S&P 500 Stock Price Index

90

10
0
1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

0
2015

Figure 5.3
Opinion of Aftermath of a Stock Market Crash, 1996–2014
Percentage of high-income U.S. investors who agree “If there is another crash
like October 19, 1987, the market will surely be back up to its former levels in a
couple years or so,” along with the real S&P 500 Stock Price Index. Source: Author’s
calculations using surveys conducted at Yale International Center for Finance,
Standard & Poor’s, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

As shown in Figure 5.2, we find the same striking correlation between prices
and opinions about best investment: generally when home prices are going
up, the percentage who think real estate is the best investment also goes up.
When home prices are going down, the percentage who think real estate is
the best investment goes down too. This is feedback.3
Associated with these “best investment” views is a feeling that prices always
go up in the longer run, if not immediately, and this belief varies through time
and across markets. As part of our survey of high-income investors, we asked
the following question: “How much do you agree with this statement? ‘If there
is another crash like October 19, 1987, the market will surely be back up to its
former levels in a couple years or so.’” Figure 5.3 shows the responses.
The agreement with this statement roughly tracks the market. When the
market was near its peak in 1999, near the end of the Millennium Boom, 88%
agreed with this statement. After 2000, when the stock market started sliding,
the percentage who agreed also started sliding, to 69%, by 2004. When the stock
market rose with the Ownership-Society Boom, the percentage who agreed

74

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

started increasing as well, to 76% in 2007. When the market corrected down
after 2007, so did the percentage agreeing, though it was not until 2012 that
agreement fell to its lowest point of 56%. Eventually, with the New-Normal
Boom, the percentage agreement recovered to 68% in 2014. A rising market
seems indeed to foster a sort of complacency: there may be drops in the market,
but there is an increase in the blithe assurance that any such downturns do not
matter in the longer run. Falling markets seem to damage this complacency,
even though the falling markets themselves do not add observations about
how the market will behave after a major crash.
It is curious that people do not seem to believe the converse of the premise stated in our question: they do not believe that the market will surely go
back down in a couple of years if it goes up dramatically.4 Their belief in the
resilience of the market seems to stem from a generalized feeling of optimism
and assurance, rather than a belief in the long‑run stability of prices.
There is some evidence suggesting that in 1929—the peak of the bull stock
market of the 1920s—many people felt as certain about the long-run success of
the stock market as did people in the late 1990s. Although we do not have survey
data from the time, we do have contemporary accounts of investor confidence.
In his 1931 history of the 1920s, Only Yesterday, Frederick Lewis Allen wrote:
As people in the summer of 1929 looked back for precedents, they were comforted by the recollection that every crash of the past few years had ultimately
brought prices to a new high point. Two steps up, one step down, two steps up
again—that was how the market went. If you sold, you had only to wait for
the next crash (they came every few months) and buy in again. And there was
really no reason to sell at all: you were bound to win in the end if your stock was
sound. The really wise man, it appeared, was he who “bought and held on.”5

Some Reflections on Investor Confidence
It is important to consider the nature, and likely sources, of the changes we
have observed in investor confidence, not only to understand the present situation but also to lead us into a discussion, later in this chapter, of feedback
loops. We will see that the feedback that reinforces investor confidence occurs
in the context of a complex social and psychological environment.
Where did people get the idea that, if there is ever a stock market crash,
the market is sure to rise to past levels within a couple of years or so? History
certainly does not suggest this. There are many examples of markets that have
done poorly over long intervals of time. To pick just one from recent memory, the
Nikkei index in Japan is still selling at less than half its peak value in 1989. Other
examples are the periods after the 1929 and 1966 stock market peaks discussed
in Chapter 1. However, during a booming market, these examples of persistent
bad performance in the stock market are not prominent in the public mind.

A M P L I F I C AT I O N M ECH AN IS MS

75

One reason that the recent domestic market performance is more prominent
in investors’ minds is simply that they have experienced these domestic stock
prices every day. During the bull stock market of the 1990s, they watched and
reacted to a U.S. market that had been rising since 1982. U.S. investors of the
1990s did not have the same experience with Japanese stocks, or with the U.S.
market of decades past. Many people fixed their attention on plots of rising
stock prices in newspapers every day, and they seemed to come away with
an intuitive feeling that every decline is reversed, to be followed swiftly by
new highs. The same human pattern‑recognition faculty that we used when
we learned to ride a bike or to drive a car, giving us an intuitive sense of what
to expect next, shapes our expectations for the market. For investors in the
middle years of their lives in the 1990s, this upward trend characterized most
of the years they had been observing or investing in the market.
The subjective experience over the years of seeing stock market declines
consistently reverse themselves has a psychological impact on our thinking
that is hard to appreciate, or reconstruct, after the fact. Those who thought
the market would go down and stay down became sensitized to their bad
feelings from being repeatedly wrong, year after year. Those who consistently
predicted a decline became painfully aware of a loss of reputation from being
so wrong so often. Since our satisfaction with our views of the world is part of
our self‑esteem and personal identity, it is natural for the formerly pessimistic
to want to settle on a different view, or at least to present themselves to the
public with a different theme. Thus, the changed emotional environment will
have an impact on their views—or certainly the expression of them—that is
independent of any objective evidence supporting or refuting those views.
Even if they had not personally paid attention to the stock market since
1982, the investors of the booming stock market of the 1990s were living in
a time and place where recitations of the feelings of others who had experienced the market were heard regularly. To appreciate this sense, it is helpful
to quote one person’s argument against market timing, from the 1999 book
Dow 40,000 by David Elias:
An example of what can happen when an individual waits for the Dow to indicate “the perfect time” to invest is the saga of Joe, a friend of mine. Joe started
calling me in 1982 when the Dow was just over 1000, looking for the right time
to get into equities. Over the years, he continued to seek a pullback that would
be his perfect moment. Today, at age 62, Joe still has his money parked in bank
CDs. He has missed the entire bull market and all its thousand‑point milestones.
Even now, Joe does not realize that there never is a perfect time. When the market
recovers from a pullback, it generally goes to new highs.6

There is something superficially convincing about this passage, especially
when it is combined, as in the next paragraph in Elias’s book, with illustrations

76

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

of the power of compound interest when returns are high (as they had recently
been in the stock market when that book was written), suggesting that the
stock market is your chance to become really and truly rich. The tale has
emotional immediacy, as would a story about a driving mistake that led to a
serious accident or a story about the advantages of asking the boss for a raise.
A related reason why an argument built around such a story has such appeal
is that by presenting successful investing as a process of mastering one’s own
internal impulses rather than taking account of our present situation in history,
it invites the reader to forget what is special about the present time in terms of
the level of the market. Normal people think a lot about controlling their own
impulses—for example, about disciplining themselves to perform good work
rather than wasting time, about staying slim rather than getting fat—and so
arguments that appeal to such self‑control have more resonance than articles
about the history of price‑earnings ratios. The appeal of Elias’s argument is
also that it calls to mind the pain of regret, the emotional reasons we have for
investing now, a point to which I will return later in this chapter. When arguments become so detached from an analysis of historical data, the only impact
on people’s thinking made by actual data is a vague sense, from casual inspection of very recent data, that the market has always reversed declines.
Many media accounts routinely tell stories about the satisfaction felt by
those who have invested in stocks in years past, with the clear suggestion to
the reader that “you can do it too.” To cite only one among numerous examples,
a 1999 article in USA Weekend, a national Sunday magazine insert for newspapers, carried an article titled “How to (Really) Get Rich in America.” The
article gave examples of investor successes and offered the hypothetical story
of a twenty‑two‑year‑old college graduate earning $30,000 a year with annual
real income raises of 1%. “If she saved only 10% of her income and invested
the savings in an S&P index fund she’d have a net worth of $1.4 million on
retirement at age 67, in today’s dollars.”7 These calculations assume that the
S&P index fund earns a risk-free 8% real (inflation‑corrected) return. There is
no mention of the possibility that the return might not be so high over time,
and that the investor might not end up a millionaire. An article with a very
similar title, “Everybody Ought to Be Rich,” appeared in the Ladies’ Home
Journal in 1929.8 It performed comparable calculations, yet similarly omitted
to describe the possibility that anything could go wrong in the long term. The
article became notorious after the 1929 crash.
These seemingly convincing discussions of potential increases in the
stock market are rarely offered in the abstract, but instead in the context
of stories about successful or unsuccessful investors, and often with an
undertone suggesting the moral superiority of those who invested well. A
strong public admiration for those who make money patiently and slowly,
unfazed by market fluctuations, has evolved. It is a theme developed in
