
INTRODUCTION

In a very real sense, this book is my life's work. It touches on
many of my most abiding interests and it brings together the two
main strands in my 'intellectual development: one abstract and
one practical.
The abstract came' first. Ever since I became conscious of my
existence I have had a passionate interest in understanding it, and
1 regarded my own 'understanding as the central problem that
needed to be understood. To understand oneself-gnote aucton;
nosce te ipsum-is an impossible task. TO achiwe-anythingsL_
sembling- knowledge
we must be a b J ~ I ~ - d r a w
a d@in-cti-onebe-- --- -tween subject and object;
- -yet in this case the two are the same.
~ h d - o nihinks
e
is p a r t 3 what one thinks about; therefore, one's
thinking lacks an independent p i n t of referexce by -,=.hichit can
be judged-it lacks objectivity.
As an undergraduate I studied economics, but I found economic theory highly unsatisfactory because it failed to come to
grips with th$problem; indeed, it went through great contortions
to avoid it. Economics seeks to be a science. Science is supposed
to be objective and it is difficult to be scientific when the subject
matter, the participant in the economic process, lacks objectivity.
I was greatly influenced at the time by Karl Popper's ideas on
scientific method. I accepted most of his views, with one major
exception. He argued in favor of what he called "unity of
methodH1-that is, the methods and criteria that apply to the
study of natural phenomena also apply to the study of social
events. I felt that there was a fundamental difference between the
v-

12
t

I

Introduction

two: the events studied by the social sciences have thinking participants; natural phenomena do not. The participants' thinking
creates problems that have no counterpart in natural science. The
closest analogy is in quantum physics, where scientific observation gives rise to Heisenberg's uncertainty principle; but in social
events it is the participants' thinking that is responsible for the
element of uncertainty, not the outside observer.
Natural science studies events that consist of a sequence of
facts. When events have thinking participants, the subject matter
is no longer confined to facts but also includes the participants'
perceptions. The chain of causation does not lead directly from
fact to fact but from fact to perception and from perception to fact.
This would not create any insuperable difficulties if there were
some kind of correspondence or equivalence between facts and
perceptions. Unfortunately, that is impossible because the participants' perceptions do not relate to facts, but to a situation that is
contingent on their own perceptions and therefore cannot be
treated as a fact.
Economic theory tries to sidestep the issue by introducing the
assumption of rational behavior. People are assumed to act by
choosing the best of the available alternatives, but somehow the
distinction between perceived alternatives and facts is assumed
away. The result is a theoretical construction of great elegance
that resembles natural science but does not resemble reality. It
relates to an ideal world in which participants act on the basis of
perfect knowledge and it produces a theoretical equilibrium in
which the allocation of resources is at an optimum. It has little
relevance to the real world in which people act on the basis of
imperfect understanding and equilibrium is beyond r e a ~ h .
The relationship between the participants' understanding and
the situation in which they participate continued to preoccupy
me long after I left college. My first priority was to try and make a
living but in my spare time I wrote a philosophical treatise on the
subject with the catchy title "The Burden of Consciousness." Unfortunately, the title was the best part of it. By the time I finished,
I disagreed with my own presentation. I spent three years revising
it. One day I reread what I had written the day before and I could
not make head or tail of it. It made me realize that I had reached
a dead end, and I decided to give it up. That was when the practical streak in me began to dominate my intellectual development.
If I had to sum up my practical skills, I would use one word:
survival. When I was an adolescent, the Second World War gave

Introduction

13

me a lesson that I have never forgotten. I was fortunate enough to
have a father who was highly skilled in the art of survival, having
lived through the Russian revolution as an escaped prisoner of
war. Under his tutelgge the Second World War served as an advanced course at a tender age. As the reader shall see, the investment vehicle I created a quarter of a century later drew heavily on
skills I learned as an ;adolescent.
After leaving college I had a number of false starts and finally
became an international arbitrage trader in stocks, first in London
and then in New York. When the European Common Market was
formed in 1957, American investors became interested in European shares, 1 became a security analyst r;bsiaisg Aiiuc~icrnniirstitutions on their European investments and for a brief period I
ruled as a one-eyed king among the blind. My glory came to an
abrupt end when President Kennedy introduced a so-called interest equalization tax which effectively stopped purchases of foreign securities. I decided to put my money-making activities on
the back burner and spent three years, from 1963 to 1966, revising
"The Burden of Consciousness."
When I finally decided to return to the land of the living I
started a model portfolio that became a hedge fund (a mutual fund
that employs leverage and uses various techniques of hedging) in
1969. I have been in charge of that fund ever since, although I
delegated much of the responsibility to others between September
1981 and September 1984. The fund has g r o w h o m about $4
million at inception to nearly $2 billion and most of the growth
has been internally generated. Original investors have seen the
value of their shares mulitiply 300-fold. No investment fund has
ever prodsced comparable results,
In the first ten years of my business career I had not much use
for anything I had learned in college and there was an almost total
separation between my practical activities and my theoretical interests. Selling and trading in securities was a game I played without putting my true self on the line.
All this changed when I became a fund manager. I was putting
my money where my mouth was and I could not afford to dissociate myself from my investment decisions. I had to use all my
intellectual rasources and I discovered, to my great surprise and
gratification, that my abstract ideas came in very handy. It would
be an exaggeration to say that they accounted for my success; but
there can be no doubt that they gave me an edge.
I developed my own peculiar approach to investing, which was

14

'

I

Introduction

at loggerheads with the prevailing wisdom. The generally accepted view is that markets are always right-that is, market
prices tend to discount future developments accurately even
when it is unclear what those developments are. I start with the
opposite point of view. I believe that market prices are always
wrong in the sense that they present a biased view of the future.
But distortion works in both directions: not only do market participants operate with a bias, but their bias can also influence the
course of events. This may create the impression that markets
anticipate future developments accurately, but in fact it is not
present expectations that correspond to future events but future
t
The psrticipants'
ents that are s h a ~ e dby p r o s e ~ expect~?fons.
rceptions are inherently flawed, and there is a two-way connection between flawed perceptions and the actual course of events,
which results in a lack of correspondence between the two. I call
this two-way connection "reflexivity."
In the course of my investment activities, I discovered that financial markets operate on a principle that is somehow akin to
scientific method. Making an investment decision is like formulating a scientific hypothesis and submitting it to a practical test.
The main difference is that the hypothesis that underlies an investment decision is intended to make money and not to establish
a universally valid generalization. Both activities involve significant risk, and success brings a corresponding reward-monetary
in one case and scientific in the other. Taking this view, it is
possible to see financial markets as a laboratory for testing hypotheses, albeit not strictly scientific ones. The truth is, successful investing is a kind of alchemy.
Most market participants do zot view ~ll,arketbiii this ligC:. That
means that they do not know what hypotheses are being tested; it
also means that most of the hypotheses that are submitted to market testing are quite banal. Usually they amount to nothing more
than the assertion that a particular stock is going to outperform
the market averages.
I had a certain advantage over other investors because at least I
had an idea about the way financial markets operate. I would be
lying, however, if I claimed that I could always formulate worthwhile hypotheses on the basis of my theoretical framework.
Sometimes there were no reflexive processes to be found; sometimes I failed to find them; and, what was the most painful of all,
sometimes I got them wrong. One way or another, I often invested

.

t

without a worthwhile hypothesis and my activities were not very
different from a random walk. But I was attuned to reflexive processes in financial markets and my major successes came from
exploiting the opportunities they presented.
My approach to the market was not as abstract as it sounds. It
took an intensely pArsonal, emotional form: testing was closely
associated with pain ;and success with relief. When I asserted that
"markets are always biased" I was giving expression to a deeply
felt attitude: I had a very low regard for the sagacity of professional investors and the more influential their position the less I
considered them capable of making the right decisions. My partner and 1 taoltl ;malielous plsasure in makhg rnoriey by selling
short stocks that were institutional favorites. But we differed in
our attitudes to our own activities. He regarded only the other
participants' views as flawed, while I thought that we had as good
a chance of being wrong as anyone else. The assumption of inherently flawed perceptions suited my self-critical attitude.
Operating a hedge ;fund utilized my training in survival to the
fullest. Using leverage can produce superior results when the
going is good, but it can wipe you out when events fail to conform
to your expectations: One of the hardest things to judge is what
level of risk is safe. There are no universally valid yardsticks: each
situation needs to be judged on its own merit. In the final analysis
you must rely on your instincts for survival. Thus my engagement
in running a hedge fund brought together both my abstract interests and my practical skills.
I did not play the financial markets according to a particular set
of rules; I was always more interested in understanding the
changes that cccur in the rules of the game. I started with hypotheses relating to individual companies; with the passage of
time my interests veered increasingly toward macroeconomic
themes. This was due partly to the growth of the fund and partly
to the growing instability of the macroeconomic environment. For
instance, exchange rates were fixed until 1973;subsequently, they
became a fertile field for speculation.
For the past four or five years I have had a growing sense of
impending financial disaster. I felt that a long-lasting expansionary cycle was becoming increasingly unsound and unsustainable
and we were getting ready for a bust. That was one of the reasons
I distanced myself from the active management of the fund in
1981 and reduced its overalflevel of exposure. My interest shifted

16
I

4

Introduction

from my own survival to the survival of the system. I made a
study of the international debt problem and published some papers on the subject. I used the same theoretical framework as in
my investment activities and my analysis was not without merit.
Unfortunately, the more complex the system, the greater the room
for error. I made some mistakes in my analysis that detracted from
the accuracy of my predictions; they also had a detrimental effect
on my investment results until I revised my views in the course
of writing this book.
The more successful I had been in applying my ideas in financial markets, the keener I became to express them in theoretical
i E e i k hthe Iarrtasy that the concept of ref"lr;xform. I ~ u ~ ~ t i i mt ~e~d
ivity constitutes a major contribution to our understanding of the
world in which we live. I believed that the participants' bias is
the key to an understanding of all historical processes that have
thinking participants, just as genetic mutation is the key to biological evolution. But a satisfactory formulation of the theory of reflexivity continued to elude me. I always ran into trouble when I
tried to define what I meant by the imperfect understanding of the
participants. To speak accurately of a distortion we must know
what the situation would be if it were not distorted by the participants' perceptions. Unfortunately that does not seem possible
because the participants' thinking is an integral part of the situation they have to think about. It is not surprising that the concept
of reflexivity should present extreme difficulties; if it were an
easier concept to work with, economists and other social scientists would not have gone to such lengths to banish it from their
subject matter.
of reThis book is a finel. attempt to expiore the i~~iplications
flexivity. I have tried to circumvent the difficulties I encountered
in the past by approaching the subject from the opposite direction. Instead of getting bogged down in abstract theory, I am going
to draw on my experimental, practical findings to the greatest
possible extent. I cannot avoid an abstract discussion altogether,
but I have confined it to a single chapter. In exploring the practical implications, I start with the simplest cases and gradually lead
up to more complex ones. This approach happens to coincide
with the historical order in which 1 encountered reflexive developments in practice: first the stock market, then the currency market, then the international debt problem, and finally what may be
called the credit cycle.

Introduction

17

The stock market provides some pure examples of a boom and
bust pattern; freely floating currency rates allow me to explore
well-formed wave patterns. The boom and bust in international
bank lending is part pf a more complex, historical process of
credit expansion and eventual credit contraction. It has given rise
to the configuration that I have dubbed "Reagan's Imperial Circle." The configuratioq prevailed from the international debt crisis of 1982 until the first half of 1985 but it was inherently
unstable. How the instability will be resolved is one of the main
questions considered in this book.
The experimental approach has borne unexpected results. I
mads two major discavsries in the courss of writiiig: one is a
reflexive connection between credit and collateral; the other is a
reflexive relationship between the regulators and the economy
they regulate.
It has long been asshmed that monetary values are a passive
reflection of the state of affairs in the real world. Classical economics focused on the real world and neglected the problems
connected with money and credit; even Keynes couched his general theory in real terms. Monetarists sought to stand the relationship on its head: they kgue that it is possible to control inflation
by controlling the growth of the money supply.
In my opinion, all 'these views are based on a fundamental
misconception. Money values do not simply mirror the state of
affairs in the real world; valuation is a positive actqhat makes an
impact on the course of events. Monetary and real phenomena are
connected in a reflexive fashion; that is, they influence each other
mutually. The reflexive relationship manifests itself most clearly
ir, the use ~ n abuse
d
o l credit.
Loans are based on the lender's estimation of the borrower's
ability to service his debt. The valuation of the collateral is supposed to be independent of the act of lending; but in actual fact
the act of lending can affect the value of the collateral. This is true
of the individual case and of the economy as a whole. Credit
expansion stimulates the economy and enhances collateral values; the repayment or contraction of credit has a depressing influence both on the economy and on the valuation of the collateral.
The connection between credit and economic activity is anything
but constant-for instance, credit for building a new factory has
quite a different effect from credit for a leveraged buyout. This
makes it difficult to quantify t& connection between credit and

I

18
4

I

Introduction

economic activity. Yet it is a mistake to ignore it. The monetarist
school has done so, with disastrous consequences.
The reflexive interaction between the act of lending and collateral values has led me to postulate a pattern in which a period of
gradual, slowly accelerating credit expansion is followed by a
short period of credit contraction-the classic sequence of boom
and bust. The bust is compressed in time because the attempt to
liquidate loans causes a sudden implosion of collateral values.
Economic history has been punctuated by booms and busts.
Nevertheless, the concept of a credit cycle is too simplistic to
explain the course of events. For one thing, the connection be! w e e ~credit and sson~micactivity is too tenuous and variable to
yield a regular pattern. For another, the sequence of events is
greatly complicated by the influence of economic policy. Periodic
busts have been so devastating that strenuous efforts have been
made to prevent them. These efforts have led to the evolution of
central banking and of other mechanisms for controlling credit
and regulating economic activity.
To understand the role of the regulators it must be realized that
they are also participants: their understanding is inherently imperfect and their actions have unintended consequences. The relationship between the regulators and the economy is reflexive
and it also exhibits cyclical characteristics in the sense that it
tends to swing from one extreme to another.
What is the connection between the regulatory cycle and the
credit cycle? At this point, my views become very tentative. I
believe that the two cycles broadly overlap in time, that the minimum of regulations tends to coincide with the maximum of
credit expansion and v i ~ eversa. But within this chronological
coincidence there is constant interaction between the two cycles
that influences the shape and duration of both. The interaction
between the two cycles yields a unique path that cannot be fitted
into any regular or repetitive pattern.
I have tried to apply this complex and tentative framework to
an interpretation of recent economic and financial history. Needless to say, a great many factors come into play; but my focus is
on the twin cycles in credit and regulation. The main topics I deal
with are the transformation of banking from a highly regulated to
a less regulated industry, the boom and bust in international lending, mergermania, and international capital movements.
Until 1982, the story is a fairly straightforward case of boom

Introduction

19

and bust, but after 1982 the situation gets very complicated. If
events had been allo&d to take their course, the uncontrolled
credit expansion of the 1970s would have come to an unhappy
end; but exactly becauae the consequences would have been so
disastrous, the financial authorities came to the rescue and successfully avoided a bust. Since then, we have been passing
through uncharted waters. The great boom exhausted itself some
time ago but its life span has been extended by artificial means in
order to avoid a great bust.
I try to trace the unique path that events have taken: the preservation of the accumulated burden of bad international debt
through the formation c f what I call the "Collective" system of
lending and the emergence of the United States government as
the "borrower of last resort." Both of these are unprecedented
developments. They gave rise to this strange constellation that I
have called the Imperial Circle: a benign circle at the center and a
vicious circle at the periphery of a worldwide system based on a
strong dollar, a strong ;US. economy, a growing budget deficit,
a growing trade deficit, and high real interest rates. The Imperial
Circle held the international economic and financial system together but it was inherently unstable because the strong dollar
and high real interest rates were bound to outweigh the stimulating effect of the budget deficit and weaken the U.S. economy. The
Imperial Circle could not last indefinitely. What would happen
next?
To answer that question, I conducted an experiment from August 1985 onward. In effect, I kept a diary in which I recorded the
thoughts that went into my investment decisions on a real-time
h s i s . Since I c~nsideredthe future of the Imperial Circle of parkmount importance, the experiment served as a test of my ability
to predict the future course of events, using the framework developed in the book. The experiment was a roaring success in financial terms-my
fund never did better. It also produced a
surprising result: I came out of the experiment with quite different expectations about the future.
I started with the presumption that the benign circle was in
danger of reversing itself: a weak dollar and a weak economy
would combine to keep interest rates higher than they ought to
be, and without any scope for further monetary or fiscal stimulus
the decline of both the economy and the dollar would become
irreversible. But the situation was once again saved by the interX

\

20

+

t

Introduction

vention of the monetary authorities. By changing from a system
of freely floating exchange rates to a "dirty float," the decline of
the dollar was cushioned, and, with the help of lower interest
rates and booming financial markets, the economy was prevented
from slipping into recession. We entered a new phase which I
describe, with only a modicum of irony, as the "Golden Age of
Capitalism."
It can be seen that this book seeks to accomplish a number of
things at the same time. It propounds not just one general theory
-the theory of reflexivity-but also another specific theory, that
of a credit-cum-regulatory cycle. The latter idea is so tentative
y
that it hardly qualifies as a theory. Yet I try != apijly it zot ~ a l to
explain contemporary history but also to predict the outcome,
and in the course of doing so I provide a practical demonstration
of the fundamental difference between explaining and predicting
reflexive phenomena. I also try to draw some general conclusions
from the analysis. The most important ones are, first, that it is
credit that matters, not money (in other words, monetarism is a
false ideology), and, second, that the concept of a general equilibrium has no relevance to the real world (in other words, classical
economics is an exercise in futility). Financial markets are inherently unstable; that leads to a third conclusion that is better stated
as a question than an assertion: what policy measures are needed
to reestablish the stability of our economic system?
The book would be easier to read if it tried to make just one
point at a time. Unfortunately, that is not possible, because the
various points are interconnected. If the theory of reflexivity were
widely known, I could have taken it for granted and concentrated
on an exploration of +&ecredit and regulat~rycycles. S i ~ ~ i i a r lify ,
the fact that financial markets are inherently unstable were generally recognized, I need not have spent so much time on demonstrating that the concept of equilibrium as used in economic
theory is totally unrealistic. As it is, I had to try to make several
points more or less simultaneously.
To make matters worse, the book does not qualify as a finished
product. When I started writing it, I thought I had a theory of
reflexivity to present and my difficulties related only to its presentation. As I tried to apply the theory to various situations, I discovered that I do not actually have a well-formed theory. The idea
that the participants' biases play an important causal role in historical events is both valid and interesting, but it is too general to
