
book_c09.qxd

12/20/06

2:16 PM

Page 77

Mapping Out a New Career

77

tion after these reports! I could just be ready to go in the direction of the
movement after the report, and then bank some quick profits.
I’d seen the GBP/USD move 200 pips in just a few moments. If I just got
50 of those pips for every economic report, at $40 each, that was $2,000 in
gains. Every day! It was no wonder that those Wall Street guys were making so much money. They were trading position sizes of probably $10 million at a time. That would be . . . $1,000 per pip. At 50 pips a day, they were
easily making hundreds of thousands of dollars per week.
That was when I knew it was my time to shine. I could not wait to start
trading again. I had broken down my wife by losing my job. I had raised her
hopes high on the plans to become a trader, and now I had to prove myself.
She was giving me another chance to make right the bad trade and the loss
of $1,200. I decided that I never wanted to talk about that loss again. I was
going to focus on the future! What gain could come from miserably dissecting the past?
So I mentally stepped into a phone booth and changed myself into
Harry Banes: Supertrader. This was my destiny. I was going to earn back
every cent that I had lost. I might even earn it back on one trade.
I told all this to my wife the next morning.
She was supportive. “You got a nice severance check, and I know it
wasn’t easy to get that. Maybe we should put that money in the trading
account instead of the bank. You can earn more trading it than we can in
interest.”
“That is not a bad idea,” I agreed. “The severance alone is not going to
get us very far.” I did some calculations in my mind. With a $6,000 account,
I could use $3,000 for margin, and I’d be able to command a $1.2 million position, which would be worth $120 per pip. Now we were talking about serious money. More than enough to live on. On a daily diet of 50 pips off
economic reports, I could expect to make $5,000 per day. This was nearly
too great to comprehend. I was going to be rich. It occurred to me that so
many people in life never took advantage of their opportunities. The $6,000
severance money was a fantastic opportunity.
Because I’d recently lost a big chunk of money, I decided to play it
cool. I told Gini, “What I’ll do is get the trading account back up to a thousand dollars, and then we can put the six thousand in. That way I can get
my new trading plan off the ground, try it out, talk with Craig again. That
will be perfect. By the time I talk to him, I’ll have lots of good questions,
and he can help me maximize the severance money.”
Gini believed this was a good idea. “How are we going to get by in the
meantime?”
I had a plan for this. “I think we should take my retirement money out
of the Wakeman 401(k) plan. And we can live on that for at least six
months.”

book_c09.qxd

78

12/20/06

2:16 PM

Page 78

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

I had between $15,000 and $20,000, if I was remembering correctly, in a
retirement account. We had promised each other that we would never
touch it except for an absolute emergency. Now seemed like an appropriate time.
“Do you think you should trade with that money too?” she asked.
This didn’t feel right to me. Not at all. The severance money felt like a
gift, like a $20 bill that I’d found on the street. But the retirement savings
seemed completely different. That money had been set aside for a long
time, had been growing slowly and steadily, and I’d taken less pay home
every two weeks just so we could put more money toward retirement.
“No, I don’t think so. That money was meant for something else. Only
in a total emergency would I consider taking that money out.”
“Okay,” she agreed. “That money could keep us going for more than six
months, if we scale down a bit. We can get by with less. No more huge
spending sprees at the bookstore.”
“All right.”
“And we can change the way we eat. I bet we could get by for seven or
eight months on that money.”
“What do you mean by scaling down?” I asked. “Do you mean selling
some of our stuff?” This didn’t sit right with me. I was positive I would be
making a lot of money very soon. She seemed to be taking the safe route.
And what’s more, she didn’t seem bothered by this. It was as if she now
considered this to be exciting—even an adventure with her husband, the
currency trader.
We had no idea what an adventure it would be.

book_c10.qxd

12/20/06

1:51 PM

Page 79

CHAPTER 10

Charlie Flank
Meets His
Match

hat weekend I learned that the words “scaling down” actually referred to selling off all the things that I liked in the house. My wife
canceled the expanded cable television subscription. She auctioned
off our big screen television on eBay, and replaced it with a tiny 17-inch set
that she bought online for $50. She sold my bookcases to a neighbor. Now
that my book collection no longer had a home, she visited a used bookstore in her old Brooklyn neighborhood, and just a few days later they
came and picked up all the books except for the new ones about trading.
She sold the high-end stereo components that she’d given me for Christmas two years earlier. And she sold my tennis racket.
Lest I only tell one side of the story, I’ll admit that she also gave up her
sewing machine and gave a ton of her older clothes and some of our furniture to a consignment shop down the road. She was boxing up the microwave one afternoon when I called a halt to the entire operation.
“We gotta eat! We’ve definitely sold enough of our things.”
She paused. “I just want to make sure we don’t go bankrupt. So far I’ve
raised a lot of money for us.”
This made me feel like we were trying to raise funds to buy a kidney
for one of our children. “How much?” I asked.
“Five thousand, give or take a few hundred.”
I had to admit that it was impressive. I hardly missed the books and actually missed the television far less than I had imagined that I would. The
kids missed it terribly, but they would get over it. If I added my wife’s ability to sell things to the retirement money (which turned out to be just over

T

79

book_c10.qxd

80

12/20/06

1:51 PM

Page 80

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

$23,000, which was on the way to our bank account) this brought our savings to $29,000.
“What else?” Gini asked. “What else can we sell, if you don’t want to
give up the microwave? What about the car?”
I shook my head. “We are not selling the car. You’ve sold everything
you need to sell for now. We have almost $30,000 and that’s enough. We’ll
do all right with that. We can make a budget and work out the numbers.
With trading and that money we are going to be all right.”
“Are you sure?” I noticed that she was worried. That all this selling of
our stuff had more of a reason behind it than she had told me.
“Gini, are you all right?”
She shook her head.
“I promise we’re going to be fine. I promise I can do this.”
“I’ve started to worry that maybe trading is a bit more risky than I first
thought.”
“Why?” Had she talked to someone? Seen something on television?
“Well,” she started. “You did lose over a thousand dollars in one day.”
Oh. She had seen me. That was the source of her doubt. Hearing this
was mildly depressing, but I determined to face it head on.
“I am not going to do that again. I learned my lesson. It wasn’t really
even my fault—I left the account only because Herbie wanted to chew
me out.”
“But it’s not just that. I do believe you can do better. But my father’s
best friend lost everything day-trading the stock market. You know Emilio
Gonzales, right?”
“The guy who carried mail with your dad?”
She nodded, and continued: “He took out something like fifty thousand
dollars of their retirement money and bet it on the stock market. Then
when he lost that, he mortgaged their home. Then he lost everything after
just two months or something. They lost the home; they had to sell their
car; they even sold their furniture on eBay, just to survive.”
We were both quiet and uncomfortable for a few moments. I could
hear the traffic outside. Some boys were yelling and playing basketball on
the court down below the apartment building. A pigeon settled down outside our living room window and cooed. Something tugged at my emotions; I could sense that whatever Emilio Gonzales had done wrong, I
could do wrong as well.
I took a deep breath. “I won’t do that. I won’t use our retirement
money to trade. That is only for us to live on. And we might not even have
to use it all.”
Gini liked this idea. Neither of us wanted to feel negative about trading. After all, it was the only solution we had at this point.
“Maybe you could go talk to Emilio. Learn from what he did wrong.”

book_c10.qxd

12/20/06

1:51 PM

Page 81

Charlie Flank Meets His Match

81

“I’d rather talk to Craig. He’s been successful. I don’t know how much
I could learn from someone who lost everything.”
“When are you going to see him again? When are you going to start
trading?” she asked.
“Soon. I want to meet with Craig one more time.”
“When is that?”
“I will call him today.”
“What about the nice old man at the other bank?”
“Mr. Wilson? At U.S. National? I guess I could call him, too.” I didn’t remind her that he had invited me to stop by the next day, Monday, to talk
some more.
“You guess you’ll call him?”
“Okay, I will call him.”
But I had no intention of doing so. In the past two days, Mr. Wilson had
drifted into the background. The more I thought about it, the more I realized that the traders at U.S. National Bank didn’t take advantage of what
Craig knew—they were living in the past. No computers! How could a
trader succeed without a computer? Everything told me that I wanted to
be Ernest Wellington-esque in my trading. On the forefront of information,
of technology. This is how the big boys made money. It was how I would
make money, too.
While Gini had been selling our possessions, that weekend I had
helped watch the kids and read as much as I could on economic indicators.
Realizing that Scott was no longer around to help me, I had reread the entire user’s manual for my forex trading platform. I’d learned how to effectively use the new charting program. In all, I now had set myself up to be
ready to trade the economic reports. I didn’t really need Mr. Wilson and decided that it would be best if I didn’t bother him again.
Over dinner on Sunday, we continued the conversation. I had one eye
on my currency charts the entire time.
“And you’re sure that you can do this trading thing,” my wife remarked.
“Yes,” I promised her. The GBP/USD was moving sideways. Not doing
anything. Sunday nights clearly didn’t matter in currency trading. Who
would trade at this time of day, anyway? I turned back to my wife. “Yes, for
sure. Especially with all the tools that are out there right now. It’s probably
easier to make money than ever before. This operation at Ernest Wellington was first class. Those guys are making a million dollars per year. Craig
is going to show me what he does to make that kind of money. And I’m already learning a ton of stuff on my own.”
“You are sure you can get Craig to teach you what he does?” This
brought to mind the subject of Craig’s mentor. I could still meet and learn
from the person who taught Craig how to trade. I wondered if he was a
trader at Ernest Wellington. I wondered again if it was really Anderson, or

book_c10.qxd

12/20/06

1:51 PM

82

Page 82

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

someone else I had seen on the trading floor at Ernest. For a moment I considered calling Craig that very evening to see if he could set up a meeting.
By now I had learned plenty enough to qualify myself for some advanced
mentoring.
This emboldened me even more. “I am sure I can learn what I need to
learn. From Craig, from books, from others. I have the names of eight more
Wall Street banks and haven’t even tried to visit them yet.”
The events of the past two weeks had left her understandably unstable
in her emotions. What I love about my wife is that even after I’d lost my job
and half the trading account, and I had no evidence to prove that I could
duplicate the results of a Wall Street trader, Gini was still willing to go
along with the entire plan. Surely, the knowledge that Craig made $1 million per year helped to convince her to give the plan a chance.
I wondered what the other currency pairs were doing. I switched pages
on my charts. The USD/JPY was moving down fast—my one-minute chart
was showing some serious action! Apparently the traders in Asia could get
things moving even on a Sunday night! Well, of course it was Monday morning for them, I realized. No wonder. I summoned all my willpower to avoid
taking a trade.

HALF A TRILLION
I called Craig the next morning. Having seen the action on Sunday night I
could not resist getting back into the game, but I determined to not trade
again until I received more instruction from someone who knew more than
I did. And from someone like Craig who could teach me to trade the economic news. I had learned more in 30 minutes with Craig than I had from
reading any of the books so far. The books were good for learning terminology. But the practical knowledge I could get from a successful trader
would take me to the next level.
Which is why I dialed Ernest Wellington’s number on Monday morning
and asked to speak with Craig Taylor.
He answered immediately.
“Have you started trading again?” was his first question.
“Not yet,” I told him, “I took your advice.”
“Hallelujah!” he cried. “How I wish I’d taken that advice early on.”
“I also plan to put a bit more money into the trading account. That way,
I can actually make some real money.”
This didn’t impress him. “Remember that you don’t need a huge trading account to trade successfully. And that trading doesn’t have to be your
only job. You could do something on the side. Earn some money to put into
your trading account.”

book_c10.qxd

12/20/06

1:51 PM

Page 83

Charlie Flank Meets His Match

83

This was perhaps the dumbest idea I’d ever heard. Of course I didn’t
say that. Instead: “Anyway, did you trade on Friday?”
“Sure did. Did you watch the market?”
“Yeah, I did. I actually sneaked onto the trading floor at U.S. National
Bank.”
“Really! Impressive! You did that? Did you meet any of the traders?”
“Yep. They were a boring bunch. Like a funeral home in there. Wood
paneling.”
“Oh,” he said. This seemed to jar his memory. “Those guys. I don’t
know anyone over there. They are the slow bunch. They take it nice and
easy. No short-term trading for them.”
“Right. I thought I was going to fall asleep there. Obviously, they need
some computers. Maybe they can’t afford them.”
Craig let out a hearty laugh. “Those guys? Oh, they can afford computers. They could afford to buy every last computer on Wall Street if they
wanted.”
“Really?”
“Really. They were the most profitable trading floor on Wall Street a
couple of years ago.”
A slight twinge of regret fell over me as I realized I was supposed to be
meeting with Mr. Wilson right now. Maybe I had misread him.
“How profitable?” I asked.
“They had something like half a trillion dollars in assets. Their trading
desk probably made two billion dollars in profits last year alone.”
“Whoa.”
“Right. We did a billion last year. With twice as many traders. You
should definitely see if you can get in there again. Did you meet Hank
Doorecker?”
“No.” Doorecker? I was sure I would have remembered a name like
that. “Who’s Hank Doorecker?”
“Hank is probably the best trader on the street right now. He’s older,
has been trading for at least three decades. Only trades currencies. He
never gives interviews so you can’t learn anything about his methods. You
should look him up if you get over there again. He and I have the same
mentor. Just years apart.”
I now felt really badly that I’d not shown up at U.S. National Bank that
morning. There could be a lot of people there worth meeting! Would Mr.
Wilson mind if I showed up late? He hadn’t specified a time. I now decided
that as soon as I hung up with Craig I would race downtown. Hopefully, he
would not have already left for the day. Perhaps if he was gone, I could try
to meet Mr. Dudley Dooright or whatever his name was. If he was anything
like Mr. Wilson, he wasn’t going to be busy with trading and would surely
have time to talk.

book_c10.qxd

84

12/20/06

1:51 PM

Page 84

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

“They trade a lot of currency and bonds futures there,” he said, “And
if you can get them to show you how they use the long-term charts, it’s
fascinating.”
Clearly, I was a moron. I had missed a huge opportunity by not learning
more while I’d been there.
“What about short-term trading? I’ve been thinking about doing more
short-term trading. Like you do.”
“That’s good too,” he answered. “It’s really good. You can make money
either way.”
“That sounds like a contradiction.”
“It’s not,” he shot back. “Not at all. It’s a misconception that almost
every trader goes through. We think there’s one best way to do this. But
there are a zillion ways that can work.”
But it had seemed that short-term trading had huge opportunities to
make money fast. I had already decided it was better for me.
“You know, I did interview there,” he said. “They’ve got an aggressive
operation over there. Quiet, catatonic, like they’re all sleeping on the job.
The reality is that they are wholly unimpressed with anything except making huge sums of money. And behind that stoic impression, they are hungry
to be the very best in the business, and they usually are. They go after profits like an animal that stalks its prey for a long time, and then just pounces.
And when they pounce, they don’t let go.”
“Sounds cool.”
He laughed and agreed. “There is a story about Hank Doorecker buying
up the Swiss Franc against the British Pound in the late 1990s—slowly, methodically, until he held an enormous position on the spot forex market.
Rumor is that he actually placed calls to the finance ministers of small countries and talked about how they needed to protect themselves by selling any
British government bonds they had and replacing them with Swiss bonds.”
“What would that do? How would that help him?”
“Well, I don’t have time to get into all of it, but what happened was he
started a free fall. In the next year, the Swiss Franc gained over 1,000
points against the Pound. People say he made one hundred million dollars
on that trade alone. If you can meet him, it would be awesome to hear the
story firsthand.”
What Craig was describing seemed slightly dishonest, if not outright illegal. And hugely profitable. I wondered how close I wanted to get to Hank
Doorecker. And at the same time I hoped I could meet him. There was so
much to learn.
“Do you have traders like that at your firm?” I asked. Maybe I could
meet them. Getting to meet and learn from Mr. Wilson or Hank Doorecker
seemed more difficult now that I knew how profitable their firm was.

book_c10.qxd

12/20/06

1:51 PM

Page 85

Charlie Flank Meets His Match

85

“We have lots of short-term guys. All short-term guys. No one as famous as Doorecker or the other guys at U.S. National.”
Because I wanted to short-term trade, I was happy he had brought up
the subject.
“Do you think I should use the one-minute chart?” I asked.
His tone of voice dampened, like he had been asked this before and
didn’t want to talk about it. “I don’t know. It depends.”
I changed gears. “Did the short-term traders at Ernest Wellington do
well on Friday? It was a big move down for the British Pound at least.”
“Oh, yes. A lot of us jumped on that fast.”
“What did you do?” I asked.
“I sold Pounds, as you can imagine. Sold everything I could for as long
as I could that morning. When that report is first released, all the liquidity
dries up. Your short-term charts will show the price falling, and that’s exactly what it is doing. It’s falling hard because there isn’t anyone who wants
to buy it.”
“Supply and demand,” I offered.
“Exactly,” he continued. “No one wanted to buy Pounds for the first
two or three minutes. Then when it had fallen a good 200 points, it rebounded slightly, as traders who were already short going into the report
closed their positions by buying back Pounds and selling U.S. Dollars. You
can see this happening on a short-term chart, like a five-minute. Even a
one-minute, like you were talking about. You can see the price fall fast and
then rebound suddenly.”
“And the rebound showed some interest in buying the Pound again.”
“And that’s when I sold it. I sold all of it that I could.”
“Where did you get out?” I asked.
“Oh, I was out fifteen minutes later. That was it for me. I didn’t trade
again that day.”
“This sounds much like what you did on the FOMC interest rate decision.”
“Yep. I follow a similar method all the time, really. It has worked for me
very well.”
This was the time when it was appropriate to ask Craig how much he
had made.
“How much did you make?”
“Well, I did 100 points. Which was an excellent—a very excellent—
NFP day for me.”
It was odd. When he spoke about his own gains, it wasn’t about the
money. It was about the points or pips that he had made. Another flood of
questions came to mind. This was either going to be a four-hour phone call
or I was simply not going to get all the answers I wanted.

book_c10.qxd

86

12/20/06

1:51 PM

Page 86

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

This was exactly the reason that I wanted to meet with him again in
person, and his mentor, to learn more about short-term trading. So much
easier. The excitement of trading the economic news appealed to me, of
course. But the thought that I could make a pile of money in a half hour
and be done for the day—that was overwhelming.
“I’m surprised you kept yourself from trading when you saw the NonFarm Payroll reaction,” Craig remarked.
I grinned and said, “I didn’t have a computer or a phone with me. I
couldn’t trade.”
“Well, it’s all the same anyway. They’ll have another Non-Farm Payroll
report next month.”
“And I’ll be ready for that one. Did everyone at your firm trade it like
that?” I asked.
“No. One guy got full of himself and started selling the U.S. Dollar
against the Yen. He was totally out of his mind, talking about how the reaction to the jobs report was ridiculous and that he had a tip from a big Wall
Street trader that the dollar was going to sell off big time, and that the NonFarm Payroll reaction was a perfect time to take advantage of the idiots
who were buying dollars. And then he said that the USD/JPY had to fall at
least 200 to 300 points from the high of the day.”
“Did he lose a lot of money?”
“Oh, yes,” Craig answered. “In fact, he left his trades open and then left
for the day. He didn’t want to look at the trades any longer.”
“He is allowed to do that?” I asked. “Seems like he could get fired for
doing that.”
“He’s got a leash,” Craig replied with a chuckle. “He can only lose so
much and then the firm closes his trades. He’s allowed a certain amount of
leeway. They used to call it a Daylight Limit, although around here it’s
called a Net Asset Value Calculation, and for short it’s called Net NAV.”
“But shouldn’t someone step in and get him out of the trade before it
gets worse?” Talking about this guy made me think about my FOMC trade,
and how I wished that someone would have stepped in and ended the trade
before it got as bad as it did. Imagine if I still had $1,000 instead of $500! I
really wanted that money back. It hurt to think about how stupid I had
been.
“Good point, Banes. Yes, it would be good if someone could step in and
help him. But he’s not the kind of person to accept help. Remember, all
these guys including me are used to being the best at what we do. We made
good grades in school. We played first string. We are meant to be right, to
be making money. It’s human nature to not want to admit that you’re
wrong.”
“I know exactly how that works,” I told him. “That pretty much sums
up my disaster trade.”
