
ment was reinforced by the white candle's high volume activity. This
volume showed the pressure of the buying force.

Spinning Tops
we have seen the power inherent in tall white or black real bodies. A
tall white body reflectsa strong sessionin which the bulls are in control,
whereasa long black real body means that the bears are in charge.Now,
what would it mean if, instead of tall real bodies, there were small real
bodies?This would tell us that the bulls and bears are in a tug of war
and that there is more of a balancebetween supply and demand. Such
small real bodies, called spinning tops, tell us that the power to move
up or down is lacking, or as the ]apanesephrase it, the "market is losing
its breath."
As shown in Exhibit 2.3L, these are spinning tops even if the lower
and/or uPPer shadows are large. It is the diminutive size of the real bo$r

The Basics

- DAILY
RUBBERMAID

35.0

35.0

34.5

34.5

34.0

34.0

? 2 F

33.0
32.5

32.5

5t-u

5Z.U

3r.5

3 t .5

3t.0

?1 n

30.5

30.5

30.0

30.0

2S.5

29.5

23.0

?qn

28.5

28.5

,E3 F

t5

to

L2

EXHIBIT 2.30. Open Above the Center of a Black Real Body, Rubbermaid-Daily

that defines a spinning top. A spinning toP is a warning sign that the
market is losing its momentum. For instance, if the market is at or near
a new high-especially after a steep advance-the emergenceof a spinning top could be a signal that the bulls are having trouble in continuing
their ascent. This could be a cautionary signal that the prior move is
stalling.
In Exhibit 2.32, the strong, long white real bodies at the end of July
left no doubt about who had control of this market-the bulls. But the
two spinning tops after these long white real bodies sent out a warning

il
Real body can be
black or white

EXHIBIT 2.31. Spinning ToPs

41,

42

Candles

EXHIBIT 2.32. Spinning Tops, Dow |ones-Daily

that the bulls were unable to maintain the momentum of their advance.
The arrival of the spinning tops showed that the market was losing its
vitality. The black candles after the spinning top added more reason to
suspecta turn.

Accumulation and Distribution
One of the most powerful and important aspectsof candle charts is their
ability to meld themselves with any other form of technical analysis. Let
us, for example, uncover how one candle (the spinning top), combined
with volume, can provide critical information about the inner workings
of the market.
Two key conceptsrelating volume to price action are those of accumulation and distribution. Accumulation occurs when, at a low price
level, there is a high volume session with stagnant prices. The high volume relays that the bears are attacking full force, throwing all their re-

The Basics

sourcesand ammunition into the fray. But the stagnant prices during the
sessionshow that the bears are unable to drag down prices. All that the
bears have tried to sell has been accumulatedby the bulls. After such a
scenario,the bears may either run out of ammunition of just give up.
The consequenceof either of these is a rally.
Distribution is the opposite of accumulation. Distribution occurswhen,
at a high price level, there is heavy volume but virtually frozen prices.
"smart" money
What is happening in such an environment is that the
is thought to be distributing their supply to meet all the buying that is
entering the market. With distribution, the sellers are offering enough
supply to meet all the buyer's demand, thus keeping prices in check.
Distribution should therefore be viewed as a topping scenario.
Note that as part of the definition for either accumulation or distribution, there must be little price movement. A spinning top reflects a
session in which there is little price action (as defined by the difference
betweenthe open and the close).So, by combining volume with spinning
tops, we can determine when there is accumulation or distribution.

EXHIBIT 2.33. Spinning ToPs and
Accumulation, April 1993Crude OilDaily

43

44

Exhibit 2.33shows that a spinning top candlestickemergedon January
12. Note also the heavy volume of that session.As describeabove, stagnant prices and high volume at a low price level are classic signs of
accumulation.The high-volume spinning top in this example shows that
the selling Pressurewas easily absorbed.This positive sign was further
reinforced by the fact that this spinning top sessionmade a new low for
the move, yet the bears were unable to maintain these new lows.
In Exhibit 2.34, June's tall white candle sessionwas also a high-volume session.This was a very bullish development insofar as the market
moved up sharply with strong buying interest (as gauged by the high
volume). However, what occurred in the next sessionwas causefor concern. In that session, a small real body (i.e., a spinning top) emerged.
The volume on the spinning top session (circled on the chart) was not
as extreme as it was the prior day. Yet, looking back at the volume at
the bottom of the chart, we see that it was nonetheless a very highvolume sessioncompared to the prior periods. Consequently,there was
a high-volume spinning top session. \rvhat does that tell us? The high
volume reflects a market in which the bulls came out in force, but the
small real body-the spinning top-means that the bearswere aggressive
enough to almost stalematethe bull's advance.This action was a classic
sign of distribution. The small real bodies over the next few sessions

EXHIBIT 2.34. spinning Top and Distribution september 1991silver-Daily

The Basics

45

continued to echo the inability of the bulls to propel this market. Note
how the longest real bodies following the spinning top were black. This
showed that the bears had gained a foothold on the market.

Doii
One of the more important individual candlestick lines is the doji. As
shown in Exhibit 2.35, a doji session has a horizontal line instead of a
real body. This is becausea doji is formed when the session'sopen and
close are the same (or almost the same). If the market is trading laterallv,
a doji is neutral. In essencethe doji is echoing, on a micro scale, the
indecision reflected on a more macro scale by the market's sideways
action. However, a doji that emerges after the mature part of an uptrend
or sell-off has a gteater chance of a market turn. At such a time, the
"a hint of tops and bottoms."
Japanesesay that a doji provides
One should be especially cautious about a doji that arises after a tall
white candle which in turn aPPearsafter a significant uptrend. This is
true whether the doji is within the prior long white real body or above
it. Such action representsa disparity about the state of the market. Specifical$, the rally and tall white candles during such a rally tell us that
the bulls are still in charge. But a doji means that the bulls are failing to
sustain the upside drive. This is shown in Exhibit 2.36.
How do you decide whether a near doji day (i.e., where the open
and closeare very close,but not exact)should be considereda doji? One
method is to look at a near doji day and compare it to recent action. If
there is a seriesof very small real bodies, I would not view the near dOji
day as significant since so many other recent periods had small real bodies or doji. (Other methods are covered in my first book).
As mentioned before, a doji is meaningful when it arises after a tall
white candle during an uptrend. In this scenario,the market is consid-

'{l+I l,uu,n
r,il.
t
I

Examples of Doii

EXHIBIT 2.3s. Doii

I

"
r'il*
l

EXHIBIT 2.35. Doji After a Tall White Real Body

46

f;tr

il

I

'l

I

EXHIBIT 2.37. Doii as Resistance I

ered by the Japaneseto be "tired." Also, as shown in Exhibit 2.37, the
top of a doji session(that is, the top of the upper shadow) often represents resistance.However, if the highs of the doji sessionare exceeded,
then the market's uptrend should continue. This is discussedin more
detail below.
A common mistake among those who use canctes is to use a doji as
an outright buy or sell signal. This is not correct. The doji indicates, as
the japanesesay, "a crossroadsbetween the bulls and the bears." While
the doji can mean the market may reverseits prior trend, traders should
view the doji as echoing a market in transition rather than being an
outright reversal pattern. Based on this, traders should wait until the
next sessionor two after the doji to show them which way the market
will move.
If there is a doji during a rally, and if the market continues strong
after this doji, it is a bullish indication sincethe market has resolveditself
from the state of transition (as shown by the doji) to its new trend-up.
Thus, while a doji that appears after a rally could be an indication of a
reversal(sincethe market is at a crossroads),it is best to wait for bearish
confirmation over the next day or two to get a top reversalconfirmation.
For those who sell on a doji, the doji should act as resistance(seeExhibit
2.37). If the market closesabove the high of the doji, the japanese say
the market has become "refreshed." Based on this, a buy stop should
be placed above the high of the doji. The opposite would be true with a
doji in a downtrend. To wit, a doji in a downtrend shows that the market
is at a point of indecision, and a white candle after such a doji shows
that the market has resolved itself to the bull side. A buy based on the
doji after a downtrend should have a sell stop under the doji's low (including the lower shadow). This is becausesuch a scenariois viewed as
a bearish continuation signal.
one of the most fascinating aspects about candle charts is that, in
spite of their underlying simplicity, they provide so much valuable information about the state of the market. For example, what is more il-

The Basics

0""
, ,+Tr

I

I

doji'---> f

doli--'-----+f

,l
t l

(A)

l , '
(B)

ooii----- -l(c)

EXHIBIT 2.38. Doji After Extended Move

lustrative of a market in balance than a doji? That simple, individual
candle line relays how a market is in a state of balancebetween the bulls
and bears. As a result, the market may be at a transition point. All this
information in one candle line!
An important aspectabout doji (the plural of doji is also doji) is that
traders should look at where the doji appears in a trend. Exhibit 2.38
shows a doji in relation to the trend. As in Exhibit 2.38(A),the appearance
of a doji after a steep advance or in an overbought market could be a
top. However, as shown in Exhibit 2.38(8), if the market just started to
rise, it indicates there is less of a chance that the market is at a top. In
Exhibit 2.38(C)we see how the emergenceof a doji after a precipitous
decline could mean a bottom. Exhibit 2.38(D)displays a market that has
just begun to fall. In this scenario,prices may continue their descenteven
after a doji. The main concept behind Exhibit 2.38 is that doji become
more important as a reversal signal the more overbought or oversold the
market.
In Exhibit 2.39,we notice a rally that startedin early November stalled
after two doji following a tall white candle. The appearanceof these doji
told of a market in which the bulls and bears were in equilibrium. This
was very different from the prior session when the tall white candle
displayed a vibrant and healthy market in which the bulls were in control.
"the
These doji were showing, as the fapanese would phrase it, that
market is separatingfrom its trend."
As discussedbefore, doji becomeresistance.In this chart, there is also
a long black real body candle (at the arrow) a few days after the doji.
This black real body should also be resistance.With this in mind, the
doji sessionsand the long black real body provided a resistancezone in

(D)

47

48

&ndIes

GAP _ DAILY

38.0
77F.

77 tr,

32.0

27n

7( tr,

?(6
JD, U

?66

?q6

oo,iloil

?4q
?4n

?EN

?46

??6
< <

t l

?1 tr
JLr

J

af

| |

9rn
? t 6
J T .U

ni n
JI. U

?NF

?n6

30.0

30.0

)q6

'92 09 15 23 D 0Z
11 2t 28 '93 tl

t8 25 t

08 16 22

08

EXHIBIT 2.39. Doji After a Tall White Candle, Gap-Daily

the $37 to $38 area. It was within here that the market failed during the
early 1993rally.
The arrow in Exhibit 2.40 points to a doji sessionin which the open,
low, and close are at the bottom end of the session'srange. This doji is
known as a gravestonedoji. A gravestonedoji looks like a wooden memorial used in Buddhist funerals that is placed at a gravestone.It is said
that those who buy at a high price level after this doji will die and become
ghosts. (Thosefamiliar with candle patterns will note how this doji was
part of a classic evening doji star pattern [this pattern is discussedin
Chapter 3l).
Exhibit 2.41 shows how the small real bodies at 1 and the doji at 2
warned that the market was losing its upside drive. After trading in a
lateral range for a few weeks, prices ascendedto new highs in late ]anuary. However, there were two clues that the rally might not be sustainable. The first was the doji at 3. This showed that, although the market
had reachednew highs, the upside drive had stalled. Another clue was

The Basics

EXHIBIT 2.40. GravestoneDoji August 1993Natural Gas-Intra-Day

provided by the rate of change (ROC) oscillator.This oscillatorcompares
today's closing price to that of ten sessionsago.
For this example, I show the ten day ROC. This compares today's
close to that of ten days ago. With a healthy market, traders would like
to seean increasingROC oscillator.This reflectsthat the market's upside
momentum is growing as prices are ascending. However, note how at
doji 2, Dell touched a new high, yet the ROC oscillator was at a lower
reading than it was at the prior highs in December.This underscoresa
slackening of the upside drive.
Thus, the ROC oscillator helped reinforce the bearish implication of
doji 2. As further confirmation of a top, there was the long black candle
on the day after doji 3. A few days after this black candle, the ROC
oscillatorfell under 0 (some techniciansview that as a time to sell). This
chart is an exampleof how easyit is to combine the candleswith Western
technicaltools.

49

50

Candles

DELL& 1OPERIODROC

02123r33

0
-25

'T{lu,*o*hl;+T
"*il'.
-Ff '
'1,

{9
{8
17
15
15
11
4?

12
4L
{0

lF

19
18
17
16
15
11
13
12
4L
10

'Totrrrril+rtT

.';

?q

<K

JU

37
36

37
36

?E

?6

31

31
JJ

37

JL

'92

2l

2g

'93

11

t8

tt

OB

t5

22

EXHIBIT 2.41. Doji and Momentum, Dell-Daily

SHADOWS
While the real body is often considered the most important segment of
the candle, there is also substantial information to be gleaned from the
length and position of the shadows. Thus, the location and the size of
the shadow should also be considered when analyzing the psychology
behind the market.
A tall upper shadow is especially important when it appears at a high
price level, at a resistance area, or when the market is overbought. This
is becausesuch a candle line would hint that there is either heavy supply
entering at higher prices or an evaporation of buying. In either case(see
Exhibit 2.42), a long upper shadow could be a bearish development. A
long lower shadow candle that bounces from a support area, or appears
in an oversold market, could be an important clue that the bears are losing
control.

The Basics

l l TI

Bearish-Long
Upper
Shadows

Bulllish-LonoLower

Shadoils

EXHIBIT 2.42. Long Shadows

In Exhibit 2.43, in early L992there was a hint of trouble with the doji
following the tall white candle. Remembering the concept that the doji
sessionshould be resistance,the market stalled at the doji's high over
the next two weeks. The two candlesafter the doji had long upper shadows. Theseshadows displayed that there was either very aggressiveselling near the 109level, or that buying quickly evaporatednear thesehighs.
In either case, these long lower shadows showed a dampening of the
rallying strength. Further evidence of the importance of this resistance
was the failure there in mid-1992.
Exhibit 2.M displays that candles L, 2, and 3 rebounded from near
59Cvia long lower shadows. These long lower shadows reflected the
solidity of the support and the eagernessof the buying. Also important
was the length of the base that had been built. For almost two months,

EXHIBIT 2.43. Long Upper Shadows Confirm Resistance,Notionnel Bond-Weekly

51

52

Candles

EXHIBIT 2.44. Long Lower Shadows Confirm Support, fune 1993Deutsche MarkDaily

the bears tried to break prices under 59c and they failed. In general, the
longer the base, the more solid the scaffolding on which a rally can be
built.
A popular moving average among futures traders is the 65-day moving average. This line often swerves as support or resistance. For example, note how in Exhibit 2.45 that it was support in early November
and again in early |anuary. The test of this support in early fanuary via
long lower shadows, shows how strongly and quickly the market sprang
from there. For those who are familiar with candles, the first long lo*",
shadow candle is a hammer. Hammers will be explained in the next
chapter.

High-Wave Candles
A candlewith a long upper and lower shadows is calledahigh-wnaecandle
(shown in Exhibit 2.46).It shows that the market is in a standoff between
the bulls and bears. when a high-wave emerges after a downtrend or
uptrend, the |apanesesay that the market has lost its senseof direction.
This lack of market orientation means that the prior trend is in jeopardy.

The Basics

EXHIBIT 2.45. Long Lower Shadows Confirm Support, March 1993S & P FuturesDaily

A doji that has long upper and lower shadows is either called a highwave doji or a long-legged doji.
In Exhibit 2.47, a series of high-wave candles are displayed at 1', 2,
and 3. The high-wave candle at L hinted that the bulls and bears were
at a standoff. The action that precededcandle t had a bearishbias. Thus,
with the appearance of high-wave candle 1, the market had sent out a
clue that the trend was probably in the process of change. This outlook
was reinforced by the dual white candles after high-wave candle 1. The
market ascendedfrom candle L until it got to another high-wave candle
(at 2). From there, prices declined sharply in the next sessionvia a long
black real body. However, at the sessionafter this long black real body,
a candle with an extended lower shadow (at X) showed that the lows

I
EXHIBIT 2.45. High-Wave Candles

53

54

Candles

CRUDE
OIL- DEC.1993

19.5

19.5

19.0

19,0

1 06

lB.5

lB,0

rB.0

17,5

t7.5

lz.0

li.0

l

/

f

16.5

lb,3

33

3 0 s07 l 3

20

lt

IB

?5

OB 15

MetaStockby EQUIS Int'l

EXHIBIT 2.47. High-Wave Candles, December1993Crude Oil

from the prior week had become an attractive buying area. As prices
ascendedfrom candle X, a whisper of trouble emergedvia the high-wave
candle at 3. Two days later the long black candle showed that the bears
had entered the market in force, and as a result, increasedthe likelihood
that the high-wave candle at 3 was a top reversal.

CHAPTER3

THE PATTERNS
HE6if6--.3tZE6D
"He WhoseRanksare United in PurposeWiIl Be Victoious"

Dince the publication of my first book, I have had new ]apanesematerial
translated, have met new Japanesetraders, and have continued my dialogues with those japanese traders who have previously helped me. In
addition, I have also had another three years of hands-on experience.As
a result, I have gleaned new insights and conceptsthat will be conveyed
to you in this chapter.
This chapter will not be a reference to all the patterns that are in my
first book. Instead, my aim here is twofold. For those new to candles,
this chapter will reveal how some of the more common and important
candle patterns can provide powerful insights into your market analysis.
For those already knowledgeable about the candles, you will discover
new refinementsand trading techniques.It is especiallyimportant to read
the detailed descriptions of the charts. It is in these that you will most
easily seesome of the new refinements of candle theory, as well as some
new concepts.
As one of the Japanesebooks I had translatedstated, "the psychology
of the market participant, the supply and demand equation, and the
relative strengths of the buyers and sellers are all reflected in the one
candlestickor in a combination of candlesticks."l In this chapter, I will
describethe many uses and trading insights provided by individual candle lines and candle patterns based on two or more candle lines. The
organization of this chapter is based on the number of lines that form
the pattern. Consequently, this chapter's first section will focus on individual candle lines, such as the hammer and shooting star. The next
section will delve into candle patterns comprised of two candle lines.
55

56

Theseinclude the dark cloud cover and two gapping black candles.The
final section in this chapter will address those candle patterns, such as
the evening star and record sessions,which have three or more candle
lines.

SINGLE CANDLE LINES
In Chapter 2, I detailed how the length of the shadows can relay information about the resiliency of the bulls or the bears. For example, a long
upper shadow echoes the ability of the bears to regain control of the
market during a rally. A long lower shadow pictorially reflects the bulls'
ability to rally the market after the market's new sessionlows have been
made.
In this section, the single candle lines I will be describing (the hammer, hanging man line, and the shooting star) either have a long upper
or lower shadow. But, becausethey also possessthe important aspectof
having a small real body near the top or bottom of the trading range,
these candles lines take on increased importance when using candle
charts.
The Hammer
As shown by Exhibit 3.1-,the hammer, with its long lower shadow and
a close near or at the high, is easily understood to be a bullish signal.
The term "hammer" derivesfrom the fact that the market is "hammering
out a base," or that a bottom is so solid that it does not break, even
when a hammer knocks away at it.

,,1

EXHIBIT 3.L. The Hammer

V

ThePatterns

An aspect of the hammer is that it must appear after a significant
downturn or in an oversold market to have significance.The hammer is
a reversal indicator, and as such, should have a downtrend to reverse.
A hammer that appears after a fall of, say, two or three days is usually
not important. Since the hammer is most useful after a significant downturn, it should be noted that there may be selling on a rally from the
hammer. As such, the first bounce from the hammer may fail and the
market may return to test the hammer's support.
Consequently,trading with the appearanceof a hammer depends on
a trader's aggressivenessand risk adversity. Some traders may decide to
buy immediately after the hammer appearsin casethe market does not
pull back to retest the hammer. Some traders may decide to wait to see
if the market returns to the hammer, and if so, will buy on that return
move. If the market successfullytests the hammer's support area, there
is then a more solid support areaand a better chancefor a rally. A method
that I sometimesrecommend to our clients is to lightly test the waters
from the long side after a hammer, and then add the remainder of the
long position after (and if) there is a successfultest of the hammer.
Whichever methodology is used, a stop (based on the close) could be
placed under the lows of the hammer.
Exhibit 3.2 displays a classichammer in that the extreme length of
the lower shadow reflectshow aggressivelythe bulls were able to propel
prices off the lows of the session.The bounce from this hammer stalled
during the next few sessions.But the pullback held the hammer's support. This action helped enlarge the base upon which to build a more
substantial rally.
A trading tool that I find useful with candles is a Western technique
called a spring.As shown in Exhibit 3.3, a spring occurs when the bears
are unable to hold prices under a broken support area. Becausesuch
action proves that the bears were unable to grab control of the market
when they had their chance, it should be viewed as a bullish development. The opposite of a spring is an upthrust.An upthrust occurs when
the market makes a new high, but then fails to hold that high. Upthrusts
will be addressed in the section titled "The Shooting Star" later in this
chapter. (Springs and upthrusts are describedin detail in my first book.)
An ancient oriental book on military tactics referred to gaining an
advantageover the enemy by acting as a "moving shadow." This term,
asused by the warrior who wrote that book, meansthat when you cannot
see the state of your opponent, you pretend to make a powerful attack
to uncover the intention of the enemy. This concept,as related to trading,
is one of the reasonsa spring is so important.
Probes of support or resistanceareas are attempted throughout the
markets by large-scaletraders. They want to discover how the market
