
08 506455-ch04.indd 63

9/24/09 10:17:11 PM

64

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It

Learning a key fundamental math skill:
Percentage changes
If you’ve noticed so far, I’ve tried to spare you from much ugly math in the
first couple of pages. And hoping not to scare you off, I try to introduce math
topics in this book gently and only when it’s relevant.
But there’s one math skill that you’ll encounter so frequently in fundamental
analysis, you might as well tackle it now. And that’s the concept of percentage
change. Because fundamental analysis is infatuated with looking at increases
and decreases in business factors, such as sales and revenues, the percentage change is a way to put gains and declines into context. For instance, if I
told you that the price of a sweater rose $50 this year, that doesn’t tell you
much. But if I told you the price was $50 before, then you know that the price
doubled to $100.
You calculate a percentage change this way:
New number – old number ÷ old number × 100
Going back to the sweater example, the new price is $100 and the old price
was $50, so:
100 – 50 ÷ 50 × 100 = 100%
If a value rises by 100%, then it has doubled. Similarly, if a number rises
by 200%, it has tripled and 300%, quadrupled. Some make the mistake, for
instance, of seeing the 2 in the 200% and saying it has doubled when it has in
fact, tripled.

How to Get the Fundamental
Data You Need
You might have the fastest car in the neighborhood, but if you don’t have any
gas, you’re not going to get far. So goes fundamental analysis. You might build
the fanciest financial spreadsheet, but it’s not going to do you any good if you
don’t have the raw financial numbers to put in it.
Until the dawn of the Internet, getting fundamental data could be a real
hassle. You would have to call or write a company and ask it to mail — yes,
mail — its 10-K, 10-Q and annual report to you.

08 506455-ch04.indd 64

9/24/09 10:17:11 PM

Chapter 4: Getting Your Hands on Fundamental Data

65

Thankfully, the days of having to deal strictly with paper financial statements
are over. But the skills of the fundamental analyst must keep up with the electronic age. In this section, you’ll find out how to quickly, and for no cost, get
your hands on the fundamental data you’ll need to complete your analysis.

Getting acquainted with
the SEC’s database
You can spend thousands of dollars for access to Web sites that provide fundamental data. But really, to get started, you don’t have to spend a dime.
The SEC’s website at www.sec.gov is a treasure trove for fundamental analysis. You’ll find all the financial forms discussed above in this chapter, and
then some. All the fundamental data are stored in the SEC’s Interactive Data
Electronic Applications, or IDEA, database. You can use IDEA to look up any
public company’s filings and even download the financial statements to your
computer so you can do further analysis.
You might hear or read references to the SEC’s EDGAR database. EDGAR was
the SEC’s primary financial-form database prior to IDEA. EDGAR is still available on the SEC’s site, but it’s not worth the time. IDEA can do everything
EDGAR could and adds additional information.

Step-by-step directions on accessing
company fundamentals using IDEA
Now that you know how powerful IDEA is, it’s time to dive in and discover
how to get what you need from it. For the example below, I’ll show you how
to get the 10-Q, 10-K and proxy statement for General Electric. Just follow
these steps:
1. Log into the SEC’s Web site at www.sec.gov.
2. Click the “Search” link on the upper right-hand corner of the page.
3. Enter the name of the company in the Company name blank.
It’s the first blank in the top of the blue-shaded box. Type in general electric for this example.
4. Scroll down and click the Find Companies button.

08 506455-ch04.indd 65

9/24/09 10:17:11 PM

66

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
5. Choose the company name.
Because General Electric has separate business units, you’ll see companies like General Electric Capital Assurance Co. But you want the main
company, so click on the red numbers to the left of where it says General
Electric Co.
6. Click on the form you want.
If you want GE’s 10-Q, scroll down until you see the form 10-Q listed and
click on the “Documents” button. If you want the 10-K, choose 10-K, and
the proxy is marked as 14-A.
7. Click on the red code under the document in the first line.
This line should have the form under the “Type” head, which in this case
is the 10-Q. When you’re downloading the 10-K, the line should read 10-Q.
When you’re scrolling down through the list of forms, you might notice that
some have a blue button that says “Voluntary Interactive Data.” These forms
are presented in a special format that computers can read, called eXtensive
Business Reporting Language or XBRL. Financial statements available in
XBRL can be easily processed and downloaded. If you click on the Voluntary
Interactive Data button, you’ll be moved to an area of the SEC’s Web site that
lets you view financial reports using XBRL. You can easily skip between the
income statement and balance sheet without scrolling, for instance. XBRL
also lets you easily download the financial statements to a spreadsheet. Since
it’s not required to file using XBRL, only a handful of companies do. But that’s
changing.
Most of the major Web portals, such as Yahoo, at finance.yahoo.com, and
MSN, at money.msn.com, provide summaries of companies’ primary financial
statements. MSN Money also lets you access all the regulatory forms. Most
companies, too, put their financial data on their Web sites. But as a fundamental analyst, it’s important to know how to get the data direct from the source:
The SEC’s IDEA database.

Pulling fundamental data from
Web sites into spreadsheets
Sometimes reading a company’s financial statements using the SEC’s IDEA isn’t
enough. If you want to perform the analysis you’ll find out about in the next
part of this book, you’ll likely need to download the data into a spreadsheet.
If the company you’re analyzing provides XBRL data, it’s easy to download
into a spreadsheet.

08 506455-ch04.indd 66

9/24/09 10:17:11 PM

Chapter 4: Getting Your Hands on Fundamental Data

67

Luckily, there’s a handy trick using Microsoft Excel all fundamental analysts
should know about. While it’s possible to cut-and-paste the financial data
from a company filing into a spreadsheet, the results can be a disorganized
mess. Instead, use an Excel function that’s built to order. Here’s how:
1. Open the filing.
Find the filing you’re interested in downloading using the steps above.
Copy the Web address from the address bar in your browser by highlighting the address and holding the Control button and the C key.
2. Open Microsoft Excel.
3. Instruct Excel to find the filing.
Choose Excel’s “Data” pull-down menu, and then select Import External
Data and then New Web Query.
4. Provide the Web address of the filing.
Paste the filing’s address by holding down the Control button and
choose the V key, in the address bar at the top.
5. Import the filing.
Click the Import button at the bottom of the page.
6. Select the relevant financial data.
Scroll down until you see the financial data you would like to download.
Click the small yellow arrow next to the data.
After you follow these steps, the financial information you want, such as the
company’s income statement or balance sheet, will automatically appear in
a spreadsheet. This will be a handy skill that can help you with the analysis
you’d do later in the book.

Finding stocks’ dividend histories
Dividends are periodic cash payments some companies make to their shareholders. The dividends are paid out of the company’s cash as a way of returning profits to the shareholders. Dividends are a very important piece of your
total return on an investment.
Don’t ignore dividends. These cash payments, over time, account for about
one-third of the total return investors make on the market, according to
Standard & Poor’s. The remaining two-thirds of total return come from the
stock price rising.

08 506455-ch04.indd 67

9/24/09 10:17:11 PM

68

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
Dividends are also important ways to help value a company, as you will discover
in Chapter 8. Companies that pay dividends generally pay them quarterly.
The best way to look up a dividend history is on the company’s Web site.
Going back to the GE example, go to www.ge.com and click on the investor
relations link at the top of the page. Next, click on the Stock Information link
on the left-hand side. You’ll see a link for Dividend History, which listed GE’s
dividend payments going back for nearly a decade.

Getting stock-split information
When a company’s stock price rises dramatically and begins to approach $50
a share or more, the executives might decide to split the shares. The theory
goes that some naïve investors, who read too much into a stock’s per-share
price, might assume a stock trading for $50 or more is too expensive.
In a stock split, the company cuts its share price, say in half, by cutting the
shares into multiple shares. For instance, let’s say you own 100 shares in a
stock trading for $60 a share. If the company has a 2-for-1 split, you will suddenly have 200 shares, but they’ll be worth $30 apiece. Management feels some
investors are more likely to buy stock in a company for $30 a share than $60.
Some investors assume that a stock split is a major boon since they suddenly
have more shares. But, as discussed in Chapter 3, the per-share price of a
stock doesn’t tell you much. The value of your shares is still $6,000, whether
you own 100 shares at $60 or 200 shares at $30 a share. The company’s market
value also stays the same.
Understanding when stock splits occur is important for fundamental analysis, though, since it can affect the number of shares outstanding, which is
described in Chapter 3. You’ll need an accurate count of shares outstanding
to do some of the fundamental analysis later in the book.
Fortunately, many companies provide stock-split histories on their Web sites.
For instance, if you follow the instructions above to get GE’s dividends, you’ll
notice stock splits are listed on the same page.
MSN Money also helps you look up if, and when, a company split its shares.
Here’s how:
1. Log into www.live.com.
2. Enter “quote:” in the search box followed by the stock’s symbol.
For GE, for instance, enter quote:GE and click the green icon that looks
like a magnifying glass.

08 506455-ch04.indd 68

9/24/09 10:17:11 PM

Chapter 4: Getting Your Hands on Fundamental Data

69

3. Click on the small stock chart that appears in the search results.
This will take you to MSN’s Charting feature.
4. Click on the Download MSN Money Investment Toolbox link that
appears in the chart.
This will download a small piece of software that will let you get
advanced charts. You only need to follow this step once.
5. Observe the chart.
If the stock has been split, you’ll see a small box that’s half white and
half red. For instance, the chart tells you that GE last split its stock, by 3
for 1, on May 8, 2000.

08 506455-ch04.indd 69

9/24/09 10:17:11 PM

70

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It

08 506455-ch04.indd 70

9/24/09 10:17:11 PM

Part II

How to Perform
Fundamental
Analysis

09 506455-pp02.indd 71

9/24/09 10:27:53 PM

Y

In this part . . .

ou may already know what fundamental analysis is,
but you may not be clear on how to use this important technique to evaluate investments. I’ve designed this
part to step you through how to thoroughly analyze a
company and dig into its key financial statements, including the income statement, the balance sheet, and the
statement of cash flow. I also show you how financial
ratios can help you get quick and insightful information
about companies. Lastly, you can discover how to unearth
some of the more sensitive items about a company’s management by using the proxy statement.

09 506455-pp02.indd 72

9/24/09 10:27:53 PM

Chapter 5

Analyzing a Company’s Profitability
Using the Income Statement
In This Chapter
▶ Understanding what a company’s profit is and how it’s reflected on the income statement
▶ Finding out why learning to analyze the income statement is key to fundamental analysis
▶ Digging into how to read an income statement and to understand a company better
▶ Discovering how to compare a company’s reported profit to what is expected

I

n everything from sports to school, you’ve probably been trained to
measure results. At the end of the game or class semester, you either get
a score or grade that determines how well or poorly you did, and how you
measured up to expectations and ranked against your peers.
When you measure the success of a company, you really don’t do anything
differently than when you gauge the results of last night’s basketball game.
Fundamental analysts carefully evaluate a company’s income statement to
see how well the company did, examining how much money it brought in,
how much it spent to operate, and the final amount of profit it generated.
Companies lay out all of their critical information for you in their income
statement. In this chapter, you dig into the parts of the income statement
necessary for fundamental analysis. Better yet, this chapter gives you the
tools to know how to read those parts, which is critical when you want to
determine whether a company’s stock is cheap or expensive (see Chapters 10
and 11 for more on determining a stock’s worth). Don’t let the cryptic appearance of the income statement scare you. The pointers in this chapter prepare
you to get everything you need out of the income statement.

10 506455-ch05.indd 73

9/24/09 10:28:34 PM

74

Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis

Digging Deep Into the Income Statement
When you invest in a company by buying its stock, you’re probably not doing
it to be charitable. By buying shares of stock, you’re claiming a piece of the
company’s future revenue and profits. If all goes well, the company will grow
and your stake will become more valuable.
The trick, though, is knowing how to make sure the company is keeping its
end of the bargain by making money. That’s where the income statement
comes in. Companies that have issued stock on a stock market exchange
such as the New York Stock Exchange or Nasdaq, or borrow money from the
public, are required to issue an income statement. The income statement
spells out in gory detail how the company did during each quarter and year.
Fundamental analysis requires you to pay close attention to the income statement for any sign the company isn’t progressing as it should or, conversely,
doing better than many thought it could.

Cutting through to the key parts
Luckily for investors, the accountants have somewhat standardized the way
companies must prepare the income statement. No two income statements
look identical, and subtle differences can make comparing one company’s
income statement with other companies’ problematic, (you can read about
making comparisons more in Chapter 16). Income statements can also vary
a bit depending on what line of business a company is in. Still, income statements tend to follow the same basic structure.
You can dedicate a great deal of time obsessing over every nuance of financial
statements, including the income statement. If that’s of interest to you, check
out Reading Financial Reports For Dummies (Wiley), which gets into the nittygritty of financial reporting. In this book, though, you’ll get a look at the basic
layout of the income statement and what you’ll need to do some serious fundamental analysis.
The basic structure of an income statement includes these items:
✓ Revenue: This is how much money the company brought in by selling
goods and services. Revenue is often called the “top line.”
✓ Cost of goods sold: It takes money to make money. Cost of goods measures what a company must spend to actually create the good or service
sold. These are direct costs, meaning they are costs for items that may
literally go into the products. Cost of goods sold, for many manufacturing

10 506455-ch05.indd 74

9/24/09 10:28:34 PM

Chapter 5: Analyzing a Company’s Profitability Using the Income Statement

75

companies, is the largest single cost of doing business. For instance, with
an automaker, the cost of goods sold might include the cost of steel used
to build the cars.
✓ Operating expenses: Indirect expenses are incurred by companies as
they conduct business, but may not go directly into the product. These
costs are usually necessary or important, but peripheral. These indirect costs are called operating expenses or better known as overhead.
Operating expenses may include:
• Marketing expenses: Include advertising and other promotional
expenses.
• Research and development: What a company spends to cook up
new products or services to sell to customers.
• Administrative expenses: Expenses connected with support
staff, such as legal, human resources, and other functions that are
directly tied to manufacturing the product.
✓ Other income: Companies sometimes bring in money for things other
than selling products and services. This income is recorded as other
income. For instance, a company might win a legal settlement or sell a
factory.
✓ Other expenses. Similarly to how other income doesn’t qualify as revenue, other expenses do not qualify as normal operating expenses. Other
expenses might include the cost to restructure a unit of the company,
paying severance to lay off employees, or depreciation — accounting for
wear and tear (see the sidebar, “Appreciating depreciation”).
✓ Earnings before interest and taxes. After you subtract cost of goods
sold, operating expenses, and other expenses from revenue, what you’re
left with is earnings before interest and taxes.
✓ Interest expense. Most companies borrow money to fund their operations or to buy inventory. Here, the company discloses how much it’s
paying to borrow money.
✓ Taxes. Companies must pay taxes too. Here, companies disclose how
much they they paid to Uncle Sam.
✓ Net income. Finally, after paying all these costs and expenses, what’s
left is the profit, or net income. This is how much the company earned
during the period, based on accounting rules or GAAP.
Ever hear a company say it used GAAP? No I don’t mean that they used
expense accounts to buy khakis and collared shirts at a popular clothing
store. Instead, I’m talking about GAAP — Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles — painstakingly detailed rules that instruct companies on the right
way to report results.

10 506455-ch05.indd 75

9/24/09 10:28:34 PM

76

Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis

Appreciating depreciation
Accountants normally classify depreciation
as an other expense. This can sometimes be
a tough thing for nonaccountants to understand. Depreciation is an accounting method of
recording wear and tear on things like factories
or equipment. Think of it this way. If you buy a
car for $15,000, in a year’s time that car might

only be worth $13,000. But while you’re out
$2,000 in value, you didn’t actually have to write
a check for $2,000 to anyone. The same applies
to a machine a company might use to make
products. The erosion of value of the machine
is an expense that goes into the cost of making
the product being sold.

Taking in the Top Line: Revenue
For a fundamental analyst reading an income statement, revenue is a critical
item because it tells you how:
✓ Rapidly the company is growing (or shrinking): Comparing revenue
generated during a year or quarter with revenue reported in the same
period a year ago can be very telling. This simple comparison tells you
whether the company’s growth is on an uptrend or downtrend.
✓ Strong demand is for a company’s products: Companies love to brag
about how popular their products are. But revenue is where hype can
be quantified. Strong demand for a product will show up in the revenue
line, even if the company’s expenses are out of line and still losing
money.
✓ A company ranks in sheer size next to its rivals: While there are many
ways to measure a company’s size, such as number of employees, revenue is as good a benchmark as any other. If you want to find out which
company is the biggest in a competitive field, you should always check
out revenue first.
Fundamental analysts pay close attention to revenue for the reasons listed
above, but there’s also reason to be skeptical. Accounting rules give companies a great deal of leeway in how and when they record or “recognize” revenue. The most classic distortion may occur when a company books revenue
before the product is actually bought or received by a customer. Regulators,
for this reason, warned companies to be more conservative when booking
revenue. The General Accounting Office, a unit of the government charged
to study waste in both the private and public sectors, found that improper
revenue recognition was to blame for more than a third of misstated financial
statements. Always be skeptical of revenue.

10 506455-ch05.indd 76

9/24/09 10:28:34 PM

Chapter 5: Analyzing a Company’s Profitability Using the Income Statement

77

Breaking down a company’s revenue
Most companies will provide several revenue figures. Generally, there will be
a total revenue line that totals up the money the company brought in from all
its business units. But if the company is complex, it might break total revenue
down into its component parts so you can see which units are performing best.
Due to its large size and wide array of technology businesses, International
Business Machines is a great example of how you can use the revenue line to
peer deeply into a company’s operations. Below, in Table 5-1, is a breakdown
of IBM’s 2008 results, to give you an idea of how digging into what makes up
total revenue can be revealing about a business:

Table 5-1

IBM’s Total Revenue Breakdown in 2008

Source of revenue

Revenue ( in billions)

Global technology services

$39.3

Global business services

$19.6

Systems and technology

$19.3

Software

$22.1

Global financing

$2.6

Other

$0.8

Total revenue

$103.6

Source: IBM (www.ibm.com/investor/4q08/press.phtml)
