
Often, however, he disappeared for long periods into his condo overlooking the golf course, where he read
and watched business news in the living room seated next to an enormous stone fireplace.7 He barely noticed
the view of pine-covered Baldy, the mountain outside his window, or the bank of blossoms like a Persian
palace rug: pastel lupines and sapphire delphiniums towering over poppies and Indian paintbrush, crisp blue
salvia and veronica nestled among the stonecrop and hens-and-chicks. “The scenery is there, I guess,” he
said. He came for the warm atmosphere Herbert Allen had created.8 He liked being with his closest friends:
Kay Graham and her son Don; Bill and Melinda Gates; Mickie and Don Keough; Barry Diller and Diane von
Furstenberg; Andy Grove and his wife, Eva.
But above all, for Buffett, Sun Valley was about reuniting with his whole family during one of the rare times
most of the family spent together. “He likes us all being in the same house,” says his daughter, Susie Buffett
Jr. She lived in Omaha; her younger brother, Howie, and his wife, Devon—missing this year—lived in
Decatur, Illinois; while their younger sibling, Peter, and his wife, Jennifer, lived in Milwaukee.
Buffett’s wife of forty-seven years, Susan, who lived apart from him, had flown in to meet them from her
home in San Francisco. And Astrid Menks, his companion for more than twenty years, remained at their
home in Omaha.
On Friday night, Warren donned a Hawaiian shirt and escorted his wife to the traditional Pool Party on the
tennis courts next to their condo. Most of the guests knew and liked Susie. Always the star of the Pool Party,
she sang old-fashioned standards by the light of tiki torches in front of the illuminated Olympic pool.
This year, as the cocktails and camaraderie flowed, the babble of a barely comprehensible new
language—B2B, B2C, banner ads, bandwidth, broadband—competed with the sounds of Al Oehrle’s band.
All week long a vague sense of unease had drifted through the lunches and dinners and cocktails like a silent
fog amid the handshakes, kisses, and hugs. A new group of recently minted technology executives, filled with
an unusual swagger, introduced themselves to people who had never heard of them a year before.9 Some
displayed a hubris that was at odds with Sun Valley’s usual atmosphere, where a determined informality
reigned and Herbert Allen enforced a sort of unwritten rule against pomposity, on penalty of banishment.
The cloud of arrogance hung heaviest over the presentations that were the conference’s centerpiece. Heads
of companies, high government officials, and other people of note gave talks unlike those they delivered
anywhere else, because hardly a word of what was said was ever whispered beyond the flower boxes hanging
by the doors of the Sun Valley Inn. Reporters were banned, and the celebrity journalists and the media barons
who owned the television networks and newspapers sat in the audience but honored a code of silence. Thus
freed to perform only for their peers, the speakers said important and often true things that could never be
articulated in front of the press because they were too blunt, too nuanced, too alarming, too easily satirized,
or too likely to be misinterpreted. The workaday journalists lurked outside, hoping for crumbs that were
rarely thrown.
This year the new moguls of the Internet had been strutting, showing off their soaring expectations,
trumpeting their latest mergers and looking to raise cash from the money managers sitting in the audience.
The money people, who stewarded other people’s pensions and savings, together commanded so much
wealth that it could hardly be comprehended: more than a trillion dollars.10 With a trillion dollars in 1999,
you could pay the income tax of every single individual in the United States. You could give a brand-new
Bentley automobile to every household in more than nine states.11 You could buy every single piece of real
estate in Chicago, New York City, and Los Angeles—combined. Some of the companies making
presentations needed that money, and they wanted this audience to give it to them.
Early in the week, Tom Brokaw’s panel, called “The Internet and Our Lives,” had drum-majored a
procession of presentations about how the Internet would reshape the communications business. Priceline’s
Jay Walker took the audience through a dizzying vision of the Internet that compared the information superhighway to the advent of the railroad in 1869. One after another, executives laid out the glittering prospects
for their companies, filling the room with the intoxicating vapor of a future unlimited by storage space and

geography, so slick and visionary that while some were convinced that a whole new world was unfolding,
others were reminded of snake-oil salesmen. The folks who ran technology companies saw themselves as
Promethean geniuses bringing fire to lesser mortals. Other businesses that grubbed in the ashes to make the
dull necessities of life—auto parts, lawn furniture—were now of interest mostly for how much technology
they could buy. Some Internet stocks traded at infinite multiples of their nonexistent earnings, while “real
companies” that made real things had declined in value. As technology stocks overtook the “old economy,”
the Dow Jones Industrial Average*1 had burst through the once-distant 10,000-point barrier only four months
before, doubling in less than three and a half years.
Many of the recently enriched congregated between speeches at a cordoned-off dining terrace by the Duck
Pond, where a pair of captive swans paddled around a pool. There, any guest—but not a reporter—could
edge through the masses of people in khaki pants and cashmere cable sweaters to ask a question of Bill Gates
or Andy Grove. Meanwhile, the journalists chased after the Internet moguls as they moved between the Inn
and their condos, amplifying the atmosphere of inflated self-importance that permeated Sun Valley this year.
Some of the new Internet czars spent Friday afternoon lobbying Herbert Allen to get them into celebrity
photographer Annie Leibovitz’s Saturday afternoon shoot of the Media All-Star Team for Vanity Fair. They
felt they had been invited to Sun Valley because they were the people of the moment, and they had trouble
believing that Leibovitz had made her own choices about who to photograph. Why, for example, would she
include Buffett? His role in media had come mostly secondhand—through board memberships, a large
network of personal influence, and a history of media investments large and small. Besides, he was old
media. They found it hard to believe that his face in a photograph still sold magazines.
These would-be all-stars felt slighted because they knew perfectly well that the balance in media had shifted
toward the Internet. That was so even though Herbert Allen himself thought the “new paradigm” for valuing
technology and media stocks—based on clicks and eyeballs and projections of far-off growth rather than a
company’s ability to earn cold hard cash—was bunk. “New paradigm,” he sniffed. “It’s like new sex. There
just isn’t any such thing.”12
***
The next morning, Buffett, emblem of the old paradigm, rose early, for he would be the closing speaker of the
year. Invariably, he turned down requests to speak at conferences sponsored by other companies, but when
Herbert Allen asked him to speak at Sun Valley, he always said yes.13 The Saturday morning closing talk was
the keynote event of the conference, so instead of heading straight to the golf course or grabbing a fishing
rod, almost everyone went to the breakfast buffet at the Sun Valley Inn, then settled into a seat. Today
Buffett would be talking about the stock market.
In private, he had been critical of the gunslinging, promoter-driven market that had sent technology stocks
galloping toward delirious heights all year. The stock of his company, Berkshire Hathaway, languished in
their dust, and his rigid rule of not buying technology stocks seemed outmoded. But the criticism had no
influence on how he invested, and to date, the only statement he had made in public was that he never made
market predictions. So his decision to get up at the podium in Sun Valley and do just that was unprecedented.
Perhaps it was the times. Buffett had a firm conviction and an overwhelming urge to preach.14
He had spent weeks preparing for this speech. He understood that the market was not just people trading
stocks as though they were chips in a casino. The chips represented businesses. Buffett thought about the
total value of the chips. What were they worth? Next he reviewed history, pulling from an exhaustive mental
file. This was not the first time that world-changing new technologies had come along and shaken up the
stock market. Business history was replete with new technologies—railroads, telegraph, telephone,
automobiles, airplanes, television: all revolutionary ways to connect things faster—but how many had made
investors rich? He was about to explain.

After the breakfast buffet, Clarke Keough walked to the podium. Buffett had known the Keough family for
many years; they had been neighbors back in Omaha. It was through Clarke’s father, Don, that Buffett had
made the connections that led him to Sun Valley. Don Keough, now chairman of Allen & Co. and former
president of Coca-Cola, had met Herbert Allen when he bought Columbia Pictures from Allen & Co. for
Coca-Cola in 1982. Keough and his boss, Coca-Cola’s CEO, Roberto Goizueta, had been so impressed by
Herbert Allen’s unsalesmanlike approach to selling that they had convinced him to join their board.
Keough, a Sioux City cattleman’s son and former altar boy, had now technically retired from Coca-Cola but
he still lived and breathed the Real Thing, so powerful he was sometimes called the company’s shadow chief
executive.15
When the Keoughs were his neighbors in Omaha in the 1950s, Warren had asked Don how he was going to
pay for his kids’ college and suggested that he invest $10,000 in Buffett’s partnership. But Don was putting
six kids through parochial school on $200 a week as a Butter-Nut coffee salesman. “We didn’t have the
money,” his son Clarke now told the audience. “This is part of my family’s past that we will never forget.”
Buffett joined Clarke at the podium, wearing his favorite Nebraska red sweater over a plaid shirt. He finished
the story.16
“The Keoughs were wonderful neighbors,” he said. “It’s true that occasionally Don would mention that,
unlike me, he had a job, but the relationship was terrific. One time my wife, Susie, went over and did the
proverbial Midwestern bit of asking to borrow a cup of sugar, and Don’s wife, Mickie, gave her a whole
sack. When I heard about that, I decided to go over to the Keoughs’ that night myself. I said to Don, ‘Why
don’t you give me twenty-five thousand dollars for the partnership to invest?’ And the Keough family
stiffened a little bit at that point, and I was rejected.
“I came back sometime later and asked for the ten thousand dollars Clarke referred to and got a similar
result. But I wasn’t proud. So I returned at a later time and asked for five thousand dollars. And at that
point, I got rejected again.
“So one night, in the summer of 1962, I started heading over to the Keough house. I don’t know whether I
would have dropped it to twenty-five hundred dollars or not, but by the time I got to the Keough household,
the whole place was dark, silent. There wasn’t a thing to see. But I knew what was going on. I knew that Don
and Mickie were hiding upstairs, so I didn’t leave.
“I rang that doorbell. I knocked. Nothing happened. But Don and Mickie were upstairs, and it was pitchblack.
“Too dark to read, and too early to go to sleep. And I remember that day as if it were yesterday. That was
June twenty-first, 1962.
“Clarke, when were you born?”
“March twenty-first, 1963.”
“It’s little things like that that history turns on. So you should be glad they didn’t give me the ten thousand
dollars.”
Having charmed the audience with this little piece of give and take, Buffett turned to the matter at hand.
“Now, I’m going to attempt to multitask today. Herb told me to include a few slides. ‘Show you’re with it,’
he said. When Herb says something, it’s practically an order in the Buffett household.” Speeding past
exactly what comprised “the Buffett household”—for Buffett thought of his household as being like any
other family’s—he launched into a joke about Allen. The secretary to the President of the U.S. rushed into
the Oval Office, apologizing for accidentally scheduling two meetings at once. The President had to choose
between seeing the Pope and seeing Herbert Allen. Buffett paused for effect. “‘Send in the Pope,’ said the
President. ‘At least I only have to kiss his ring.’

“To all you fellow ring-kissers, I would like to talk today about the stock market,” he said. “I will be talking
about pricing stocks, but I will not be talking about predicting their course of action next month or next
year. Valuing is not the same as predicting.
“In the short run, the market is a voting machine. In the long run, it’s a weighing machine.
“Weight counts eventually. But votes count in the short term. And it’s a very undemocratic way of voting.
Unfortunately, they have no literacy tests in terms of voting qualifications, as you’ve all learned.”
Buffett clicked a button, which illuminated a PowerPoint slide on a huge screen to his right.17 Bill Gates,
sitting in the audience, caught his breath for a second, until the notoriously fumble-fingered Buffett managed
to get the first slide up.18
DOW JONES
INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
December 31, 1964
874.12
December 31, 1981
875.00
He walked over to the screen and started explaining.
“During these seventeen years, the size of the economy grew fivefold. The sales of the Fortune five hundred
companies grew more than fivefold.*2 Yet, during these seventeen years, the stock market went exactly
nowhere.”
He backed up a step or two. “What you’re doing when you invest is deferring consumption and laying
money out now to get more money back at a later time. And there are really only two questions. One is how
much you’re going to get back, and the other is when.
“Now, Aesop was not much of a finance major, because he said something like, ‘A bird in the hand is worth
two in the bush.’ But he doesn’t say when.” Interest rates—the cost of borrowing—Buffett explained, are the
price of “when.” They are to finance as gravity is to physics. As interest rates vary, the value of all financial
assets—houses, stocks, bonds—changes, as if the price of birds had fluctuated. “And that’s why sometimes a
bird in the hand is better than two birds in the bush and sometimes two in the bush are better than one in
the hand.”
In his flat, breathy twang, the words coming so fast that they sometimes ran over one another, Buffett related
Aesop to the great bull market of the 1990s, which he described as baloney. Profits had grown much less than
in that previous period, but birds in the bush were expensive because interest rates were low. Fewer people
wanted cash—the bird in the hand—at such low rates. So investors were paying unheard-of prices for those
birds in the bush. Casually, Buffett referred to this as the “greed factor.”
The audience, full of technology gurus who were changing the world while getting rich off the great bull
market, sat silent. They were perched atop portfolios that were jam-packed with stocks trading at extravagant
valuations. They felt terrific about that. It was a new paradigm, this dawning of the Internet age. Their
attitude was that Buffett had no right to call them greedy. Warren—who’d hoarded his money for years and
given very little away, who was so cheap his license plate said “Thrifty,” who spent most of his time thinking
about how to make money, who had blown the technology boom and missed the boat—was spitting in their
champagne.

Buffett continued. There were only three ways the stock market could keep rising at ten percent or more a
year. One was if interest rates fell and remained below historic levels. The second was if the share of the
economy that went to investors, as opposed to employees and government and other things, rose above its
already historically high level.19 Or, he said, the economy could start growing faster than normal.20 He called
it “wishful thinking” to use optimistic assumptions like these.
Some people, he said, were not thinking that the whole market would flourish. They just believed they could
pick the winners from the rest. Swinging his arms like an orchestra conductor, he succeeded in putting up
another slide while explaining that, although innovation might lift the world out of poverty, people who invest
in innovation historically have not been glad afterward.
“This is half of a page which comes from a list seventy pages long of all the auto companies in the United
States.” He waved the complete list in the air. “There were two thousand auto companies: the most
important invention, probably, of the first half of the twentieth century. It had an enormous impact on
people’s lives. If you had seen at the time of the first cars how this country would develop in connection
with autos, you would have said, ‘This is the place I must be.’ But of the two thousand companies, as of a
few years ago, only three car companies survived.21 And, at one time or another, all three were selling for
less than book value, which is the amount of money that had been put into the companies and left there. So
autos had an enormous impact on America, but in the opposite direction on investors.”
He put down the list to shove his hand in his pocket. “Now, sometimes it’s much easier to figure out the
losers. There was, I think, one obvious decision back then. And of course, the thing you should have been
doing was shorting horses.”*3 Click. A slide about horses popped up.
U.S. HORSE POPULATION
1900—17 million
1998—5 million
“Frankly, I’m kind of disappointed that the Buffett family was not shorting horses throughout this entire
period. There are always losers.”
Members of the audience chuckled, albeit faintly. Their companies might be losing money, but in their hearts
beat a conviction that they were winners, supernovas blazing at the cusp of a momentous shift in the heavens.
Undoubtedly their names would grace the pages of history books someday.
Click. Another slide appeared.
“Now the other great invention of the first half of the century was the airplane. In this period from 1919 to
1939, there were about two hundred companies. Imagine if you could have seen the future of the airline
industry back there at Kitty Hawk. You would have seen a world undreamed of. But assume you had the
insight, and you saw all of these people wishing to fly and to visit their relatives or run away from their
relatives or whatever you do in an airplane, and you decided this was the place to be.
“As of a couple of years ago, there had been zero money made from the aggregate of all stock investments
in the airline industry in history.
“So I submit to you: I really like to think that if I had been down there at Kitty Hawk, I would have been
farsighted enough and public-spirited enough to have shot Orville down. I owed it to future capitalists.”22
Another light chuckle. Some were getting tired of these musty old examples. But out of respect, they let
Buffett get on with it.

Now he was talking about their businesses. “It’s wonderful to promote new industries, because they are very
promotable. It’s very hard to promote investment in a mundane product. It’s much easier to promote an
esoteric product, even particularly one with losses, because there’s no quantitative guideline.” This was
goring the audience directly, where it hurt. “But people will keep coming back to invest, you know. It
reminds me a little of that story of the oil prospector who died and went to heaven. And St. Peter said,
‘Well, I checked you out, and you meet all of the qualifications. But there’s one problem.’ He said, ‘We
have some tough zoning laws up here, and we keep all of the oil prospectors over in that pen. And as you
can see, it is absolutely chock-full. There is no room for you.’
“And the prospector said, ‘Do you mind if I just say four words?’
“St. Peter said, ‘No harm in that.’
“So the prospector cupped his hands and yells out, ‘Oil discovered in hell!’
“And of course, the lock comes off the cage and all of the oil prospectors start heading right straight down.
“St. Peter said, ‘That’s a pretty slick trick. So,’ he says, ‘go on in, make yourself at home. All the room in
the world.’
“The prospector paused for a minute, then said, ‘No, I think I’ll go along with the rest of the boys. There
might be some truth to that rumor after all.’ 23
“Well, that’s the way people feel with stocks. It’s very easy to believe that there’s some truth to that rumor
after all.”
This got a mild laugh for a half second, which choked off as soon as the audience caught on to Buffett’s
point, which was that, like the prospectors, they might be mindless enough to follow rumors and drill for oil in
hell.
He closed by returning to the proverbial bird in the bush. There was no new paradigm, he said. Ultimately,
the value of the stock market could only reflect the output of the economy.
He put up a slide to illustrate how, for several years, the market’s valuation had outstripped the economy’s
growth by an enormous degree. This meant, Buffett said, that the next seventeen years might not look much
better than that long stretch from 1964 to 1981 when the Dow had gone exactly nowhere—that is, unless the
market plummeted. “If I had to pick the most probable return over that period,” he said, “it would probably
be six percent.”24 Yet a recent PaineWebber-Gallup poll had shown that investors expected stocks to return
thirteen to twenty-two percent.25
He walked over to the screen. Waggling his bushy eyebrows, he gestured at the cartoon of a naked man and
woman, taken from a legendary book on the stock market, Where Are the Customers’ Yachts?26 “The man
said to the woman, ‘There are certain things that cannot be adequately explained to a virgin either by
words or pictures.’” The audience took his point, which was that people who bought Internet stocks were
about to get screwed. They sat in stony silence. Nobody laughed. Nobody chuckled or snickered or guffawed.
Seeming not to notice, Buffett moved back to the podium and told the audience about the goody bag he had
brought for them from Berkshire Hathaway. “I just bought a company that sells fractional jets, NetJets,” he
said. “I thought about giving each of you a quarter share of a Gulfstream IV. But when I went to the
airport, I realized that’d be a step down for most of you.” At that, they laughed. So, he continued, he was
giving each of them a jeweler’s loupe instead, which he said they should use to look at one another’s wives’
rings—the third wives’ especially.
That hit its mark. The audience laughed and applauded. Then they stopped. A resentful undercurrent was
washing through the room. Sermonizing on the stock market’s excesses at Sun Valley in 1999 was like
