
Now let’s turn the tables and imagine that, instead of mov-
ing higher, prices move lower. In the previous example, because
prices advanced, the combined reaction of the market partici-
pants caused each downside reaction to be met with additional
buying (thereby creating new support). However, if prices start to
drop and move below the previous support area, the reaction
becomes just the opposite. All those who bought in the support
area now realize that they made a mistake. For futures traders,
their brokers are now calling frantically for more margin money.


Basic Concepts of Trend 61

Because of the highly leveraged nature of futures trading, traders
cannot sit with losses very long. They must put up additional
margin money or liquidate their losing positions.

What created the previous support in the first place was
the predominance of buy orders under the market. Now, howev-
er, all of the previous buy orders under the market have become
sell orders over the market. Support has become resistance. And the
more significant that previous support area was—that is, the more
recent and the more trading that took place there—the more
potent it now becomes as a resistance area. All of the factors that
created support by the three categories of participants—the longs,
the shorts, and the uncommitted—will now function to put a ceil-
ing over prices on subsequent rallies or bounces.

It is useful once in a while to pause and reflect on why the
price patterns used by chartists, and concepts like support and
resistance, actually do work. It’s not because of some magic pro-
duced by the charts or some lines drawn on those charts. These
patterns work because they provide pictures of what the market
participants are actually doing and enable us to determine their
reactions to market events. Chart analysis is actually a study of
human psychology and the reactions of traders to changing mar-
ket conditions. Unfortunately, because we live in the fast-paced
world of financial markets, we tend to rely heavily on chart ter-
minology and shortcut expressions that overlook the underlying
forces that created the pictures on the charts in the first place.
There are sound psychological reasons why support and resistance
levels can be identified on price charts and why they can be used
to help predict market movements.

Support Becoming Resistance and Vice
Versa: Degree of Penetration

A support level, penetrated by a significant margin, becomes a
resistance level and vice versa. Figures 4.Sa-c are similar to Figures
4.3a and b but with one added refinement. Notice that as prices
are rising in Figure 4.5a the reaction at point 4 stops at or above
the top of the peak at point 1. That previous peak at point 1 had
been a resistance level. But once it was decisively penetrated by


62 Chapter 4

Figure 4.5a In an uptrend, resistance levels that have been broken bya
significant margin become support levels. Notice that once resistance at point
1 is exceeded, it provides support at point 4. Previous peaks function as Sup-
port on subsequent corrections.

Figure 4.5b = Ina downtrend, violated support levels become resistance lev-
els on subsequent bounces. Notice how previous support at point 1 became
resistance at point 4.



Basic Concepts of Trend 63

12/19/96 (°NDX) Nasdaq 100 Index oar2798

| ae
a

r T
| New Support
+800
+850
[00
Wr ¥ w "~ i] u ei N 3 6 WN D Ye.
¥ rae ar Rasen

Figure 4.5c Role reversal at play. Once the early 1997 resistance peak
was broken, it reversed roles to become a support level. A year later, the inter-
mediate price decline found support right at that prior resistance peak which
had become new support.

wave 3, that previous resistance peak became a support level. All
of the previous selling near the top of wave 1 (creating the resis-
tance level) has now become buying under the market. In Figure
4.5b, showing declining prices, point 1 (which had been a previ-
ous support level under the market) has now become a resistance
level over the market acting as a ceiling at point 4.

It was mentioned earlier that the distance prices traveled
away from support or resistance increased the significance of that
support or resistance. This is particularly true when support and
resistance levels are penetrated and reverse roles. For example, it
was stated that support and resistance levels reverse roles only
after a significant penetration. But what constitutes significant?
There is quite a bit of subjectivity involved here in determining
whether a penetration is significant or not. As a benchmark, some


64 Chapter 4

chartists use a 3% penetration as a criteria, Particularly for major
support and resistance levels. Shorter term support and resistance
areas would probably require a much smaller number, like 1%. In
reality, each analyst must decide for himself or herself what con-
stitutes a significant penetration. It’s important to remember,
however, that support and resistance areas only reverse roles
when the market moves far enough away to convince the market
participants that they have made a mistake. The farther away the
market moves, the more convinced they become.

The Importance of Round Numbers as
Support and Resistance

There is a tendency for round numbers to stop advances or
declines. Traders tend to think in terms of important round num-
bers, such as 10, 20, 25, 50, 7S, 100 (and multiples of 1000), as
price objectives and act accordingly. These round numbers, there-
fore, will often act as “psychological” support or resistance levels.
A trader can use this information to begin taking profits as an
important round number is approached.

The gold market is an excellent example of this phenome-
non. The 1982 bear market low was right at $300. The market
then rallied to just above $500 in the first quarter of 1983 before
falling to $400. A gold rally in 1987 stopped at $500 again. From
1990 to 1997, gold failed each attempt to break through $400.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average has shown a tendency to stall
at multiples of 1000.

One trading application of this principle is to avoid placing
trading orders right at these obvious round numbers. For example, if
the trader is trying to buy into a short term market dip in an
uptrend, it would make sense to place limit orders just above an
important round number. Because others are trying to buy the
market at the round number, the market may never get there.
Traders looking to sell on a bounce should place resting sell orders
just below round numbers. The opposite would be true when
placing protective stops on existing positions. As a general rule,
avoid placing protective stops at obvious round numbers.


Basic Concepts of Trend 65

In other words, protective stops on long positions should
be placed below round numbers and on short positions, above
such numbers. The tendency for markets to respect round num-
bers, and especially the more important round numbers previous-
ly referred to, is one of those peculiar market characteristics that
can prove most helpful in trading and should be kept in mind by
the technically oriented trader.

TRENDLINES

Now that we understand support and resistance, let's add
another building block to our arsenal of technical tools—the
trendline. (See Figures 4.6a-c.) The basic trendline is one of the
simplest of the technical tools employed by the chartist, but is
also one of the most valuable. An up trendline is a straight line
drawn upward to the right along successive reaction lows as
shown by the solid line in Figure 4.6a. A down trendline is drawn
downward to the right along successive rally peaks as shown in
Figure 4.6b.

Figure 4.6a

Example of an up trend-
line. The up trendline is
drawn under the rising
reaction lows. A tenta-
tive trendline is first
drawn under two succes-
sively higher lows (points
1 and 3), but needs a
third test to confirm the
validity of the trendline

(point 5).



66

Chapter 4

Figure 4.6b
A down trend-
line is drawn
over the succes-
sively lower rally
highs. The ten-
tative down
trendline needs
two points (1
and 3) to be
drawn and a
third test (5) to
confirm its
validity.

12/22/05 (°BKX) Phix Kbw Bank Index

02/27/98

Weekly Bar Chart

a

50

i)
Ny i |

(be i y i) Ww % H

eee

0 mA

Figure 4.6c Long term up trendline at work. The up trendline was drawn
upward and to the right along the first two reaction lows (see arrows). The
third low at the start of 1998 bounced right off the rising trendline, thereby

keeping the uptrend intact.



Basic Concepts of Trend 67

Drawing a Trendline

The correct drawing of trendlines is a lot like every other aspect of
charting and some experimenting with different lines is usually
necessary to find the correct one. Sometimes a trendline that
looks correct may have to be redrawn. But there are some useful
guidelines in the search for that correct line.

First of all, there must be evidence of a trend. This means
that, for an up trendline to be drawn, there must be at least two
reaction lows with the second low higher than the first. Of course,
it always takes two points to draw any straight line. In Figure 4.6a,
for example, only after prices have begun to move higher from
point 3 is the chartist reasonably confident that a reaction low has
been formed, and only then can a tentative up trendline be drawn
under points 1 and 3.

Some chartists require that the peak at point 2 be penetrat-
ed to confirm the uptrend before drawing the trendline. Others
only require a 50% retracement of wave 2-3, or that prices approach
the top of wave 2. While the criteria may differ, the main point to
remember is that the chartist wants to be reasonably sure that a
reaction low has been formed before identifying a valid reaction
low. Once two ascending lows have been identified, a straight line
is drawn connecting the lows and projected up and to the right.

Tentative Versus the Valid Trendline

So far, all we have is a tentative trendline. In order to confirm the
validity of a trendline, however, that line should be touched a
third time with prices bouncing off of it. Therefore, in Figure 4.6a,
the successful test of the up trendline at point 5 confirmed the
validity of that line. Figure 4.6b shows a downtrend, but the rules
are the same. The successful test of the trendline occurs at point
5. To summarize, two points are needed to draw the trendline,
and a third point to make it a valid trendline.

How to Use the Trendline

Once the third point has been confirmed and the trend proceeds
in its original direction, that trendline becomes very useful in a


68 Chapter 4

variety of ways. One of the basic concepts of trend is that a trend
in motion will tend to remain in motion. As a corollary to that,
once a trend assumes a certain slope or rate of speed, as identified
by the trendline, it will usually maintain the same slope. The
trendline then helps not only to determine the extremities of the
corrective phases, but maybe even more importantly, tells us
when that trend is changing.

In an uptrend, for example, the inevitable corrective dip
will often touch or come very close to the up trendline. Because
the intent of the trader is to buy dips in an uptrend, that trend-
line provides a support boundary under the market that can be
used as a buying area. A down trendline can be used as a resis-
tance area for selling purposes. (See Figures 4.7a and b.)

As long as the trendline is not violated, it can be used to
determine buying and selling areas. However, at point 9 in Figures
4.7a-b, the violation of the trendline signals a trend change, call-
ing for liquidation of all positions in the direction of the previous
trend. Very often, the breaking of the trendline is one of the best early
warnings of a change in trend.

Figure 4.7a Once the up trendline has been established, subsequent dips
near the line can be used as buying areas. Points 5 and 7 in this example could
have been used for new or additional longs. The breaking of the trendline at
point 9 called for liquidation of all longs by signaling a downside trend reversal.


Basic Concepts of Trend 69

Figure 4.7b
Points 5 and 7 could
have been used as
selling areas. The
breaking of the
trendline at point 9
signaled an upside
trend reversal.

How to Determine the Significance
of a Trendline

Let’s discuss some of the refinements of the trendline. First, what
determines the significance of a trendline? The answer to that
question is twofold—the longer it has been intact and the number of
times it has been tested. A trendline that has been successfully test-
ed eight times, for example, that has continually demonstrated its
validity, is obviously a more significant trendline than one that
has only been touched three times. Also, a trendline that has been
in effect for nine months is of more importance than one that has
been in effect for nine weeks or nine days. The more significant
the trendline, the more confidence it inspires and the more
important is its penetration.

Trendlines Should Include All Price Action

Trendlines on bar charts should be drawn over or under the entire
day’s price range. Some chartists prefer to draw the trendline by
connecting only the closing prices, but that is not the more stan-
dard procedure. The closing price may very well be the most
important price of the day, but it still represents only a small sam-
ple of that day’s activity. The technique of including the day’s
price range takes into account all of the activity and is the more
common usage. (See Figure 4.8.)


70 Chapter 4

Figure 4.8 = The correct
drawing of a trendline
Should include the entire
day’s trading range.

How to Handle Small Trendline Penetrations

Sometimes prices will violate a trendline on an intraday basis, but
then close in the direction of the original trend, leaving the analyst
in some doubt as to whether or not the trendline has actually been
broken. (See Figure 4.9.) Figure 4.9 shows how such a situation might
look. Prices did dip under the trendline during the day, but closed
back above the up trendline. Should the trendline be redrawn?

Figure 4.9 Sometimes an intraday violation of a trendline will leave the
chartist in doubt as to whether the original trendline is still valid or ifa new
line should be drawn. A compromise is to keep the original trendline, but draw
@ new dotted line until it can be better determined which is the truer line.


Basic Concepts of Trend 71

Unfortunately, there’s no hard and fast rule to follow in
such a situation. Sometimes it is best to ignore the minor breach,
especially if subsequent market action proves that the original
line is still valid.

What Constitutes a Valid Breaking
of a Trendline?

As a general rule, a close beyond the trendline is more significant than
just an intraday penetration. To go a step further, sometimes even a
closing penetration is not enough. Most technicians employ a
variety of time and price filters in an attempt to isolate valid
trendline penetrations and eliminate bad signals or “whipsaws.”
One example of a price filter is the 3% penetration criteria. This
price filter is used mainly for the breaking of longer term trend-
lines, but requires that the trendline be broken, on a closing basis,
by at least 3%. (The 3% rule doesn’t apply to some financial
futures, such as the interest rate markets.)

If, for example, gold prices broke a major up trendline at
$400, prices would have to close below that line by 3% of the
price level where the line was broken (in this case, prices would
have to close $12 below the trendline, or at $388). Obviously, a
$12 penetration criteria would not be appropriate for shorter term
trading. Perhaps a 1% criterion would serve better in such cases.
The % rule represents just one type of price filter. Stock chartists,
for example, might require a full point penetration and ignore
fractional moves. There is tradeoff involved in the use of any type
of filter. If the filter is too small, it won’t be very useful in reduc-
ing the impact of whipsaws. If it’s too big, then much of the ini-
tial move will be missed before a valid signal is given. Here again,
the trader must determine what type of filter is best suited to the
degree of trend being followed, always making allowances for the
differences in the individuals markets.

An alternative to a price filter (requiring that a trendline be
broken by some predetermined price increment or percentage
amount) is a time filter. A common time filter is the two day rule.
In other words, to have a valid breaking of a trendline, prices
must close beyond the trendline for two successive days. To break


72 Chapter 4

an up trendline, therefore, prices must close under the trendline
two days in a row. A one day violation would not count. The 1-
3% rule and the two day rule are also applied to the breaking of
important support and resistance levels, not just to major trend-
lines. Another filter would require a Friday close beyond a major
breakout point to ensure a weekly signal.

How Trendlines Reverse Roles

It was mentioned earlier that support and resistance levels became
the opposite once violated. The same principle holds true of
trendlines. (See Figures 4.10a-c.) In other words, an up trendline
(a support line) will usually become a resistance line once it’s deci-
sively broken. A down trendline (a resistance line) will often
become a support line once it’s decisively broken. This is why it’s
usually a good idea to project all trendlines as far out to the right
on the chart as possible even after they’ve been broken. It’s sur-
prising how often old trendlines act as support and resistance
lines again in the future, but in the opposite role.

Measuring Implications of Trendlines

Trendlines can be used to help determine price objectives. We'll
have a lot more to say about price objectives in the next two chap-

Figure 4.10a
Example of a rising
support line becom-
ing resistance.
Usually a support
line will function as
a resistance barrier
on subsequent ral-
lies, after it has
been broken on the
downside.



Basic Concepts of Trend 73

Figure 4.10b
Very often a down
trendline will
become a support
line once it’s been
broken on the
upside.

0/14/97 ("UDX) Us Dollar Index 02/27/98

baty Br cha Ih

Broken Up Trendline

"

Lee

Becoming Resistance

bos,

Nov ‘Dec —e% ; ___ Feb

Figure 4.10c — Trendlines also reverse roles. On this chart, the broken up
trendline became a resistance barrier on the following rally attempt.



74 Chapter 4

ters on price patterns. In fact, some of the price objectives
addressed that are derived from various price patterns are similar
to the one we'll cover here with trendlines. Stated briefly, once a
trendline is broken, prices will usually move a distance beyond
the trendline equal to the vertical distance that prices achieved on
the other side of the line, prior to the trend reversal.

In other words, if in the prior uptrend, prices moved $50
above the up trendline (measured vertically), then prices would be
expected to drop that same $50 below the trendline after it’s broken.
In the next chapter, for example, we'll see that this measuring rule
using the trendline is similar to that used for the well-known head
and shoulders reversal pattern, where the distance from the “head” to
the “neckline” is projected beyond that line once it’s broken.

THE FAN PRINCIPLE

This brings us to another interesting use of the trendline—the fan
principle. (See Figures 4.11a-c.) Sometimes after the violation of an
up trendline, prices will decline a bit before rallying back to the
bottom of the old up trendline (now a resistance line). In Figure
4.11a, notice how prices rallied to but failed to penetrate line 1. A

Figure 4.1la Example of the fan principle. The breaking of the third
trendline signals the reversal of a trend. Notice also that the broken trend-
lines 1 and 2 often become resistance lines.


Basic Concepts of Trend 75

Figure 4.11b = The fan principle at a bottom. The breaking of the third
trendline signals the upside trend reversal. The previously broken trendlines
(1 and 2) often become support levels.

08/22/97 (*RUT) Russell 2000 Index 02/27/98
Daily Bar Chart y

Fan Lines

il
|

i

Bey ed "Now Dec ET "Feb.

Figure 4.11¢ Fan lines are drawn along successive peaks as shown in this
chart. The breaking of the third fan line usually signals the start of the uptrend.



76 Chapter 4

second trendline (line 2) can now be drawn, which is also broken.
After another failed rally attempt, a third line is drawn (line 3).
The breaking of that third trendline is usually an indication that prices
are headed lower. In Figure 4.11b, the breaking of the third down
trendline (line 3) constitutes a new uptrend signal. Notice in these
examples how previously broken support lines became resistance
and resistance lines became support. The term “fan principle”
derives from the appearance of the lines that gradually flatten out,
resembling a fan. The important point to remember here is that the
breaking of the third line is the valid trend reversal signal.

THE IMPORTANCE OF THE
NUMBER THREE

In examining the three lines in the fan principle, it’s interesting
to note how often the number three shows up in the study of
technical analysis and the important role it plays in so many tech-
nical approaches. For example, the fan principle uses three lines;
major bull and bear markets usually have three major phases
(Dow Theory and Elliott Wave Theory); there are three kinds of
gaps (to be covered shortly); some of the more commonly known
reversal patterns, such as the triple top and the head and shoulders,
have three prominent peaks; there are three different classifica-
tions of trend (major, secondary, and minor) and three trend
directions (up, down, and sideways); among the generally accept-
ed continuation patterns, there are three types of triangles—the
symmetrical, ascending, and descending; there are three principle
sources of information—price, volume, and open interest. For
whatever the reason, the number three plays a very prominent
role throughout the entire field of technical analysis.

THE RELATIVE STEEPNESS OF
THE TRENDLINE

The relative steepness of the trendline is also important. In gen-
eral, most important up trendlines tend to approximate an aver-
age slope of 45 degrees. Some chartists simply draw a 45 degree


Basic Concepts of Trend 77

Figure 4.12 Most
valid trendlines rise at an
angle approximating 45
degrees (see line 2). If the
trendline is too steep (line
1), it usually indicates
