
Pfizer, on the other hand, thinks that it can figure out a way to invest that
$8 billion more profitably than its shareholders. Because the company is in a

relatively fast-growing area of the economy—health care—and has a solid


PROFITABILITY

track record of turning out profitable new drugs, it may very well be able to
do so. However, if Pfizer started to pile up cash on its balance sheet the way
Microsoft has over the past several years, we'd probably conclude that the
company doesn’t have many profitable avenues for reinvesting its excess prof
its. In this case, we'd want the firm to pay a dividend or buy back shares. Al-
though Microsoft's dividend isn’t very large at this writing, at least the
company has one, which means that it has recognized that internal reinvest-
ment opportunities are diminishing.

On the bottom half of the matrix, we have companies such as Amazon
com, JetBlue, Comcast, and Lowe’s, which generate low or negative free cash
flow. Companies like these aren't generating much free cash because they're using
all the cash their businesses generate—and then some—to invest in expansion.
They're investing heavily because they hope that those expansion efforts will pay
off in the form of fat profits in the future. Amazon, for example, is spending
heavily on building a brand and expanding its Web site, while JetBlue is spending
heavily on new airplanes so that it can expand its service to new cities.

JetBlue and Amazon are like young entrepreneurs. They've taken out
loans and maxed out their credit cards, and they're plowing every cent they
have into building and expanding their businesses. Although theyre not
earning much in the way of profits right now, folks are investing in their busi-
nesses because they expect these companies to be very profitable sometime in
the future, which is when investors will be rewarded. Pfizer, on the other
hand, is more like a successful, middle-age businessman. He’s already proven
he can earn a good return on shareholders’ money, so folks line up outside his
door for the privilege of investing in his ventures.

You'd be taking a lot less risk investing with the older businessman than
you would with the young entrepreneur—though that entrepreneur might
just pay you back many, many times over. Just remember that for every Jeff
Bezos or Steve Jobs, there are literally hundreds of entrepreneurs who never
paid their investors a dime.

There’s nothing wrong with investing in the entrepreneurs of the world,
as long as you know what you're getting into. A profitability matrix can help
you separate your long shots from your core holdings.

Think of the profitability matrix like this: That upper right-hand corner,

where Pfizer sits, is the sweet spot—excess cash and the ability to earn a high

93


94

ANALYZING A COMPANY—THE BASICS

return on it. Companies in this square tend to be the cream of the crop and
have a low level of business risk. (They might be very risky stocks, though, if
they’re trading at high valuations.)

Moving down to the bottom right, where Lowe’s is, you see companies
that are reinvesting all of their cash in expansion but are still able to generate
a high return on shareholders’ money. If these firms still have profitable rein-
vestment opportunities, they should be spending all the cash they generate on
expansion. For example, Starbucks and Home Depot posted high ROEs and
negative free cash flow all through the 1990s because they were plowing every
cent they earned into building more stores.

In the bottom left are young companies growing like weeds, but which
haven't yet proven that they can earn a decent ROE—they’re spending tons
of money, but they're not yet making it pay off very well. This is where the
most speculative companies hang out. These companies are generally long
shots because it’s still unclear whether all of that heavy investment will ever

generate an attractive return,

Return on Invested Capital (ROIC)

Return on invested capital is a sophisticated way of analyzing return on
capital that adjusts for some peculiarities of ROA and ROE. Although you
needn't worry about calculating it for yourself—it’s pretty complicated—it's
worth knowing how to interpret it because it’s overall a better measure of
profitability than ROA and ROE. (If you are interested in how to calculate
it, see the ROIC box.)

Essentially, ROIC improves on ROA and ROE because it puts debt and
equity financing on an equal footing: It removes the debt-related distortion
that can make highly leveraged companies look very profitable when using
ROE. It also uses a different definition of profits than ROE and ROA, both
of which use net income. ROIC uses operating profits after taxes, but before
interest expenses. Again, the goal is to remove any effects caused by a com-
pany’s financing decisions—does it use debt or equity?—so that we can focus
as closely as possible on the profitability of the core business.

What does all this mean to you if you hear someone talking about ROIC?
Simply that you should interpret ROIC just as you would ROA and ROE—

a higher return on invested capital is preferable to a lower one.


PROFITABILITY 95

Return on Invested Capital (ROIC)

Waming: The material in this box drifts dangerously close to finance-geek territory. If
hard-core finance puts you to sleep, ignore this box and don’t worry about the inner
workings of ROIC and WACC.

The true operating performance of a fim is best measured by retum on invested capi-
tal (ROIC), which measures the return on all capital invested in the fim regardless of
the source of the capital. The formula for ROIC is deceptively simple:

Net operating profit after taxes (NOPAT)
Invested capital

ROIC=

The numerator of this equation is easy: profits after taxes, but before interest costs.
The denominator is a bit trickier, and although there are many different ways to calcu-
late it, you'll do just fine if you use this version:

Non-interest-bearing Excess cash (cash

Invested _ Total current liabilities (usually _ not needed far
capital “assets accounts payable and day-to-day
other current assets) business needs)

You may also want to subtract goodwill if it's a large percentage of assets.

Let’s run through an example: At the end of fiscal 2002, Wal-Mart's total assets were
warth $94.7 billion. Subtract accounts payable, accrued liabilities, and accrued income
taxes, and $67.7 billion remains, which is Wal-Mart's invested capital. Looking at the
fim’s income statement, we see that operating profit was $13.6 billion. If we multiply
this by the fim’s 36 percent tax rate, we get a rough idea of what taxes would have
been without any interest income or interest expense (remember, interest is tax
deductible for corporations), and we find that NOPAT equals $13.6 — ($13.6 x 0.36) =
$8.7 billion.

Next, divide NOPAT by invested capital, or $8.7 billion by $67.7 billion, and ROIC is
12.9 percent—pretty respectable for a firm as large and mature as Wal-Mart.



96 ANALYZING A COMPANY—THE BASICS

Financial Health

Once we've figured out how fast (and why) a company has grown and how
profitable it is, we need to look at its financial health. Even the most beauti-
ful home needs a solid foundation, after all.

The bottom line about financial health is that when a company increases
its debt, it increases its fixed costs as a percentage of total costs. In years when
business is good, a company with high fixed costs can be extremely profitable
because once those costs are covered, any additional sales the company makes
fall straight to the bottom line. When business is bad, however, the fixed
costs of debt push earnings even lower.

Look at what debt does to the earnings volatility of the creatively named
Acme (see Figure 6.6). With more debt, Acme’s earnings fluctuate a lot:
They're up more in good times and down more in bad times.

A common measure of leverage is simply the financial leverage ratio that
we used in calculating ROE, equal to assets divided by equity. Think of fi-
nancial leverage like a mortgage—a homebuyer who puts $20,000 down on a
$100,000 house has a financial leverage ratio of 5. For every dollar in equity,
the buyer has $5 in assets.

The same holds true for companies. In 2002, home improvement retailer
Lowe's had a financial leverage ratio of 2.1, meaning that for every dollar in
equity, the firm had $2.10 in total assets. (It borrowed the other $1.10.) A finan-
cial leverage ratio of 2.1 is fairly conservative, even for a fast-growing retailer. It’s
when we see ratios of 4, 5, or more that companies start to get really risky.

In addition to financial leverage, make sure to examine a few other key

metrics when assessing a company’s financial health.

Debt to Equity

This is just what it sounds like—long-term debt divided by shareholder's
equity. It’s a little like the financial leverage ratio, except that it’s more nar-
rowly focused on how much long-term debt the firm has per dollar of equity.

Times Interest Earned
This one requires a little more work to calculate, but it’s worth it. Look up

pretax earnings, and add back interest expense—this gives earnings before


Acme: Conservatively financed

FINANCIAL HEALTH

2003 Hypothetical Scenarios:

with a little debt. 2002 Good Year (Sales up 20%) Bad Year (Sales down 20%)
Sales 5,000 6,000 4,000
Gross profit 1,000 1,200 800
Less: Interest Expense 200 200 200
Earnings before taxes 800 1,000 600
Less: Taxes (35% rate) 280 350 210
Net incame §20 650 390
Profits up 25% Profits down 25%
Acme: Aggressively 2003 Hypothetical Scenarios:
financed with a lot of debt. 2002 Good Year (Sales up 20%) Bad Year (Sales dawn 20%)
Sales 5,000 6,000 4,000
Gross profit 1,000 1,200 800
Less: Interest Expense 600 600 600
Earnings before taxes 400 600 200
Less: Taxes (35% rate} 140 210 70
Net income 260 390 130
Profits up 50% Profits down 50%

Figure 6.6 The impact of financial leverage. Source: Morningstar, Inc.

interest and taxes (EBIT). Divide EBIT by interest expense, and you'll know
how many times (hence the name) the company could have paid the interest
expense on its debt. The more times that the company can pay its interest ex-
pense, the less likely that it will run into difficulty if earnings should fall un-
expectedly.

For home improvement retailer Lowe’s, for example, we add $182 million
in interest expenses to $2.36 billion in pretax earnings to get $2.54 million in
EBIT, and we divide $2.54 million by the $182 million in interest expense to
get times interest earned of 14. In other words, Lowe’s earned enough money
in 2003 to cover its interest obligation 14 times over, which is a pretty safe

margin (see Figure 6.7).

97


98 ANALYZING A COMPANY—THE BASICS

Lowe’s Companies: Partial Income Statement

Year ending January 31 2003
Net sales $26,491
Cost of sales 18,465
Gross margin 8,026
Expenses:

Selling, general, and administrative 4730
Store opening casts \29
Depreciation 626
Interest 182
Total expenses 5,667
Pre-Tax Earnings 2,359
Income tax provision 888
Net earnings $1,471

Figure 6.7 Lowe's Income Statement. Source: Lowe's SEC filings.

It’s tough to say precisely how low this metric can go before you should
be concerned—but higher is definitely better. You want to see higher times
interest earned for a company with a more volatile business than for a firm in
a more stable industry. Be sure to look at the trend in times interest earned
over time, as well. Calculate the ratio for the past five years, and you'll be able
to see whether the company is becoming riskier—times interest earned is

falling—or whether its financial health is improving.

Current and Quick Ratios

The current ratio (current assets divided by current liabilities) simply tells
you how much liquidity a firm has—in other words, how much cash it
could raise if it absolutely had to pay off its liabilities all at once. A low ratio
means the company may not be able to source enough cash to meet near-

term liabilities, which would force it to seek outside financing or to divert


THE BEAR CASE

operating income to pay off those liabilities. As a very general rule, a current
ratio of 1.5 or more means the firm should be able to meet operating needs
without much trouble.

Unfortunately, some current assets—such as inventories—may be worth
less than their value on the balance sheet. (Imagine trying to sell old PCs or
last year’s fashions to generate cash—youd be unlikely to receive anything
close to what you paid for them.) So there’s an even more conservative test of
a company’s liquidity, the gaéck ratio, which is simply current assets less in-
ventories divided by current liabilities. This ratio is especially useful for man-
ufacturing firms and for retailers because both of these types of firms tend to
have a lot of their cash tied up in inventories. In general, a quick ratio higher
than 1.0 puts a company in fine shape, but always look at other firms in the

same industry to be sure,

The Bear Case

After you've assessed growth, profitability, and financial health, your next
task is to look at the bear case for the stock you're analyzing. Start by listing
all of the potential negatives, from the most obvious to the least likely. What
could go wrong with your investment thesis? Why might someone prefer to
be a seller of the stock than a buyer? Constructing a convincing bear case is
especially important for those who like to buy high-quality companies that
have hit temporary speed bumps, because what looks like a speed bump may
very well be a roadblock on closer inspection.

Equally important, your bear case will be a great reference point even if
you do decide to buy the stock. You'll know in advance what signs of trouble
to watch for, which will help you make better decisions when bad news
comes down the pike in the future. Having already investigated the negatives,
you'll have the confidence to hang on to the stock during a temporary rough
patch as well as the savvy to know when the rough patch might really be a
serious turn for the worse.

[ll admit to a painful example from my own history that shows the im-
portance of developing a bear case before buying a stock. In the mid-1990s, I
purchased some shares of a small firm called Ballantyne of Omaha, which
was one of the world’s largest manufacturer of motion picture projectors (for

movie theaters) in the world at the time. (The big ones in movie theaters—

99


100 ANALYZING A COMPANY—THE BASICS

not the ones your teacher used in elementary school.) The firm was growing
at a decent clip, had few competitors, and management seemed to have their
heads on straight. The stock was selling for what I thought was a pretty rea-
sonable price, as well.

Unfortunately, the movie theater industry—Ballantyne’s main customer—
was in the midst of a huge debt-fueled building boom at the time. Remember
all of those 10- and 20-screen suburban theaters that got thrown up during the
1990s? That’s what was pumping up Ballantyne’ sales, and the expansion
wasn't sustainable. Many of the big theater chains had liquidity crunches, and
a few even went belly up. Needless to say, this did not do wonders for movie-
projector demand, and Ballantyne’ financial results (and stock price) went
into a fast slide.

The lesson? I should have constructed a convincing bear case for Ballan-
tyne before I bought it. If !'d looked deeper into the financial health of Bal-
lantyne’s customers, | might have asked myself what would happen if the
multiplex boom slowed down. I didn’t and, as a result, I made a poor invest-

ment that could have been avoided.

Conclusion

To this point, we've investigated the financial performance of companies.
We've assessed their competitive strengths by investigating their economic
moats, and we've analyzed their financial statements.

In Chapter 7, Pll discuss how to assess the quality of management. In
Chapter 8, P'Il give you some tips on how to spot aggressive accounting, after
which we'll turn to perhaps the toughest task faced by any serious investor:
Deciding ona fair price for the stock. How can we avoid paying too much for
excellent companies, while not being so cheap that We let wonderful opportu-

nities pass us by? In Chapters 9 and 10, I'll show you how to value stocks.

Investor's Checklist: Analyzing a Company—tThe Basics

> When youre evaluating a company’s growth rate, don’t get swept away by
heady historical growth. Make sure you understand where the growth is
coming from and how it can be sustained over time.

> Be wary of companies that have relied on acquisitions to boost growth.

Most acquisitions fail to produce positive returns for shareholders of the


INVESTOR’S CHECKLIST

acquiring firm, and they make it tough to evaluate a company’s true
growth rate.

If earnings growth outstrips sales growth over a long period, this might be
a sign of manufactured growth, Make sure to dig into the numbers to see
how the company keeps squeezing out more profits from stagnant sales.
Return on assets measures the amount of profits that a company is able to
generate per dollar of assets. Companies with high ROAs are better at
translating assets into profits.

ROE is a good measure of profitability because it measures how the com-
pany is at earning a return on shareholders’ money. But because companies
can boost their ROEs by taking on more debt, don’t take it as gospel. For a
nonfinancial company, look for an ROE of at least 10 percent, without ex-
cessive leverage.

Free cash flow gives financial flexibility because the firm isn’t relying on
the capital markets to fund its expansion. Firms with negative free cash
flow have to take out loans or sell additional shares to keep things going,
and that can become a risky proposition if the market becomes unsettled
at a critical time for the company.

Be wary of companies with too much financial leverage. Because debt is a
fixed cost, it magnifies earnings volatility and leads to more risk.

Before you buy a stock, think through all the potential negatives. This
can help you make better decisions ifbad news does come down the pike.

IO1L




Analyzing a Company—
Management

EXCELLENT MANAGEMENT CAN make the difference between a mediocre
business and an outstanding one, and poor management can run even a great
business into the ground. Your goal is to find management teams that think
like sharcholders—executives that treat the business as if they owned a piece
of it, rather than as hired hands. Unfortunately, managers like this are more
rare than you might think.

People buy stocks all the time without checking out the folks in the exec-
utive suite, and the excuse I hear most often is that it’s tough to assess man-
agement without meeting them face-to-face. Hogwash. There are many,
many ways to get a feel for the folks running a company that have nothing to
do with looking the CEO in the eye. No one can run a public company with-
out leaving a trail of pretty strong objective evidence behind. My advice is to
divide the management-assessment process into three parts: compensation,

character, and operations.


104. ANALYZING A COMPANY—-MANAGEMENT

Compensation

Compensation is the easiest of the three areas to assess because the bulk of the
information is contained in a single document, usually called the proxy state-
ment. This is the form that companies mail shareholders around the time of the
annual meeting, and it details how much executives are paid and what perks
they get. (You can find this form online at www.sec.gov or www.freeedgar.com.
Look for form DEF14A.)

Here’s what to look for ina company’s compensation plan. First and most
important, how much does management pay itself? (This is detailed in the
aptly named “summary compensation table.”) Generally, I prefer big bonuses
to big base salaries and restricted stock grants to generous option packages.
Bonuses mean that a good portion of the pay is at least theoretically at risk,
and restricted stock means the executive loses money if the share price de-
clines. That's just the tip of the iceberg, though.

First, look at the raw level of cash compensation to see if it’s reasonable.
There’s not necessarily a strict limit here, though I personally think an 8 mil-
lion cash bonus is silly no matter how well the company has done. (For refer-
ence, the average CEO ofa large U.S. firm currently earns about 500 times as
much as the average employee. Twenty years ago, this multiple was just 40.)

In any case, use your own judgment—if the amount that executives earn
makes you cringe, it’s probably too much. Also look at competing firms to
see what their CEOs are paid, so you can see how the boss that you're inves-
tigating stacks up. In general, the larger the firm and the better its financial
performance, the more an executive should be paid. But some executives
think they have a license to print money just because they manage a huge
company, no matter how poor a job they're doing, which is why you need to
determine whether their pay is tied to the firm’s operational performance.
(Case in point: After retiring as chairman and co—CEO of Verizon, Charles
Lee became a “consultant” to the firm at the exorbitant rate of $250,000 per

month, To me, that’s a cringe-worthy retirement package.)

Pay for Performance
What’s even more important is whether executives’ pay is truly tied to the
company’s performance. At many companies, so-called “performance tar-

gets” are set by a subcommittee of the board of directors, which can often


COMPENSATION

rewrite the rules of the game if the CEO appears to be losing. In 2001, for
example, Coca-Cola's board reduced CEO Douglas Daft’s goal of 15 percent
earnings growth over five years to 11 percent. Moving the goalposts like this
can be justified in one sense—after all, if the performance target isn’t achiev-
able, it’s hardly going to motivate the CEO—but you can also fault the
board for not setting more realistic goals in the first place. In any case, I
think it’s a negative sign when the targets are changed but the potential re-
ward stays the same, because it indicates that the board is unwilling to stand
up to the CEO and punish him or her by slashing the bonus when perfor-
mance slumps.

At least Coke’s shareholders knew what the target was, though. According
to the 2001 proxy, Walt Disney's compensation gurus decided that bonuses:
