
Stop orders
A stop order is an order to buy or sell a security as soon as a security moves
beyond the current market price. A stop buy order is set above the current
market price, and it is used to manage a short position. A stop sell order is set
at a price below where the market is now, and it is used to protect a profit or
limit a loss on a security that you already own. If you want to make sure you
sell a block of stock when it falls below $30 per share, for example, you can
enter a stop order at $30 (telling your broker “Sell Stop 30”). As soon as the
stock hits or goes below $30, the broker sells it, even if the price goes to $29
or $31 before all the stock is sold. This is often known as a stop loss order.
A version of a stop, known as a trailing stop, is used to help protect a profit.
You can enter a trailing stop order at the current market with a stop loss
price below the current market price. It would be set to trail, or automatically
increase, as the stock price does. If you bought a block of stock at $30 with a
trailing stop of $5, for example, the stop would kick in at $25. But if your trade
was a good one and the stock went from $30 to $35, the stop would trail with
it and rise to $30, a price $5 below the current market value.

Limit orders
A limit order is an order to buy or sell a security at a specific price or better:
lower than the current price for the buy order (because you want to buy low,
naturally), higher than the specific price for a sell order (because you want to
sell high).
If you want to make sure you sell a block of stock when it’s at $30 per share,
for example, you can enter a limit order at $30 (telling your broker, “Sell Limit
30”). As soon as the stock hits $30, the broker sells it, continuing to place
the order as long as the price stays at $30 or higher. If the price goes even a

Chapter 2: Planning to Succeed As a Day Trader
penny below $30, the limit is no longer enforced, and the broker stops selling
your position. After all, no buyers are going to want to pay an above-market
price just so you can get your order completed!

Stop-limit orders
A stop-limit order is a combination of a stop order and a limit order. It tells
the broker to buy or sell at a specific price or better but only after the price
passes a given stop price. If, for example, you want to make sure you sell a
block of stock when it falls below $30 per share but you also want to make
sure you sell it only when you’d have a loss, you can enter a stop order at
$30 with a limit of $29 (telling your broker, “Sell 30 Limit 29”). As soon as the
stock hits $30, the broker sells it as long as the price stays above $29. If it
goes below $29, the broker stops selling. Stop-limit orders help you get out
without maximizing your losses; the danger, of course, is that the stock goes
to $6 and you could have gotten out at $28 without the stop-limit order.
Are you confused? Well, the differences may be confusing, but understanding them is important to helping you manage your risks. That’s why Table 2-2
gives you a handy breakout of the different types of orders.

Table 2-2

Different Types of Orders

Buy Orders
Stop Order

Limit Order

Stop-Limit Order

Order instructions

Buy Stop 30

Buy Limit 30

Buy Stop 30
Limit 31

Market Price ($)

Action after the stock hits $30

28.50

Nothing

Buy

Buy

29.00

Nothing

Buy

Buy

29.50

Nothing

Buy

Buy

30.00

Buy

Buy

Buy

30.50

Buy

Nothing

Buy

31.00

Buy

Nothing

Nothing

31.50

Buy

Nothing

Nothing

Sell Orders
Stop Order

Limit Order

Stop-Limit Order

Order Instructions

Sell Stop 30

Sell Limit 30

Sell Stop 30 Limit 29

Market Price ($)

Action after the stock hits $30

28.50

Sell

Nothing

Nothing

29.00

Sell

Nothing

Sell
(continued)

35

36

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
Table 2-2 (continued)
Market Price ($)

Action after the stock hits $30

29.50

Sell

Nothing

Sell

30.00

Sell

Sell

Sell

30.50

Nothing

Sell

Nothing

31.00

Nothing

Sell

Nothing

31.50

Nothing

Sell

Nothing

Order cancels other
Also known as one cancels other or OCO, an order cancels other order is used
with a limit and a stop-loss to set a trading bracket in a volatile market. The
limit sets an automatic exit point when your position hits your price target,
and the stop-loss kicks in if your trade moves against you in order to limit
your losses. The broker will execute only the relevant order, cancelling the
other order when that happens. If not, the other half of the order will be
hanging out, waiting to be executed, causing you headaches.

Order sends other
Depending on who you talk to, OSO stands for order sends order, order sends
other, or one sends other. They all mean the same thing: When one order is
executed, another order is automatically entered into the system — and not
a moment before. You use an OSO to enter a limit order or a stop-loss order
as soon as your order to open a long or short position is executed.

What if the trade goes wrong?
No matter how in tune you feel with the market, no matter how good your
track record, and no matter how disciplined you are with setting stops, stuff
is going to happen. Just as you can make more money than you plan to, you
can also lose a lot more. If you day trade, you have to accept that you’re
going to have some really bad days.
So what do you do? You suck it up, take the loss, and get on with your life.
Yes, the market may have blown past your stops. That happens sometimes,
and it’s hard to watch real dollars disappear into someone else’s account,
someone you will never know. Still, close your position and just remember
that tomorrow is another day with another chance to do better.

Chapter 2: Planning to Succeed As a Day Trader

A sample trading plan
A trading plan may only be good for a short
time, but having an idea of what to expect in
the market and how you’ll react goes a long
way toward keeping trading discipline, which
improves your likelihood of long-run profits.
What does such a plan look like? Well, here’s a
sample to get you started.
What I’m Trading Today
Today I’ll be trading the E-Mini S&P 500 futures.
They closed down yesterday, but I’m expecting an uptick in the market today as companies report good earnings, so I am going to
trade on the long side. My plan is to start the
day buying two contracts with stop orders to
sell if they decline more than three ticks each.
These contracts will remain open until the end
of the day unless the stop is reached. I will add
a third contract if the market shows momentum
in the morning and a fourth contract if it shows
momentum in the afternoon. These two additional contracts can be long or short, depending
on the market direction, although it is unlikely
that the purchasing manager or home sales
surveys will have a large effect on the market’s
direction. I will close all positions at the end of
the day, if not sooner.
Because the margin on each contract is $3,500,
my maximum exposure today will be approximately 28 percent of my total account, with no
contract accounting for more than 7 percent of
my account.
Today’s Expected News Announcements
Before the open: Earnings announcements from
ADM (expect $0.62), PG (expect $0.74)

10:00 a.m.: Pending Home Sales — market
expects up 0.5 percent
After the close: Earnings announcements from
AAPL (expect $8.27), MET (expect $1.29)
5:00 p.m.: Auto Sales — market expects 5.1m
5:00 p.m.: Truck Sales — market expects 7.2m
My Profit and Loss Goals for the Day
My profit goal is five ticks or $62.50 per contract traded for a target of $250 if I acquire my
planned maximum of four contracts, but I plan
to ride my profits until the end of the day. If all
four contracts decline in value, I will close when
they fall three ticks apiece, for a maximum loss
of $37.50 per contract or $150 for the day.
Tip: Set up a basic form or spreadsheet with all
this information so that it’s easy to fill out each
morning. It might look like this:
What I’m trading today:
Assets: ____________________
Leverage: __________________
Limits: _____________________
Expected news announcements:
Time: ________ Item: ________
Time: ________ Item: ________
Time: ________ Item: ________
Time: ________ Item: ________
Profit and Loss Goals: ____________________
_____________________________________

10:00 a.m.: ISM Index — survey of purchasing
managers — market expects 51.0

Don’t hold in hopes of making up a loss. The market doesn’t know what you
own and will not reward your loyalty and best hopes.

37

38

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
After you take the loss and clear your head, see whether you can learn something for next time. Sometimes a loss can teach you valuable lessons that
make you a smarter, more disciplined trader in the long run.

Closing Out Your Position
By definition, day traders only hold their investment positions for a single
day. Closing out at the end of the day is important for a few reasons:
✓ Closing out daily reduces your risk of something happening overnight.
✓ Margin rates — the interest rates paid on money borrowed for trading —
are low and in some cases zero for day traders, but the rates go up
on overnight balances.
✓ Good trade discipline is what can keep you from making expensive
mistakes.
But like all rules, the single-day rule can be broken and probably should
be broken sometimes. In this section, I cover a few longer-term trading
strategies that you may want to add to your trading business on occasion.

Swing trading: Holding for days
Swing trading involves holding a position for several days. Some swing traders hold overnight, while others hold for days or even months. The longer
time period gives more time for a position to work out, which is especially
important if the position is based on news events or if it requires taking a
position contrary to the current market sentiment. Although swing trading
gives traders more options for making a profit, it carries some risks because
the position can turn against you while you are away from the markets.
A tradeoff always exists between risk and return. When you take more risk,
you do so in the hopes of getting a greater return. But when you look for a way
to increase return, remember that you have to take on more risk to do it.
Swing trading requires paying attention to some basic fundamentals and
news flow. (Fundamental research is discussed in Chapter 7.) It’s also a good
choice for people who have the discipline to go to bed at night instead of
waiting up and watching their position in hopes that nothing goes wrong.

Chapter 2: Planning to Succeed As a Day Trader

Position trading: Holding for weeks
A position trader holds a stake in a stock or a commodity for several weeks
and possibly even for months. This person is attracted to the short-term
price opportunities, but he also believes that he can make more money
holding the stake for a long enough period of time to see business fundamentals play out. Position trading increases the risk and the potential return
because a lot more can happen over months than minutes.

Investing: Holding for months or years
An investor is not a trader. Investors do careful research and buy a stake in an
asset in the hopes of building a profit over the long term. It’s not unusual for
investors to hold assets for decades, although good ones sell quickly if they
realize that they’ve made a mistake or if the story changes. (They want to cut
their losses early, just as any good trader should.)
Investors are concerned about the prospects of the underlying business.
Will it make money? Will it pay off its debts? Will it hold its value? They view
short-term price fluctuations as noise rather than as profit opportunities.
Many traders pull out some of their profits to invest for the long term (or
to give to someone else, such as a mutual-fund manager or hedge fund, to
invest). Doing so is a way of building financial security in the pursuit of
longer goals. This money is usually kept separate from the trading account.

Maxims and Clichés That Guide and
Mislead Traders
In this chapter, I cover a few of the many maxims traders use to think about
their trading, such as
✓ The stock doesn’t know you own it.
✓ Failing to plan is planning to fail.
✓ Your first loss is your best loss.
A lot more are out there.

39

40

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
Clichés are useful shorthand for important rules that can help you plan your
trading. But they can also mislead you because some are really obvious —
too obvious to act on effectively. Yes, everyone knows that you make money
by buying low and selling high, but how do you tell what low is and high is?
Here’s a run-through of some clichés that you’ll come across in your trading
career, along with my take on what they mean.

Pigs get fat, hogs get slaughtered
Trading is pure capitalism, and people do it for one primary reason: to make
money. Sure, a ton of economic benefits come from having well-functioning
capital markets, such as better price prediction, risk management, and
capital formation. But a day trader just wants to make money.
Get too greedy, however, and you’re likely to get stupid. You start taking too
much risk, deviating too much from your strategy, and getting careless about
dealing with your losses. Good traders know when it’s time to take a profit
and move on to the next trade.
This maxim is one of those obvious but tough-to-follow ones. After all, when
do you cross the line from being a happy little piggy to a big fat greedy hog
that’s about to be turned into a pork belly? Just know that if you’re deviating
from your trading plan because things are going so great, you may be headed
for some trouble.
Here’s a cliché that’s related to “Pigs get fat, hogs get slaughtered”: “Bears
get fat, bulls get fat, and hogs get slaughtered.” In other words, a savvy trader
can make money whether the market is up or down, but a greedy trader runs
into trouble.

In a bear market, the money returns to its
rightful owners
A bull market is one that charges ahead; a bear market is one that does
poorly. Many people erroneously think of themselves as trading geniuses
because they make money when the entire market is going up. Making money
by day trading was easy with Internet stocks in 1999, but it wasn’t so easy
in 2000 when the bubble burst. And when the markets turn negative, those
people who really understand trading and who know how to manage risk are
able to stay in until things get better, possibly even making nice profits along
the way.

Chapter 2: Planning to Succeed As a Day Trader
The corollary cliché for “In a bear market, the money returns to its rightful
owners,” is “Don’t confuse brains with a bull market.” When things are going
well, watch out for overconfidence. It may be time to update your business
and trading plans, but it’s not to time cast them aside.

The trend is your friend
When you day trade, you need to make money fast. You do not have the
luxury of waiting for your unique, contrary theory to play out. An investor
may be buying a stock in the hopes of holding it for decades, but a trader
needs things to work now.
Given the short-term nature of the market, short-term sentiment is going to
trump long-term fundamentals. People trading today may be wrong about the
direction of foreign exchange, interest rates, or stock prices, but if you are
closing out your positions tonight, you need to work with the information in
the market today. In the short run, traders who fight the market lose money.
There are two problems with the maxim “The trend is your friend.” The first
is that by the time you identify a trend, it may be over. Second, sometimes,
going against the herd makes sense because you can collect when everyone
else realizes their mistake. In such a situation, the psychology of trading
comes into play. Are you a good enough judge of human behavior to know
when the trend is right and when it’s not?

Buy the rumor, sell the news
Markets react to information. That’s ultimately what drives supply and
demand. Although the market tends to react quickly to information, it can
overreact, too. Lots of gossip gets traded in the markets as everyone looks to
get the information they need to gain an advantage. And despite such things
as confidentiality agreements and insider-trading laws, many rumors turn out
to be true.
These rumors are often attached to such news events as corporate earnings.
For whatever reason — good news, analyst research, a popular product —
traders may believe, for example, that the company will report good quarterly earnings per share. That’s the rumor. If you buy on the rumor, you can
take advantage of the price appreciation as the story gets more play. When
the earnings are actually announced, one of two things will happen:

41

42

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
✓ The earnings will be as good as or better than rumored, and the price
will go up. The trader can sell into that and make a profit.
✓ The earnings will be worse than rumored, everyone will sell on the bad
news, and the trader will want to sell to get out of the loss.
Of course, if the rumor is bad, you want to do the opposite: sell on the
rumor and buy on the news. For more information on short selling —
selling securities in hopes that they fall in price — turn to Chapter 9.
The problem with “Buy the rumor, sell the news” is that rumors are often
wrong, and there may be more opportunities to buy on bad news when
other traders are panicking, thus driving prices down for a few minutes
before sanity sets in. But this rule is one of those that everyone talks about,
whether or not they actually follow it.

Cut your losses and ride your winners
I mention earlier in this chapter that you need to cut your losses before they
drag you down. No matter how much it hurts and no matter how much you
believe that you’re right, you need to close out a losing position and move on.
But the opposite — that you should ride your winners — is not necessarily
true. Although good traders tend to be disciplined about selling winning
positions, they don’t use stops and limits as rigorously on the upside as they
may on the downside. They’re likely to stick with a profit and see how high it
goes before closing out a position.
Note that this conflicts a little with the “Pigs get fat, hogs get slaughtered”
maxim. (Trading maxims can be so contradictory!) To prevent overconfidence and sloppiness from greed, ride your winners within reason. If your
general discipline is to risk three ticks on a futures contract to make five, and
a contract goes up six ticks before you can close it out, you may want to stick
with it. But if you also close out at the end of every day, don’t give in to the
temptation of keeping that position open just because it’s still going up. Keep
to your overall discipline.

You’re only as good as your last trade
The markets churn on every day with little regard for why everyone
trading right now is there. Prices go up and down to match the supply

Chapter 2: Planning to Succeed As a Day Trader
and the demand at any given moment, which may have nothing to do with
the actual long-term worth of an item being traded. And it certainly has
nothing to do with how much you really, really want the trade to work out.
One of the biggest enemies of good traders is overconfidence. Especially
after a nice run of winning trades, a trader can get caught up in the euphoria
and believe that he finally has the secret to successful trading under control.
While he’s checking the real estate listings for that beachfront estate in Maui,
BAM! The next trade is a disaster. Does that mean that the trader is a disaster,
too? No, it just means that the markets won this time around.
Most day traders work in zero-sum markets, where for every winner, there’s
a loser. Hence, not everyone can make money every day. The challenge is to
maintain an even keel so as not to be distracted by confidence when the
trading is going well or by fear when the trading is going poorly. The next
trade is a new trade.

If you don’t know who you are, Wall Street
is an expensive place to find out
The best traders know their limits. They know what gets them excited, what
gets them angry, and what they need to watch out for. They haven’t necessarily
figured it out in front of a screen, either. Instead, they’ve looked back on their
lives and realized how to apply their strengths and weaknesses to trading.
If you are new to trading, consider your own capabilities when designing a
trading plan and think carefully about the things that are likely to trip you up.
By thinking about those things, you can pay attention and act accordingly.
If you wait to trade with real money to find out your tolerances for risk and
stress, you’re going to lose a lot of real money first.

43

44

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading

Chapter 3

Deciding What to Trade and
How to Trade It
In This Chapter
▶ Finding good assets for day trading
▶ Seeking securities to trade
▶ Counting cash and currency
▶ Making money from commodities
▶ Deriving profits from derivatives

S

o what are you going to trade? Stocks, corn, or bitcoins? You have myriad
choices, but you have to choose so that you can learn the market, know
what changes to expect, and make your trades accordingly. And to avoid the
devilment of the wash-sale rule, which can limit the tax deductibility of shortterm losses (and which you can read about in Chapter 15), you probably want
to make your universe of trading assets to be as broad as possible.
Still, you can’t trade everything. A day has only so many hours, and your
head can hold only so many ideas at any one time. Furthermore, some trading strategies lend themselves better to certain types of assets than others
(see Chapter 8). By finding out more about all the various investment assets
available to a day trader, you can make better decisions about what you want
to trade and how you want to trade it.

Defining a Good Day-Trading Asset
In academic terms, the universe of investable assets includes just about
anything you can buy at one price and sell at another, potentially higher
price. Artwork and collectibles, real estate, and private companies, for
example, are all considered to be investable assets.

46

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
Day traders have a much smaller group of assets to work with. Expecting a
quick, one-day profit on price changes in real estate isn’t realistic. Online auctions for collectible items take place over days, not minutes. If you’re going
to day trade, you want to find assets that trade easily, several times a day, in
recognized markets. In other words, you want liquidity. As an individual trading your own account, you want assets that you can purchase with relatively
low capital commitments. And finally, you may want to use leverage —
borrowed money — to improve your return, so you want to look for assets
that can be purchased using other people’s money. The following sections
outline the characteristics of good assets for day trading.
