
sense of his own interests. There were signs of tension between him and
the corporate bond department (which oversaw utility bond trading). In
September 1977 his nemesis Bill Voute was made a partner while he was
not. "Lewie went bullshit when he was passed over," says Steve Joseph. A
former Salomon corporate bond salesman from the 1970s remembers
Ranieri as a corporate bond trader "bitching and moaning about pay.
Lewie was sure he wasn't being paid what he was worth to the firm. He
said, and I remember his exact words, 'If it weren't for the fact that I
can do anything I want around here, I'd quit.' "
He was loose, loudmouthed, and brash. Back, office staff who worked for
Ranieri remember him telling them what to do by screaming at them at
the top of his lungs while standing on the top of a desk waving his arms,
like a referee. Still, he had the charm of wanting to be loved. "I have no
enemies," he says. "Even my competitors like me which is amazing
considering I never let them get any of the business."
When Ranieri came to Salomon Brothers, the mailroom was staffed
largely by recent immigrants to America who did not speak English.
Among their inefficiencies was the bad habit of placing too much postage
on the outgoing mail. His first contribution was to cut costs; that is
ironic since he never really cared about costs. He had no time for details.
"I got the brilliant idea one day to put a map of the U.S. on the wall and
outline the postage zones in Magic Marker. For that they made me
supervisor." He dropped out of St. John's when they rnade him
supervisor of the day shift. "Where I came from it didn't take much to
make that kind of decision," he says. From supervisor of the mailroom he
moved out to the clerical back office, which brought him directly in
contact with trading and traders. By 1974 he was sitting where he
wanted, in the utility bond trader's seat on the corporate bond desk.
By 1985, when Matty Oliva hopscotched from Harvard to the training program to the mortgage trading desk, a barrier had arisen between
the back office and the front. The process by which one became a trader
had become rigidly systematized. You needed a resume. You should have
graduated from college. It helped to have gone to business school. It was
important to look like an investment banker. In the mid-1970s this was
plainly not the case because Ranieri hadn't finished college, didn't have a
resume, and looked about as much like an investment banker as the
average Italian chef. He was, in the words of one of his former partners,

"a fat slob." But it simply did not matter. "If somebody quit on the
trading floor, they'd look at the nearest body and say, 'Do the job,' "
recalls Tom Kendall, who himself moved out of the back office to trade
for Lew Ranieri's mortgage department. "A trader would say, 'Hey, kid,
you're a smart kid, sit here." And if you were an extremely smart kid,
like Ranieri, you took over.
Up to the point of his transfer to the mortgage department, Ranieri had
dominated every department he had joined. The firm encouraged both
aggression and ability; it made a point never to interfere with natural
jungle forces. In a matter of months after his appointment power over
the new mortgage department consolidated in Ranieri's hands. In view of
Ranieri's ambition, even Dall concedes a coup was inevitable. Dall fell ill
and was often away. In his absence Ranieri started a research
department ("Mortgages are about math," he, the college dropout,
insisted) by asking Michael Waldman, a top mathematician, to join him.
The request came, Waldman recalls, "in Lewie's usual forceful manner."
Then Ranieri persuaded the firm to give him a sales force to sell the
godforsaken mortgages he was being asked to trade. All of a sudden a
dozen salesmen learned they had to please Lew Ranieri, rather than
whomever they had been pleasing before. Rich Shuster, who had been a
thrift salesman in the Salomon Brothers Chicago office, now found
himself a mortgage salesman working for Lewie Ranieri. "Once I misdialed the commercial paper department and got mortgages instead.
Lewie happened to answer the phone and immediately realized what had
happened. He started to shout at me, 'What the fuck are you doing
selling commercial paper? You are paid to sell mortgages!' " Salesmen
began to focus on mortgages.
Steve Joseph was the only other person who conceivably could have
replaced Dall, but he was a corporate financier, not a trader. As he says,
"At Solly at the time you didn't take a major trading operation and put it
under a corporate finance guy." You did, however, take a major financial
operation and put it under a trader. So Lewie took charge upstairs, too,
and came to treat the finance department as an amusing overhead into
which even women could be hired. (The mortgage department was never
exactly a bastion of sexual tolerance. One women who wished to trade
mortgages but was denied the chance says, "You were acceptable to the
trading desk as long as you were relatively white and male." No women

traded mortgage bonds until 1986.)
Bob Dall disappeared, although lie didn't leave Salomon until 1984. He
found himself out of a job. He was squeezed out by Ranieri months after
he had hired him. This sort of thing went on continually at Salomon. The
challenger took, over by being a little more energetic, a little more
popular with clients, a little more influential with colleagues until the man
whom he was quietly challenging seemed to evaporate. He became almost
quaintly obsolete, like the handle crank on the automobile. Management
did not intervene. The loser eventually left.
"Gutfreund never told me that I'd be replaced by Lewie Ranieri," says
Dall. "I was left hanging there, and it must have taken me six months to
figure out it wasn't my deal anymore." To this day Ranieri calls the
mortgage securities market "Bobby's vision." In 1984 Dall left to work
first for Morgan Stanley and then for Steve Joseph, who had left
Salomon for Drexel Burnham. "If I didn't believe in the capitalist system
I could never accept what happened. But I do believe in it: the fittest
move ahead," Dall told James Sterngold, a reporter from The New York
Times, who was trying to discover what had become of the old partners
of Salomon Brothers.
In February 1979 Gutfreund placed Ranieri officially in charge of the
entire mortgage operation. For the next two and a half years, to
everyone except the people inside, the department was more comical
than practical. Ranieri created a trading desk in his own image: Italian,
self-educated, loud, and fat. The first traders had their origin, like
Lewie, in the back office. Among them there was a single college degree
—aB.A. from Manhattan College. The founding fathers of the mortgage
trading desk, in addition to Ranieri, were John D'Antona, Peter Marro,
and Manny Alavarcis. Close on their heels were Bill Esposito and Ron
Dipasquale. They went by their first names: Lewie,
Johnny, Peter, Manny, Billy, and Ronnie. They sounded more like an infield
than a team of investment bankers. "All that stuff about me in the
mailroom is true," says Ranieri. "And when I ran mortgages, I religiously
took people from the back office. At first I did it for moral reasons. But
it worked. They appreciated it. They didn't feel like the world owed
them a living. They were more loyal." But Ranieri also wanted vital young
brains from the Salomon training program. So it happened that the desk
took its first trainee, who was also its first M.B.A., first skinny person,

and first Jew: Jeffery Kronthal.
Kronthal recalls that he was the only trainee out of the Salomon
Brothers training Class of 1979 to start his professional life as a clerk.
The people placed on other desks were permitted to call themselves
salesmen or traders. Kronthal wasn't even head clerk. He was junior clerk
under Peter Marro. As junior clerk, his primary responsibility was to keep
track of the bond position run by John D'Antona.
Kronthal had just graduated from the five-year Wharton combined
undergraduate and M.B.A. program—the closest thing in America to a
trade school for financiers—and he had more elevated interests than
Johnny's positions. This displeased Johnny. Johnny would lean back in his
chair and ask, "Jeffery, what's the position?"
Jeffery would say, "I don't know."
Johnny would scream at Lewie, "What the fuck's going on? The clerk
doesn't know the positions."
Lewie would scream at Peter, "What the fuck is going on? Your clerk
doesn't know the positions."
Peter would scream at Jeffery, "Why don't you know the positions?"
And Jeffery would shrug.
It was hard for Kronthal to take any of this seriously for two reasons.
First, he knew Lewie was fond of him, and Lewie was the boss. Kronthal
had done Lewie a favor by agreeing to join the mortgage department. As
Kronthal recalls, members of his training class felt nothing but disdain
for the fledgling department. "Definitely not the M.B.A. set; mortgage
traders were Donnie Green types," he says.
Donnie Green types were traders who made trainees miserable. They
were deliberately nasty or rude to anyone who hadn't made the firm a
pile of dough.
"A Donnie Green type wouldn't say hello to you when you tried to sit with
him, wouldn't say good-bye when you left, wouldn't look at
you while you were there. No trainee ever dared sit next to Dannie
Green," says Kronthal. Donnie Green himself had been a trader at
Salomon Brothers in the dark ages, when traders had more hair on their
chests than on their heads. He is remembered as the man who stopped a
callow young salesman on his way out the door to catch a flight from New
York to Chicago. Green tossed the salesman a ten-dollar bill. "Hey,
takeout some crash insurance for yourself in my name,"he said. "Why?"

asked the salesman. "I feel lucky," said Green.
"No one wanted to get anywhere near the mortgage department," says
Kronthal. Even Ranieri admits that "Jeffery's decision to join the
mortgage department was regarded as remarkably stupid." So why did
Kronthal join? "I looked at it and said one, I'm twenty-three years old,
and it doesn't matter if it doesn't work out. I don't have to support
anything but my own drinking. And two, the firm must have faith in
mortgages or they wouldn't have Lewie doing it."
Another reason Kronthal wasn't concerned that his many bosses spent so
much time screaming at him was that Lewie didn't take the clerk's job
seriously. "Lewie used to say that I was the second worst clerk he ever
saw. The first one was himself," says Kronthal. But there wasn't much
for a clerk to do. For that matter, there wasn't much for anyone to do.
The mortgage market was the financial equivalent of a ghost town:
Nothing moved, nothing traded. It meant that they made no money. To
get bonds to trade, Lewie realized he needed to hit the road and
persuade Salomon's customers to play. He would have to be the promoter
of the casino and usher people in. But to free himself from the trading
desk, Lewie needed to find a "head of trading." He made a hasty search
and came up with Mario, a small but amusing error in judgment, perhaps
not his first, certainly not his last.
"Mario came from Merrill Lynch, and he knew nothing," says Samuel
Sachs, who joined the mortgage department as a salesman in 1979. While
all the other traders were slobs, Mario wore a three-piece polyester suit
with a gold watch chain dangling down in front. Very slick. Every hair was
in place. Says Sachs: "He'd lean across to Lewie and ask, 'How do you like
'em, Lewie?' (referring to the bond market). Lewie would say, 'Hike 'em
a lot!' And Mario wouldsay, 'Yeah, I like 'em, too, I like 'em, too.' Fifteen
minutes later he'd lean across again to Lewie and ask, 'How do you like
'em now, Lewie?' Lewie would say, 'Don't like 'em at all.' And Mario would
say, 'I don't like 'em
neither, I don't like 'em neither.' Mario lasted about nine months at
Salomon Brothers as the new head of mortgage trading."
There was still a perceived need for a head of trading. In May 1980
Michael ("Fat Ankles") Mortara was recalled from the London office,
where he had been a trader, to fill the void left by Mario's departure.
One of his former London colleagues recalls Mortara with his bags

packed and a forlorn look saying he didn't have any idea what he was
going back to. Mortara claims now that he knew exactly what he was
going back to. But he could not have been very pleased with it. After a
year of making no money and being the butt of ridicule within Salomon
Brothers, mortgage trading looked doomed. A rift was growing between
this small group of uneducated Italians and the rest of the firm. The
mortgage traders deeply resented the corporate and government
traders.
Partly it was a money problem. The Salomon compensation game, like the
job placement game for trainees, has a political wild card in it. Year-end
bonuses are not tied directly to one's profitability, but rather to the
perception of one's value by the Salomon Brothers compensation
committee. At the end of the year bonuses are highly subjective, and a
well-placed friend can be as helpful as a good year's trading. The
mortgage department had neither friends nor profits. "I couldn't get my
people paid," says Lewie. "They were regarded as second-rate. We were
the black sheep squadron." What really stung the traders, however, was
not their absolute level of pay but their pay in relation to the other bond
traders. "You got the sense the firm was doing you a favor [in paying you
anything]," says former mortgage trader Tom Kendall.
"Ask the guys," says Ranieri, "they'll tell you that the corporate traders
got paid twice as much as them." Bonus numbers were supposed to be a
management secret. A trader wasn't supposed to know the size of his
neighbor's bonus. Right. A big bonus was about as well concealed on the
Salomon Brothers trading floor as the results of a hot date in a high
school boys' locker room. It took about an hour for a trader to discover
what everyone else was paid.
Had the source of the rift between the mortgage traders and the rest
of the bond traders been money alone, however, it might eventually have
been repaired. But there was a widening cultural gap between the two. In
the late 1970s Jim Massey, the architect of Salomon's recruitment
policy, decided that Salomon needed to upgrade its personnel. "He came
to the conclusion that we couldn't have a bunch of schlepps
trom Podunk U on the trading floor," says Scott Brittenham. Brittenham
worked as a recruiter for Massey in 1980 before moving on to trade
mortgages.
Salomon Brothers began to resemble the rest of Wall Street. It

recruited the same M.B.A.'s as Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley. The
effect was as much social as it was intellectual. Like the Goldmans, the
Sachses, the Lehmans, the Kuhns, and the Loebs before them, the
Salomons were feeling the pull of what the writer Stephen Birmingham
called "our crowd," though we weren't quite to the stage of building new
wings onto the Metropolitan Museum. The firm had always been run by
Jews. It came to be controlled by a contingent of WASPs, wannabe
WASPs, and social climbers. The face-lift coincided with the sale of the
firm to the commodities dealer Phillips Brothers in 1981. Salomon ceased
to be a partnership and became a corporation. The average partner
received a lump sum of $7.8 million from the sale. It was as if they said,
all at once, "We have our money now, what next?" An empire. Class.
Weekends in Paris. Nights at St. James's Palace.
The mortgage department had a far richer and earthier culture to
protect than did either governments or corporates. While the rest of
the firm gradually acquired a new persona, mortgages remained more
trenchantly the same. Ranieri welded a coherent departmental
personality out of two separate but equally gamy ethnic groups. Nearly all
the traders came from one of two backgrounds: There were the Italians
who started the department, and there were the Jews with M.B.A.'s who
joined fresh from the training program. I'm not sure any of them had
what you'd call genuine ethnic identity. But they were an oppressed
minority. And they shed rather than acquired airs. They were back-row
people to a man.
By outside standards, the mortgage trading department was highly
discriminatory: few blacks and Orientals; no women. Next to the rest of
the firm, however, the mortgage department looked like the United
Nations. The photographs from Salomon Brothers' annual reports tell a
tale in themselves. Those from the late 1970s look like advertisements
for world peace. Picture afterpicture contains the obligatory mixture of
black, yellow, and white people, men and women, working in peaceful
harmony at shiny conference tables. By the mid-eighties, however, all
things black, yellow, and female have disappeared from the photographs. There isn't a trace of anything but white men in the annual
reports.
The mortgage department became a white brotherhood apart. The tacit
agreement was that Lewie would do everything he cou!4 to get his

traders paid and his traders would be loyal to Lewie. Their covenant was
weaker than Ranieri's. The traders had come from business school
rather than the mailroom. Many of them were financially independent. It
was hard for Ranieri to do favors. Ranieri liked to be surrounded by
people he could do things for. He liked people, but he especially liked the
concept of "his people." He would have thriven on a steady stream of
traders with medical bills they couldn't meet. When Bill Esposito fell
short nineteen thousand dollars on a house he wanted to buy, Ranieri had
Salomon make up the difference. "He was apologetic he couldn't give it
to me out of his own pocket," says Esposito.
Still, people responded. In 1979 Tom Kendall joined the desk from
Wharton, with a brief intervening stop in the back office. In 1980 Mason
Haupt, a fraternity brother of Kronthal's from Wharton, and Steve Roth
from Stanford signed up. In 1981 Andy Stone and Wolf Nadoolman from
Harvard came on board. They viewed themselves in relation to the rest
of the firm in much the same way as Lewie. As Nadoolman says, "While
Tom Strauss [the emerging kingpin of the government department] and
his crowd wore Hermes ties and ran triathlons, Lewie's people were an
Italian family. While the government department ate tofu and wore
pleated pants, the attitude in the mortgage department was: 'What do
you mean you only had two servings, didn't you like it?' Did you ever see
a fat government trader? Of course not. They were lean and mean. They
discriminated against fat people. Look, I know what I'm talking about,
I'm fat."
"It was clear that the rest of the firm tolerated us without approval,"
says Tom Kendall. "They'd ask, 'What do those fucking yo-brains over
there in the corner do for a living?' " One of Andy Stone's most vivid
memories as a trainee is of pointing in the direction of Ranieri & Co. and
asking a corporate bond trader who they were. " 'Nobody,' said the
trader. 'Mortgages. They're a nothing department. Nobody wants to be
in mortgages.' " Craig Coates, the head of government trading at
Salomon, asked Stone, "Why would you possibly want to be in mortgages
when you can be in governments?" Even at higher levels the fat people
II'
thought the skinny people had it in for them. "The firm," says former
managing director Mortara, "was a bunch of fiefdoms. People in the
other departments were more concerned with protecting their own

business than with developing this new business."
The resentment the mortgage department felt toward those in power
increased when it became known in early 1980 that those outside the
department wanted it shut down. The mortgage department wasn't
making money. The other mortgage units on Wall Street—Merrill Lynch,
First Boston, Goldman Sachs—were stillborn. They closed almost before
they had opened. The prevailing wisdom was that mortgages were not for
Wall Street.
The business was reeling from what appeared to have been the knockout
punch. Paul Volcker had made his historic speech on October 6, 1979.
Short-term interest rates had skyrocketed. For a thrift manager to
make a thirty-year home loan, he had to accept a rate of interest of 10
percent. Meanwhile, to get the money, he was paying 12 percent. He
ceased, therefore to make new loans, which suited the purpose of the
Federal Reserve, which was trying to slow the economy. New housing
starts dropped to postwar lows. Before Volcker's speech, Steve
Joseph's mortgage finance department had created roughly two billion
dollars in mortgage securities. It was a laughably small amount—less than
two-tenths of a percent of outstanding American home mortgages. But it
was a start. After Volcker's speech the deals stopped. For Ranieri & Co.
to create bonds, the thrifts had to want to make loans. They didn't. The
industry that held most of America's home mortgages on its books was
collapsing. In 1980 there were 4,002 savings and loans in America. Over
the next three years 962 of those would collapse. As Tom Kendall put it,
"Everybody hunkered down and licked their wounds."
Everybody but Ranieri. Ranieri expanded. Why? Who knows. Perhaps he
had a crystal ball. Perhaps he figured that the larger his department
grew, the harder it would be to dismantle. For whatever reason, Ranieri
hired the fired mortgage salesmen from other firms, built his research
department, doubled the number of traders, and left the dormant
mortgage finance department in place. He hired a phalanx of lawyers and
lobbyists in Washington to work on legislation to increase the number of
potential buyers of mortgage securities. "I'll tell you a fact," says
Ranieri. "The Bank of America deal [Bob Dall's first brainchild] was a legal investment in only three states. I had a team of
lawyers trying to change the law on a state-by-state basis. It would have
taken two thousand years. That's why I went to Washington. To go over

the heads of the states."
"If Lewie didn't like a law, he'd just have it changed," explains one of his
traders. Even if Ranieri had secured a change in the law, however,
investors would have stayed clear of mortgage bonds. Tom Kendall
remembers visiting Ranieri's top salesman, Rick Borden, in Salomon
Brothers' San Francisco office in 1979. Borden was reading a self-help
book. "I remember him saying over and over, These Ginnie Macs suck.
They get longer [in maturity] when rates go up, and shorter when rates
go down, and nobody wants them,' " says Kendall.
To make matter worse, the Salomon Brothers credit committee was
growing reluctant to deal with the collapsing savings and loans industry.
Stupid customers (the fools in the market) were a wonderful asset, but
at some level of ignorance they became a liability: They went broke. And
somehow, thrifts weren't like normal stupid customers. One thrift in
California, Beneficial Standard, reneged on a purchase of bonds from
Salomon that had been confirmed—as are all bond trades—by phone. The
thrift claimed in the subsequent lawsuit that the mortgage bond business
should be governed by real estate law, rather than securities law, and
that in real estate law an oral contract wasn't binding (years later it lost
its case). This very nearly was the final straw.
The executive committee members of Salomon Brothers decided the
mortgage market was bad news. They didn't understand it; they didn't
want to understand it; they just wanted out of it. They planned to start
by severing ties with the thrift industry. The entire thrift industry
looked shaky. Lines of credit were to be cut. Cutting off thrifts was the
same as shutting down the mortgage department since thrifts were the
only buyers of mortgage bonds. "I basically threw my body between the
credit committee and the thrift industry," says Lewie. In all his decisions
Ranieri had the support of only one man on the Salomon Brothers
executive committee, but his was the important vote: John Gutfreund.
"John protected me," says Ranieri.
The upshot of the hostilities between the mortgage department and the
two real powers of Salomon, corporate and government bond trading, was
that everything in the mortgage department was separate: mortgage sales, mortgage finance, mortgage research, mortgage operations,
and mortgage trading. "The reason everything was separate is that no
one would help us," says Ranieri.
