
Deeper Discussion of This Chart
When beginning traders looked at the chart in Figure 21.8 at the end of the day, they
immediately would see a trading range that began around bars 7, 9, or 11. As the bull
channel from bar 7 to bar 15 was forming, they were probably not aware that a bull
channel in a spike and channel day is usually the start of a trading range. However,
experienced traders knew this, and they began to short above every prior swing high,
and many scaled in higher. They exited their shorts around the bar 22 double bottom
test of the bar 9 or bar 11 bottom of the bull channel. Bar 22 also appeared to be a
possible ﬁnal ﬂag reversal, as well as a second entry long setup at the bottom of the
developing trading range. Finally, it was a lower low pullback from the bar 20 breakout
above the bear micro channel down to bar 19.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

354

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

Figure 21.8

The wedge up to bar 15 was also a shrinking stairs bull channel since the second
peak was eight ticks above the ﬁrst and the third was only three ticks above the second.
This indicates waning momentum.
A wedge usually has a two-legged correction, but when the wedge is large, the legs
often subdivide. The move down to bar 16 was contained in a fairly tight bear channel
and therefore was likely to be just the ﬁrst leg down, even though it subdivided into two
legs. It had too few bars to adequately correct a wedge of this size. The low-momentum
move to bar 18 was the pullback that led to the second leg down, which ended at bar 22.
Bar 18 was an exact double top with the bar 15 top of the wedge, and when the market
reverses down at a double top test of a wedge high, traders become more conﬁdent that
the top is in for the near term. The sell-oﬀ is usually strong and has at least two legs.
Bar 22 tested the bars 9 and 11 bottom of the channel and formed a double bottom bull
ﬂag with them. Since bar 20 broke above the micro channel down to bar 19, bar 22 was
a two-legged lower low pullback from that channel breakout. The two-bar reversal that
began with bar 22 was therefore a reasonable buy setup for at least a small swing up.
The move from bar 6 to bar 15 was so strong that the trading range to bar 22
that followed would likely have an upside breakout and maybe lead to a leg 1 = leg 2
measured move up (leg 1 was from bars 6 to 15 and leg 2 began at bar 22 and its end
had not yet formed).
Most breakouts of trading ranges fail, so traders were expecting the move down to
bar 19 to have little follow-through, since it was near the bottom of the trading range. If
they shorted the low 2 at bar 21, they were expecting a ﬁnal ﬂag (bars 19 through 21)
and a reversal up from the bottom of the trading range.
Since bar 6 was a large bull spike, traders should look to take proﬁts at possible
measured move targets based on the spike. You should look at the open or low and
measure to the close or high of the bar. In this case, the top of the spike was the bar 7
doji, which is not an obvious choice to consider, but it is best to look at every possibility.
The bar 15 high of the wedge was a measured move to the tick from the low of bar 6 to
the high of bar 7, projecting that number of points up from the bar 7 high.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Figure 21.9

Printer: Donnelly

SPIKE AND CHANNEL TREND

355

FIGURE 21.9 A Gap Up and Double Bottom

A large gap up on the open often has a two-legged sideways or down move before
the trend up begins. Whenever the opening range (the first five to 10 bars or so) is
under 30 percent of an average daily range, the day is in breakout mode and traders
will buy a breakout above and short a breakout below. If this small range occurs
when there is a large gap up, the odds of a trend day up or down are high.
In Figure 21.9, the rally from bar 5 to the bar before bar 6 was a strong bull
spike. The market corrected sideways to bar 9 and then had a buy climax rally up
to bar 10, completing the spike and climax type of spike and channel bull trend.
Bar 6 was the first bear spike in a strong bull trend, and it led to a bull flag (an
iii pattern) as expected.
Once traders saw the strong bar 11 bear spike, they wondered if there might be
a trend reversal because it was a reversal down from a higher high after the final
bull flag to bar 9 broke the steep bull trend line. It followed a strong spike up after
bar 9. When the market has two strong spikes in opposite directions within a few
bars of each other, it then usually goes sideways as the two sides fight over the
creation of the channel. The bulls want the channel to go up and the bears want it
to go down. The market went sideways here but ultimately the bear spike won.
As the market went sideways, it formed a lower high in the form of a small
double top at bar 12 and then a pullback to bar 13. Bar 13 was a bull trend bar that

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

356

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

Figure 21.9

trapped bulls into a long position, and was the first bar of a two-bar reversal that
led to a large sell-off.
There will often be a spike down and a spike up within a trading range, and this
usually puts the market in breakout mode. The bulls are hoping for follow-through
in the form of a bull channel, whereas the bears want a bear channel. Bar 9 led to
a two-bar bull spike, and the pullback that could lead to a bull channel began with
the bar 11 bear spike. At this point, the bears were looking for a bear channel. The
market entered a tight trading range and the bulls attempted to begin their channel
with the bar 13 bull trend bar, but the bears overwhelmed them and were able to
turn the market down into a bear channel.

Deeper Discussion of This Chart
The market gapped up strongly in Figure 21.9, breaking out above yesterday’s high, but
the ﬁrst bar was a bear reversal bar and it set up a failed breakout short. The market
went sideways and formed a double bottom at the bar 4 outside up bar. Some traders
would have reversed to long as bar 4 went above the high of the prior bar, because many
large gap up days have small double bottoms and then huge bull trends. Other traders
bought above the bar 5 breakout pullback setup (an inside bar is a pause and, therefore,
a type of pullback), and still others waited to buy until there was a breakout above the
opening range, above bar 2.
Bar 5 was a breakout pullback buy setup for the breakout above the bars 3 and 4
double bottom or high 2. Bars 3, 4, and 5 also formed a triangle after a large gap up.
The large gap up was a spike and the triangle was likely to be a bull ﬂag, since most
trading ranges in bull trends break out to the upside.
Bars 6, 8, and 9 created a triangle (it could also be called a wedge bull ﬂag), and any
trading range in a bull trend is a bull ﬂag. Bar 9 was also a one-bar pullback from the
breakout on the bar before it from the bars 6 and 8 double bottom.
Although the bars 6, 8, and 9 triangle became a large ﬁnal ﬂag, the four bars down
from bar 12 and the double bottom bull ﬂag created by bar 11 and the third bar after
bar 12 were also a ﬁnal bull ﬂag. The bull breakout to the bar 13 high was brief and
could not even go above the bar 12 lower high, but it was still a ﬁnal ﬂag. It was a bull
ﬂag and the ﬁnal attempt by the bulls to resume the trend, but it immediately reversed
down after just a one-bar bull breakout.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 21.10

SPIKE AND CHANNEL TREND

357

FIGURE 21.10 Spike and Climax

A spike and climax variant of a spike and channel pattern often has the spike and
channel reversed. In Figure 21.10, there was a channel from bar 2 to bar 3, and it
was followed by a large bull trend bar. The channel functions as the spike up and
that one-bar spike functions like the channel.

Deeper Discussion of This Chart
The reversal down from the bar 5 high of the day in Figure 21.10 was also a ﬁnal ﬂag reversal where bar 4 was a one-bar ﬁnal ﬂag. After a climax, especially after a ﬁnal ﬂag
reversal, the market usually has a two-legged correction, which means that a high 1 and
maybe a high 2 would fail. If you shorted below bar 5, you then have to expect pullbacks
and keep your protective stop above the bar 5 high until after the market has begun its
second leg.
Once the market broke to the downside on the move down to bar 11, traders believed
that there was going to be more selling, which meant that the breakout turned the market
into always-in short. The breakout bar was therefore likely to lead to a measured move
down and there could be a measuring gap. The gap between the bar 8 breakout point
and the bar 11 pullback became that gap.
Since the spike up was sharp and therefore climactic, the high 1 above bar 6 was
likely to fail. Aggressive traders would place limit orders to short at or above the bar 6
high 1 signal bar high and above the bar 7 high 2 signal bar high.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

358

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 21.10

Bar 8 was a wedge bull ﬂag (a high 3) and a reasonable scalp, but only if you were
emotionally prepared to reverse to short as you took proﬁts on your long, since a second
leg down was likely. Since the move down to bar 8 was a channel, it was probably just
the ﬁrst leg.
The opening range was about half of the size of an average daily range, and therefore
the day could become a trending trading range day, which it did. The upper range was
from the bar 2 low to the high of the day, and the lower range was from around bar 12
to bar 22. The market then broke again to the downside and formed a channel from the
bar 24 tight trading range, ﬁnal ﬂag area to the bar 26 low of the day, although there
was very little two-sided trading and the market quickly reversed back into the middle
range by the close.
It also became a spike and channel bear trend day where the move from bar 5
to bar 12 was the spike and the three pushes down to bars 12, 18, and 26 created a
parabolic, climactic channel.
Once the market reversed up from the breakout below the channel at the bar 26
low, the next objective was a poke above the top of the channel, which it accomplished
on the close.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c22

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

19:7

Printer: Donnelly

CHAPTER 22

Trending Trading
Range Days

P

rimary characteristics of trending trading range days:

r The opening range is about a third to half the size of the range of recent days.
r There is a breakout after an hour or two and then the market forms another
trading range.

r Because there are trading ranges, there are usually opportunities to take trades
in both directions.

r There sometimes are multiple breakouts and trading ranges, but when this happens, it is usually better to consider the day as a stronger type of trend day and
trade only with trend.
r After the second trading range begins to form, there is usually a pullback that
tests the earlier trading range.
r The test often breaks back into the earlier range. When it comes close to but
does not penetrate the prior range, the trend is a little stronger.
r Sometimes the market goes all the way through the earlier range and the day
becomes a reversal day.
r Most reversal days begin as trending trading range days.
r When the breakout is very strong, the day is more likely to become a weak
spike and channel trend.
Since every trend has pullbacks and they are small trading ranges, some form
of a trending trading range day is present during every trend day, and the trending
trading ranges are the dominant features at least a couple of times each week. If the
opening range is about a third to half of the size of the recent average daily range,
359

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c22

360

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

19:7

Printer: Donnelly

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

then look for a breakout and an approximate doubling of the range of the day.
These trend days are made of a series of usually two, or occasionally more, trading
ranges separated by brief breakouts, and the formations are sometimes not readily
seen as trading ranges. However, on the daily chart, the day is clearly a trend day,
opening near one end of the bar and closing near the other. Whenever the market
is creating trending swings but the day does not look like a clear trend day, it is
probably a trending trading range day. Also, if the day’s range in the first hour or
two is only about a third to half of the average range of recent days, watch for
a breakout and an approximate measured move, and then a second trading range
forming over the rest of the day. This type of trend is present in some form several
days each week but is often better classified as another type of trend or even a large
trading range.
Many days can be classified as either spike and channel trend days or trending
trading range days, depending on their strength. The stronger the trend, the more
the day will behave like a spike and channel trend day. The reason to try to distinguish between them is that they should be traded differently. When a day is more
of a spike and channel trend day, it is a strong trend, and traders should focus on
with-trend trades and swing trades. They should avoid countertrend trades unless
there is a clear transition into a trading range or an opposite trend. When the day is
more of a trending trading range day, traders can usually take trades in both directions and look for more scalps. As a day is forming, there are clues that tell traders
if the breakout is more likely to lead to a strong trend day, like a spike and channel
trend day (or even a small pullback trend day), or to a trending trading range day.
Trading ranges are more common than strong trends, and trending trading range
days, in particular, are about twice as common as spike and channel trend days,
although every day has at least one spike and channel swing. The spike in a spike
and channel trend day is most likely to begin early in the day, often from the first
bar or with a large gap up or down. Also, it usually either breaks well beyond bars
from yesterday or strongly reverses from a breakout, like a sharp rally from the first
bar on a large gap down day. The spike in a trending trading range day is a breakout
from a trading range, but it is usually still within the range of the prior day.
The opening trading range often lasts one to three hours and can be about half
of the size of an average day’s range. This lack of urgency is a sign that the day is less
likely to become a strong trend day. Also, the initial trading range has a magnetic
pull, as does any trading range, and that works against the breakout going too far
before pulling back and forming another trading range. The breakout on a spike and
channel trend day is often large and fast. The spike can have three or more large
bull trend bars with small tails and very little overlap. On a trending trading range
day, the spike is usually just one to three bars, and they tend to be smaller and have
larger tails and more overlap. If the pullback is just a single bar and the breakout
from the pullback is another spike, even if it is smaller and only a single bar, the day

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c22

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

19:7

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDING TRADING RANGE DAYS

361

is more likely to be a spike and channel trend day. If the pullback goes sideways
for five to 10 bars, or if the breakout from the pullback is a weak channel with
overlapping bars and trend bars in the opposite direction, the day is more likely
to be a trending trading range day. If the pullback after the spike is strong enough
to make traders uncertain of the always-in direction, a trading range is more likely
than a trend channel, so look for scalps instead of swings.
Entering on the breakout of any trading range is a low-probability trade, except in special circumstances, which are discussed in book 2 on trading ranges. It
is usually much better to enter on a breakout pullback or on some earlier reversal
from the opposite side of the range, but if a trader is confident that the day might
be evolving into a trending trading range day and the breakout is strong, the trader
can consider entering as the breakout bar is forming, or around the close of the
breakout bar or on the close of the next bar, if it is also strong. The breakout spike
is usually followed by a channel, but it will often stop around the measured move
area, and then the market will begin to form a trading range. The market breaks out
of one range and then forms another. Rarely, three or four small trading ranges will
develop in a day, but when that happens, the day should probably be thought of
and traded as a stronger type of trend day, like a spike and channel or a small pullback trend day. Traders should focus much more if not exclusively on with-trend
setups. If the market later pulls back into a prior range, it will often retrace all the
way to the other side of that range. The implication is that the market consolidates
in a range after the breakout. This means that there will be two-sided trading that
tests both the top and bottom of the new range and possibly breaks out in either
direction at some point. Once the market reaches the measured move area, it is
likely to transition into a second trading range. Traders should then transition with
it from trend style trading to trading range trading. For example, if the day is a bull
trending trading range day, traders should take profits in the area that is approximately a measured move up, if the trend is weakening, based on the height of the
lower trading range. This is because the market will then usually test down into the
breakout area and then form a trading range.
Traders should not trail their protective stops below a swing low once they
think that the market is in a trending trading range, because those stops will usually
get hit. It makes more sense to look to exit on strength when the market is forming
an upper range, than to exit on weakness. Remember, in a trading range, traders
should buy low, sell high. Aggressive traders will fade big trend bars in the area
of the measured move target. For example, in a bull trending trading range day,
once the market gets close to the measured move target, bears will look for a large
bull trend bar. If one forms, they will often short its close or just above its high,
and then scale into more shorts if the market goes higher. They expect that the
large bull trend bar is an exhaustive buy climax, and that it will be followed by an
eventual test down into the gap (the two or three bull trend bars forming a breakout

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c22

362

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

19:7

Printer: Donnelly

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

from the lower trading range), and possibly to the top of the lower range. Since they
are expecting an upper trading range to develop, shorting at the top of a bull spike
in the area where the market is likely to form the top of the upper trading range
gives them an excellent entry price. This is discussed more in the second book in
the section on trading range trading. Even if the market goes higher, the odds are
very strong that the market will come back below their entry price. If they scaled
in higher, they could exit their first entry at breakeven, and then move the stop on
their higher entry to breakeven, and hold for a test into the gap.
Since there is two-sided trading throughout the day, it is common for the day
to reverse through at least one of the trading ranges in the final hour or two of the
day. Since each trading range has two-sided trading, it is a comfort zone for bulls
and bears, who both see the area as value. This creates a magnetic pull and tends
to draw breakouts back into the range.
The importance of recognizing this type of trend day is that this reversal is a
reliable countertrend trade, since the market will usually form a breakout test. Because of this, once the breakout reaches the approximate measured move target
where trend traders will take profits, traders will watch for a trade in the opposite direction, looking to exit on the breakout test. Experienced traders will fade
strong trend bars around the measured move area, looking for the pullback to test
the breakout gap. For example, when the average daily range in the Emini is about
10 points, if there is a trading range for a couple of hours and then an upside breakout, strong bears will begin to scale into shorts at about four to six points above the
lower range. They are looking for a pullback into the breakout area and maybe all
the way back to the top of the lower trading range. If the market reverses back
into the prior range, it will likely test the countertrend signal bars in the prior
range. For example, if a bear trend reverses up, it will attempt to reach the high
of prior failed bull signal bars. If the rally extends to the top or above the upper
trading range and the day closes up there, the day will be a reversal day on the daily
chart. The day sold off and then reversed up and closed near its high. Most reversal
days begin as trending trading range days (the section on reversal days in the third
book has examples), so whenever traders recognize that the day is a trending trading range day, they should always be prepared for a possible late reversal swing
trade, which might become a large intraday trend trade that can cover the entire
day’s range.
Trending trading range days often give a subtle clue that a breakout should be
expected. If you see a trading range day forming, but each swing high is a little
higher than the prior one and each swing low is higher than the prior one, the market may already be trending even though it is still in a trading range. Once enough
participants recognize this, the market breaks out and quickly moves to a higher
level, where it once again will become two-sided and form another trading range.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c22

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

19:7

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDING TRADING RANGE DAYS

363

When the initial breakout occurs, do not assume that a measured move is assured as the market tries to grow to an average daily range. In about a third of cases,
the market will break out of one side and extend the range a little, and then reverse
and break out of the opposite side and extend the range a little more, resulting in a
quiet trading range day.
Sometimes there is a trading range with a height that is about half of the recent
average daily range and the range stays small until the final hour. For example, if
the day’s range in the Emini has been just five points as the market enters the final
hour and the average recent range has been 12 points, and only two days in the past
12 months ended up with a range of five points or less, be prepared for a breakout
