
Download at www.wowebook.com

29

Chapter 3 History of Technical Analysis

concepts that are still popular today. Some of the other great technicians during this time were
Kenneth Ward, Edmund Tabell, E. S. C. Coppock, D. G. Worden, Garfield Drew, and George
Lindsay.

Edwards

Magee

Source: W.H.C. Bassetti, adjunct professor Finance and Economics, Golden Gate University, San Francisco; editor John
Magee Investment Series; editor and coauthor, Edwards and Magee’s Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, ninth edition

FIGURE 3.2 Edwards and Magee

In the 1960s, the concept of rate of change (ROC), or momentum, became one of the technician’s tools. By the late 1970s, computer technology was available to draw charts more accurately and with greater speed. In addition, ratios, oscillators, and other more arcane calculations
could be moved from the adding machine to the computer for quicker calculation and more thorough testing. The computer changed the face of technical analysis forever.
One of the most popular technical tools developed in the 1970s was the relative strength
index (RSI), created by J. Welles Wilder, Jr. (see Figure 3.3). One of the most inventive technicians, Wilder is also credited with the Directional Movement concept, the Parabolic System, and
Average True Range, all still used today. Another technician and commodity trader, Richard
Donchian, promoted the use of the 10-day and 20-day moving averages crossovers as buy and
sell signals, as well as the “4-week” rule, whereby a price break above or below the four-week
high or low indicated the initial stage of a new trend. Focusing on the options market, technician
Martin Zweig examined the use of the put-call ratio. A variety of moving average indicators was
developed, such as moving-average envelopes, moving-average crossover, and the MovingAverage Convergence/Divergence (MACD) oscillator, by technicians like Fred Hitschler and
Gerald Appel. We mention many other inventive technical analysts in later chapters when we
cover their specialties.
Just as the mathematical sophistication and computer technology was allowing for great
advances in the development of technical analysis, technical analysis came under fire by the academic community. Academics argued that technical analysis was impossible because prices were

Download at www.wowebook.com

30

Part I Introduction

randomly distributed and had no history embedded in them that could predict future prices. At
the same time, proponents of the Efficient Markets Hypothesis argued that markets were efficient
and that news, information, and so on was immediately and rationally discounted in the markets.
Because no means of price study could anticipate such news, technical analysis was a futile
study. Gradually, professional money managers, most of whom were raised and trained at business schools in this antitechnical school of thinking, closed their technical departments, and
technical analysis went into a decline.
However, while the academic community was discounting the use of technical analysis, the technical analyst’s access
to more powerful computers and better data was rapidly
increasing. The fast computers and accessibility to a large data
set of clean post-World War II data allowed analysts to attempt
to optimize their trading strategies, taking past price data and
performing numerous calculations to determine which of a
number of strategies would have yielded the best profits. These
optimized results could be used to develop future trading
strategies, assuming that the markets would behave similarly
Source: J. Welles Wilder, Jr.
in the future.
FIGURE 3.3 J. Welles Wilder, Jr.
Ironically, although the dawning of the computer age
brought new, increasingly sophisticated technical tools to the
study of technical analysis, the development of these tools coincided with the introduction of an
ancient technical tool to the U.S. financial markets. As we discussed earlier, Japanese candlestick
charts dated back to the mid-1700s; however, the western financial markets had not had access to
the Japanese writings and technical tools. Steve Nison introduced candlestick charts into U.S.
technical analysis in the late 1980s. Since then, numerous other chart types like Kagi, Kase,
Renko, and Ichimoku Kinko have been added to the list of visual analysis methods.

CURRENT ADVANCES IN TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Interest in technical analysis is resurging. The Efficient Markets Hypothesis has been found to
have a number of serious flaws, and stock price motion is being shown to be nonrandom. This
new knowledge has cast doubt on the objections raised earlier about technical analysis, and academics are gradually beginning to perform serious studies on technical theory and indicators.
Behavioral Finance, a relatively new realm of study concerned with the psychology of market
participants, has shown that investors do not necessarily act rationally, as is assumed in the Efficient Markets Hypothesis. They have found instances of predictable investor behavior and are
beginning to explain some of the reasons for price patterns known by technical analysts over a
hundred years.
During the equity market decline from 2000 to 2002 and from 2007 to 2009, many stocks
declined severely before the damaging information causing their decline became public. In the
earlier period, the names of Enron, WorldCom, Tyco, HealthSouth, Qwest, and others ring in the

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 3 History of Technical Analysis

31

ears of those who suffered large losses by owning these stocks and by being fooled and lied to by
their managements. Although this might not have been manipulation in the old style, it nevertheless again was the uninformed being duped by the informed. In the later period, the seriousness
of the mortgage-debt implosion was kept from the public to prevent panic, yet the stocks affected
by the crisis took terrible beatings. For example, Citigroup, a Dow Jones Industrial Average
stock, declined from $57 to less than $1, and AIG, an institutional favorite, declined from over
$1,400 to $8 during the same period.
Figure 3.4 shows a monthly stock chart for Tyco. Technical analysis, if properly applied,
would have protected an investor from large losses in this stock because it would have warned
that the price action of these stocks was not consistent with what management was saying to the
fundamental analysts. On January 9, 2002, a Prudential Securities analyst was the first large Wall
Street analyst to downgrade the stock from a buy to a hold (New York Times). Figure 3.4 shows
the price of Tyco falling while fundamental analysts were still recommending that investors buy
the stock and while insiders of the company, such as the CFO, were claiming, “The more you
know about our accounting, the more comfortable you will be” (Wall Street Journal, February
14, 2002).
In addition, falling commissions and maximum speed of communication have made technical analysis extremely useful to those who can spend the time studying it. Analysts developed
trading rules that trade portfolios without human intervention. Futures markets in stock averages,
currencies, and other markets have expanded and become more efficient, making competition
extremely keen. Stock market trades have become almost instantaneous, and with the advent of
computerized markets, intermediaries, with their delay and cost, have largely been eliminated.
Computers are now so sophisticated that almost every possible technical calculation has
been tried and tested. Market participants know, as they have long suspected, that no magic formula for riches exists. The reason is that people trading and investing in an imperfect, emotionally charged world determine prices. Because technical analysis deals only with price and some
other incidental trading information, it has evolved into a study of more intangible information,
concerned mostly with psychology and trading behavior. Modern computer technology has
demonstrated that prices are not necessarily random, but also that they are not perfectly predictable. The reason, of course, is that people buy and sell items based not only on what they
believe are reasonable expectations but also on emotion, specifically fear and greed, inherent and
learned bias, overconfidence, perception, and prejudice. Emotion has always been a large component in technical analysis studies.
Today, technical analysis covers many different time horizons: long-term investing, shortterm swing, and intraday trading. The indicators and methods utilized for these horizons often
have their own characteristics. In addition to time horizons, different investing or trading instruments exist. Commodities, for example, have their own technical information and peculiarities,
as do currencies and financial instruments such as bonds and notes. The subject of technical
analysis is complex. Because knowledge of all possibilities is impossible, the individual must
decide the period, methods, and instruments best suited to his or her personality, ability, knowledge, and time available. Although the basic principles of technical analysis that we investigate
in this book are common to all areas of markets, investors must learn by reading, studying, and
experiencing the peculiarities of the markets in which they want to profit.

Download at www.wowebook.com

32

Part I Introduction

60
55
50
45

Monthly TYCO

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 3.4 Example of fraudulent insiders (1996–2003)

When you enter the stock market [or any other market], you are going into a competitive field in which your evaluations and opinions will be matched against some of
the sharpest and toughest minds in the business. You are in a highly specialized
industry in which there are many different sectors, all of which are under the intense
study by men (and women) whose economic survival depends on their best judgment. You will certainly be exposed to advice, suggestions, and offers of help from
all sides. Unless you are able to develop some market philosophy of your own, you
will not be able to tell the good from the bad, the sound from the unsound.
—John Magee (Edwards and Magee, 2009)

Download at www.wowebook.com

C H A P T E R

4

THE TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
CONTROVERSY

CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should have a good understanding of

• The basic principles of the Random Walk Hypothesis (RWH)
• The historical distribution of stock market returns
• The basic principles of the Efficient Markets Hypothesis (EMH)
• The pragmatic criticisms of technical analysis
• How technical analysts respond to critics
Though technical analysis is widely used by practitioners, its popularity is not mirrored in the
academic community. The divergence in emphasis placed on technical analysis is highlighted by
a study conducted by Flanegin and Rudd (2005) in which they surveyed both college professors
and practitioners. The college professors were asked how much emphasis they placed on each of
20 topics in their investment courses. These professors ranked the subject areas on a 1 to 5 scale,
with “1” indicating that they spent very little time in class on the material and “5” indicating that
they spent considerable time on the topic. Given the same list of 20 topics, the practitioners were
asked which subject matter they utilized within the realm of their jobs on a fairly consistent
basis. These professionals also ranked the topics on a 1 to 5 scale, with “1” signifying the topic
was not used and “5” indicating that the subject was used all the time. Table 4.1 provides a summary of their results. The practitioners report seldom using many of the topics most thoroughly
covered by the professors. Likewise, the professors in the study report very little class time is
spent teaching the subject material practitioners claim to use most often.

33

Download at www.wowebook.com

34
TABLE 4.1

Part 1 Introduction

Importance of Financial Topics as Reported by Professors and Practitioners*

Topic

Instructors’ Mean

Practioners’ Mean

Portfolio Theory

3.89

2.44

Discounted Cash Flows
CAPM/Beta
Required Rate of Return

3.87
3.85
3.85

2.95
2.48
2.41

Dividend Discount Model
Efficient Markets Hypothesis

3.77
3.54

1.73
1.85

Ratio Analysis

2.70

2.56

Arbitrage Pricing
Acct. Aspect of Earnings

2.40
2.34

2.21
2.95

Crowd Psychology

1.99

3.56

Charting
EIC Analysis
Trend Lines
Support/Resistance Levels
Trading Ranges
Relative Strength Index
Stochastic
Volume Tracking
Moving Average/Convergence
Overbought/Oversold

1.80
1.70
1.70
1.68
1.66
1.65
1.63
1.54
1.49
1.46

2.56
4.39
4.41
4.37
3.54
3.51
3.78
3.56
3.93

3.56

*Adapted from Flanegin and Rudd (2005)

This divergence is not surprising given the fact that the majority of academics opposes the use of
technical analysis. In fact, a study by Robert Strong (1988) showed that over 60% of PhDs do not
believe that technical analysis can be used as an effective tool to enhance investment performance. Because of the view of these academics, little emphasis has been placed on technical analysis in traditional finance curriculums in recent years, as shown in the Flanegin and Rudd survey
results.
Because the academic community strongly resists the use of technical analysis, we address
in this chapter some of the academic community’s criticisms before moving on to the specific
techniques and tools of technical analysis. The principal theoretical arguments against technical
analysis are the Random Walk Hypothesis (RWH) and the Efficient Markets Hypothesis (EMH).
Each hypothesis makes broad assumptions that in their purest state would eliminate the possibility for technical analysis, or fundamental analysis for that matter. Let us look at each of these
hypotheses a little more closely.

Download at www.wowebook.com

35

Chapter 4 The Technical Analysis Controversy

DO MARKETS FOLLOW A RANDOM WALK?
Opponents of technical analysis claim that looking at past technical data, such as price and volume, to help predict the future is outlandish. In the popular book, A Random Walk Down Wall
Street, Burton Malkiel refers to technical analysis as “sharing a pedestal with alchemy.” Some of
these opponents believe that no underlying patterns exist in stock prices. These individuals
believe that prices move in a random fashion and have no “memory.” This assumption would
imply that technical analysis, which depends on prices predicting prices, has no foundation
because all price motion is random.
A random walk occurs when future steps cannot be predicted by observing past steps. For
example, flipping a coin produces a random walk. Suppose you flip a coin once and it lands on
heads; observing that the coin landed on heads does not help you predict what the outcome will
be the next time the coin is flipped. Each flip of the coin is an independent event, and the outcome of one flip of the coin has no impact on the outcome of any other flip. If the stock market
follows a random walk, future stock prices cannot be predicted by observing past stock price
movements.
The concept that stock price returns followed a random walk was first suggested by Louis
Bachelier (see Box 4.1), a French mathematician, in his PhD thesis, “The Theory of Speculation”
(1900, 1906, and 1913). He commented that “the mathematical expectation of the speculator is
zero.” In the 1937 Econometrica article, “Some A Posteriori Probabilities in Stock Market
Action,” Alfred Cowles and Herbert E. Jones (1937) also hypothesized that the stock market
prices exhibited randomness. It was Paul Cootner’s 1964 book, The Random Character of Stock
Market Prices, that popularized the random walk theory and its application in the stock market.
The following year, Eugene Fama’s seminal article (1965), “The Behavior of Stock Market
Prices,” was published in the Journal of Business, giving additional credence to the random walk
theory.

BOX 4.1 LOUIS BACHELIER
Louis Bachelier (1870–1946) was the first person to anticipate Brownian motion,
random walk of financial prices, option pricing, and martingales long before Einstein, Wiener, and Black and Scholes. Receiving high marks from his advisor, the
famous mathematician, Henri Poincare, Bachelier became a lecturer at the Sorbonne
and at several other universities. In 1926, he was turned down for a professorship at
Dijon because of a critical letter from another famous mathematician, Paul Levy,
who was unfamiliar with his earlier work. Later, in 1931, Levy learned of his work
and sent an apology. Bachelier ended up as a professor in Besançon. Einstein had
never heard of his work, and, finally, in the 1960s, when Professor Paul Samuelson
distributed Bachelier’s work among leading economists, his financial theories were
“rediscovered.”

Download at www.wowebook.com

36

Part I Introduction

Fat Tails

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

A normal distribution curve looks like the bell-shaped chart in Figure 4.1.

4

2

0

2

FIGURE 4.1 Normal bell-shaped curve

Figure 4.2 shows a chart of the actual distribution of stock returns for General Electric
between January 1, 2003, and November 19, 2004. Compare Figure 4.1 with Figure 4.2. Notice
how the chart of real historical returns (Figure 4.2) does not perfectly match the bell-shaped
curve shown in Figure 4.1. In particular, compare the outer edges, or tails, of the two charts. The
tails of the normal distribution, in Figure 4.1, get thinner and thinner, approaching zero. However, in the actual stock return data in Figure 4.2, we do not see this thinning of the tails; instead,
we see that the tails have bumps or remain flat. Thus “fat tails” are present in Figure 4.2 but not
in Figure 4.1.
Benoit Mandelbrot (1963) first noticed this phenomenon of fat tails, called a “leptokurtic
distribution,” in stock market returns in the early 1960s. Fat tails occur when one or more events
cause stock prices to deviate extraordinarily from the mean.
An example of one of these events is the large decline in stock prices that occurred on
October 19, 1987. On this day, known as “Black Monday,” the U.S. stock market crashed, sending the Dow Jones Industrial Average down 22.6%. What are the chances of a one-day drop of
this magnitude occurring randomly? In a 1996 article appearing in the Journal of Finance, Jens
Carsten Jackwerth and Mark Rubenstein state that if the life of the universe had been repeated
one billion times and the stock market were open every day, a crash of that magnitude would still
have been “unlikely.” In his 2003 book, Why Stock Markets Crash: Critical Events in Complex
Financial Systems, Didier Sornette claims that, statistically, a crash as large as was seen on Black
Monday would be expected to occur only once in 520 million years. Thus, the huge negative
return seen in October of 1987 is clearly an outlier.

Download at www.wowebook.com

37

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Chapter 4 The Technical Analysis Controversy

0.06

0.04

0.02

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06

FIGURE 4.2 Density estimation for GE compared with a normal distribution (adapted from Luke Olsen,
“Why Be Normal?” Society for Amateur Scientists, E-bulletin, November 21, 2003)

Drawdowns
Black Monday represented an abnormally large one-day negative return in the stock market.
Although this alone was a significant deviation from the mean stock return, even more significant is the fact that October 19 was preceded by three days of market losses. Market losses were
2%, 3%, and 6% on the three previous trading days. In other words, there were four consecutive
days of trading losses, resulting in a 30% decline in the market. Periods of successive losses like
this are referred to as drawdowns.
Sornette has studied these types of drawdowns in an attempt to understand why outliers
occur and how they can be integrated into the RWH. He argues that although independence can
accommodate one large deviation, the probability of two or more large deviations occurring
back-to-back is out in the stratosphere.
For example, the probability of a one-day decline of 10% in the stock market is approximately 1 in 1,000. In other words, a 10% drop would occur statistically once every four years.
Although a drop of this magnitude would be a large deviation from the average daily stock
return, it would fall within the normal distribution. If stock returns are independent, the probability of two consecutive daily drops of 10% would be the product of the probability of the two
independent events occurring, or 1/1000 multiplied by 1/1000. Likewise, the probability of three
consecutive 10% drops, or a 30% drawdown, is 1/1000 × 1/1000 × 1/1000, or 1 in 1,000,000,000.
This means, statistically, a 30% three-day drawdown could be expected to occur only once every
four million years!
Historically, of course, these back-to-back events have occurred, especially in declines.
Dismissing randomness under such events suggests that when sequential returns reach a critical

Download at www.wowebook.com

38

Part I Introduction

mass, they begin to foretell future returns and are, thus, no longer random or independent. Sornette calls these periods “bursts of dependence” or “pockets of predictability.” If these successive
declines occur more often than what is statistically predicted, some correlation must exist
between the daily stock returns, indicating that stock returns do not follow a random walk.
TABLE 4.2 Historical Drawdowns in the Dow Jones Industrial Average*

Rank

Beginning Date

Dow Jones
Industrial Average

Duration (Days)

Decline (Percent)

1

10/1987

2508

4

–30.7

2

7/1914

76.7

2

–28.8

3

10/1929

301

3

–23.6

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

7/1933
3/1932
11/1929
11/1929
8/1932
12/1931
9/1932
9/1974
6/1930
9/1931
8/1998

109
77.2
238
274
67.5
90.1
76.6
674
240
110
8603

4
8
4
2
1
7
3
11
4
5
4

–18.6
–18.5
–16.6
–16.6
–14.8
–14.3
–13.9
–13.3
–12.9
–12.4
–12.4

*Adapted from Didier Sornette, 2003

As shown in Table 4.2, Sornette’s research indicates that large drawdowns in the DJIA
have occurred more often than can be statistically expected. When considering the three largest
twentieth-century stock market declines (1914, 1929, and 1987), Sornette calculates that statistically about 50 centuries should separate crashes of these magnitudes. He concludes that three
declines of this magnitude occurring within three-quarters of a century of each other are an indication that the series of returns was not completely random.
What Sornette found was that under normal circumstances, returns follow a generally normal distribution. These normal conditions represent about 99% of market drawdowns. However,
there appears to be a completely different dynamic occurring in the remaining 1% of drawdowns;
these drawdowns occur in the fat tails of the distribution when extraordinary market declines
occur (see Figure 4.3). Interestingly, Sornette also found this drawdown, outlier behavior common to currency, gold, foreign stock markets, and the stocks of major corporations, even though
individual-day declines were contained within the normal distribution.
