University of Berkshire Hathaway 

 University of Berkshire Hathaway 30 
 Y EARS OF L ESSONS L EARNED FROM 
 W ARREN B UFFETT 
 & 
 C HARLIE M UNGER AT THE A NNUAL S HAREHOLDERS M EETING Daniel Pecaut with Corey Wrenn

University of Berkshire Hathaway 

 Dedication This book is dedicated to my hero, Russell B. Pecaut (1902–2000, Dow Jones Industrial Average: 67–11,551). Papa, as we grandkids called him, was a good-natured, honest, and unfailingly upbeat gentleman. He encouraged me greatly in my career. He taught me that optimism is a choice and that your word is your bond. This world could use a few more like Russell Pecaut. Papa, this one’s for you. —Daniel Pecaut

University of Berkshire Hathaway 

 The Electronic Record Asked why he is on TV so much, Buffett responded that he likes having the electronic record, so there is no chance of him being misquoted or misunderstood. If he’s on Charlie Rose, he knows the record will be permanent and will be exactly what he said. — E XCERPT FROM OUR NOTES AT THE 2010 S HAREHOLDERS M EETING What follows in this book is not an electronic record. This is the result of feverish note-taking during 30 years of Berkshire Hathaway’s annual shareholders meetings. While we, the authors, believe these notes capture the essential meaning and intention conveyed, we apologize in advance for any misrepresentations.

University of Berkshire Hathaway 

 Introduction My dad was also my hero, just like the case with you. Dick clearly was a terrific guy and a sound thinker. You were lucky to have him as a father, teacher, and inspiration. — W ARREN E . B UFFETT (written on the back of a Pecaut & Company newsletter) After my dad, Dick Pecaut, passed away in 2009, I wrote a loving tribute to him in my investment firm’s monthly newsletter. Days later, I received one of the newsletters back. Handwritten, on the back of that newsletter, was a note from the Oracle of Omaha, Warren Buffett. The man whose mindset, strategies, and investing insights my business partner, Corey, and I have studied for three decades. The man whose wisdom we are honored to share with you in the coming pages. Buffett’s short note served as a heartwarming footnote to my father’s life work as an investment advisor. It also served as validation of both the newsletters that make up this book and our work as investment advisors. We have been longtime Berkshire Hathaway commentators. Our analyses of its chairman, Warren Buffett, and vice chairman, Charlie Munger, have been featured in the New York Times , Money Magazine , Schiff’s Insurance Observer , and a host of other leading investment publications. One of our newsletters was referenced in James O’Loughlin’s book, The Real Warren Buffett: Managing Capital, Leading People . 1 
 For years, we sent our newsletter, unsolicited, to Berkshire Hathaway’s headquarters. But until this thoughtful reply, we never knew if anyone actually opened the envelopes. 2 Corey and I were electrified. Buffett read our newsletter! It was an acknowledgment that our writings and insights on value investing are of interest to the master himself. On a personal level, mourning my father, it was one of the warmest and most affirming notes I have ever received. For that, I am eternally grateful. But it wasn’t always like this. We didn’t always receive personal notes from the world’s greatest investor. How Did We Get Here? I graduated from Harvard in 1979 with a philosophy degree. While there, I took only one economics course. I found it too theoretical, not anything like the investing I saw happening in my family’s business. My grandfather, father, and uncle had founded Pecaut & Company, a stockbrokerage firm, in 1960. My grandfather, Russell, often marveled that they made money from day one and never looked back. My involvement in the family business began in the late 1970s, when I was working summers in the back office. I did the grunt work, including updating the S&P 500 tear sheets. Back then, the S&P sent its clients color-coded binders that were alphabetized like a set of encyclopedias. Every month, a packet would arrive in the mail with colored sheets that matched the binders. Green sheets were large-company stocks. Yellow sheets were small-company stocks. Blue sheets were for bonds. Someone needed to manually update the binders by replacing old sheets with the new. That was my job. I learned a lot by reading those sheets. After graduating, I entered the firm as a full-time employee. I felt inadequate and clueless. Our small, family-run operation had no formal training program or structure. My dad rarely sat me down to discuss how things were going. I tortured myself with my own self-judgment about how poorly I thought I was doing. I learned by trial and error. One error was option trading. It was quick and exciting. You could theoretically triple your money in a short time. Do that a few times, and you’d have a good year. I spent a year trying to develop a successful option trading strategy. And at the end of the year? I had made about a hundred bucks. Calculating that into the amount of time spent, I had made about 10 cents an hour. Clearly, that wasn’t worth it. Trading in the short-term may work for some people, but it wasn’t for me. I needed a better approach. Then, in 1982, I read the book The Money Masters by John Train, in which he profiles nine brilliant investors, including John Templeton and Warren Buffett. A light bulb came on when I finished the book. I said, “I’m going back to school. These investors are my professors. My curriculum is everything they say and write.” I was excited. I would study the most brilliant investors in the world like they were my professors at Harvard. I was on fire to learn everything I could about them and to figure out how to invest like them. From that point forward, I saw my role in the firm primarily as a learning organism. My thought was that the more I learned, the better my decision-making would be, and the better I would serve our clients. Over time, my favorite professors would include Sir John Templeton (of the Templeton Growth Fund), 3 George Michaelis of Source Capital (a top-performing closed-end fund), Jean-Marie Eveillard (who ran what is now the First Eagle Global Fund), Bob Rodriguez (of First Pacific Advisors), and Marty Whitman (of Third Avenue Value Investors). These experts would all offer tremendous insight and direction. But of all the brilliant “professors,” none of them has been more instructive than Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger of Berkshire Hathaway. After realizing that Buffett was one of the guys to learn from, I devoured all his annual letters to shareholders from Berkshire. When I met a friend who had Buffett’s letters from his partnership prior to taking over Berkshire, I devoured those, too. I loved reading them. From where I lived, it was only a 90-minute drive to Omaha and Berkshire’s annual meetings. But to attend, you had to be a shareholder. Undaunted, I bought a single share of Berkshire Hathaway for $2,570 that year. That share paved the way for over 30 years of first-class tuition from two of the greatest professors you could ever hope to learn from. The “University of Berkshire Hathaway” I distinctly remember that first meeting in 1984. It was an electric yet cozy affair at Omaha’s Joslyn Art Museum. A local CPA I knew, Corey Wrenn, was taking tickets at the door. 4 He was a relatively new employee, hired by Berkshire’s audit department in 1983. After graduating college and working two years in public accounting in Sioux City, Iowa, Corey decided that wasn’t what he wanted to do his whole life. While looking for another job, he received a call from a headhunter in Omaha who told him that Berkshire Hathaway was looking for an internal auditor. Corey asked, “Berkshire what?” The headhunter said, “It’s run by Warren Buffett.” And Corey responded, “Warren who?” He had no idea who or what they were. Nonetheless, he took the job and began working alongside the six or seven other employees in the audit department, auditing Berkshire’s subsidiary companies and preparing schedules used for quarterly financial statements and for Buffett’s use. I had felt a pang of jealousy when I found out he had been hired there. I envied how he would be learning firsthand from Buffett. 5 But I wasn’t focused on Corey at the time. My eyes were on the stage. Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger sat on the auditorium’s stage in front of an audience of 300 shareholders (which at the time I felt was large). I realized that if I were going to learn, I would have to get up and ask what I was wondering about. I wrote pages and pages of detailed questions with the goal of getting to the microphone. I nervously asked my one question. Their clarity of mind and high intellect was clear from their answer. I thought, Wow. That was a fantastic answer. They took my dumb question and turned it into a masterpiece. I kept thinking, What took me so long to get here? Why haven’t I been here before? 
 At that meeting, I learned that Berkshire owned 80% of Wesco Financial, where Charlie Munger served as the chairman. So I flew out to Pasadena to attend the Wesco meeting. It was a much smaller affair. The first Wesco meeting I attended had only 15 people, and half worked for the company. Once again, I had prepared questions. After asking three questions, it was clear I would be asking a lot more. I felt nervous. Munger has an imposing presence behind his thick Coke-bottle lenses. He seemed like an old professor who doesn’t tolerate fools. I got up and stammered, “I’m sorry, I’ve got a lot of questions. It looks like I’m asking all the questions. I didn’t mean to take over the meeting.” He was gracious, saying, “That’s what we’re here for. I’ll answer your questions as long as you’ve got them. If people want to leave, they can leave. But I’ll be here.” 6 I thought, Wow. All right, then. Here we go. I don’t know how long it went, but I was in heaven. There’s no doubt that having that level of expertise delivered directly to me accelerated my learning. The “University of Berkshire Hathaway” is what I nicknamed the accumulated wisdom dispensed by Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger. Each year’s curriculum consists of Berkshire Hathaway’s annual reports and the lectures at its annual meetings. That course of study, now accessible in these pages, has taught Corey and me far more about investing than any other source. Pouring over Berkshire’s reports, reading Buffett’s annual letter, and listening to Buffett and Munger at the annual meeting have all been central to our growth as value investors. It is the core curriculum of our business education—one that easily rivals most MBA programs. 7 It is the cornerstone of our continuing education. It is, without a shadow of doubt, the best investment either of us has ever made. Once a year, you have arguably the greatest investment team of all time on hand to answer your questions. It is a fantastic annual tutorial on the world of business. Buffett admitted in the beginning that he was terrified of public speaking. (He used to get physically ill at just the thought of it.) Thankfully, over the years, Buffett and Munger have grown ever-more comfortable as educators. Today, they are excellent teachers. Their wisdom and willingness to share make each annual meeting an invaluable installment in a sublime lecture series. The Unstoppable Rise of Berkshire Hathaway Few on Wall Street would dispute the claim that Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger are the greatest investors of our time. Their genius in identifying and evaluating intangibles sets them apart. As a value investor, your ideal situation is to find a company increasing its intrinsic value. Ideally, the company would be one with a declining stock price, thus creating an even better bargain as time unfolds. No one has employed these principles more effectively than Buffett and Munger. Over the last 50 years, they have consistently sought to own either all or part of good businesses, bought at bargain prices. In addition, to succeed using this approach, one must control one’s emotions. Buffett and Munger’s are set apart by their mastery at business valuation and relentless rationality in implementing this approach. The results of this have been awe-inspiring. Under Buffett and Munger’s leadership, Berkshire Hathaway has become one of the greatest business stories of the 20th and 21st centuries. A Short History Buffett was educated at the University of Nebraska. Afterward, he enrolled at Columbia Business School. He went there to learn from the father of value investing, Benjamin Graham. Buffett became Graham’s star student. Afterward, Graham took him on at his investment partnership, Graham Newman. Buffett used what he learned from that experience to start his own partnership back in Omaha. He did phenomenally well from the very beginning. A $10,000 investment in his partnership in 1956 grew to $200,000 by 1969. That’s a 25.9% compounded annualized return. Incredibly, the partnership never had a down year, even though the market had six down years during that period. In 1959, Buffett met Charlie Munger, who was also from Omaha, at a dinner party. Each man instantly recognized the intelligence of the other. Munger had worked in law, but Buffett convinced him that he should be in the investment business if he wanted to make real money. 8 Munger started his own investment partnership, Wheeler, Munger & Co., in 1962. From then on, he and Buffett worked on a number of investment ideas together, both formally and informally. Berkshire Hathaway was originally a New England textile company. It was a deeply discounted stock, with a book value of $19. Its net working capital was over $11 a share. Buffett bought shares at around $7–$8 per share. Buffett was buying shares at a discount to net cash and near-cash items. The decline of the textile industry was underway. Berkshire Hathaway was consolidating and selling assets. Then, with the cash, it was buying in its stock—which was intelligent because the stock was so cheap. In 1963, Berkshire did a massive buy-in of almost a third of its shares. The owners of Berkshire Hathaway saw Buffett’s position and didn’t want him in their little fiefdom. They called Buffett, offering to pay him $11.50 a share. He agreed. He’d make about a 40% profit in a short period. When the letter came for the offer, however, it was less than the agreed-on amount—but only by pennies. Nevertheless, their dishonesty upset Buffett. They were trying to chisel him out of 12.5 cents per share. So Buffett went the other way and started buying increasingly more shares of Berkshire until he took control. He then booted out the guy who had tried to chisel him out. In 1964, Warren Buffett took control of that small New England textile firm, and it became his new base for making investments. At the time, the move made no sense. Buffett had bought a business in decline that he didn’t know how to run. He later joked that he should have taken the money. That would have been the smarter thing to do. As it turned out, this textile company was an ideal vehicle for making investments. With Berkshire Hathaway’s stock, Buffett had a publicly traded corporation with captive capital. The benefits of this corporate structure for managing money are significant. In his previous partnership, if shareholders redeemed their shares, the money would come right out of the till. Now, when shareholders sell their shares in Berkshire Hathaway, that doesn’t affect its available capital. Capital doesn’t leave the corporate shell unless Buffett pays a dividend. He could use this captive permanent capital to invest long-term by buying businesses, in part or in whole. Berkshire’s structure also allows for making opportunistic investments in special situations. Over time, Buffett phased out the textile portion of the business. He sold off assets to create more cash. With the cash, he began to build his wealth-compounding machine. In 1967, Buffett bought an insurance company, National Indemnity. Insurance has been a core operation at Berkshire Hathaway ever since. He loves the insurance business. With its float characteristics, it creates a powerful platform for compounding wealth. Insurance companies collect premiums, of which a significant portion goes into reserves to pay future claims. This reserve (the “float”) earns money for Berkshire, leveraging the company’s return on capital. If you can operate in a way where that float is generated at a low cost and you can grow it over time, you have built a wealth-compounding machine. As Munger once put it, “Basically, we’re a hedgehog that knows one big thing. If you generate float at 3% per annum and buy businesses that earn 13% per annum with the proceeds of that float, we have figured out that’s a pretty good position to be in.” Few investors understand that float is one of the secrets to Berkshire’s success. For every $1 of equity at Berkshire, over time there has been roughly another 50 cents or so in float. By investing $1.50 for every $1 of capital over the years, Berkshire has leveraged its returns. A significant portion of Berkshire’s long-term outperformance can be attributed to Buffett and Munger’s ability to execute on this brilliant insight. That’s not something you or I can go out and do. In 1972, Berkshire bought See’s Candy. While Buffett paid more than he normally might have, he discovered how powerful a cash generator a great brand could be. It taught him about the power of brands and the virtues of companies that don’t require a lot of capital to grow. Selling chocolate doesn’t require a lot of innovation. It won’t become obsolete. If you have a good brand, customers will keep coming back every Valentine’s Day for more. Those two pieces—the insurance company as a platform and high-quality brands as cash generators—built the base for the wealth-compounding machine that is Berkshire Hathaway. Another significant company Buffett bought was GEICO, a company he had a long history with. His mentor, Ben Graham, owned shares of GEICO at Graham Newman. At the University of Nebraska, Buffett wrote his thesis about GEICO. Looking at it now, he understood that with a terrific basic business model, it just had to be run the right way to be successful. In the mid-1970s, GEICO got into some trouble, and its stock price collapsed. A new CEO, Jack Byrne, was brought in, and Buffett was confident that Byrne was the man to fix it. Buffett bought a ton of GEICO stock. 9 Munger liquidated his partnership in 1976. The Wheeler–Munger partnership had earned 24.3% compounded from 1962 to 1975, versus 6.4% compounded for the Dow Jones Industrial Average. In 1978, Munger became Berkshire Hathaway’s vice chairman. In addition to being Berkshire’s vice chairman, Munger served as CEO and chairman from 1984 to 2011 for Wesco Financial, the holding company for Mutual Savings, a savings and loan in Pasadena. Wesco was 80.1% owned by Blue Chip Stamps, which, in turn, was wholly owned by Berkshire Hathaway. 10 Over the years, Wesco was seen as a sort of “mini-Berkshire” as Munger reallocated the company’s assets into reinsurance, CORT business equipment, Kansas Bankers Surety, and shares of some of Charlie’s favorite stocks. Over the years, Berkshire Hathaway has accumulated ownership of many other wonderful businesses: utilities (Berkshire Hathaway Energy), consumer products (shares of Coca-Cola), and even media properties (the Buffalo News and shares of the Washington Post ). The public has long viewed Berkshire as a sort of mutual fund with large stock holdings. This view underestimates or ignores 1) Berkshire’s insurance companies’ impressive generation of low-cost float, 2) Berkshire’s impressive and growing stable of cash-generating operating businesses, and 3) Berkshire’s ability to orchestrate value-enhancing deals. With billions in cash and fixed income securities, Berkshire is now a financial Fort Knox. During the first decade of the 21st century (a.k.a. “the lost decade”), Buffett was criticized for holding enormous amounts of cash and bonds. During the subprime mortgage crisis, Buffett and Munger went on an investing spree. Berkshire was in the position of seeing every decent deal in America as the nation’s “buyer of last resort.” While retail investors were selling, Buffett and Munger bought and bought—and bought some more. Their investments included the acquisitions of a railroad, Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) and a chemical company, Lubrizol. They did high-yield lending with warrants attached. They made capital investments at BNSF and MidAmerican Energy. All told, Berkshire may have put $100 billion to work at double-digit rates of return during the subprime crisis. Over the last 30 years, Berkshire has created a collection of fantastic, independently great businesses that generate a lot of cash to grow the enterprise. If Berkshire were strictly in the investment portfolio business, you would need investing geniuses like Buffett and Munger to oversee it and determine when to buy and sell. But by owning great businesses, it is less essential to have Buffett and Munger there. GEICO will keep selling auto insurance. Burlington Northern will keep shipping stuff by rail. These companies will all keep going without them. In doing this, they have intentionally created Berkshire to extend their success past their own lifespans. Today, Berkshire Hathaway is one of the world’s most powerful conglomerates. In 2014, Fortune ranked Berkshire as one of the world’s largest companies—boasting revenues of $140 billion, profits of $19.5 billion, and assets of $485 billion. With $230 billion of equity and $77 billion of float, Berkshire has substantial capital to fund its operations. In terms of market value, Berkshire now trails only Apple, Google/Alphabet, Exxon Mobil, and Microsoft for the title of America’s most valuable company. Berkshire continues to represent solid value, lower-than-average risk, and unparalleled quality. It is a superb company with better relative value than almost anything else in the U.S. stock market. Berkshire vs. S&P 500 (or 751,113% vs. 11,196%) Since Buffett took over Berkshire 50 years ago, its per-share book value has grown from $19 to $146,186. That’s a rate of 19.4% compounded annually. Let’s compare that to the S&P 500. Since the S&P is a cross-section of American businesses (as opposed to having all your eggs in one basket), it’s largely considered a safe choice. To justify the risk of owning Berkshire, it needs to outperform the general market. Mission accomplished: 19.4% is nearly double the S&P 500’s 9.9% gain for the same 50-year period. Berkshire consistently outperforms the S&P 500 during negative years. In fact, it has outperformed the S&P over every five-year period since 1965 (except two: 2009–2014 and 2010–2015). Moreover, the S&P had 11 down years in the 50-year period. The cumulative loss for those 11 years amounted to 251.4%. Comparatively, Berkshire Hathaway had only two losing years during the same period and had a cumulative gain of 117.8%. That’s an incredible 369.2% advantage over the S&P. More than two-thirds of Berkshire’s outperformance over the S&P was earned during down years. This is the fruit of Buffett and Munger’s “Don’t lose” philosophy. It’s the losing ideas avoided, as much as the money made in bull markets that has built Berkshire’s superior wealth over the long run. Utilizing compounding, a small advantage in the annual rate of gain creates a huge advantage in total dollars over time. In terms of the overall percentage gain from 1965–2014, a dollar invested in Berkshire in 1965 experienced an amazing gain of 751,113%, versus a gain of 11,196% for the S&P 500. Though Corey and I have been aware of the results for a number of years, we still marvel at Buffett’s and Munger’s incredible achievement. They have presided over one of the greatest records of wealth-building in history. For five decades, money under Buffett’s control has grown at a phenomenal rate. “Woodstock for Capitalists” As Buffett’s and Munger’s fame and wealth have grown, so has the frenzy around Berkshire’s once humble annual meetings. As noted, my first meeting in 1984 was a cozy, 300-attendee affair. Since then, the meeting has changed many times. First it was an event, then a spectacle, and now it is a full-fledged, three-day party. But in 1984, 300 attendees was considered large, since only 13 people attended just six years before. Fast-forward to 2015, when 45,000 people were in attendance. 11 In a short period, Berkshire’s annual meetings morphed from a small private lecture series into a chamber of commerce’s dream event. It may be a sign of the times that so many people now flock to Omaha to hear Buffett and Munger speak. It’s often called “Woodstock for capitalists.” This testifies to the world’s rising interest in the realm of investment. Buffett and Munger are happy to accommodate the hordes of fans, friends, students, and shoppers who flock to Omaha each year. In fact, they have managed to stretch out the whole affair for an action-packed, three-day weekend. It’s a weekend vacation package where shareholder discounts abound. Stores such as Borsheim’s (jewelry) and Nebraska Furniture Mart have exclusive openings and parties for shareholders. Around town, Omaha routinely features events, such as an Omaha Storm Chasers baseball game, where Buffett has signed autographs and thrown out the first pitch. Over the weekend, shareholders are encouraged to patronize everything in which Berkshire has an economic interest—which brings us to “The Berkshire Mall,” a target-marketing retail bonanza for Berkshire subsidiaries. The ground floor of the CenturyLink Center turns into a mini-mall for Berkshire’s shareholders. Dozens of subsidiaries form a midway of booths hawking their wares. 12 And then there’s the meeting itself, which kicks off with an original short film. Over the years, these films feature skits that have featured every kind of celebrity, including soap opera legend Susan Lucci, boxer Floyd Mayweather, and actor Bryan Cranston (appearing in his role as Walter White from Breaking Bad ). The Meeting Itself With all the furor around the Q&A, you might be forgiven for thinking it was of lesser importance. But you couldn’t be farther from the truth. These two men are always the main attraction. People care deeply about what they have to say and will wait for hours just to ask a single question. In 1984, the Q&A session went on for 2.5 hours. Now, it’s considered short if it wraps up in under six hours. Such is the value attendees place on the combined wisdom of these two modern-day sages. Admittedly, adjusting to the larger numbers of attendees has been, well, an adjustment. With so many people vying to get a question in, the quality of the questions appeared—to Corey and me—to drop off. But perhaps we are being unfair. Having been longtime attendees, 13 we miss the quieter, more intimate meetings of the past. Fortunately, in 2013, the quality of questions significantly improved by adding a panel of three journalists and three analysts, who now ask a majority of the questions. Regardless of size, though, the meetings are always informative and full of Buffett and Munger’s wit and insight. A Conversation Across Time Corey and/or I have taken copious notes during every single Berkshire meeting since that first one in 1984. In 1986, I decided I shouldn’t keep them to myself and started sending them out as a newsletter to clients and friends. While working for Berkshire, Corey was still on my newsletter’s mailing list. He remembers reading and enjoying my newsletters while there. He found them to be informative and down-to-earth and thought they captured the essence of the meetings. We talked on the phone from time to time, and I would ask him questions. He said I understood Berkshire’s business, from the outside looking in, as well as anyone. While at Berkshire, Corey had often thought about chronicling what he learned there in a diary, but part of him thought that would be disloyal to the corporation, so he opted against it. While he didn’t formally sit down to take notes, Corey still picked up gems of wisdom as he talked to his coworkers and the executives of the subsidiaries and watched how these exceptional people thought. As a necessity of his job, Corey was always focused on learning. The subsidiaries he worked with varied greatly in their business models. Nebraska Furniture Mart’s business, after all, is a lot different from National Indemnity, See’s Candies, and Buffalo News. While working there, Corey also went to graduate school for his MBA and studied organizational theory as part of that. So during his workdays, he observed how effectively Berkshire’s decentralized organization functioned through the lens of what he was studying. Corey became my business partner in 1992. While not disclosing any of the proprietary information he had been privy to, Corey and I discussed Berkshire all the time. He brought a deep understanding of the culture, the values, and of the players involved. At that time, he personally knew a lot of the people involved and intimately understood the businesses that Berkshire owned. He had spent a lot of time traveling to meet with the subsidiaries. 14 Ajit Jain, who is often talked about as being Buffett’s replacement now, invited Corey for dinner after he spent the day working at his office in New York. Corey even had brief interactions with Buffett, talking to him briefly two or three times. 15 Corey had seen firsthand Berkshire’s high ethical standards. Corey saw how Buffett, from the top, set the tone that Berkshire employees would monitor and respect all laws and rules. When Corey started in internal audit, computers could be purchased online without paying sales tax. But, at Berkshire, if anything like that was purchased, it had to be reported to corporate, so they could file the use tax returns. Buffett wanted to make sure that Nebraska got their sales tax. He was adamant about making sure that Berkshire paid—not more taxes than it had to, but the taxes that it was responsible for. Taking everything he understood from that experience, Corey has contributed to the notes every year since he came to work at Pecaut & Company in 1992. In the years he attended alone, I based the newsletter on his notes and insights. While I wrote each newsletter, 
 Corey rigorously edited each one. 16 
 Writing feverishly at each meeting, Corey and I jot down what we feel are the most significant of Buffett and Munger’s comments and insights. Our rigorous note-taking enables us to highlight, reflect on, and pass along the golden nuggets of what we learned. Once home, we do a condensed but detailed write-up of each meeting’s notes for our clients. Those write-ups are what make up this book. In addition to their words, we often address what was unsaid, inferred, or implied. Our own expertise as value investors adds a depth of insight that goes beyond a dry, static, verbatim reporting of events. Much of the mainstream news reporting on Buffett is done without deep insight into the working world of investing. 17 In these pages, you will benefit from our own critical assessment of the meetings. We have taken hundreds of hours of lectures and distilled them to their most concentrated form. You’ve been saved the painstaking task of digging through the archives to bring the gold to the surface. You’ll quickly be swept up by the highlight reel of what has been a fascinating, informative, and often hilarious ride through 30 years of the Warren and Charlie show. This isn’t a book about dusty old “investment theory.” This is a curated collection of the best advice and insights Buffett and Munger have shared over the last three decades. Shocking revelations. Funny moments. Devilishly insightful strategies. These newsletters form a conversation with Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger spanning three decades. We have no doubt that any serious investor will be fascinated and informed, in equal measure, by these letters. (And we challenge you not to laugh out loud at Munger and Buffett’s sibling-like haranguing.) We believe these notes (excluding the annual reports) are the best substitute for attending Berkshire’s annual meetings in person over the last 30 years. Of course, if you were at the meetings, then this book is the perfect refresher. The pages to follow will add color and definition to your own memories of events. The layout of the book is simple. It’s designed to put you in the room with Buffett and Munger, every year for the past 30 years (1986–2015). 18 You will see how Buffett and Munger responded to their own mistakes and faced challenges as the world changed around them. The book unfolds as a journey. If you decide to jump on board, you will see the remarkable rise of Berkshire Hathaway as it happens. You’ll come to understand the genius behind it. You have in your hands fly-on-the-wall analyses of 30 years of annual meetings. Admittedly, for most companies, that would be like watching paint dry. But Berkshire Hathaway is a different kind of beast. 19 The company’s unique success, and the strategies that made it possible, are legendary. How To Use These Letters This book isn’t for the first-time investor. It’s for the informed investor who sees the value of being able to get deep into the mindsets of Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger. If you want to walk around in their shoes for the past three decades, absorb what works, and then apply it to your own investments, then this book is for you. Also, one significant personal benefit of value investing is peace of mind. Many investors tough it out in the markets for years, living a life filled with anxiety and stress. They constantly fear that their investments will disappear overnight. On the other hand, great value investors, like Buffett and Munger, sleep like a baby—provided they follow simple timeless principles. We hope that by the time you’ve finished this book, these principles will be engrained in your consciousness. We hope that your investment decisions will take on a quality and depth that give you a serious competitive edge. This is not a “how-to” book. This book wrestles with the question, “Why do two of the world’s greatest investors do what they do?” The answer is contained in these pages. If you understand it, you will become a better investor. If you can think and behave like they do, particularly under pressure, you will become a great and wealthy investor. This book will provide you with a deeper insight into how two of the world’s greatest investors deal with investment problems as they arise. You’ll witness, in real time, their reactions to events like the sovereign debt crisis, the subprime crisis, and nuclear terrorism. Through it all, you get an honest and frank account of mistakes made and obstacles overcome. You’ll see firsthand Buffett’s rock-solid reasoning for investing in Coke and See’s Candy. You’ll also take a long look into the morbidly funny yet jaw-droppingly astute mind of Munger on a range of issues. From the futility of growing corn for fuel to the annual whipping of the modern portfolio theory, Munger never misses a beat. Had this been just a collection of anecdotes drawn from the last 5–10 years, it would have been too short of a time period to be meaningful. Instead, this is a three-decade, year-by-year analysis of history unfolding. You will be able to view Buffett and Munger’s decision-making process from a unique vantage point. You have a collection of insights about what went on beneath the surface of those decisions over time. You see how the same timeless principles are applied to vastly changing landscapes and circumstances (i.e., the internet, the demise of newspapers, booms and busts, and so on). While reading, you may wonder, If Berkshire got out of the market, shouldn’t I do the same? or If Berkshire bought it, should I buy it too? Buffett and Munger are clear in their advice—people should learn from them and model their advice rather than copy their behavior. The main reason is this: Unless you find yourself in the enviable position that Berkshire operates in, you would do well not to copy its moves. Berkshire Hathaway now represents half a trillion dollars of assets. It makes direct purchases and deals of its own design. Berkshire sometimes buys whole companies. Buffett and Munger play the game at a scale that most investors cannot match. So instead of copying, understand why they made the decisions they did. Then apply those insights to your own decisions and your own position. In more than one annual meeting, Buffett suggests that the best investment you can make is in yourself. After a lifetime of following his teachings and seeing the success in our own business, we wholeheartedly agree with him. These letters are a valuable resource of learning and analysis that you can model for your own investing decisions. But before you dive in, understand that you are about to reap the rewards of the best investment we ever made, as a student at the University of Berkshire Hathaway. So we invite you to turn the page and step into the fascinating world of the world’s greatest investment 
