to have a gamma of .10 because the delta changed by .10 as the underlying
price rose. If the underlying price declined from 100.00 to 99.00, the delta of
the call would fall from 0.50 to 0.40. This would have an impact on the delta
of a covered-write position because as the underlying price changed, the delta of the short call would change, affecting the delta of the overall position.

Example
An investor has a covered-write position consisting of 100 shares of
long stock and short one .50 delta call. The call has a gamma of .10. What is
the delta of the overall position if:
The stock rises 1.00 . . .
100  (100  (0.50  0.10))  40 shares
The stock falls 1.00 . . .
100  (100  (0.50  0.10))  60 shares
Note that the gamma simply increases or decreases the delta of the
option as the underlying price changes; it does not change whether the
delta is positive or negative.
The gamma of an option is not linear and is also sensitive to market
conditions. It is highly dependent on the location of the strike price relative to the underlying price (sometimes called moneyness) and the time left
until expiration. Figure 1.5 shows the relationship between the gamma of
an option, moneyness, and time until expiration.

9

Chapter 1

The Covered-Write

0.08
5 days
15 days

0.06

30 days
60 days
90 days

Gamma

10

0.04

0.02

0.00

–0.02
70

80

90

100

110

120

130

Strike

Figure 1.5 Gamma vs. Strike

Gamma is highest when an option is at-the-money, and the rate of
change of gamma itself increases as expiration approaches. For the
covered-write, this means that the delta of the position will change the
most as the underlying crosses the strike of the short call, and that this
effect will be greater as time to expiration decreases.

Vega
Vega describes the sensitivity of an option’s theoretical value to a 1 percent change in implied volatility. It is usually expressed as the change in
value that would be gained or lost from a 1 percent rise or fall in implied
volatility. Long option positions have a positive vega, and short option
positions have a negative vega. Because a covered-write has a short call as
its option component, it will always have a negative vega.
Rising implied volatility causes the extrinsic value of options to rise,
and falling implied volatility causes the extrinsic value of options to fall.
Furthermore, longer-dated options are more sensitive to changes in implied
volatility, since a rise or fall of implied volatility over a longer period is
extrapolated to a much larger (in the case of rising volatility) or much
smaller (in the case of falling volatility) universe of possible price outcomes
at expiration. This is illustrated in Figure 1.6.
Because a covered-write has a negative vega, rising implied volatility
will cause the value of the structure to fall as the short call component of
the strategy rises in price. Conversely, falling implied volatility will cause
the value of the covered-write to rise, as the short call component of the
strategy falls in price. In addition, the value of a covered-write with a
longer-dated short call component will be more sensitive to fluctuations
in implied volatility than a covered-write with a shorter-dated short call
component.

The Greeks

30
90 strike
100 strike

25

110 strike

Vega

20
15
10
5
0
5

15

30

60

90

120

150

Days to Expiry

Figure 1.6 Vega vs. Time to Expiration

Example
An investor has a covered-write position consisting of 100 shares of
long stock at $100.00 and short one 100 strike call at $5.00. The call has a
vega of 0.10. With the stock unchanged, what is the change in value of the
overall position if:
Implied volatility rises 5 percent . . .
The price of the call will change from $5.00 to $5.50 ($5.00  5  0.10), so
the value of the position will change accordingly:
Initial Position Value

New Position Value

Stock price

$100.00

Stock price

$100.00

 Call price

$5.00

 Call price

$5.50

Position value

$95.00

Position value $94.50

Implied volatility falls 5 percent . . .
The price of the call will change from $5.00 to $4.50 ($5.00  5  0.10), so
the value of the position will change accordingly:

Initial Position Value

New Position Value

Stock price

$100.00

Stock price

$100.00

 Call price

$5.00

 Call price

$4.50

Position value

$95.00

Position value $95.50

11

Chapter 1

The Covered-Write

As these examples show, rising implied volatility works against a coveredwrite, while falling implied volatility works in favor of a covered-write.

Theta
Theta is used to describe the sensitivity of an option’s theoretical value
to the passage of time. It is usually expressed as the number of points that
are lost from one day’s time decay. Long option positions have a negative
theta, and short option positions have a positive theta. Because a coveredwrite has a short call as its option component, it will always have a positive
theta.
As mentioned above in “Strategy Overview,” all options are composed
of intrinsic value and extrinsic value, and as time passes, the extrinsic value
begins to decay. At expiration, the extrinsic value is gone, and an option is
either in-the-money and has intrinsic value, or it expires worthless. This
means that, all else being equal, the theoretical value of an option should
fall by some amount every day. However, this amount varies because the
rate at which extrinsic value decays is not linear and is itself dependent on
other market factors, especially time to expiration and moneyness, as can
be seen in Figure 1.7:
–90
90 strike

–80

100 strike

–70

110 strike

–60

Theta

12

–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
5

15

30

60

90

120

150

Days to Expiry

Figure 1.7 Theta vs. Time to Expiration
We can see in the figure that the theta of all long-dated options is low
and is very similar for the 90, 100, and 110 strike calls. As time moves forward toward expiration, time decay begins to accelerate and the theta for
all of the options begins to rise. Then, as expiration approaches, the in- and
out-of-the-money calls (the 90 and 110 strike calls) lose their extrinsic value
early, and their thetas begin to decline. Notice, however, that the theta of
the 100 strike call, which is the at-the-money option, begins to accelerate.
Heading into expiration, when the surrounding in- and out-of-the-money
options no longer have extrinsic value to lose, the decay of the at-the-money
option will continue to accelerate.

Investment Objectives

Example
An investor has a covered-write position consisting of 100 shares of
long stock at $100.00 and short one 100 strike call at $5.00. The call has a
theta of 0.02. With the stock unchanged and implied volatility unchanged,
what is the change in value of the overall position if:
Five trading days pass . . .
The price of the call will change from $5.00 to $4.90 ($5.00  5  0.02), so
the value of the position will change accordingly:
Initial Position Value

New Position Value

Stock price

$100.00

Stock price

$100.00

 Call price

$5.00

 Call price

$4.90

Position value

$95.00

Position value $95.10

As this example shows, time decay works in favor of a covered-write.

INVESTMENT OBJECTIVES
As mentioned earlier in “Strategy Overview,” the covered-write
strategy is a neutral to mildly bullish strategy. The main objectives of a
covered-write are the generation of income and limited downside protection. Every covered-write is a mixture of both and, depending on how the
investor structures the trade, that is, which strike price and expiration cycle
are chosen, the trade will be more of one and less of the other. It is also
extremely important to distinguish between the covered-write as a long-term,
systematic strategy, and the covered-write as a short-term trade.

Covered-Write as a Long-Term Strategy
Investors who use the covered-write as a long-term strategy usually have
a core portfolio of stocks that—up or down, better or worse—they will hold.
They systematically write calls against the stocks in the portfolio to help generate income, and, over time, lower the cost basis of the portfolio. Even though
the written calls provide some downside protection for the portfolio, these investors are not as sensitive to downside risk because they will be holding the
portfolio regardless of whether the market rises or falls in the short-term.

Covered-Write as a Short-Term Trading Strategy
The investor who uses the covered-write as a short-term trading strategy usually purchases the stock specifically for the purpose of writing
a call against it and creating a strategy. Many times this trade is executed as
a spread on an exchange known as a buy-write. The stock is not part of a longterm core portfolio, and, therefore, the short-term covered-write investor is

13

14

Chapter 1

The Covered-Write

usually much more sensitive to downside risk than the long-term coveredwrite investor is and requires a stronger, bullish market view.

Rates of Return
Regardless of whether one is a short-term or long-term covered writer,
the best outcome is a slow rise that allows the stock to appreciate in price
while the option slowly decays, and, hopefully, expires worthless. This
allows the investor to capture both the price appreciation in the stock and
the time decay in the option, generating a profit on the overall position. The
exact amount of profit depends on how the covered-write was constructed,
the stock price, the option price, and the strike price. Usually covered-write
strategies are analyzed in terms of rates of return at various points:
• Return to Call
This is the rate of return generated on the position if the stock price is
at the strike price or higher at expiration, a price at which the stock would
be called away by the holder of the written call. The stock price at or higher
than the strike price is the best-case scenario for a covered-write:
K
 1 R  100%
Return to call  Q ________
(S1  C)
Where:
C  Call price
K  Strike price
S1  Beginning stock price

Example
An investor buys stock at a price of $100.00 and sells a 105 strike call
against it for $5.00. There are thirty days until expiration. What would be
the rate of return if the stock were called?
Q

105
_________
 1 R  100%  10.53%
(100  5)

• Return to Unchanged
This is the rate of return generated on the position if the stock is
unchanged but is still lower than the strike price at expiration, meaning an
out-of-the-money call was written. This is the rate of return if the written
call expires worthless while the stock remains unchanged:
S2
 1 R  100%
Return to unchanged  Q ________
(S1  C)
Where:
C  Call price
S1  Beginning stock price
S2  Ending stock price

Strategy Component Selection

Example
An investor buys stock at a price of $100.00 and sells a 105 strike call
against it for $5.00. There are thirty days until expiration. What would be
the rate of return if the stock were unchanged at expiration?
Q

100
_________
 1 R  100%  5.26%
(100  5)

Return to call and Return to unchanged are variations of the same formula
with the numerator representing the selling price for the stock at the end of
expiration. In the case of Return to call, the numerator is represented by the
strike price, because that is the price an investor would receive for his stock
if it were called. In Return to unchanged it is represented by the current stock
price, because that is the price an investor would receive for his stock if he
wished to sell it in the open market.

Break-Even Point
The break-even point is the point at which the decline in stock price
equals the amount of premium collected on the written call. At this point
all of the protection furnished by the written call is “used up” and the
investor is exposed to losses if the stock continues lower:
Break-even point  S1  C
Where:
C  Call price
S1  Beginning stock price

Example
You buy stock at a price of $100.00 and sell a 105 strike call against it for
$5.00. There are thirty days until expiration. What is the break-even point?
Break-even point  $100.00  $5.00  $95.00

STRATEGY COMPONENT SELECTION
So how does one structure a good covered-write strategy? The answer
to this question depends on many of the variables we have discussed in
previous sections:
• What is one’s current market forecast?
— Neutral
— Mildly bullish
— Moderately bullish

15

16

Chapter 1

The Covered-Write

• What is one’s risk appetite?
— Is covered-writing part of a long-term strategy against a portfolio?
— Is covered-writing part of a short-term trading strategy?
• What is the goal of one’s covered-write?
— Income generation?
— Downside protection?
— Some of each?
• What is the current state of implied volatility in the market?
— High volatility?
— Low volatility?
— What are the potential rates of return?

What Is One’s Current Market Forecast?
As we have mentioned several times, the covered-write is a neutral
to moderately bullish strategy, so, first and foremost, it is mandatory to
have a neutral to moderately bullish outlook on the stock or portfolio one
is considering as a candidate for a covered-write program. An extremely
bullish strategy is inappropriate because the upside is limited, and a bearish approach is also inappropriate because the long stock portion of the
position will lose money, which is only partially offset by the premium
received when writing the call. A sharp or sustained move lower in a stock
or portfolio is disastrous for covered-writes.
Whatever methodology one chooses to use for forecasting market
behavior—fundamental analysis, technical analysis, broker forecasts and
research, or other methods—one should consider a covered-write strategy only if confident in a market forecast of neutral to moderately bullish. Where the forecast falls within that range will help determine strike
selection. It is always desirable to have the stock price greater than or
equal to the strike price at expiration, to achieve maximum returns, so
the strike selected for writing should be where one expects the stock to
be at expiration.
• Neutral to Bullish
With a neutral outlook one is likely forecasting little change in the
underlying price through expiration. In this case, one would want to write
a call that is at-the-money to potentially achieve maximum returns.
• Mildly Bullish
With a mildly bullish outlook, one is most likely forecasting a slight
rise in the underlying price through expiration. In this case, one would
want to write a call that is out-of-the-money in the expected target zone to
potentially achieve maximum returns.

Strategy Component Selection

• Moderately Bullish
With a moderately bullish outlook, one is likely forecasting a more substantial rise in the underlying price through expiration. In this case, one
would want to write a call that is further out-of-the-money in the expected
target zone to attempt to achieve maximum returns.

What Is One’s Risk Appetite?
The risk appetite of an investor interested in pursuing a covered-write
strategy is usually determined by the category into which he falls in terms
of time frame. Risk appetite determines strike selection and duration.
The risk in a covered-write is determined by the premium received for
the written call, which provides some downside protection for the stock
position. This premium, in turn, is determined by the location of the strike
price relative to the stock price (moneyness) and the time until expiration
(duration).
• Long-Term (High Risk Appetite)
The long-term covered writer usually has a portfolio of stocks that he
or she has selected to hold. These investors have purchased the stocks in
their portfolios because they like their long-term prospects and because
they intend to hold them no matter what the market chooses to do in the
short-term. They are pursuing a covered-write strategy against the stocks
in their portfolio in order to help generate income and lower the overall
cost basis of the portfolio. They are not particularly interested in the downside protection aspect of the covered-write since they are going to hold
their portfolio regardless of what the market might do; therefore, they are
less sensitive to risk.
High Risk Appetite: Investors with high risk appetites can afford to collect less premium for downside protection; this allows them to write calls
that are further out-of-the-money or of shorter duration. Writing calls that
are further out-of-the-money creates a covered-write that has a stronger
bullish stance, allowing for more potential appreciation in the stock price.
Writing calls of shorter duration generates a larger time decay (theta) for
faster income generation.
• Short-Term (Low Risk Appetite)
The short-term covered writer usually enters the position as a trade. In
other words, he has no particular long-term view for the stock that he is
buying; he is more interested in the potential return of the covered-write
itself, and is attracted to situations where high volatility (higher call premiums) are throwing off high potential rates of return. Because, for these
investors, the covered-write is a short-term strategy or trade, they are very
sensitive to risk because a loss in the position cannot be recouped over time
as it might be with a long-term covered-write. Indeed, because short-term
covered writers tend to be more the “trader” type than the “investor” type,

17

18

Chapter 1

The Covered-Write

they tend to keep their trades on a short leash, may only be in the trade a
few days, and will exit at the first sign of trouble.
Low Risk Appetite: The investor with a low risk appetite needs to collect more premium for downside protection; this forces him to write calls
that are at- or even in-the-money or of longer duration. Writing calls that
are at- or in-the-money creates a covered-write that has a defensive stance
of neutral to slightly bearish, and this removes any chance for upside
appreciation in the stock price. Writing calls of longer duration will generate a smaller time decay (theta), slowing potential income generation.

What Is the Purpose of the Covered-Write?
• Income Generation
Time decay is the key to income generation, and, as we noted in the earlier discussion of theta in “Strategy Composition,” shorter-dated options
have a higher rate of time decay (a larger theta) than longer-dated options,
and at-the-money options have a higher rate of time decay than in- or outof-the-money options. This pushes the investor interested in income generation into the short-dated options. Of course, this has to be balanced with
market view and risk appetite, which require some give and take, but, in
general, covered writers interested in quick income generation need to be
operating in the shorter-dated (forty-five days to expiry and less) options
that are near-the-money. This produces maximum time decay.
• Downside Protection
The investor interested in protecting his portfolio needs to generate
larger premiums when writing calls against his holdings. Calls that are inthe-money, or of longer duration, generally carry larger premiums. Writing
calls that are in-the-money creates a covered-write that has more of a defensive stance, which offers greater downside protection. However, structuring
a covered-write in this fashion eliminates most if not all of the potential for
upside appreciation in the stock price. In addition, writing calls of longer
duration will result in a smaller time decay (theta), thus slowing income
generation and increasing the holding period for the trade.

What Is the Current State of Implied Volatility
in the Market?
Implied volatility is determined by the current pricing of options in the
marketplace. By using the current option price and an option pricing model,
investors are able to solve for the volatility implied by the option price. An
option calculator such as the one on the Chicago Board Options Exchange
(CBOE) website can make this calculation easier (www.cboe.com).
Implied volatility reflects the consensus opinion of options market
participants about what the expected volatility of the underlying will be
through expiration. High implied volatility means that market participants
are expecting high volatility in the price of the underlying through that

Strategy Component Selection

particular expiration cycle. Low implied volatility means that market participants are expecting low volatility in the price of the underlying through
that particular expiration cycle. Implied volatility is in a constant state of
flux as new information influences the market and alters the expectations
of the participants. It is a “market” in and of itself.
As we discussed in “Strategy Composition,” when we examined vega,
rising implied volatility causes option prices to rise, while falling implied
volatility causes option prices to fall. This has a direct impact on the
covered-write because it is the premium generated by the sale of the call
option(s) that determines the risk, reward, break-even point, and potential
rate of return of the strategy.
• High Implied Volatility
As mentioned previously, high implied volatility means that market
participants are expecting high volatility (that is, a lot of movement) in
the price of the underlying through that particular expiration cycle. That
means three things to the potential covered writer:
• Market participants see risk in the price of the underlying.
• Premiums may be elevated to reflect this risk.
• Rates of return may be higher than normal to reflect this risk.
Remember that the first and most important determining factor for a
covered-write strategy is a neutral to moderately bullish forecast for the
underlying price. High implied volatility is an indication that market participants have built in the possibility of greater than usual movement in
the underlying price both to the upside and downside. In other words,
they see risk and, because of that, option prices and rates of return on a
covered-write are elevated to reflect this perceived risk. The investor who
is confident of a neutral to bullish forecast for the stock and who has a view
opposite the marketplace may be rewarded, if correct, by a higher than
usual rate of return. But remember: It is the neutral to bullish price forecast that should be the first determining factor for a covered-write, never
the rate of return! The rate of return is simply an indicator of the risk level
perceived by market participants at that time. Using rate of return to determine covered-write strategies is a trap.
• Low Implied Volatility
Low implied volatility means that market participants are expecting
low volatility (that is, a lack of movement) in the price of the underlying
through that particular expiration cycle. That means three things to the
potential covered writer:
• Market participants may see low risk in the price of the underlying.
• Premiums may be depressed to reflect this lack of risk.
• Rates of return may be lower than normal to reflect this lack of risk.
