
PRICE ACTION GAPS
THROUGH THE
POTENTIAL
REVERSAL ZONE (PRZ)

Figure 10.10

As was the case with the bullish illustration, the blowout of a bearish PRZ should trade
through the entire group of harmonic numbers and continue in the predominant trend. These
situations should be practically obvious, as the price action should rally sharply above the
projected resistance area.

Chapter 10 Price Action in the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)

195

Microsoft
(MSFT): 60-Minute
Microsoft blew out this Bearish Crab on the 60-minute chart, as the stock gapped through the
PRZ on the open and immediately continued higher (see Figure 10.11).

Figure 10.11

196

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The blowout in this case exemplified the ideal price gap-warning signal that typically
invalidates setups. After the stock opened above these numbers, the validity of the pattern
was negated. Again, it is important to focus on the action on the initial test of the harmonic
numbers. Although the stock briefly retested the top range of the zone, the strong continuation
following the violation confirmed the warning signal provided by the price gap. The chart of the
price action in the PRZ in Figure 10.12 shows the clear violation of the price gap and the
immediate bullish continuation.

Figure 10.12

It is uncanny how frequently these situations occur, signaling an invalid pattern completion.
These warning signs should appear nearly obvious, as the price action should convincingly
take out the PRZ.

Chapter 10 Price Action in the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)

197

Extreme Price Expansion Through a Potential
Reversal Zone (PRZ)
Frequently, an invalid setup will be indicated by extreme price expansion moves that quickly
trade through the PRZ and continue in the predominant trend. Although it might be difficult
to validate such an extreme expansion until after the fact, the critical factor is the general
momentum that the initial test possesses as it trades into the PRZ. Such extreme price
expansion should be followed by a clear continuation of that predominant trend.

Extreme Price Expansion—Bullish Potential Reversal
Zone (PRZ)
In an extreme price expansion through a bullish PRZ, the trading should clearly and decisively
break down through the support zone on the initial test and continue lower in the predominant
trend after the violation (see Figure 10.13).

EXTREME PRICE
ACTION EXPANSION
THROUGH THE
POTENTIAL
REVERSAL ZONE (PRZ)

Figure 10.13

The breakdown should occur quickly and be practically obvious during the test of the PRZ. As
is the case for most PRZ tests, the determining factor is the price action after the entire range
of numbers has been tested. If the price action continues sharply lower after the dramatic
violation, the completion point of the pattern should be considered invalid.

198

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Coca-Cola
(KO): Weekly
The weekly chart in Figure 10.14 shows a Bullish Gartley that possessed a sharp decline as it
tested the entire Potential Reversal Zone.

Figure 10.14

Chapter 10 Price Action in the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)

199

Figure 10.15 of the price action in the PRZ exemplifies the extreme price expansion that
clearly signaled an invalid setup. As the stock traded into the PRZ, it quickly violated the critical
numbers at the completion of the pattern. After the initial test violated the entire range of the
harmonic numbers, Coke continued decisively lower.

Figure 10.15

The setup was clearly violated, as the severity of the violation was overwhelming. The
validity of the harmonic support defined by the PRZ revealed itself quickly after the pattern
completed.

200

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Price Action Expansion—Bearish Potential Reversal
Zone (PRZ)
Extreme price expansions that break out above bearish PRZs frequently signal a continuation
of the predominant trend (see Figure 10.16). The price action should trade decisively through
the resistance area and continue to rally following the violation.

EXTREME PRICE
ACTION EXPANSION
THROUGH THE
POTENTIAL
REVERSAL ZONE (PRZ)

Figure 10.16

Again, it might be difficult to validate such an extreme expansion until after the fact. The
deciding factor is the price action immediately after the entire PRZ has been tested. If the price
action rallies with strong momentum, it is likely that the warning sign is indicating an invalid
pattern setup. Any trading that continues higher will confirm this signal.

Chapter 10 Price Action in the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)

Dow Jones Industrial Average
($INDU): 15-Minute
Figure 10.17 is an ideal example of the extreme price expansion warning of an invalid setup.
The Dow Jones Industrials formed this Bearish Gartley on the following 15-minute chart that
rallied through the entire PRZ as it tested the convergence of harmonic numbers just above
9900.

Figure 10.17

201

202

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Figure 10.18 of the price action in the PRZ shows an ideal blowout of the extreme
expansion bar. It is important to note that the index closed above the top range of the PRZ
and continued higher immediately following the confirmation of the blowout of the bearish
pattern.

Figure 10.18

Price Action in the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)
Conclusion
One of the key principles of Harmonic Trading is analyzing the price action within precise zones
as defined by a convergence of Fibonacci calculations of specific 5-point structures. The type of
price bars that form at the completion of a pattern can provided extensive information regarding
the potential state of the future trading action. In this example, the price action in the Dow
Jones Industrials overwhelmingly indicated a pattern failure. Although such interpretation
requires some experience, it is important to respect clear violation signals to differentiate valid
reversals from failures.

Chapter 11

The Harmonic Trade
Management System

I want to review the trade that forced me to create this system because it was a real heartbreaker. It probably was one of the greatest moves that I’ve ever missed. The stock: Redhat—RHAT! I
remember thinking before I entered this trade that the symbol alone was a sign of a bad trade—
a dirty RHAT! I thought that it might be a loser, despite the overwhelming harmonics.
The trade involved a nice bullish AB=CD at a critical 0.618 retracement that defined the area
just under $75 as significant harmonic support (see Figure 11.1). Despite my apprehension for
the symbol, I placed my trade. I bought 1200 shares at 74 3/4. Within a day or two, the stock
rallied vigorously. The stock moved sideways for several days after the initial bounce.

Figure 11.1
203

204

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

With the lack of follow-through, I immediately covered the position. I was up nearly 15 points
at the high and felt compelled to take my profits and run. I was very happy with this trade. I felt
that this move would not continue much higher—was I ever wrong! The chart in Figure 11.2 of
price action in the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ) clearly shows the ideal reversal after testing
all of the numbers in the harmonic support zone.

Figure 11.2

Despite stalling for nearly two weeks after the initial reversal, RHAT eventually rallied
considerably higher, more than doubling in the following month. Yes, say it with me: “An easy
hundred thousand left on the table!” You can see why I felt compelled to develop a system that
would respond to market signals rather than emotional reactions.
Although I missed out on these profits, I was determined to learn from this experience. If I
was not going to directly profit from this trade, I made it a point to learn from yet another tuition
payment to the University of NASD! It was the only way I could overcome my anguish over
missing a “lottery trade.”
I learned several important factors from this trade that helped me distinguish the big moves
from the small reactions. I noticed specific traits in the price action that led me to explore and
experiment with different ideas that effectively gauged the strength of the reversal. Techniques
such as trend lines, Fibonacci targets, and trailing stops are effective tools that can improve
trading decisions. Furthermore, these strategies create a systematic approach to maximize
trading decisions in any market environment.

Chapter 11 The Harmonic Trade Management System

205

The experience with RHAT forced me to develop a trade management system that truly lets
the price action provide the signals to handle the position. Essentially, if you do not have rules
to determine the information that the market is providing, you are closing positions based
mostly on emotional decisions. Think about it—what was the last trade you closed out? Why?
Was it because you didn’t think the market would go completely your way? Were you burned by
a previous trade that compelled you to take the quick profit or cut the loss small? Quite simply
in the case of the RHAT trade, I failed to follow through, as I did not have any technical reasons
to close the position.
In the same sense that effective pattern recognition rules—the Harmonic Trading
techniques—are employed to identify potential opportunities, it is critical to have guidelines
that maximize the management of positions and gauge the price action after a setup has been
executed. The trade management rules address all possibilities in advance, enables you to
respond to any situation, and instills confidence in your execution skills.

The Harmonic Trade Management Terms
Review these terms to understand the concepts of this system.

Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)
The Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ) is a specific area where harmonic patterns complete and
Fibonacci projections converge. Identification of a valid PRZ is dependent upon finding the
clearest pattern structures that possess several Fibonacci calculations converging at a
well-defined price level. Also, it is important to remember that a PRZ represents a significant
“potential” reversal area and a violation of that area indicates that the primary trend is strong.
Therefore, the validity of the setup still requires an accurate assessment of the pattern after the
entire zone has been tested.

Initial Profit Objective (IPO)
The Initial Profit Objective (IPO) represents the first area to consider taking profits for the
position. Typically, an original position can be parceled into multiple pieces, treating each
portion differently depending upon the reversal. The first part of the position—the IPO—is
defined by a predetermined Fibonacci level retracement, as measured by the limits (high and
low) of the pattern. Most frequently, it is either a 38.2% or 61.8% retracement from the extreme
points of the pattern. Also, the IPO can be a trend line violation after the initial target has been
exceeded. After a reversal has completed and a small profit has been attained, it is critical to
determine the area where the first profit will be secured. The decision to secure the initial profit
at the 38.2% or the 61.8% retracement of the pattern range depends upon the price action. If a
reversal exceeds the 38.2% level in strong “blowout” fashion by a price gap, extreme price
range, or tail close, the 61.8% level should be targeted as the IPO. At a minimum, it is prudent
to secure a partial profit at one of these levels.

206

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The blowout of these levels is dependent upon a continuation of the trend. If price action
reverses from the PRZ and hits one of the IPO levels but fails to clearly continue in that
direction, it is important to cover a part or all of the position. A lack of continuation in the price
action is a sign of temporary exhaustion that must be respected. The IPO establishes the initial
exit strategy within the Harmonic Trade Management process.

Portioning the IPO
As I mentioned previously, it is customary to split the position into two or even three portions.
Such a strategy can secure a profit automatically (with a limit order), ensuring a winning trade
on part of the initial position, while creating a “comfort zone” for the other half of the position.
The other advantage to splitting the position into two parts is that the other half can “ride for
free” after securing an initial profit. Since anything can happen in the market, the other half
keeps the position live until the price action signals obvious evidence that it’s time to cover.
This is critical because it reduces the amount “left on the table.” Also, this strategy shifts your
trading behavior to respond to the market rather than your own emotions. Although the example
of Redhat is an extraordinary case, it underscores the importance of leaving a portion of the
original position in long enough to capitalize on the potential of a more significant reversal.
Reversals that move sideways after an initial reaction can frequently appear to not yield a
substantial move, only to really get moving after a delayed period of consolidation. In this
instance, the initial profit is secured by the first 1/2 of the position while maintaining the other
portion to permit more time to see if the reversal will continue in the direction of the initial
reaction. Regardless of the outcome, the second position lets the market determine the result
of the trade. If the price action resumes the reversal, the second position can capitalize on
the additional gains and employ greater price objectives for further profit management. If the
reversal fails, the trade can be exited with a small profit. This area is referred to as the Profit
Protection Zone (PPZ).

Profit Protection Zone (PPZ)
Although this is a bit more subjective in the management of a trade, the Profit Protection Zone
(PPZ) is a predetermined level beyond the execution point after a small profit has been
achieved. The PPZ is critical because it enforces one of the most important rules within the
Harmonic Trading approach:
“Never let a profit become a loss.”

It is important to note that not all setups yield the same reversal. Some setups will react for
a short period of time and then continue in the predominant trend. These setups can provide a
quick move and a small profit, as long as the make-or-break price level is defined. Sometimes,
price action can consolidate in the reversal zone and trigger the position to be covered, only
to have the reversal resume its move. Although these are frustrating situations, the PPZ will
prevent the common mistakes of staying in a position that eventually fails.

Chapter 11 The Harmonic Trade Management System

207

Stop Loss Zone (SLZ)
The Stop Loss Zone (SLZ) is the area beyond the Potential Reversal Zone that defines an
invalid setup. When price action exceeds a reversal zone, it indicates that the PRZ is not a valid
turning point, requiring that the position be covered and the loss to be taken.

The 0.382 Trailer
The 0.382 trailing stop is a technique that was initially discussed in The Harmonic Trader and
developed after studying the Redhat trade closely. The trailing stop is typically employed after a
profit has been attained in a position. The 38.2% trailer represents the “make-or-break” limit for
the continuation of a reversal. This trailing stop is typically utilized after the Initial Profit
Objective (IPO) has been attained.
The 0.382 trailer is measured from the reversal point to the reversal extreme—high (bullish
setup) or low (bearish setup). The 0.382 is significant because the strongest price action will
only retrace to this level before continuing in the trend of the reversal. Although it is common for
the reversal trend to frequently retest this retracement, the critical technical consideration is a
violation beyond this area. Therefore, the position should be covered on a continuation past the
38.2% level.

Trend Lines
There are two types of trend lines that are utilized in trade management decisions. After the
initial reversal from a Potential Reversal Zone, it is common for price action to adhere to a
general trend line that can serve as a gauge of the potential continuation of the new move.
Trend lines can be effective in catching reversals that provide brief reactions but revert to the
predominant trend. Although brief reactions from well-defined patterns occur frequently, these
temporary moves can provide quick profitable trades, if they are handled properly.
The other trend line consideration involves the Initial Profit Objective (IPO), usually at the
38.2% or 61.8% pattern retracement. In most setups, the 0.382 IPO typically converges with
a trend line from the existing pattern. For example, a bullish pattern will possess a down
trend line from the high points (A and C) that can be drawn to define the predominant trend’s
resistance channel. In combination with the IPO, this area represents the “line in the sand.” If a
reversal can exceed the initial profit objective, the probability is favorable for a more significant
move than just a temporary reaction. Although this rule allows for some discretion, the initial
profit area is crucial in differentiating the big moves from the small reactions well in advance.

Angle of Ascent/Descent
The angle of ascent/descent refers to the degree of the trend line of the price action after it
has reversed from the completion of the pattern. Although the angle does not need to be
precisely measured, it is important to note that most valid reversals will frequently possess
steep trend lines with decisive continuation. In comparison, price action that moves sideways
at the completion of a pattern is typically an early sign of an impending failure.

208

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Time Considerations
After the initial reversal from a PRZ, a certain amount of time is required to allow the price
action to assert itself and begin a new trend. Whether the pattern forms on a 5-minute,
60-minute, daily, or weekly chart, each reversal must be allotted a certain time period relative
to the size of the pattern to manifest signals of its validity.
As I discussed in the beginning of the book, each pattern must be regarded as a specific
technical entity that possesses precise numeric ranges, where all elements, such as execution
points, stop loss limits, and profit objectives, are defined relative to the structure. These
established price parameters apply to the time considerations, as well.
Although time considerations are not as significant as the factors of price, an understanding
of when a setup should complete can optimize trade management decisions and offer relevant
technical confirmation of a reversal’s potential.
There is a general “window of time” that should be considered after a reversal has
completed. The acceptable limits of pattern completions are comprised of two time
measurements—the equivalent time completion and alternate time calculations—that are
critical in the decision-making process of trade management.
The equivalent time projection is a general estimation of the completion of a symmetrical
pattern. Utilizing the X point as the initial starting point, the time duration is measured to the
pattern’s mid-point (B). This time duration is projected from the B point to determine the
approximate D point completion. Ideally, the most symmetrical patterns will complete at the
equivalent completion time. For example, if a pattern required ten days to form the X to B point,
the B to D point projected time completion should be ten days thereafter. In a similar fashion as
a perfect AB=CD pattern, the time symmetry should be equivalent.
The alternate time calculation is calculated with the range of Harmonic Trading ratios,
starting with 0.382 and extending to 1.618. In many patterns, the CD leg frequently does not
complete before the equivalent projected time date. Although the symmetry may be less than
ideal in these situations, a proper alignment of Fibonacci ratios is still the critical requirement to
validate any potential pattern setup.
At a minimum, a pattern should not complete until it has reached the 0.382 time projection.
For example, if the time distance to the mid-point of a pattern (from X to B) is ten days, the
pattern should not complete until the distance from B the projected completion has traded for
3.82 or approximately four days. Although this is a rule that should be applied generally with
some room for interpretation, this minimum 38.2% projected time requirement serves as a filter
for potentially invalid patterns. Essentially, if a pattern possesses a sharp CD leg that completes
in a relatively short period of time as compared to the rest of the price structure, a red flag
should go up and the validity of the setup must be considered suspect.
Although there are many other time considerations that should be assessed in the trade
management process, I believe this basic understanding of a projected “time window” promotes
the proper anticipation of price action and establishes the model of “what should be happening”
in a valid reversal. Basically, the projected time window defines the accepted duration of the
reversal, creating a “do or die” perspective.

Chapter 11 The Harmonic Trade Management System

209

The equivalent time projection helps to define the PPZ. The decision to protect a small profit
versus allowing more time for a trade to reverse is dependent upon the equivalent time completion of the pattern. Within this “time window,” the price action either reverses within the time
allotted or the reversal at hand must become suspect. In these circumstances, small profits
must be defended. Although this may be mentally frustrating, small profits are better than sitting
on your hands and allowing a loss.
The concept of the PPZ evolved from many personal experiences with patterns that
provided an initial reaction, only to continue in the predominant trend. As I have said throughout
this material, most distinct patterns will provide some type of reaction at a minimum.
The ability to profit from these situations depends upon an honest assessment of the price
action within the PPZ. Although such defensive tactics can result in a covered position that
eventually reverses in the anticipated direction, in the long run this strategy is one of the most
effective tools within the Harmonic Trade Management System.
It will take some time to grasp the intricacies of these trade management techniques.
However, the system defines all possible parameters of the trade relative to the pattern and
the price action in the PRZ. It is essential to establish entry points, profit targets, and stop loss
limits well in advance to facilitate the decision-making process.
