,

THE

ALCHEMY
READING THE MIND OF THE MARKET

GEORGE SOROS
NEW PREFACE

FOREWORD BY PAUL TUDOR JONES 11
,crP*

JohnWiley & Sons, Inc.
New York

Chichester

Brisbane

Toronto

Singapore

'
TO SUSAN,
without whom this book would have been ready much sooner

A number of people have read all or part of the manuscript at various stages of its development. They are too numerous to be listed,
but I want to thank them all for their help and criticism. Byron
Wien, in particular, has gone beyond the call of duty in reading and
commenting on, the manuscript at three different stages of development. Special thanks are due to Antonio Foglia, who generated the
graphics that illustrate the real-time experiment. Larry Chiarello
supplied the figures.
I also want to thank the team that contributed to the performance of Quantum Fund during the experiment: Bill Ehrman, Gary
Gladstein, Tom Larkin, Robert Miller, Steven Okin, Joe Orofino,
Stephen Plant, Allan Raphael, and Anne Stires.

'I

CONTENTS

:

Foreword 1
Preface 4
Introduction 11

I

Part I
THEORY
1. The Theory of Reflexivity
Anti-equilibrium 27
The Problem of Imperfect Understanding 31
The Problem of the Social Sciences 34
The Participants' Bias 40
The Concept of Reflexivity 41
Reflexivity versus Equilibrium 43

e

2. Reflexivity in the Stock Market
3. Reflexivity in the Currency Market
4. The Credit and Regulatory Cycle
Part I1
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE

5. The International Debt Problem
6. The Collective System of Lending
7. Reagan's lmperial Circle
8. Evolution of the Banking System
9. The "Oligopolarization" of America

vi

Appendix

Part I11
THE REAL-TIME EXPERIMENT

10. The Starting Point: August 1985
11. Phase 1: August 1985-December 1985
12. Control Period: January 1986-July 1986
13. Phase 2: July 1986-November 1986
14. The Conclusion: November 1986
Part IV
EVALUATION

I

15. The Scope for Financial Alchemy: A n Evaluation of
the Experiment
16. The Quandary of the Social Sciences
Part V
PRESCRIPTION

17. Free Markets Versus Regulation
18. Toward an international Central Bank
Exchange Rates 328
International Debt 329
Oil 333
An International Currency 338
19. The Paradox of Systemic Reform
20. The Crash of '87
Epilogue 361
Notes 366
Appendix 368

I

1

I

FOREWORD

Four hundred seventy-three million to one. Those are the odds
against George Soros compiling the investment record he did as the
mabger of the ~ u a n t u mFund from 1968 through 1993. His investing record is the most unimpeachable refutation of the random
walk hypothesis ever!
As a trader coming of age in the latter half of the frenetic 1970s
and the 1980s, The Alchemy of Finance was somewhat of a revolutionary book. Remember, this was the period when trend following
and indexation were the vogue in investing. It was a time when
technical analysis (the study of price movemen? as a forecasting
tool) reached its zenith. Traders of my generation armed themselves with charts and computer-generated graphics that predicted
future price direction. We sat day after day in front of screens, mesmerized by blinking lights and everchangir~gnumbers in a deafening cacophony of information overload. With the possible exception
of Elliott Wave Theory, an intellectual framework for understanding the course of social, political, and economic events was noticeably forgotten in favor of just making sure that one was part of the
ever-quickening process.
The Alchemy of Finance was a shot out of the dark for me. It let
me take a giant step forward by first taking a step backwards,
clarifying events that appeared so complex and so overwhelming.
During an era when so much money was made in larger than life
events, from the Hunt brothers' squeeze of the silver market in
1979 to KKR1stakeover of RJR Nabisco in 1989, Mr. Sorosls theory
of reflexivity is the first modern, nontechnical effort to describe

2
I

+

Foreword

and forecast the dynamic interplay between the participants in
the process. That is the brilliance of this book. It describes the dynamics of the path between points of extreme valuation and equilibrium in the marketplace. This is particularly important for the
average investor. How many times have we been correctly long
near the bottom or short near the top of a major market move? But
our staying power with these positions has been weak (as well as
our returns) because of a lack of understanding of the path of big
price moves. Soros gives us critical insight into that path and thus
more confidence in our investments. This constitutes 70% of any
successful investing campaign.
When I enter the inevitable losing streak that befalls every illvestor, I pick up The Alchemy and revisit Mr. Soros's campaigns.
Studying how he coped with adversity provides an excellent tutorial for breaking the string of negative behaviors that occasionally besets any investor. Winning is infectious. And this book in
replete with examples of trading behaviors all would want to emulate. Importantly, Mr. Soros's intellect gives him the confidence and
strength of his own convictions to stay with his positions even during trying periods. In that sense, The Alchemy joins Edwin LefGvre's
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator as a timeless instructional guide of
the marketplace. And as such, Soros should beware! In the World
War I1 movie Patton, my favorite scene is when U.S. General George
S. Patton has just spent weeks studying the writing of his Germany
adversary Field Marshall Erwin Rommel and is crushing him in an
epic tank battle in Tunisia. Patton, sensing victory as he peers onto
the battle field from his command post, growls, "Rommel, you magnificent bastard. I read your book! " Enough said.
The Alchemy is also an excellent economic and political hijiory oi
recent times. From unknowingly providing a blueprint as to how
the savings and loan fiasco in the United States would be resolved
six years in advance (page 124)to predicting the stock market crash
of 1987two years in advance (page 181), Soros reveals himself as the
great market visionary of our time.
History will probably remember Mr. Soros as the speculator who
tilted against the Bank of England in 1992 (and freed the English
people from recession). His billion dollar score is simply too compelling a story for scribes to overlook. Mr. Soros himself would
probably like to be remembered as a great economist or even scientist. But I am going to remember him for something even more important, for which he does not receive the credit he deserves. He is

Foreword

3

someone who genuinely cares about the state of the human condition and tries to better it. His myriad and monumental philanthropical efforts will qualify him as one of history's great
benefactors. Even today at age 62, he pursues the activities of his
six foundations with the vigor and work ethic of a young turk on
the way up the financial ladder, working 18-hour days around the
globe on behalf of fjis causes. He does not just write checks, which
any wealthy person can do. He is a hands-on workaholic who materially impacts the quality of the lives of people less fortunate than
he. Now this, this is a sign of greatness.

PREFACE

Seven eventful years have passed since The Alchemy of Finance was
first published. My investment fund, the Quantum Fund, has continued to flourish: Shareholders have enjoyed average annual gains
of 35. .8% in the last seven years in spite of a setback in the crash of
1987. Quantum Fund has also spawned a number of offspring,
some of which are doing even better than the goose that is laying
the golden eggs. Starting in 1989, we decided to distribute a portion of our earnings to shareholders, either in cash or in shares of
the newly created funds. As a result, we now manage seven funds
with combined equity of over $10 billion.
I have become progressively less active in the management of the
funds. I was fortunate in meeting Stanley Druckenmiller through
The Alchemy of Finance. He was managing another fund at the time,
and he sought me out because he was intrigued by my book. We
started talking and, eventually, he joined my firm. At the beginning, he found it difficult to work with me. Although I gave him a
great deal of authority, he was inhibited by my presence and felt
that he was not doing as well as he had before joining my firm. Fortunately, I was becoming increasingly involved in the revolutionary
process that led to the collapse of communism. I was establishing a
network of foundations throughout the communist world and it involved travelling in places where communications were rather poor.
In the summer of 1989, I told Stan that he must take full charge of
running the Fund. Since then we have had no difficulties.
I became the coach, and he became the competitor. Our performance improved and we embarked on a period of sustained growth.
In each of the last three years, we chalked up gains in excess of

Preface

5

50%. Although we hpve had two similar periods of prosperity previously, this qualifies as an exceptional performance in view of our
outlandish size. Druckenmiller is not only a good fund manager, he
is also a good partner. Under his leadership, we have been able to
enlarge and improve our management team so that it now has a
depth which it never had before. So it happened that I found the
reward for my philaqthropic activities in the prosperity of my business. That prosperity enabled me to expand the foundation network at a breakneck speed.
My participation in the collapse of communism is a different
story which has to be told in a different place. In fact, I have already
written two books on the subject, Gyersing ihtl Soviei Syslsiem in 1930,
and Underwriting Democracy in 1991. The point that needs to be
made here is that I was guided by exactly the same philosophy in
my philanthropic activities in Eastern Europe as in the financial
markets. As the reader will learn, I treat developments in financial
markets as a historical process. That makes my theory eminently
applicable to a histyical process such as the collapse of communism. I did apply my theory and on the whole it enabled me to anticipate events better than most people. As I discovered, there is a
great deal of similarity between a boom-bust process in the financial ma&kets and the rise and fall of the Soviet system.
It is ironic that I b'ecame famous, not because of my activities in
Eastern Europe, but because of the profit we made on sterling when
Britain left the Exchange Rate Mechanism on S e e m b e r 16,1992. I
became an instant celebrity, first in Britain, then in the rest of the
world. When it became known that the Quantum group of funds
had bought a large block of Newmont Mines, the price of gold
soared. Although I expressed no opinion or.gold, ail itil3ds ur' opinions were attributed to me. I made some attempts to rebut them,
but to no avail. Although I had not sought guru status, I could not
ignore it when it was thrust upon me. In fact, I welcomed it because
I thought that it would be useful in having my voice heard on political issues. But that was not as simple as it seemed. When I said that
the Bundesbank's high interest rate policy was becoming counterproductive, the markets responded by pushing down the German
Mark. But when I inveighed against European policy on Bosnia, I
was either ignored or told to stick to the field of my expertise. I
fared particularly poorly in France, where I refrained from speculating against the franc because I did not want to be responsible for
the collapse of what remained of the European Exchange Rate

6
I

I

Preface

Mechanism, but I was blamed for it anyhow. The French government resented my advice even more than it would have resented
my speculative activities. It goes to show that speculators ought to
speculate and keep their mouths shut.
My notoriety as a financial guru has created a tremendous demand for The Alchemy of Finance, hence this new edition. I must confess that my thinking has evolved a great deal since I wrote this
book, but I have been concerned mainly with historical processes,
not with financial ones. I cannot summarize my ideas in this preface-I need to write another book. I intend to do so as soon as time
permits, but there is one important theoretical point I need to make
in urcler iu Llir~gi i t i ~book in line with my curr6nt thirtkmng.
In The Alchemy of Finance, I put forward the theory of reflexivity
as if it were relevant at all times. That is true in the sense that the
two-way feedback mechanism that is the hallmark of reflexivity
can come into play at any time, but it is not true in the sense that
it is at play at all times. In fact, in most situations it is so feeble
that it can be safely ignored. We may distinguish between nearequilibrium conditions where certain corrective mechanisms prevent perceptions and reality from drifting too far apart, and
far-from-equilibrium conditions where a reflexive double-feedback
mechanism is at work and there is no tendency for perceptions and
reality to come close together without a significant change in the
prevailing conditions, a change of regime. In the first case, classical
economic theory applies and the divergence between perceptions
and reality can be ignored as mere noise. In the second case, the
theory. of equilibrium becomes irrelevant and we are confronted
with a one-directional historical process where changes in both
yerceptims and reslity a x irreversible. It is important to distinguish between these two different states of affairs because what is
normal in one is abnormal in the other
The idea of a distinction between nea
rium and far-fromequilibrium conditions is present in The Alchemy of Finance. At the
end of Chapter 1, I distinguish between humdrum and historical
change but I understate the importance of the distinction. I call it
"tautological." I now consider this a mistake. The tautology arises
only because I do not probe deeply enough and cover up with a tautology what is a fundamental difference in the structure of events.
In most phenomena investigated by scientific method, one set
of conditions follows another irrespective of what anybody thinks
about them. The phenomena studied by social sciences, which

, ,

Preface

7

include the finan~ial~markets,
have thinking participants and this
complicates matters. As I have tried to show, the participants' views
are inherently biased. Instead of a direct line leading from one set of
t
there is a constant criss-crossing beconditions to the n e ~ one,
tween the objective, abservable conditions and the participant's observations and vice &sa: participants base their decisions not on
objective conditions but on their interpretation of those conditions.
This is an important point and it has far-reaching consequences. It
introduces an element of indeterminacy which renders the subject
matter less amenable to the kind of generalizations, predictions,
and explanations that have given natural science its reputation. Exactly because it is so disruptive; the social sciztnces in general and
economic theory in particular have done their best to eliminate or
to ignore the element of indeterminacy. I have taken issue with that
endeavor and tried to develop an alternative approach which takes
the participants' bias:as its starting point.
In retrospect, I may have overstated my case. There are many situations that can be fruitfully studied by taking the participants'
bias as given and ignoring the element of indeterminacy which it
may generate. It is only in certain respects and in certain special
circumstances that the indeterminacy becomes significant. It comes
into play when expectations about the future have a bearing on
present behavior-which is the case in financial markets. But even
there, some mechanism must be triggered for the participants' bias
to affect not only market prices but the so-called fundamentals
which are supposed to determine market prices. Apparently 1have
sufficiently clear. The message of my boo
failed tokake this
is usually summed up by saying that the participants' value judgments are always biased and the prevailing bias aifects narket
prices. If that is all I had to say it would be hardly worth writing a
book about it. My point is that there are occasions when the bias
affects not only market prices but also the so-called fundamentals.
This is when reflexivity becomes important. It does not happen all
the time but when it does, market prices follow a different pattern.
They also play a different role: they do not merely reflect the
so-called fundamentals; they themselves become one of the fundamentals which shape the evolution of prices. This recursive relationship renders the evolution of prices indeterminate and the
so-called equilibrium price irrelevant.
Nobody would deny that individual participants operate with biased views; but the prevailing wisdom holds that the participants'

8
-w-

4

Preface

bias can be dismissed as temporary aberrations, so-called random
walks. That is the point on which I disagree. I now believe this
point can be more effectively made by drawing a distinction between near-equilibrium and far-from-equilibrium conditions than
by proposing a general theory of history based on the constant
cross-crossing between perceptions and reality as I have done in
The Alchemy of Finance. That does not mean that there is anything
wrong with the general theory; it means only that the concept of
reflexivity becomes more significant if it is reserved for those cases
where the double feedback mechanism is actually at work.
The Alchemy of Finance is devoted to the study of such cases. The
a s s t c??vious exam.ple is equity lewragirtg where a temporary
overvaluation of shares is converted into per-share earnings
through the issue of shares at inflated prices. In most of the cases
discussed, the participants' bias involves an actual error in their
thinking. For instance, in the late 1970s international bankers lent
too much money to developing countries because they failed to
recognize that the so-called debt ratios they used to measure the
creditworthiness of the borrowing countries were reflexive in the
sense that they were affected by their own lending activity. But
it is not necessary for the bias to involve an actual error. As I show
in Chapter 3, a freely fluctuating exchange rate system is inherently unstable because of the influence of trend-following speculation, yet speculators follow the correct strategy by following the
trend.
Judging by the public reaction-which consists mainly of comments by journalists who read the book superficially or not at allI have not been successful in demonstrating the significance of
reflexivity. Only the iirst part of my argument-that the prevailing
bias affects market prices-seems to have registered. The second
part-that the prevailing bias can in certain circumstances also affect the so-called fundamentals and changes in market prices cause
changes in market prices-seems to have gone unnoticed.
The fault is at least partially mine. Since reflexivity changes the
structure of events, I have tried to put forward a reflexive structure
as the universally valid way of looking at the evolution of market
prices-a kind of general theory h la Keynes in which the absence
of reflexivity constitutes a special case. It would have been better
to present reflexivity as the special case because what endows reflexivity with significance is the fact that it operates intermittently.

Preface

9

Once the significance of reflexivity has sunk in and the inadequacy
of the prevailing wisdom has been recognized, the time would have
been ripe for proposing a general theory of reflexivity.
I have my excuses. I did not observe reflexivity in financial markets but developed reflexivity as an abstract philosophical concept
before I entered the financial markets. In other words, I failed as a
philosophical speculptor before I succeeded as a financial one. Apparently, my failure as a philosopher carried over into my book because I did not make the concept of reflexivity-which can be
observed and converted into profit-as clear as it could be. When
one discovers something new, one has an understandable inclinaaon to exaggerate it$ importance. This is what I did with reiiexivity. By proposing a general theory of reflexivity, I may have gone
too far too soon. I claimed that economic theory is false and social
science is a false metaphor. These are exaggerated claims. Since farfrom-equilibrium conditions arise only intermittently, economic
theory is only intermittently false. And the dividing line between
natural and social sqience is not quite as hard and fast as I made it
appear when I wrote the book. These qualifications render reflexivity more rather than less significant.
Once the concept of reflexivity is established, the range of its applicability seems to widen. It is possible to treat the evolution of
prices in all financial markets taken together as a reflexive, historical process. I have done so in The Alchemy of Finance when I analyzed Reagan's "Imperial Circle," and I have found other examples
since the book was published, such as the German Imperial Circle
after the fall of the Berlin Wall. (See appendix: "The Prospect of European Disintegration.") But there is a danger in pushing the concept oi reflexivity too far, as I nave learned at my owri expefiac.
There are lohg fallow periods when the movements in financial
markets do not seem to follow a reflexive tune but rather resemble
the random walks mandated by the efficient market theory. In
these circumstances, it is better to do nothing than to pursue a ref lexive hypothesis.
Treating reflexivity as an intermittent phenomenon rather than
as a universally valid condition opens up fertile fields for investigation. For instance, the question poses itself: How can near- and farfrom-equilibrium conditions be distinguished from each other?
What is the criterion of demarcation? I have done a lot of thinking
on that question and I have the beginnings of an answer. Whether

10
4

Preface

I can formulate it properly remains to be seen in my next book. It
revolves around a question of values and it is relevant for society in
general, not only for financial markets. My next book, if it is ever
written, will be a theory of history, not a theory of finance. I am
providing an example of how the boom-bust pattern of financial
markets can be applied to larger historical processes in the appendix where I reproduce a lecture I delivered on September 29,
1993, entitled "Prospect for European Disintegration."
