
Absolutely. I learned to avoid trying to catch up or double up to recoup losses. I also learned that a
certain amount of loss will affect your judgment, so you have to put some time between that loss
and the next trade.
I guess a corollary of that would be: When things aren't going right, don't push, don't press.
Yes. After all is said and done, you have to minimize your losses and try to preserve capital for
those few instances when you can make a lot in a very short period of time. What you can't afford
to do is throw away your capital on suboptimal trades. If you do, you will be too debilitated to trade
when the right position comes along. Even if you put the trade on, it will be relatively small
because your capital will have been depleted by the other trades.
Was the 1973 soybean market your first really big market?
I made enough money in that market to go to the Chicago Board of Trade the next year. I didn't
make my money by just going long soybeans. I was basically a pit trader, who traded in and out a
lot. The markets were very good, because there was excellent order flow. It was a great time to be
in the pit.
So it wasn't so much catching the trend. It was more a matter of scalping the market
successfully.
Also, so many people would make incredibly bad trades just to take a profit. They would get out
even though the market was locked limit-up and almost sure to go up the next day. They couldn't
stand the profits burning a hole in their pocket. I would try to get in when they were getting out.
It sounds like easy pickings.
There was some amount of risk, but if you were disposed to going with a strong trend, it was a deal.
They were giving you an edge to do it.
Giving you a high probability that the next day you would be ahead?
You have to remember some of these markets went up the limit ten days in a row. Most people
thought that even four or five consecutive limit-up days was impossible.
In situations where a market goes limit-up, limit-up, limit-up, at some point, the market may
open limit-down. How do you recognize or sense when not to buy at limit bid?
It's just an odds play. There is a lot of volatility in the outcome, but you know the odds are in your
favor when you go long at limit bid.
In all the years you have traded, have there been any really bad years? Was there a
particular market or two that you were dead wrong about and that caused it to be a bad
year?
When we have had bad trading periods, it is really not one market that does it. In those situations,
almost all the markets are going sideways and making lots of false breakouts. If one of the markets
is decent, that is usually enough to avoid a bad situation.
Is there any year that stands out?
1978 was not a good year for trading. I compounded losses unnecessarily because I was in the
process of making the transition from floor trader to off-the-floor trader and had no idea how
different they were.
Was 1978 the year that you started trading from an office?
In 1977,1 was mostly a floor trader, and by 1978 I had made the full-time transition.
Did that switch cause you to become more of a long-term position trader?
Ultimately, what I learned from 1978 is that you have to be longer term as a desk trader. In the pit,
if it looked like soybeans were going to break 3 cents, I would sell, and if it didn't break, I would
get out. You don't have that luxury off the floor, because you lose the edge when putting in the
orders. Also, the judgments you make looking at prices on the screen aren't as good as those made
in the pit watching what is going on. In the pit, there are indicators that you learn subconsciously,
like "these three guys are never right at market turns," and if they all do the same thing at the same
time, a light clicks on. It took me a long time to realize that those tools weren't going to be
available anymore.
49

Why did you make the change? You were doing really well on the floor. Why switch to a
desk?
When I started in 1970, there were no futures markets in currencies, interest rates, or gold. By
1978, these markets had been listed on the board long enough to be viable. The currencies started in
1974, but it took several years to get enough volume.
So, it was the desire to trade more markets than you physically could in a single location that
motivated your move?
And the opportunity didn't exist five years earlier.
I understand that you initiated a trader-trainee program. What year was that?
We hired a group at the beginning of 1984 and another group at the beginning of 1985.
What was the motivation for this program?
I have a partner who has been a friend since high school. We have had philosophical disagreements
about everything you could imagine. One of these arguments was whether the skills of a successful
trader could be reduced to a set of rules—that was my point of view—or whether there was
something ineffable, mystical, subjective, or intuitive that made someone a good trader. This
argument had been going on for a long time, and I guess I was getting a little frustrated with idle
speculation. Finally, I said, "Here is a way we can definitely resolve this argument. Let's hire and
train some people and see what happens." He agreed.
It was an intellectual experiment. We trained them as well as we could. That was the way to do the
experiment right, I thought. I tried to codify all the things I knew about the markets. We taught
them a little bit about probability, money management, and trading. It turned out I was right. I don't
say that to pat myself on the back, but even I am surprised how well it worked. It's frightening how
well it worked.
Is your basic contention that you can take almost any reasonably intelligent individual and
turn him into a successful trader?
No. We screened for people we thought would be right. We received 1,000 applications and
narrowed it down to forty people whom we interviewed. Then we picked ten.
What qualities were you looking for?
I don't like to discuss that because if I told you one of the things we looked for was chess players,
and we ever do it again, we would be inundated by resumes from chess players.
Was intelligence one of the key items?
It was one of the traits, but it wasn't the essential item. To find the things that we were looking for,
we could choose from intelligent or extremely intelligent people. We picked the ones with extreme
intelligence just because they were available.
Didn't you have any reluctance about giving away trade secrets?
Sure, but I don't think trading strategies are as vulnerable to not working if people know about
them, as most traders believe. If what you are doing is right, it will work even if people have a
general idea about it. I always say that you could publish trading rules in the newspaper and no one
would follow them. The key is consistency and discipline. Almost anybody can make up a list of
rules that are 80 percent as good as what we taught our people. What they couldn't do is give them
the confidence to stick to those rales even when things are going bad.
How long was the training process?
Shockingly short. In the first year, it took two weeks. Then we had them trade for a month and keep
a log indicating why they made their trades. We wanted to see if they were consistent in doing what
they had been taught. We really got good at it in the second year—the course took just one week.
How many trainees were there?
Twenty-three in total.
What were the results?
We dropped three people who didn't do well. The other twenty, however, have averaged about 100
percent profit per year.
50

When you train people, you tell them your basic approach to the markets. Isn't there a risk of
creating twenty clones of Richard Dennis? Wouldn't their trading results be highly correlated
with what you are doing?
There was a huge spread. One of the things that we repeatedly told the class was: "We are going to
teach you what we think works, but you are expected to add your own personal flair, feeling, or
judgment."
How large are the stakes these traders are using?
It has increased over the years as they have made money. I would say on average about $2 million
each.
What did they start out with?
One hundred thousand dollars each.
I've heard this group of traders referred to as the "turtles." I found that term somewhat
amusing. What is the origin of the name?
When I decided to do the trader-trainee program, I had just returned from a trip to the Far East. In
telling someone about the program I said, "We are going to grow traders just like they grow turtles
in Singapore." I had visited a farm there and seen a huge vat with thousands of squirming turtles;
that became my image of growing traders.
How much of a role does luck play in trading?
In the long run, zero. Absolutely zero. I don't think anybody winds up making money in this
business because they started out lucky.
But on individual trades, obviously, it makes a difference?
That is where the confusion lies. On any individual trade it is almost all luck. It is just a matter of
statistics. If you take something that has a 53 percent chance of working each time, over the long
run there is a 100 percent chance of it working. If I review the results of two different traders,
looking at anything less than one year doesn't make any sense. It might be a couple of years before
you can determine if one is better than the other.
You are one of the few people who is both a discretionary trader and a systems trader. How
would you compare the two approaches?
Professional traders may do some very intelligent things, but they have a tendency not to think
systematically about what they are doing. For example, most traders who do a trade that works will
not think: Why did it work? What did I do here that I might be able to do in another market, at
another time? There is not a lot of reflection on the process of trading, hi contrast, I think I always
have been analytical about trading, even before I ever researched a mechanical system.
On the opposite extreme, you have the academic types who research before they have ever traded.
They lack the seat-of-the-pants knowledge necessary to develop good trading systems. Mercifully, I
did the trading first. Therefore, the research we do is more applicable to the real world.
Can you give me an example of how the lack of real world experience would hurt the
researcher?
As an example, assume I develop a mechanical system that often signals placement of stops at
points where I know there will tend to be a lot of stops, hi the real world, it is not too wise to have
your stop where everyone else has their stop. Also, that system is going to have above-average
skids. If you don't understand that and adjust the results accordingly, you are going to get a system
that looks great on paper, but is going to do consistently poorer in the real world.
You mentioned that before you developed a mechanical trading system, you paid close
attention to the trading process. Did you keep a log of what you did right and wrong, or was it
a matter of memory?
Yes, I would write down observations and think about them. I thought about everything I was
doing.
Is that something you would advise other traders to do to improve— that is, keep track of
what they are doing right and what they are doing wrong?
51

Sure. The trading experience is so intense that there is a natural tendency to want to avoid thinking
about it once the day is over. I am that way when things are working. But, when they are not, it
spurs me to want to think about what I'm doing and how I might do better. When things go bad,
traders shouldn't stick their heads in the sand and just hope it gets better.
What you are saying is that the times when it is most tempting to avoid thinking about the
markets at all are the times when you should be thinking about them the most.
Right. I don't have any problem with that because I am obsessive about the markets.
What do you do in a situation where your feelings as a trader tell you to do one thing and
your systems point in the other direction?
If they are absolutely opposed, you do nothing until you can resolve that conflict.
Are most of your systems trend oriented in nature?
Yes.
So, by definition, they will never be in the right direction at market turns. Yet you, as an
experienced trader, may sense when a market may be prone for a turn. In a situation like
that, would you be willing to buy because of what you see as a trader even though your
system is short?
I would probably want to be flat, since I tend to weigh the psychological, opinion-oriented segment
of trading about equal with the technical and trend-following element.
So you want to see the market display some signs of turning around before you'll commit?
What is more likely is that I will be positioned in the right direction of a trend and decide to
liquidate faster than a trend-following system would because of the intuitive factor.
What about entering a new trade counter to a prevailing trend?
I've certainly done it—that is, made countertrend initiations. However, as a rule of thumb, I don't
think you should do it.
Do those type of trades do more poorly than other trades?
Generally, yes, although every now and then they may give you a great story like going short sugar
at 60 cents, which I did. [Sugar plummeted from a high of 66 cents in November 1974 to a relative
low under 12 cents only seven months later. Each 1 -cent move in sugar is worth $ 1,120 per
contract. A large trader like Dennis will often trade positions measured in thousands of contracts.]
I've got ten stories like that. But I have to tell you, in all honesty, I don't think the broad class of
trades I have done like that have been profitable.
The short sugar trade is a great example because the market had witnessed an incredibly
explosive upmove and it took a lot of courage to step in as a seller at 60 cents. But take the flip
side when sugar is in a real bear market and is down to 5 cents; every trend-following system
in the world is going to be short. Yet, if conditions are such that the fundamentals are in
transition and the market price is only a little over the cost of the bag it's packed in, would
you make an exception?
Actually, I've lost more money in situations like that because all the market has to do is go down
one more cent and you are out of there. I made a lot of money going short sugar at 60 cents, but I
lost much more going long sugar at 6 cents.
When you do a trade like that, that is, buying a market because the downside is so-called
"limited," do you just ride it out, or do you eventually throw in the towel?
You throw it in. Because how do you know? Maybe it is going to 2 cents; maybe it is going to 1
cent.
I guess a main concern is that you are constantly giving up the premium in the forward
months. [In a bear market, the more forward contracts tend to trade at a premium. For
example, May sugar might be at 6 cents, July at 6\ and October at 7. Even if cash prices
remained stable, a holder of October futures would lose 1 cent between May and October.]
Sure, you are forced out at 3 and get back in at 5. Then it falls to 3 again.
52

Otherwise, there wouldn't be that much risk in the trade.
Right. The idea that one side of the market is much more likely to work in the absence of anything
else is an illusion. The market just wouldn't be there if that was true. There were plenty of guys
who went short soybeans at $4 in 1973, because just like sugar at 4 cents couldn't go any lower,
beans at $4 couldn't go any higher. Well, not only did they go higher, they went to a high of $12.97
in a matter of four or five months. There is another point that I think is as important: You should
expect the unexpected in this business; expect the extreme. Don't think in terms of boundaries that
limit what the market might do. If mere is any lesson I have learned in the nearly twenty years that
I've been in this business, it is that the unexpected and the impossible happen every now and then.
So don't be too tied to history?
Right.
And yet, all your rules are based on history. Is there a contradiction there?
No, because a good trend-following system will keep you in the market until there is evidence that
the trend has changed. If you had been doing your historical research on soybeans in 1972, you
would have concluded that any time soybeans advance by 50 cents, you might as well get out,
because the market had never moved up or down by significantly more than that. Obviously, that
was the wrong conclusion because it went up another $8. A good trend-following system, however,
would have kept you in for most of the move.
So you don't want to draw boundaries from history over market behavior?
Right. The correct approach is to say: This structure means up, and this structure means up no
more, but never that this structure means up this much and no more.
When you trade a system, do you go with the version of the system that tested out best for the
past, or do other factors command consideration?
One of the toughest problems in deciding how to trade is whether you just go with what is optimal
for the data base, or whether you start from some other premise. You might deliberately trade
something other than the optimal parameter set [version of the system with the best past performance] because you think the future is going to be unlike the past in a specific way. By
definition, any other parameter set is going to have a poorer past performance than the optimal set.
But if the difference in performance is only 10 percent, it might well be worth that 10 percent
difference if you believe the suboptimal set, as measured by past data, will fit the future better.
You have gone from being a very small trader to a very large trader, especially now that you
are managing outside money. Do you find that order size gets in the way? Does it become
substantially more difficult to be successful when you are trading size?
At some level it would. I don't think we have reached that point yet, although we may not be
tremendously far away from it. I think about three times the amount we are handling now would be
just about it. We currently have about $120 million in customer funds.
In other words, you haven't hit the wall yet?
No.
Is that because you are using many different approaches and, therefore, don't have all your
orders going in at one point?
Yes. You have to think about diversification. If you had one method, or one person, making all the
decisions, you couldn't handle amounts that large. But if you use different strategies and have a
diversity in decision makers, you can handle several hundred million dollars without any major
problem.
Could that have been a subliminal reason for developing your training program—to try to
diversify the decision-making process?
Actually, we hadn't thought of it that way, but it did work to our advantage. In fact, we are going to
try to market some of the traders we have trained for trading customer money.
Is slippage a problem in your trading? [Slippage is the difference between the theoretical
execution price assumed by a computer program and the actual fill price.]
53

No. We try to make a hard-nosed estimate when building the cost of trading into a system. Also, we
reduce our costs significantly by having our own brokers.
When you hold a major position, at what point do you know you are wrong? What tells you
to get out of the position?
If you have a loss on a trade after a week or two, you are clearly wrong. Even when you are around
breakeven, but a significant amount of time has passed, you are probably wrong mere too.
Do you define your maximum risk point when you get into a trade?
You should always have a worst case point. The only choice should be to get out quicker.
Are you largely a self-taught trader, or did other traders teach you lessons that were
worthwhile?
I would say I am self-taught. What is really amazing is how little published literature there is on
trading.
Is there anything you can recommend to people who are interested in trading?
I think Edwin Lefevre's Reminiscences of a Stock Operator [reputedly a semifictionalized
biography of Jesse Livermore, the legendary stock trader] is interesting and captures the feel of
trading pretty well, but that book was written sixty-five years ago.
Are there some key trading strategies that you can talk about without revealing any secrets?
The market being in a trend is the main thing that eventually gets us in a trade. That is a pretty
simple idea. Being consistent and making sure you do that all the time is probably more important
than the particular characteristics you use to define the trend. Whatever method you use to enter
trades, the most critical thing is that if there is a major trend, your approach should assure that you
get in that trend.
A trend could easily be defined using a simple system. Is there something special that you
look for to define a trend?
No. If I see a trend developing, I know eventually I'll have to get in. The question is whether I get
in earlier or later, and that might depend on how I see the market reacting to news. If a market goes
up when it should go up, I might buy earlier. If it goes down when it should go up, I'll wait until the
trend is better defined.
How much common behavior is there between markets? Are the patterns of beans similar to
the patterns of bonds, or do markets have their own personalities?
I could trade without knowing the name of the market.
So, what you are saying is that patterns in different markets are very similar.
Yes. In our research, if a system doesn't work for both bonds and beans, we don't care about it.
Would you say the stock market is an exception? That is, does the stock market also behave
like other markets, or does the stock market have its own behavior pattern?
I think it is probably separate.
Why would you say that is true?
Well, my research on individual stocks shows that price fluctuations are closer to random than they
are in commodities. Demonstrably, commodities are trending and, arguably, stocks are random.
Do you have an explanation for that phenomenon?
I believe that there is not enough fundamental information per stock to create sufficient trends to
move them from their random character. There aren't as many commodities as there are stocks.
In other words, there is not the same flow of information as in the commodity markets?
There is not enough information, not enough fundamentals. Just nothing going on.
In the commodity markets, technical information is basically confined to price, volume, and
open interest. Since there is so much more technical information available for stock indexes—
advance/decline ratios, various sentiment indicators, relationships between different groups
of stocks, etc.—do ordinary trend-following systems start off at a big disadvantage because
54
