
What should Alex do to reverse this destructive direction? Here
are five highly effective action tips to get back on the road to high
performance:
1. Clean out the kitchen. Remove all the junk such as empty-calorie
snacks, cream-based sauces, processed or packaged foods,
and sugary drinks. Protect your home as a healthy oasis in a
toxic food environment. If you make it inconvenient to eat
junk food, you’ll have only one option—nutritious foods.
2. Limit or eliminate visits to fast-food restaurants. Pack a cooler with
bottled water, fruit, vegetables, tuna on whole-wheat bread,

c07.indd 140

11/2/07 12:20:53 PM

Seventh-Inning Stretch

141

low-carbohydrate protein bars, and other high-quality food
items that are high in protein and nutrients. Also, take a
multivitamin with minerals every day.
3. Drink plenty of water. Our brain is 85 percent water, so it is
imperative to stay well hydrated. The most efficient way to
determine the minimum amount of water your body needs
is to drink approximately one ounce of water per kilogram
of body weight. If a person weighs 80 kilograms, or approximately 176 pounds, he should drink approximately 80 ounces
of water, or almost two and a half liters. Some benefits of
drinking water include:
• Regulates body temperature.
• Removes toxins and waste products.
• Transports nutrients.
• Maintains blood volume.
• Protects against fatigue.
• Curbs hunger pangs.
• Every major system in our bodies begins to break down
when water is low.
• Concentration and reaction time drop substantially with a
lack of water.
• Soft drinks contribute zero nutrients or vitamins—only
calories and chemicals.
• Water has zero calories, yet fills you up.
4. Exercise with free weights. A daily workout releases brain chemicals, such as epinephrine and norepinephrine, which boost
alertness. Regular exercise also raises levels of serotonin, a
nerve chemical that boosts mood. Daily exercise naturally
destresses the body by lowering blood levels of stress hormones, including cortisol.
The rise in body temperature that results from a vigorous
workout has a tranquilizing effect on the body, much like a
soaking in a hot bath. Exercise is one of the best remedies for
depression, many times better than medications or counseling.
Physical exercise:
• Arouses the body.
• Sharpens the senses.
• Increases blood flow to the muscles and brain.
• Increases the transportation of oxygen and nutrients to the
tissues.

c07.indd 141

11/2/07 12:20:53 PM

142

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

• Speeds the removal of toxins and cellular debris.
• Reduces overall stress of the body.
Research indicates that active people think more clearly,
concentrate better, remember more, and react more quickly
than sedentary people. Furthermore, research also shows that
individuals increase their memory and ability to multitask by
up to 20 percent after participating in an exercise program.
5. Eat brain foods and do mental gymnastics. Research shows that
memory and cognitive skills are greatly enhanced with a diet
rich in antioxidants (vitamins B, C, and E and beta-carotene).
Also, consuming omega-3 fatty acids found in fish will enhance the brain’s ability to function. If you have an important
morning meeting, eat a high-protein breakfast to help raise
your serotonin levels, which produce hormones that make you
feel more alert. An example of a “brain-empowering breakfast” would be five egg whites, salmon, berries, and at least
16 ounces of water.
Challenging your brain by learning new information stimulates blood flow and strengthens the connections, or synapses,
between nerve cells in the brain. Memorizing data also encourages the brain to work more effectively and may reduce age-related
memory loss.

Sweet Nothings—Literally!
If you were to take time to read most of the labels found on some
of the foods you were eating, you would be amazed to see just how
much sugar you are consuming each and every day. For instance,
a typical cola drink packaged in a 20-ounce container has in it
28 grams of sugars, which converts to seven full teaspoons! So-called
“healthy” grain cereals might also surprise you when you check the
ingredients on the side of the box. One very popular cereal brand
identified by a Special Big Red letter in the alphabet (hint: the 11th
letter) showed 11 grams of sugar for a serving size of 3⁄4 cup. What
is interesting is that most cereal boxes will state that a typical serving size is about 1 cup or 28 grams. Now when was the last time
you sat down and consumed 3⁄4 cup of anything? Just for the heck
of it, pour what you would estimate to be an average bowl of cereal

c07.indd 142

11/2/07 12:20:53 PM

Seventh-Inning Stretch

143

that you would normally eat then take the contents out of the bowl
and measure it. Now you will see exactly how many servings you are
really eating each morning. Chances are by the time you get finished
filling your cereal bowl, it will measure out at least one and a half
cups. This means the Special “health” cereal you are eating delivers a
whopping 22 grams, or 5 teaspoons, of sugar into your bloodstream
each morning.
Take time out to document your daily intake of sugar in the
foods you eat, then think about how many “Alex” moments you run
through during your trading day. Table 7.1 shows some of the things
most people eat along with the sugar content for each serving.
In this chapter we have focused on diet and exercise for several
reasons. Not only will this help you relieve stress, but these ideas will
also help you live a more healthy and fruitful life. Think about it:
What good would it do you if, for your whole life, you worked hard
and traded the markets for profit only to see those profits eaten up
with your having to fight an illness later on in life? Especially when
that illness could have been avoided early on by following some simple ideas about diet and exercise?
Many believe that there will one day be a cure for cancer, and
that day can not come soon enough, but until then many medical
experts feel that preventative medicine is the best way to head off
this disease. In fact, a report put out by the Wellness Directory of
Minnesota, entitled “Cancer Loves Sugar,” states that cancer metabolizes through the process of fermentation. Now, if you have ever
tried to make your own wine, you will know that in order for fermentation to take place, you need to have sugar in the mix. In fact,
Table 7.1

c07.indd 143

Sugar Content of Common Foods

Food

Serving Size

Grams of Sugar

Cola
Fruit drink
Chocolate bar
Sherbet
Fruit sorbet
Donut
White bread
Honey
Raisins

12 oz.
12 oz.
1 oz.
½ cup
½ cup
1
1 slice
1 tablespoon
½ cup

40
25
15
25
28
24
12
12
16

11/2/07 12:20:53 PM

144

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Dr. Otto Warburg discovered years ago that cancerous cells can live
and develop, even in the absence of oxygen:
Cancer has only one prime cause. It is the replacement of normal
oxygen respiration of the body’s cells by an anaerobic [i.e., oxygendeficient] cell respiration. (Dr. Otto Warburg, Nobel Prize winner
in physiology/medicine, 1931)

So what else does Warburg’s discovery tell us? It tells us that
cancer metabolizes much differently than normal cells. Normal cells
need oxygen; cancer cells despise oxygen. In fact, oxygen therapy
is a favorite among many clinics around the world. So how can you
improve on your health, relieve stress, and cut down on your risks of
getting cancer? The answer is: Force oxygen into your bloodstream
through aerobic exercise.
Now, we’re not suddenly professing an extraordinary expertise
in diet and nutrition. But in the same way that we read the markets
and look for patterns and signals for our trading, we are also observers of behavior as it relates to diet, nutrition, and exercise. And our
observations, coupled with some basic research available to anyone
interested, tell us that there’s more to success in the markets than
just finding the right entry point for your stock. Hopefully, that great
trade is just one part of an overall successful lifestyle.

Trading Fingers of Steel
We would be leaving out half the formula if we concentrated on
diet alone. We need exercise to stay healthy, and our brains need an
invigorating blood flow to stay alert.
Oxygen-enriched blood flowing through your veins is good for
you. Your body is a lot more efficient than you may imagine, and
it continues to become more efficient as you change your diet and
exercise routines. For example, let’s say that you were thinking about
going on a starvation diet, which is nothing more than stopping
your caloric intake for long periods of time in order to lose weight.
Under this stress, your body would react in a way that protects you
from starvation. In other words, your body senses that food in not
being digested, so what it does is slow down your metabolic rate (the
rate at which your body expends energy). On top of that, your body
will also become more efficient at storing fat. Why is that? Well, it’s

c07.indd 144

11/2/07 12:20:54 PM

Seventh-Inning Stretch

145

because your body doesn’t want to die, and if you continued on with
a starvation diet long enough, you would die. Your body needs food
to survive, so while you may feel good about losing those unwanted
pounds, you have in a sense trained your body to get better at storing
fat. You will find that the next time you eat a meal, you will store even
more fat than you did before you went on your diet. You may have
met people who have gone through this experience where you’ll
see them take off amazing amounts of fat in a short period of time
only to see them a year later heavier then they’ve ever been before.
Chances are those people have only been dieting and not changing
their lifestyles with regard to exercise.
If you are someone who is sitting in front of a computer all day
trading the markets and eating like Alex the trader, chances are you
are on the road to disaster. Instead, try little things that can help
jump-start your exercise program. Make small changes that would
not interfere with your trading or the way you conduct your business.
For instance, try standing up the next time you pick up the phone
instead of sitting down at your desk. Even if you were in a crowded
office, this would not draw any unwanted attention to you. How about
this: If you are in an office by yourself or at home, you can talk on the
phone while doing calf-ups. This is when you stand flat on both feet
with your weight evenly distributed and rock back and forth from
your heels to your toes. Stand as tall as you can on your toes while
you lift your heels off the ground. Try doing this a hundred times in
a row, and you will definitely feel the soreness in your muscles the
next day. I’m sure you have heard the old saying, “No pain, no gain.”
There is truth in that saying.
When you work your muscles, you are causing tiny tears in the
muscle tissue. Your body then heals itself of these small tears and
rebuilds the muscle, and this is why you feel achy after you have
worked out. This is also known as “delayed-onset muscle soreness” or
DOMS. As you repeat this process, the body becomes more efficient
over time as you build muscle on top of muscle. As a result, your
body burns more calories while you are at rest, and you will have
increased your metabolism. Studies have shown that the majority
of all calories burned (about 70 to 80 percent) are burned at the
resting level. So imagine what a couple of hundred calf-ups can do
for you each day. No extra time needed—just start your activities the
next time the phone rings. If you are too embarrassed to do them
in your office, then exercise while you are brushing your teeth.

c07.indd 145

11/2/07 12:20:54 PM

146

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success
Table 7.2 Activity and Calorie Burn Chart
Activity
Washing car
Walking upstairs
Playing with kids
Playing guitar
Table tennis
Canoeing
Raking the lawn
Gardening
Stretching

Calories per Hour
346
622
306
244
306
346
326
418
300

You can whip out a hundred calf-ups in no time, and your dentist
will love you for it.
Now let’s face it, we are all human, and every now and then we
are going to give in to a freshly baked Krispy Kreme donut that’s
loaded with sugar and calories. Some of you may even be consuming
these savory bits of sweetness to support your long stock position that
you are still holding at $50 per share (ticker symbol: KKD).
So, in order to give you an edge in the battle of the bulge, we
have come up with a list of activities that will fit nicely into your
everyday life. Review Table 7.2, which shows the number of calories
burned in a one-hour period for a person who weighs 170 pounds
(77 kg). Notice how many of these activities keep us in shape without
having to even step one foot in the gym.

Small Steps, Big Changes
Most people wish they could do better when it comes to diet, nutrition, and exercise. If you find yourself in that majority, don’t lose
hope. We want to encourage you to make the changes necessary to
enjoy the fruits of your labors and share them with your friends and
family for many years. You don’t have to make radical changes to
enjoy radical benefits. Think about applying your own variation of
the 1% Rule (discussed in Chapter 12) to your lifestyle. Reduce your
sugar intake by 1 percent each month. Increase your exercise time
by 1 percent each week. Add 1 percent more to your water intake
each week. You see how the small changes will add up over time?

c07.indd 146

11/2/07 12:20:54 PM

Seventh-Inning Stretch

147

Chatter Box—Rick
Many key points and information contained within this chapter were
provided by a good friend of The Market Guys, Dean Rosson. Dean is
a professional consultant who specializes in the areas of diet, nutrition,
and fitness.
Dean tells the true story of a friend of his in Atlanta. This friend was
at the top of his game; he was tremendously successful in business and
seemed to possess the Midas touch. In fact, he was just completing an
11,000-square-foot addition to his home when he called Dean to mention that he was having trouble catching his breath. Dean encouraged
him to visit his doctor as soon as possible. Dean’s friend took a stress test
on the following Monday. The doctor called him later that afternoon
and told him that he was to check into the hospital at the first opportunity the next morning. It turned out that Dean’s friend had between
70 and 90 percent blockages in all arteries and could literally drop
dead at any moment. The man was only 40 years old.
Consider the situation. Here was a man with every success financially, but his lifestyle had him on a road to physical ruin. He was on
the verge of creating wealth that he would never enjoy. Dean’s friend
was given the opportunity to make changes in his diet and exercise
because of a warning shot fired by his own body. Had he ignored that
warning, his family would be enjoying the fruits of his success without
him. We’re happy to say that this gentleman is still an active part of his
family and on the road to recovery.

Managing risk and performing at your highest level are not based
solely on how well you read the charts. Processing information and
taking action—the essence of trading—is highly dependent on how
well you take care of yourself. Don’t neglect the trader while attending to the trading. You just might find that your life improves along
with your profits!

c07.indd 147

11/2/07 12:20:54 PM

c07.indd 148

11/2/07 12:20:55 PM

8

C H A P T E R

E Pluribus Unum
O UT OF MA N Y STOCKS, ONE

“The world I am trying to understand is one in which men think
they want one thing and then upon getting it, find out to their
dismay that they don’t want it nearly as much as they thought or
don’t want it at all and that something else, of which they were
hardly aware, is what they really want.”
Albert Hirschman,
Shifting Involvements: Private Interest and Public Action,
Princeton University Press, 1982

T

he above quote from Albert Hirschman captures the battle that
every person feels when he’s given too many options. We’ve all been
in this situation at one time or another. You sit down at a restaurant
with a pretty good idea of the steak you plan to order and how you
wanted it prepared. But you open the menu to see 10 pages of everything, from salads to sandwiches to steaks to pastas. After a few
minutes, you’re considering the shrimp scampi or the bleu cheese–
encrusted filet. By the time the server comes for your order, you’re
in a turmoil trying to figure out which meal to order that won’t
leave you regretting your choice. Inevitably, the meal that arrives
for the person seated next to you looks even better than your own
selection, and your dining experience has dropped a couple of
notches. There’s some age-old wisdom in Henry Ford’s reputed
149

c08.indd 149

11/2/07 12:25:06 PM

150

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

comment regarding the Model T when he said, “The customer
can have any color he wants so long as it’s black.” Ford’s approach
may have been self-serving, as he was establishing the efficiency of
assembly-line production. However, with only one color from which
to choose, thousands of hours in the showroom agonizing over various hues were doubtless avoided.
“The presumption is, self-determination is a good thing and
choice is essential to self-determination,” writes Barry Schwartz,
author of The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is Less (New York: Harper
Perennial, 2005). “But there’s a point where all of this choice starts
to be not only unproductive, but counterproductive—a source of
pain, regret, worry about missed opportunities and unrealistically
high expectations.”

