
d THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

buy signal (which comes on the close of that session), this 1s not a trade that
warrants action.

As a Japanese proverb says, “His potential is that of the fully drawn bow,
his timing the release of the trigger." The timing of the release of the trigger
depends on the risk/reward aspect of the trade.

Although candle lines and patterns may offer excellent signals, I advise
using them in combination with other technical indicators Just as several
strands wound together are stronger than a single fiber, so is the combined
power of several indicators all giving the same buy or sell signal.

Proceed by answering the following questions. Check your answers
against the answers at the end of each section. Even if you know the answer
to a question without hesitation, take time to read my explanation. You'll
find additional information in my answers that will add to your knowledge of
candles.

In the next section of this chapter, we'll cover the construction of single
candle lines. The basic formations are easy to learn. We'll start by placing em-
phasis on the length of real bodies, whether short or long, as well as the
lengths of their accompanying shadows. With a little practice, you'll soon be
able to decipher the important signals candles present.

CHECK VOUR UNDERSTANDING

Questions for Chapter One, Section One:
Candle Chart Overview
1. The candlestick chart was invented by
a. the Chinese.
b. the Japanese.
¢. no one knows.
d. the Koreans.
2. Candle charts are believed to have started
a. in the 1600s, in the rice futures markets.
b. in the 1870s, with the opening of the Japanese stock market.
¢. in the U.S stock market, in the 1920s.
4d. in China, in the seventeenth century.


The Essentials

3. Candlestick charts can be used for which markets?
a. Japanese stock market
b. U.S. stock market
c. Futures markets
d. All of the above
4. What time frames cannot be used to construct a candle chart?
a. Daily
b. Weekly
c. Five-zminute chart
a. Tick chart
5. A limitation of candle charts ts that
a. they only work with daily or longer-term charts.
b. they can't be merged with Western technical analysis.
c. they need a close to confirm a candle signal.
d. they only work with stocks.
6. Another limitation of candle charts 1s that they
a. don't give reversal signals.
b. don't give price targets.
¢. can only be used on daily charts.
d. can only be used on equities.

7. Why can you use Wester technical analysis techniques on a candle
chart?

a. Because candlestick charts and Western technical analysis evolved at
the same time.

b. Because they both have closing prices.

c. You can't use Western technical analysis on candle charts.

d. Because candlestick charts and bar charts use the same data.
8. Before placing a trade based on a candle signal, one should

a. consider the weight of other technical signals.

b. consider the risk/reward of the trade.

¢. always look at a 5-minute chart.

a. Both (a) and (b).


THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

Answers for Chapter One, Section One:
Candle Chart Overview

1. b. The candlestick chart was invented by the Japanese. The name “can-
diestick” or candle chart is derived from the fact that the lines look like
candles with wicks.

2. b. According to my research, the first candlestick charts were used when
the Japanese stock market started in the 1870s. However, candlestick
techniques likely evolved from earlier technical methodology that started
with the Japanese rice futures market in the 1600s. Back then, traders
dealt with the psychology of the market rather than specific price pat-
terns. One author, writing in 1756, said, “When all are bearish, there 1s
cause for concern.” This is very similar to contrary opinion used today in
the trading community. Even in those days, the Japanese understood the
psychological aspect of the market.

3. d. Candle charts can be used in all markets that have an open, high, low,
and close.

4. d. Candle charts can be used throughout the trading spectrum, from
weekly to daily and intraday charting. For a weekly chart, the candle
would be composed of Monday's open, the high and low of the week, and
Friday's close. For a daily chart, you would use the open, high, low, and
close of the session. On an intraday basis, it would be the open, high, low,
and close for the chosen (Le., hourly) time period. Since tick charts only
have closes, we can't use candlesticks on ther.

5. ¢. Because candle charts use the open, high, low, and close, we need to
wait for the closing price to confirm the candle signal. However, a valu-
able technique 1s to look at a shorter time frame to obtain an earlier sig-
nal. For example, on a daily chart, we would have to wait for the close of
the day to complete the candle line, or signal. If you shift to an intraday
candle chart, you need only wait for the close of that intraday session to
get the candle signal.

6. b. Candle charts cannot give price targets (although they can provide
potential support and resistance levels). This is why it is best to combine
them with Western technical signals that help provide a target. For
example, a pivot high or a falling resistance line may be an upside target
once a bullish candlestick signal is given.

7. d. Because candle charts and bar charts use the same open, low, high,
and low prices, all Western technical analysis techniques can be com-


The Essentials 7

bined with candle charts. This is why candle charts replaced bar charts in
the 1870s in Japan. Candle charts will likely replace bar charts In the
Western world, as well. With bar charts, you receive only bar chart sig-
nals. With candle charts, you can use all Western charting techniques
and you have the insights given by candle charts.

8. d. Although candle signals provide strong visual warnings of a potential
reversal, a trader should always consider whether a trade based on a
candle signal offers an attractive risk/reward aspect. A classic candle sig-
nal does not equal a good trade. The decision to place a trade should be
contingent on risk/reward analysis. As the Japanese proverb states,
“Weigh the situation, then move," or in the case of a poor risk/reward,
“Do not move.” Another important market timing aspect in determining
a candle line or pattern ts confirming another technical signal, such as a
moving average or 50% retracement. Such an occurrence improves the
chances of a market turn. Although intraday traders may look at 5-minute
eandle charts, in my opinion, one need not look at these before placing a
trade (unless you are trading using 5-minute charts).


SECTION TWO
Candlestick Construction

Japanese proverb states, “Without oars, you cannot cross in a boat.”
This section will provide the oars you need to build your foundation of
candle charts. We will address the actual construction of the candle
lines, which have the same components as bars: a high, low, open, and close.

We will also delve into basic candle applications and begin to harness the
power of candle charts.

In this section you will learn...

* How to identify the components of individual candle lines
* How to discern the difference between real bodies and shadows
* How to construct a candle line

kev terms to watch for:

Real body
White real body
Black real body
Upper shadow
Lower shadow

GETTING STARTED

Technical analysts use three basic kinds of charts: line charts, bar charts, and
eandle charts. (Point-and-figure charts are an additional alternative, but they
don't show a session's high, low, open, or closing prices.) Line charts are

”


10

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

KEY POINT

33}

Because candles need open, high, low, and close, we can't use candle charts on mu-
tual funds or tick-by-tick charts, since these have only closing prices.

made up of points that usually represent the closing price of a financial in-
strument, connected by a single line.

Just as a bar chart uses the top and bottom of each bar to indicate high
and low prices of the time frame indicated, so does a candlestick, or candle
line (these two terms are interchangeable).

Asingle bar displays a small perpendicular line on its left to designate the
opening price and another on the right to show its closing price. When using
candlesticks, however, we draw in a real body to connect the opening and
closing prices. This gives us a quick and complete picture of the stock's ac-
tion and denotes prevailing sentiment.

The real body—the rectangular portion of the candle line—represents
the range between the opening and closing prices. A white real body tells
us that the close is higher than the open since the top of the white real body
is the session's close and the bottom of the white real body 1s that session's
open. A black (filled) real body shows that the close was lower than the
open. The bottom of the black real body ts the session's close, and the top of
the black real body is that session's open. The session can be any time frame,
from a minute to a month.

The vertical lines that extend above and below the real body are called
the upper and lower shadows. The top of the upper shadow ts the session's
high; the bottom of the lower shadow ts the session's low. The candlestick
line uses the same data as a bar chart, but the color of the candlestick’s real
body and the length of the candle line’s real body and shadows convey a

ot SIDE LIGHT

When a real body, either white or black, closes at the high of the session, it has no
upper shadow. Therefore, the Japanese say that candle has a “shaven head.” When a
real body closes at the low of the session and has no lower shadow, that candle has

a ‘shaven bottom.”



The Essentials il

The top of the upper shadow and the bottom of the lower shadow represent the highs
and lows of a session, whether the real body is black or white.

KEY POINT

snapshot of who's winning the battle between the bulls and the bears. For in-
stanee, when the real body is black, that means the stock closed below its
opening price. This gives you an instant picture of a positive or negative
elose. Those of us who stare at charts for hours at a time find that candle-
sticks are not only easy on the eyes, they also convey strong visual signals
sometimes missed on bar charts.

Exhibit 1.1 shows basic candlestick formations. In (A), stock XYZ opens
at 30 and closes at 35, with a high of 37 and a low of 29. In (B), XYZ opens at
35, closes at 30, and again has a high of 37 and low of 29.

Candlesticks, like bars, each represent a specified time frame. On a
weekly chart, each candlestick represents one week; on a daily chart, each
candlestick represents one day; and on a 15-minute intraday chart, each can-
dlestick represents a 15-minute unit of time.

One of the most important benefits of using candles 1s that they give in-
stant pictures of how traders and investors feel about a certain stock or mar-
ket. A long, protracted real body translates into very strong opinion, either
bullish or bearish. Conversely, as you will see in the chapters that follow,
short real bodies mean that stock participants have no strong opinion; the
bulls (buyers) hold the price up, while the bears (sellers) press it down.

Notice the long, white real body in Exhibit 1.14. This white real body,
showing the closing price multiple points above the opening price (in this
ease, 5 points), indicates extremely positive or bullish sentiment. In (B), the

Close = 35 | Open = 35

Open = 20 +. lami —T Close=30

Low =29 Low = 29
A B

EXGIBIT £.4 Constructing the Candlestick Line


12

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

long, black real body, with the closing price several points below the open,
reveals negative or bearish sentiment.

The upper shadow In Exhibit 1.1a tells you that buying pressure pushed
XYZ up to a high of 37. Still, while the stock closed relatively high on the ses-
sion, buyers were unable to hold it at 37 into the close. The lower shadow
shows that selling pressure forced the stock to a low of 29. Nonetheless, buy-
ers came in to offer support there and propelled it up to clase at 35, 6 points
higher than the low.

While we're talking about open and closing prices, we know that the
Japanese place great importance on these critical time periods as they per-
tain to the trading day. They believe, as do most Western analysts, that the
first hour of trading usually sets the tone for the day. One Japanese saying
states, “The first hour of the morning 1s the rudder of the day."

On opening, the market has absorbed and digested the events that took
place since the prior day's close. The results are often volatile. The impact of
market reaction can cause radical price changes for equities, or even entire
industry groups. By the hour’s end, the flurry of activity may subside a bit,
and market participants have a point of reference with which to work.

An American market adage contends, “The amateurs open the market,
and the professionals close it.” Although it’s an overstatement to assume the
market's open is populated strictly by novices, it’s true that the close of the
day usually produces heavy emotional involvement. During the last hour,
many market players adjust their positions. This is the time when traders, In-
vestors, and institutional managers decide whether or not to hold positions
overnight. Margin calls on the futures markets are calculated by their price at
the close. No wonder the last hour can produce volatile price swings fueled
by strong emotions and heightened volume.

Since both the opening and closing hours can be turbulent periods, if you
choose to take part, remember to use caution and discipline.

In the next section, we'll discuss one of the most critical uses of candle
charts: giving you early indications that the trend may be changing. Whether
a mature, extended trend, or a shorter, intermediate-term trend 1s in place,
eandle lines and patterns display powerful clues that a shift in control from
bulls to bears, or vice-versa, 1s in process or could be imminent. For a trader,
this information is crucial. For an investor, recognizing these all-important
signals could make the difference between keeping hefty gains or giving them
back to the market. The material you learned in this section will aid you in

learning how to interpret these potent signals.


The Essentials 13

CHECK VOLR ULADERSTAADING

Review Questions for Chapter One, Section Two:
Candlestick Construction

What is the rectangular portion of the candlestick called?

a. Upper shadow

b. Lower shadow

c. Real body

a. The wick

What is the thin line above the real body of the candlestick line called?
a. Upper shadow

b. Lower shadow

c. Real body

a. Lower wick

The upper shadow of a black candle line represents the range between
the session's

a. high and open.
b. low and close.
¢. open and low.
d. open and close.

The lower shadow of a white real body candlestick represents the range
between the session's

a. open and close.

b. open and low.

¢. close and low.

d. None of the above.

. A black real body on an hourly chart means

a. the close of this hour was under the close of the last hour.

b. the close of this hour was lower than the open of this hour.

¢. the close of this hour was higher than the open of the last hour.
d. the open and close of this hour were the same.


14

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

. Ona daily chart, a white real body means that today’s

a. close 1s higher than yesterday's close.

b. close is higher than today's open.

¢. open is higher than yesterday's opening price.
d. close is lower than today’s open.

. What portion of the candlestick line do you think 1s referred to as the

“essence of the price movement"?
a. The upper shadow

b. The lower shadow

«. The close

d. The real body

. The last hour and close of the stock market are important because

a. this 1s the time when market participants, from individuals to institu-
tions, may close out existing positions or open new ones.

b. fund managers switch sectors
¢. traders with short positions cover them
d. the closing bell on the floor of the NYSE ts rung by a prominent person

. Using data points in Exhibit 1.2, draw the candlestick lines.

Open High Low Close

Session | 23 28 23 24
Session 2 30 30 24 27
Session 3 27 29 26 27
Session 4 21 26 21 26
Session 5 24 27 21 23

EABIBIT £.2 Data Points

10. In Exhibit 1.3, for line x, area 3 represents the

a. close.

b. open.
c. low.

a. high.


The Essentials 15

4 4
3
3
2
2
1 1
Line x Line y

EXGIBIT £.3 © Questions 10 and 11

11. For line y in Exhibit 1.3, area 3 represents the
a. close.
b. open.
c. low.

a. high.

Answers for Chapter One, Section Two:
Candlestick Construction

1. ¢. The rectangular section of the candle line 1s called the real body. The
real body represents the range between the session's open and close.
When the real body is black (i.e., filled), that means the close of the ses-
sion was lower than the open. If the real body 1s white (Le., empty), it
shows the close was higher than the open.

2. a. The thin lines above and below the real body are shadows. These shad-
ows represent the session's price extremes. The shadow above the real
body ts called the upper shadow, and the shadow below the real body is
the lower shadow. Accordingly, the peak of the upper shadow 1s the high
of the session, and the bottom of the lower shadow indicates the low of
the session.

3. a. When the real body ts black, it means the close of the session was lower
than the open. Accordingly, the top of a black real body represents the
session's open. The range between the top of a black real body and the
upper shadow represents the open and high of that session, respectively.

4. b. If the real body is white (Le., empty), it means the close was higher
than the open. This means that the bottom of a white real body ts the


16

SERBRRBNBBS

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

open, and the lower shadow on a white candle session is the range be-
tween that session's open and low.

. b. A black real body means that the session's close is under the session's

open. The top of the black real body represents the open of the hour, and
the bottom of that real body represents the close of the hour.

. b. A white real body means that the current session's close is higher than

the current session's open. In classic Japanese candlestick charting,
when candle charts were hand drawn, instead of a white real body, the
Japanese colored it red. However, unless one uses a color printer, the red
and black real bodies would all be printed in black. This is why we have
white and black real bodies, instead of red and black real bodies.

. 4. On Japanese charts, even an individual candle line has meaning. There-

fore, one of the first clues to the vitality of the market 1s the size and color
of the real body. To the Japanese, the real body 1s the essence of the price
movement. This is a critical and powerful aspect of candle charts:
Through the height and color of the real body, candle charts show the rel-
ative posture of the bulls and the bears.

. a. The close 1s a time of major commitment. The closing price }s used for

many important calculations. Imagine a weekly chart in which the clos-
ing price above the previous week's resistance could indicate a major
breakout in the offing. The close is also the time when market partici-
pants decide whether to close out existing positions, hold current ones,
or open new ones.

Session Session Session Session Session
1 2 3 4 5

EXHIBIT 1.4 Answer to Question 9


The Essentials 17

10. a. A white (or empty) real body means that the close is above the open-
ing. Consequently, the top of a white real body 1s the close of the session.

11. b. A black real body means that the close 1s under the open, and conse-
quently the top of the black real body 1s the opening of the session.


SECTION THREE
Basic Market Strategies

arly recognition of potential trend reversals is one of the most Impor-

tant skills a trader/investor can cultivate. As you study candle charts

and learn to recognize single candle lines and patterns, you will ap-
preciate how candles offer an early heads up on possible trend reversals. In
fact, most signals given by candle formations are reversal signals.

Candle charts often display reversal signals in a few sessions rather than
over the longer time periods often needed for bar chart reversal signals.
Using candle charts, you'll identify market turns quickly, which should help
you to enter and exit the market with speed and accuracy.

In this section, we present the basics of trend reversals and how candles
play such an important role. Also discussed are concepts inherent to trend
changes and reversals: support and resistance levels and all-important break-
outs and price closes above and below those levels.

In this section you will Team...

* How candles play a powerful role in recognizing early reversal signals

* How candle lines and patterns confirm support and resistance

* The importance of confirmation

* Why the closing price plays a key role in breaks above resistance and

below support

hey terms to watch for:

¢ Trend reversal
Uptrend

Downtrend
Consolidation

Support and resistance

19


20 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

* Retracement
* Box range

GETTING STARTED

The ability to recognize a potential trend reversal is one of the most impor-
tant skills you can cultivate. Your ability to read candle lines and patterns will
increase that skill many times over.

In the sections that follow, we'll delve into speeific candle lines and pat-
terns and the signals they give in the contexts of uptrends, downtrends and
trend shifts, or reversals. At the present, however, we're going to get a top-
down overview.

To start with, let's examine the anatomy of a trend reversal. A Japanese
proverb states, “Darkness lies one inch ahead." You need only watch the
finaneial television networks to see the great degree of importance traders
and investors place on foretelling market tops and bottoms to arrive at an
early insight on upcoming moves. As you know, the common goal is to buy
low and sell high or, in the case of selling short, to sell high, buy low.

On charts, Western trend reversal patterns include double and triple tops
and bottoms, key reversal days, head-and-shoulders, cup-with-handles, and
island tops and bottoms.

Although market cyeles of alternating uptrends and downtrends inter-
spersed with peaks and valleys are inevitable, you should remember that
trends don’t always end abruptly. In fact, trends usually occur slowly, in
stages, as the underlying psychology shifts.
