
it's a s m a l l world.1

A similar misconception of probabilities arises from the random
encounters one may have with relatives or friends in highly unexpected
places. "It's a small world" is often uttered with surprise. But these are

IT

IS

EASIER

TO

BUY

AND

SELL

THAN

FRY

AN

EGG

133

not improbable occurrences - the world is much larger than we think. It
is just that we are not truly testing for the odds of having an encounter
with one specific person, in a specific location at a specific time. Rather,
we are simply testing for any encounter, with any person we have ever
met in the past, and in any place we will visit during the period
concerned. The probability of the latter is considerably higher, perhaps
several thousand times the magnitude of the former.
When the statistician looks at the data to test a given relationship, say
to ferret out the correlation between the occurrence of a given event, like
a political announcement, and stock market volatility, odds are that the
results can be taken seriously. But when one throws the computer at
data, looking for just about any relationship, it is certain that a spurious
connection will emerge, such as the fate of the stock market being linked
to the length of women's skirts. And just like the birthday coincidences,
it will amaze people.

d a t a mining, statistics, a n d

charlatanism

What is your probability of winning the New Jersey lottery twice? One
in 17 trillion. Yet it happened to Evelyn Adams, whom the reader might
guess should feel particularly chosen by destiny. Using the method we
developed above, Harvard's Percy Diaconis and Frederick Mosteller
estimated at 30 to 1 the probability that someone, somewhere, in a
totally unspecified way, gets so lucky!
Some people carry their data mining activities into theology - after
all, ancient Mediterraneans used to read potent messages in the entrails
of birds. An interesting extension of data mining into biblical exegesis is
provided in The Bible Code by Michael Drosnin. Drosnin, a former
journalist (seemingly innocent of any training in statistics), aided by the
works of a "mathematician", helped "predict" Rabin's assassination by
deciphering a bible code. He informed Rabin, who obviously did not
take it too seriously. The Bible Code finds statistical irregularities in the
Bible,- these help predict some such events. Needless to say that the book
sold well.

134

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

t h e best book i have ever

read!

My favorite time is spent in bookstores, where I aimlessly move from
book to book in an attempt to make a decision as to whether to invest
the time in reading it. My buying is frequently made on impulse, based
on superficial but suggestive clues. Frequently I have nothing but a book
jacket as appendage to my decision making. Jackets often contain praise
by someone, famous or not, or excerpts from a book review. Good
praise by a famous and respected person or a well-known magazine
would sway me into buying the book.
What is the problem? I tend to confuse a book review, which is
supposed to be an assessment of the quality of the book, with the best
book reviews, marred with the same survivorship biases. I mistake the
distribution of the maximum of a variable with that of the variable
itself. The publisher will never put on the jacket of the book anything
but the best praise. Some authors go even a step beyond, taking a tepid
or even unfavorable book review and selecting words in it that appear to
praise the book. One such example came from one Paul Wilmott (an
English financial mathematician of rare brilliance and irreverence) who
managed to announce that I gave him his "first bad review", yet used
excerpts from it as praise on the book jacket (we later became friends,
which allowed me to extract an endorsement from him).
The first time I was fooled by this bias was upon buying, when I was
16, Manhattan Transfer, a book by John Dos Passos, the American
writer, based on praise on the jacket by the philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre,
who claimed something to the effect that Dos Passos was the greatest
writer of our time. This simple remark, possibly blurted out in a state of
intoxication or extreme enthusiasm, caused Dos Passos to become
required reading in European intellectual circles, as Sartre's remark was
mistaken for a consensus estimate of the quality of Dos Passos rather
than what it was, the best remark. (In spite of having received the Nobel
Prize in literature, Dos Passos has reverted to obscurity.)
the

backtester

A programmer helped me build a backtester. It is a software program
connected to a database of historical prices which allows me to check

IT

IS

EASIER

TO

BUY

AND

SELL

THAN

FRY

AN

EGG

135

the hypothetical past performance of any trading rule of average complexity. I can just apply a mechanical trading rule, like buy NASDAQ
stocks if they close more than 1.83% above their average of the previous
week, and immediately get an idea of its past performance. The screen
will flash my hypothetical track record associated with the trading rule.
If I do not like the results, I can change the percentage, to say, 1.2%. I
can also make the rule more complex. I will keep trying until I find
something that works well.
What am I doing? The exact same task of looking for the survivor
within the set of rules that can possibly work. I am fitting the rule on the
data. This activity is called data snooping. The more I try, the more I am
likely, by mere luck, to find a rule that worked on past data. A random
series will always present some detectable pattern. I am convinced that
there exists a tradable security in the Western world that would be
100% correlated with the changes in temperature in Oulan Bator,
Mongolia.
To get technical, there are even worse extensions. An outstanding
recent paper by Sullivan, Timmerman and White8 goes further and
considers that the rules that may be in use successfully today may be the
result of a survivorship bias.
Suppose that, over time, investors have experimented with technical
trading rules drawn from a very wide universe - in principle thousands
of parameterizations of a variety of types of rules. As time progresses,
the rules that happen to perform well historically receive more
attention and are considered "serious contenders" by the investment
community, while unsuccessful trading rules are more likely to be
forgotten. ...If enough trading rules are considered over time, some
rules are bound by pure luck, even in a very large sample, to produce
superior performance even if they do not genuinely possess predictive
power over asset returns. Of course, inference based solely on the
subset of surviving trading rules may be misleading in this context
since it does not account for the full set of initial trading rules, most of
which are unlikely to have underperformed.
I have to decry some excesses in back-testing that I have closely
witnessed in my private career. There is an excellent product designed

136

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

just for that, called Omega TradeStation™ that is currently on the
market, in use by tens of thousands of traders. It even offers its own
computer language. Beset with insomnia, the computerized day-traders
become night-testers plowing the data for some of its properties. By dint
of throwing their monkeys on typewriters, without specifying what
book they want their monkey to write, they will hit upon hypothetical
gold somewhere. Many of them blindly believe in it.
One of my colleagues, a man with prestigious degrees, grew to believe
in such a virtual world to the point of losing all sense of reality. Whether
the modicum of common sense left in him might have rapidly vanished
under the mounds of simulations, or whether he might have had none to
engage in such pursuit, I cannot tell. By closely watching him I learned
that what natural skepticism he may have had vanished under the
weight of data - for he was extremely skeptical, but in the wrong area.
Ah, Hume!
a more unsettling

extension

Historically, medicine has operated by trial and error - in other words,
statistically. We know by now that there can be entirely fortuitous
connections between symptoms and treatment, and that some
medications succeed in medical trials for mere random reasons. I cannot
claim expertise in medicine, but have been a steady reader of a segment of
the medical literature over the past half decade, long enough to be
concerned with the standards, as we will see in the next chapter. Medical
researchers kret rarely statisticians; statisticians are rarely medical
researchers. Many medical researchers are not even remotely aware of
this bias. True, it may play a small role, but it is certainly present. One
recent medical study links cigarette smoking to a reduction in breast
cancer, thus conflicting with all previous studies. Logic would indicate
that the result may be suspicious, the result of mere coincidence.
t h e e a r n i n g s s e a s o n : f o o l e d by t h e

results

Wall Street analysts, in general, are trained to find the accounting tricks
that companies use to hide their earnings. They tend to beat the companies

IT

I
;
;
f
|
•

IS

EASIER

TO

BUY

AND

SELL

THAN

FRY

AN

EGG

137

at that game. But they are not trained yet to deal with randomness. When a
company shows an increase in earnings once, it draws no immediate
attention. Twice, and the name starts showing up on computer screens.
Three times, and the company will merit some buy recommendation.
Just as with the track record problem, consider a cohort of 10,000
companies that are assumed on average to barely return the risk-free
rate (i.e. Treasury bonds). They engage in all forms of volatile
businesses. At the end of the first year, we will have 5,000 "star"
companies showing an increase in profits (assuming no inflation), and
5,000 "dogs". After three years, we will have 1,250 "stars". The stock
review committee at the investment house will give your broker their
name as a "strong buy". He will leave a voice-message that he has a hot
recommendation that necessitates immediate action. You will be emailed a long list of names. You will buy one or two of them.
Meanwhile, the manager in charge of your 40IK retirement plan will be
acquiring the entire list.
We can apply the reasoning to the selection of investment categories as if they were the managers in the example above. Assume you are
standing in 1900 with hundreds of investments to look at. There are the
stock markets of Argentina, Imperial Russia, the United Kingdom,
Unified Germany, and plenty of others to consider. A rational person
would have bought not just the emerging country of the United States,
but those of Russia and Argentina as well. The rest of the story is well
known; while many of the stock markets like those of the United
Kingdom and the United States fared extremely well, the investor in
Imperial Russia would have no better than medium-quality wallpaper in
his hands. The countries that fared well are not a large segment of the
initial cohort; randomness would be expected to allow a few investment
classes to fare extremely well. I wonder if those "experts" who make
foolish (and self-serving) statements like "markets will always go up in
any 20-year period" are aware of this problem.

cancer

cures

When I return home from an Asian or European trip, my jet lag often
causes me to rise at a very early hour. Occasionally, though very rarely, I

138

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

switch on the TV set searching for market information. What strikes me
in these morning explorations is the abundance of claims by the
alternative medicine vendors of the curing power of their products. These
no doubt are caused by the lower advertising rates at that time. To prove
their claim, they present the convincing testimonial of someone who was
cured thanks to their methods. For instance, I once saw a former throat
cancer patient explaining how he was saved by a combination of
vitamins for sale for the exceptionally low price of $14.95 - in all
likelihood he was sincere (although of course compensated for his
account, perhaps with a lifetime supply of such medicine). In spite of our
advances, people still believe in the existence of links between disease and
cure based on such information, and there is no scientific evidence that
can convince them more potently than a sincere and emotional
testimonial. Such testimonial does not always come from the regular
guy; statements by Nobel Prize winners (in the wrong discipline) could
easily suffice. Linus Pauling, a Nobel Prize winner in chemistry, was said
to believe in vitamin C's medicinal properties, himself ingesting massive
daily doses. With his bully pulpit, he contributed to the common belief in
vitamin C's curative properties. Many medical studies, unable to
replicate Pauling's claims, fell on deaf ears as it was difficult to undo
the testimonial by a "Nobel Prize winner", even if he was not qualified to
discuss matters related to medicine.
Many of these claims have been harmless outside of the financial
profits for these charlatans - but many cancer patients may have
replaced the more scientifically investigated therapies, in favor of these
methods and died as a result of their neglecting more orthodox cures
(again, the rionscientific methods are gathered under what is called
"alternative medicine", that is, unproven therapies and the medical
community has difficulties convincing the press that there is only one
medicine and that alternative medicine is not medicine). The reader
might wonder about my claims that the user of these products could be
sincere, without it meaning that he was cured by the illusory treatment.
The reason is something called "spontaneous remission", in which a
very small minority of cancer patients, for reasons that remain entirely
speculative, wipe out cancer cells and recover "miraculously". Some
switch causes the patient's immune system to eradicate all cancer cells
from the body. These people would have been equally cured by drinking

IT

IS

EASIER

TO

BUY

AND

SELL

THAN

FRY

AN

EGG

139

a glass of Vermont spring water or chewing on dried beef as they were
by taking these beautifully wrapped pills. Finally, these spontaneous
remissions might not be so spontaneous; they might, at the bottom, have
a cause that we are not yet sophisticated enough to detect.
The late astronomer Carl Sagan, a devoted promoter of scientific
thinking and an obsessive enemy of non-science, examined the cures
from cancer that result from a visit to Lourdes in France where people
were healed by simple contact with the holy waters, and found out the
interesting fact that, of the total cancer patients who visited the place,
the cure rate was, if anything, lower than the statistical one for
spontaneous remissions. It was lower than the average for those who did
not go to Lourdes! Should a statistician infer here that cancer patients'
odds of surviving deteriorates after a visit to Lourdes?

professor pearson goes t o monte c a r l o
randomness does n o t l o o k

(literally):

random!

At the beginning of the twentieth century, as we were starting to develop
techniques to deal with the notion of random outcomes, several
methods were designed to detect anomalies. Professor Karl Pearson (of
Neyman-Pearson fame, familiar to every person who sat in a statistics
101 class) devised the first test of non-randomness (it was in reality a
test of deviation from normality, which, for all intents and purposes,
was the same thing). He examined millions of runs of what was called a
Monte Carlo (the old name for a roulette wheel) during the month of
July 1902. He discovered that, with a high degree of statistical
significance (with an error of less than one to a billion), the runs were
not purely random. What! The roulette wheel was not random!
Professor Pearson was greatly surprised at the discovery. But this result
in itself tells us nothing; we know that there is no such thing as a pure
random draw, for the outcome of the draw depends on the quality of the
equipment. With enough minutiae one would be able to uncover the
non-randomness somewhere (i.e. the wheel itself may not have been
perfectly balanced or perhaps the spinning ball was not completely
spherical). Philosophers of statistics call this the reference case problem,
to explain that there is no true attainable randomness in practice, only in

140

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

theory. Besides, a manager would question whether such nonrandomness can lead to any meaningful profitable rules. If I need to
gamble $1 on 10,000 runs and expect to make $1 for my efforts, then I
would do much better in the part-time employment of a janitorial
agency.
But the result bears another suspicious element. Of more practical
relevance here is the following severe problem about non-randomness.
Even the fathers of statistical science forgot that a random series of runs
need not exhibit a pattern to look random; as a matter of fact data that
is perfectly patternless would be extremely suspicious and appear to be
man-made. A single random run is bound to exhibit some pattern - if
one looks hard enough. Note that Professor Pearson was among the first
scholars who were interested in creating artificial random data
generators, tables one could use as inputs for various scientific and
engineering simulations (the precursors of our Monte Carlo simulator).
The problem is that they did not want these tables to exhibit any form of
regularity. Yet real randomness does not look random!
I would further illustrate the point with the study of a phenomenon
well known as cancer clusters. Consider a square with 16 random darts
hitting it with equal probability of being at any place in the square. If we
divide the square into 16 smaller squares, it is expected that each smaller
square will contain one dart on average - but only on average. There is a
very small probability of having exactly 16 darts in 16 different squares.
The average grid will have more than one dart in a few squares, and no
dart at all in many squares. It will be an exceptionally rare incident that
no (cancer) cluster would show on the grid. Now, transpose our grid
with the darts in it to overlay a map of any region. Some newspaper will
declare that one of the areas (the one with more than the average of
darts) harbors radiation that causes cancer, prompting lawyers to start
soliciting the patients.

t h e d o g t h a t d i d n o t b a r k : o n biases in s c i e n t i f i c

knowledge

By the same argument, science is marred by a pernicious survivorship
bias, affecting the way research gets published. In a way that is similar
to journalism, research that yields no result does not make it to print.

IT

IS

EASIER

TO

BUY

AND

SELL

THAN

FRY

AN

EGG

141

That may seem sensible, as newspapers do not have to have a screaming
headline saying that nothing new is taking place (though the Bible was
smart enough to declare ein chadash tacht hashemesh - "nothing new
under the sun", providing the information that things just do recur). The
problem is that a finding of absence and an absence of findings get
mixed together. There may be great information in the fact that nothing
took place. As Sherlock Holmes noted in the Silver Blaze case - the
curious thing was that the dog did not bark. More problematically,
there are plenty of scientific results that are left out of publications
because they are not statistically significant, but nevertheless provide
information.9

I Have No Conclusion
I am frequently asked the question: when is it truly not luck? To be
honest, I am unable to answer it. I can tell that person A seems less lucky
than person B, but the confidence in such knowledge can be so weak as
to be meaningless. I prefer to remain a skeptic. People frequently
misinterpret my opinion. I never said that every rich man is an idiot and
every unsuccessful person unlucky, only that in absence of much
additional information I prefer to reserve my judgment. It is safer.

ten

loser takes a l l - on t h e
nonlinearities of life

The nonlinear viciousness of life. Moving to Bel Air and
acquiring the vices of the rich and famous. Why Microsoft's Bill
Gates may not be the best in his business (but please do not
inform him of such a fact). Depriving donkeys of food.

ext I put the platitude that life is unfair under some examination,
but in a new angle. The twist: life is unfair in a nonlinear way.
This chapter is about how a small advantage in life can translate into a
highly disproportionate payoff, or, more viciously, how no advantage at
all, but a very, very small help from randomness, can lead to a bonanza.

N

The Sandpile Effect
First we define nonlinearity. There are many ways to present it, but one
of the most popular ones in science is what is called the sandpile effect,
which I can illustrate as follows. I am currently sitting on a beach in

LOSER

TAKES

ALL

-

ON

THE

N ON L I N E A R I T I E S

OF

LIFE

143

Copacabana, in Rio de Janeiro, attempting to do nothing strenuous,
away from anything to read and write (unsuccessfully, of course, as I am
mentally writing these lines). I am playing with plastic beach toys
borrowed from a child, trying to build an edifice - modestly but doggedly
attempting to emulate the tower of Babel. I continuously add sand to the
top, slowly raising the entire structure. My Babylonian relatives thought
they could thus reach the heavens. I have more humble designs; to test
how high I could go before it would topple. I keep adding sand, testing to
see how the structure would ultimately collapse. Unused to seeing adults
build sandcastles, a child looks at me with amazement.
In time - and much to the onlooking child's delight - my castle
inevitably topples to rejoin the rest of the sand on the beach. It could be
said that the last grain of sand is responsible for the destruction of the
entire structure. What we are witnessing here is a nonlinear effect
resulting from a linear force exerted on an object. A very small
additional input, here the grain of sand, caused a disproportionate
result, namely the destruction of my starter tower of Babel. Popular
wisdom has integrated many such phenomena, as witnessed by such
expressions as "the straw that broke the camel's back" or "the drop that
caused the water to spill".
These nonlinear dynamics have a bookstore name; chaos theory,
which is a misnomer because it has nothing to do with chaos. Chaos
theory concerns itself primarily with functions in which a small input can
lead to a disproportionate response. Population models, for instance, can
lead to a path of explosive growth, or extinction of a species, depending
on a very small difference in the population at a starting point in time.
Another popular scientific analogy is the weather, where it has been
shown that a simple butterfly fluttering its wings in India can cause a
hurricane in New York. But the classics have their share to offer as well:
Pascal (the same of Pascal's wager in Chapter 7) said that if Cleopatra's
nose had been slightly shorter, the world's fate would have changed.
Cleopatra had comely features dominated by a thin and elongated nose
that made Julius Caesar and his successor Marc Antony fall for her (here
the intellectual snob in me cannot resist dissenting against conventional
wisdom; Plutarch claimed that it was Cleopatra's skills in conversation,
rather than her good looks, that caused the maddening infatuation of the
shakers and movers of her day; I truly believe it).
