
trying to catch her undressed.” Mrs. Kaul was Clo-Ann Kaul’s mother, and while Warren was hauling empty
soda bottles, Clo-Ann was ignoring him. “I may have been the lowest-paid person to ever work in the
grocery business. I didn’t learn anything—except that I didn’t like hard work.”
Warren took his battle for autonomy home to Ernest’s Sunday dinner table. He had despised everything
green from birth, except money. Now, broccoli, Brussels sprouts, and asparagus lined Warren’s plate like
foot soldiers in a battle of wills. With his parents, he had generally gotten his way. Ernest, however, brooked
no nonsense. While Alice tried coaxing her nephew, his grandfather glared from his seat at one end of the
table, waiting, waiting, waiting for Warren to finish his vegetables. “You sat at the table for two hours to
finish your asparagus, but he always won in the end.”
In most other ways, however, being at Ernest’s brought Warren a large measure of freedom. In his
grandfather’s garage, he had spotted Doris’s blue Schwinn bicycle with her initials on it—a gift from Ernest,
left behind when they went to Washington. Warren had never owned a bicycle. “A bicycle was a pretty big
present in those days, you know,” he says. He started riding Doris’s. After a while he traded it in, using it as
most of the down payment on a boy’s bike.25 Nobody said anything. Warren had that “halo.”
His grandfather doted on him, in his way. At night he and Ernest listened with “reverential attention” to
Ernest’s favorite radio host, Fulton Lewis Jr., who expounded constantly on the theme that America should
not get involved in foreign wars. Ernest needed no convincing.
After Fulton Lewis Jr. recharged his conservative energies, Ernest would gather his latest thoughts on the
best seller he was writing. He had decided to call it How to Run a Grocery Store and a Few Things I Learned
about Fishing, feeling these were “the only two subjects about which mankind had any valid concern.26
“I would sit there at night, or late afternoon, early evening, and my grandfather would dictate this to me.
I’d write it on the back of old ledger sheets because we never wasted anything at Buffett and Son. He
thought that it was the book all America was waiting for. I mean, there wasn’t any sense writing another
book. Not Gone with the Wind or anything like that. Why would anybody want to read Gone with the Wind
when they could be reading How to Run a Grocery Store and a Few Things I Learned about Fishing?”27
Warren loved it all, or almost all. He was so glad to be back in Omaha and reunited with his aunt,
grandfather, and friends that he almost forgot about Washington for a while.
A few months later, the rest of the family made the three-day drive to Nebraska for the summer and moved
into a rented house. Their finances were becoming stretched. Heretofore, the stockyards had simply been the
home of some of Howard’s constituents. But when their reek drifted through town every time the wind blew
from the south, everybody in Omaha knew—that was the smell of money. Howard now bought the South
Omaha Feed Company to supplement his Congressional salary. And Warren went to work for his father.
“South Omaha Feed was a huge warehouse that seemed hundreds of feet long and had no air-conditioning.
My job was to carry fifty-pound sacks of animal feed from a freight car into the warehouse. You can’t
imagine how big a freight car looks when you get inside and it is packed to the top. And a freight car in the
summer, that is really something. There was a guy named Frankie Zick who was tossing these things
around. He was a weight lifter. I had on a short-sleeved shirt because it was so hot, and struggling to sort of
get these feed bags into my arms and drag them. By noon my arms were kind of a bloody mess. That job
lasted for about three hours. I just walked over to the streetcar and went home. Manual labor is for the
birds.”
Before the summer ended, the family took a short vacation at Lake Okoboji. As they were leaving, Doris
discovered that Warren had traded in her bicycle. But through some miscarriage of family justice, again he
suffered no consequences. Indeed, when summer ended and his parents forced Warren, sullen and
grim-faced, onto a train headed back to Washington, the new bicycle he had bought for himself with his
filched funds went along. Doris was furious. But the theft of her bicycle only marked the beginning of her
brother’s descent into behavior that would ultimately force his parents to take action.

***
Back in Washington, the Buffetts moved into the Fitchous’ house, an attractive two-story white colonial with
a mimosa tree in the yard in the sophisticated Washington suburb of Spring Valley, right off Massachusetts
Avenue. A restricted community*6 built in 1930 for the “socially and officially prominent,” Spring Valley
was designed as a little “colony of outstanding personages.”28 The homes ranged from gigantic stone Tudor
mansions to white two-story clapboard colonials like the Buffetts’ house. Leila had paid $17,500 for it,
including some furniture. Warren got the front bedroom. The families on either side had sons, all older than
Warren. Across the street lived the Keavneys, and Warren, now thirteen years old, developed a crush on
Mrs. Keavney, the nearest motherly middle-aged woman in sight. “I was nuts about her,” he says.
The neighborhood had an international feel; it teemed with diplomats. The WAVES,29 women members of
the wartime Navy, were headquartered at the nearby huge Gothic-style campus of American University. The
Buffetts began adjusting to wartime life in Washington, a very different place from Omaha. The country had
finally become prosperous, the Depression over, but with wartime rationing on, money mattered less and less.
Everyday life was measured in points and coupons: 48 blue points a month for canned goods; 64 red points
for perishables; coupons for meat, shoes, butter, sugar, gasoline, and stockings. No amount of money would
buy meat without coupons; only chicken went unrationed. With butter rationed and scarce, everyone learned
to squeeze yellow food coloring into containers of tasteless white oleomargarine. No one could buy a new
car, because the carmakers devoted their plants to defense work. To take an automobile trip, you pooled the
family’s gas coupons. Blowing out a tire could mean serious trouble, since automobile tires were among the
most strictly rationed commodities.
Every morning, Howard took the streetcar that ran down Wisconsin Avenue to M Street in Georgetown, then
turned down Pennsylvania Avenue. He got off near the old Executive Office Building and went to work in a
Washington that heaved and roiled. The government and diplomatic community had ballooned, and the
streets were packed with people in kilts and turbans and saris, with armies of clerical workers, and with a sea
of uniformed military.
From time to time, black women in Sunday dresses and church hats picketed the Capitol to protest lynchings
in the South. Air-raid wardens walked the neighborhoods to check that all houses had opaque blackout
curtains. Once or twice a month the Buffetts were required to go down to their basement and turn out all the
lights for a mandatory blackout drill.
Leila disliked Washington from the day she arrived. She was homesick for Omaha, and lonely too. Immersed
in his new job, Howard had become a more distant husband and father. He worked at the office all day, then
read the Congressional Record and legislative materials all evening. He spent Saturdays at the office and
often returned there on Sunday afternoons after church.
Doris now attended Woodrow Wilson High School, where again she fell in right away with the popular
crowd. Bertie, too, made friends easily, finding a compatible group of girls in the neighborhood. Warren’s
experience was nothing like his sisters’. He enrolled at Alice Deal Junior High School,30 which sat atop the
highest hill in Washington, overlooking Spring Valley, the black school in the hollow behind it, and the rest of
the city below.
The students in his class—many of them diplomats’ kids—were a world more polished than Warren and his
now-lost friends from Rosehill School. At first, he had difficulty making friends. He went out for basketball
and football, but since he wore glasses and was timid in physical contact sports, neither was a success. “I’d
been pulled away from my friends and I wasn’t making new friends. I was young for my class. I was not
poised at all. I wasn’t a terrible athlete, but I wasn’t a great athlete in the least, so that was not an entry
ticket. And Doris and Bertie were knockouts, so they did fine. A good-looking girl does not have trouble,
because the world will adjust to her. So they both fit in better than I did, far better, which was a little

irritating too.”
His grades started out at Cs and Bs and improved to As, except in English. “Mostly my grades related to how
I felt about the teachers. I hated my English teacher, Miss Allwine.31 Music class was also Cs all the way
through.” Miss Baum, the music teacher, was the best-looking teacher in the school. Most of the boys had
crushes on her, but Warren had real difficulties with Miss Baum, who reported that he needed to improve in
cooperation, courtesy, and self-reliance.
“I was the youngest one in the class. I was interested in girls, and I wasn’t avoiding them, but I felt I had
less poise. The girls were way ahead of me socially. When I left Omaha, nobody in my class was dancing.
When I moved to Washington, everybody had been dancing for a year or two. So I never caught up, in
effect.”
The Buffetts’ move when Warren was twelve had deprived him of a crucial experience: Addie Fogg’s
dancing class. At the American Legion hall in Omaha on Friday nights, Addie Fogg, a short, stout woman of
middle age, lined the boys and girls up by height and paired them off, boys in bow ties and girls in stiff
petticoats. They practiced the fox trot and box-step waltz. A boy learned how a “gentleman” behaves in
public with a young lady, and struggled through elementary small talk to break a painful silence. He felt the
touch of a girl’s hand, learned to hold her by the waist, and sensed her face close to his own. He tasted for
the first time the demands and potential pleasures of leading a partner as they moved in unison. With its
many small but shared embarrassments and triumphs, this group rite of passage awakened in its graduates a
sense of belonging. To miss it could be profoundly isolating. Already insecure, Warren had been left behind,
a child among budding young men.
His classmates noticed he was friendly but seemed shy, especially around girls.32 He was a year younger than
most of them, born in August and having skipped a half grade at Rosehill. “I was out of whack. I felt very
inept with girls at that time, and socially in general. But with older people, I was fine.”
Not long after the family’s arrival in Spring Valley, Howard’s friend Ed S. Miller—one of those older people
—called from Omaha. He wanted to talk to Warren.
“‘Warren,’ he said, ‘I’m in a terrible jam. The board of directors told me to get rid of our Washington,
D.C., warehouse. This is a real problem for me. We have hundreds of pounds—cases—of stale cornflakes
and cases of Barbecubes dog biscuits. I’m in a real pickle. I’m twelve hundred miles away and you’re the
only businessman I know in Washington.’
“So he said, ‘I know I can count on you. As a matter of fact, I told our warehouse men to deliver these
cornflakes and Barbecubes dog biscuits to your house. Whatever you get for them, send me half; you keep
the rest.’
“And all of a sudden, these huge trucks come up and fill our garage, fill our basement, everything! Now my
dad couldn’t get the car in or anything.
“And now I’ve got these things.
“Well, I just tried to figure out who it would be useful to, you know. And obviously the dog biscuits would be
useful to a kennel. The cornflakes were not fit for human consumption anymore, so I figured they might be
good for some animal. I sold the cornflakes to some poultry guy. I made probably a hundred bucks for the
merchandise.33 When I sent the fifty percent to Mr. Miller, he wrote back and said, ‘You saved my job.’
“There were some awfully nice people like that back in Omaha. I always liked to hang around with adults
when I was a kid. Always. I would walk over to church or something, and then I would just drop in on
people.
“My dad’s friends were very nice too. They had this Bible class and various things at the rectory, and they

would come over to the house and play bridge afterward. All these guys were very, very nice to me; they all
liked me and called me Warreny. I’d learned Ping-Pong from taking out books from the library and
practicing at the Y. They knew I enjoyed playing with them down in the basement, and they’d take me on.
“I had all these things I was doing in Omaha. I had a nice niche there.
“When we moved to Washington, the Ping-Pong table disappeared. It was like my cornet. And the Boy
Scouts. I was doing all these different things, but they all ended when we moved.
“So I was mad.
“But I didn’t know exactly how to direct that. I just knew I was having a whole lot less fun than I was having
before my dad got elected.”
After his father took him to watch a couple of sessions of Congress, Warren decided he wanted to become a
congressional page, but Howard was not in a position to pull that off. Instead, Warren got a job caddying at
the Chevy Chase Club, but once again discovered that physical labor did not suit him. “My mother sewed
towels inside my shirts because I was carrying these heavy bags around. Sometimes the golfers—mainly
women golfers—would feel sorry for me and practically carry the things themselves.” He needed a job that
better fit his skills and talents.
Almost from birth, like all the Buffetts, Warren had lived and breathed the news. He loved hearing it and now
he would enter the business of delivering it and find he loved that too. He got himself hired to throw a paper
route, delivering the Washington Post and two different routes for the Times-Herald. The Times-Herald
belonged to Cissy Patterson, the autocratic cousin of Chicago Tribune publisher Robert McCormick. It
catered to the right wing, which hated FDR and kept the President up nights worrying what it would print the
next day. Cissy Patterson feuded with Eugene Meyer, a financier who owned the Washington Post and
supported FDR in every line of his paper’s type.
Warren started delivering in Spring Valley, near his home. “The first year, the houses were far apart, which I
was not too keen on. You had to deliver it every day, including Christmas Day. On Christmas morning, the
family had to wait until I had done my paper route. When I was sick, my mom delivered the papers, but I
handled the money. I had these jars in my room with half dollars and quarters.34 Then he added an
afternoon route to his workload.
“The Evening Star, which was owned by this blue-blooded Washington family, was the dominant paper in
town.”
In the afternoons, he rolled down the streets on his bike, grabbing copies of the Star to throw from the huge
basket on the front. Near the end of the route he had to steel himself. “On Sedgwick was this terrible dog.
“I liked to work by myself, where I could spend my time thinking about things I wanted to think about.
Washington was upsetting at first, but I was in my own world all the time. I could be sitting in a room
thinking, or I could be riding around flinging things and thinking.”
The thoughts he was thinking were angry thoughts. He spent his days acting them out at Alice Deal Junior
High. Bertie Backus, Alice Deal’s principal, prided herself on knowing each pupil by name. She soon had
special reason to know Warren Buffett’s.
“I was kind of behind when I got there, and then I fell further behind. I was just mad at the world. I did a lot
of daydreaming, and I was always charting things—I would bring stock charts to school and just wasn’t
paying attention to what was going on in class. Then I got to be friends with John McRae and Roger Bell.
And I became disruptive.”
The pleasing personality of his childhood all but disappeared. In one class, Warren enlisted John McRae to
play chess with him while the teacher was talking, just to be obnoxious. In another class, he cut open a golf

ball, which squirted some sort of liquid onto the ceiling.
The boys had started to golf. John McRae’s father worked as a greenskeeper at Tregaron, a famous estate
close to downtown Washington that belonged to heiress Marjorie Merriweather Post and her husband, Joseph
E. Davies, who was ambassador to Russia. The family had dozens of servants and was almost never home, so
the boys went over and played on the nine-hole golf course. Then Warren convinced Roger and John to run
away with him to Hershey, Pennsylvania, where they were going to try to get jobs caddying at a well-known
golf course.35 “We hitchhiked. And after we had successfully gone a hundred fifty miles or so, we made it to
Hershey and stopped at this hotel and we made the mistake of bragging to the bellboy.
“The next morning, when we came down, there was this huge highway patrolman waiting for us, who took us
down to the highway patrol headquarters.
“We just started lying. And we lied and lied and lied about having our parents’ permission. All the while
there was this Teletype machine spitting out alerts about this and that. I was sitting there thinking that
pretty soon there was going to be an alert from Washington, D.C., and this guy will know we’re lying. All I
wanted to do was get out of there.”
Somehow they lied convincingly enough that the patrolman let them go.36 “We started walking toward
Gettysburg or someplace. We were having no luck hitchhiking, and then a trucker picked us up and stuffed
all three of us into the cab.” They were so scared by then, they only wanted to go home. “The trucker
stopped at a diner in Baltimore and divided us up with other truckers. It was getting dark and we felt like
we’d never get out of there alive, but they took us back to Washington, separately. Roger Bell’s mother was
in the hospital. I mean, she had gone to the hospital over this, which made me feel terrible ’cause I had
talked Roger into going. I was on my way to being a four-star delinquent.”
He had made another friend by then, Lou Battistone; but, as in Omaha, he had kept his friendship with Lou
separate from his relationship with Roger and John. Meanwhile, Warren was doing worse than ever at school.
His grades dropped to Cs and Ds and even D minuses: in English, in history, in freehand drawing, in music,
even Cs in mathematics.37 “Some of these grades were from the classes where I was supposedly good.”
Warren’s teachers found him stubborn, rude, and lazy.38 Some of the teachers gave him double black Xs, for
extra bad. His behavior was shocking for the times. In the 1940s, children did what they were told and
obeyed their teachers. “I was going downhill fast. My parents were dying, they were dying.”
He excelled in only one class, and that was typing. Washington was fighting the war on paper, and typing was
considered a critical skill.
At Alice Deal, typing was taught by placing black covers over the keys so that the students were forced to
type by touch.39 It helped to be able to memorize, and it paid to have good hand-eye coordination. Warren
was gifted at both. “I made As every semester in typing. We all had these manual typewriters and, of course,
you’d slam the carriage back to hear this ‘ding!’
“I was—by far—the best in the class at typing out of twenty people in the room. When they’d have a speed
test, I would just race through the first line so I could SLAM the carriage back. Everybody else would stop
at that point, because they were still on the first word when they would hear my ‘ding!’ Then they’d panic,
and they’d try to go faster, and they’d screw up. So I had a lot of fun in typing class.”
Warren put this same ferocious energy into his three paper routes. He took to the paper-throwing as if he had
been born with inky fingers. Next, says Lou Battistone, “he conned the route manager, with that personality
of his, into giving him The Westchester” in historic Tenleytown. In this, Warren had pulled off a coup. The
Westchester was the kind of route an adult news carrier would ordinarily manage.
“It was a great opportunity. The Westchester was classy. The Westchester was just the crème de la crème.
Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands owned it.40 There were six U.S. Senators on that route, and colonels,
and Supreme Court justices, all these biggies. There was Oveta Culp Hobby, and Leon Henderson, the head

of the Office of Price Administration.” Mrs. Hobby came from a famous Texas publishing family, and had
moved to Washington to serve as director of the WACs, the Women’s Army Corps.
“So all of a sudden, I had this huge operation. I might have been thirteen or fourteen years old. I first got
The Westchester just for the Post. I had to give up my other morning routes when I got The Westchester,
and I felt badly.” Warren had grown close to his Times-Herald manager. “And when I told him that I had the
chance to get the Post at The Westchester and that meant I had to give up his route in Spring Valley…he
was terrific with me, but that was really kind of a sad moment.”
By then Warren considered himself an experienced paper-route operator, but he was tackling a complex
logistical challenge. The Westchester consisted of five buildings that sprawled over 271/2 acres, four of them
connected and one separate. The route included two more apartment buildings across Cathedral Avenue, the
Marlin and the Warwick. He would also be covering a small route of single-family homes up to Wisconsin
Avenue.
“I started on a Sunday, and they handed me a book telling me the people and their apartment numbers.
There was no training session and I didn’t have the book in advance.” He put on his tennis shoes and pulled
out his bus pass, which cost three cents each way, and climbed sleepily aboard the Capital Transit bus. He did
not stop for breakfast.
“I got up there around four-thirty a.m. There were these bundles and bundles of papers. I didn’t know what
the hell I was doing. I didn’t know how the numbering system worked or anything. I sat there for hours and
hours sorting and bundling the papers. I was short papers in the end, because people just took them from
the bundles as they left for church.
“The whole thing was a disaster. I thought, what the hell have I gotten into? It took until ten or eleven in the
morning to finish up.
“But I stumbled my way through. And it got better and I got good very fast. It was easy.”
Warren raced out of his house to catch the first N2 bus over to The Westchester at 3900 Cathedral Avenue
every morning. Often he had bus-pass number 001, the first person buying a bus pass each week.41 The
driver got used to looking out for him if he was running a little late. He would jump off the bus and run the
couple of blocks over to The Westchester.
He had figured out the most efficient route and turned what could have been a boring and repetitive job
delivering hundreds of newspapers each day into a competition with himself. “See, the papers were a little
thinner in those days, because of newsprint rationing. A thirty-six-page paper was a pretty good-size paper.
I’d stand at one end of the hallway with a bundle and pull off a paper, fold it over flat, and tuck it to make a
pancake, or roll it into a biscuit. Then I smacked it against my thigh. And I’d twist it against my wrist to put
some spin on it and slide it down the hall. I could slide that thing fifty, even a hundred feet. It was kind of a
test of skill, because the apartment doors were at different lengths down the hallway. I’d do the longest
ones first. But the trick was to be able to do it in such a way that they’d all come to rest a few inches from
the door. And sometimes people would have milk bottles, which made it more interesting.”
He also sold calendars to his newspaper customers, and he developed another sideline too. He asked all his
customers for their old magazines as scrap paper for the war effort.42 Then he would check the labels on the
magazines to figure out when the subscriptions were expiring, using a code book he had gotten from MooreCottrell, the publishing powerhouse that had hired him as an agent to sell magazines. He made a card file of
subscribers, and before their subscriptions expired, Warren would be knocking at their door, selling them a
new magazine.43
Because The Westchester had so much turnover in wartime, Warren’s biggest dread was customers who
skipped out and didn’t pay, leaving him stuck with the cost of their papers. After a few people skipped out on
him, he started tipping the elevator girls to let him know when people were about to move. Then the
