
difference. With the children grown, it was time for her to tend to her needs. She told him, over and over,
“We both—we both—have needs.” That part was for sure true.
“Susie wasn’t totally leaving either, that was the thing. She just wanted a change.”
In all of Susie’s travels, in her talk of buying this place or that place, it had never occurred to him that she
would leave, because it would never occur to him to leave her. “Wanting a change” and “not totally leaving”
were the kind of ambiguous Buffettesque statements they both tended to make to avoid feeling as though
they were disappointing anyone.
And then she left.
Susie went off to Europe for a few weeks with her friend Bella Eisenberg. She returned to Emerald Bay for
Christmas with the family but left to go back to Europe again, where she connected in Paris with Tom
Newman, son of her friend Rackie. Susie and Tom, who would soon be joining his mother in her new home in
San Francisco, became instant friends.43 Increasingly, it was clear that for Susie, having a place of her own in
San Francisco did not mean renting a pied-à-terre that she would escape to for a week every now and then.
Warren was hopeless at taking care of himself and Susie Jr. came back to Omaha for a couple of weeks to
lend a hand. Since the Quicksilver wedding, she had spent much of her marriage calling her mother in tears.
Big Susie was gently assisting her out of the marriage at the same time that she was extricating herself from
many of the conventions that tied her to her own marriage. Susie Jr. tried to explain to her father that, given
how much time he and her mother had been spending apart, his life was not going to be that different from
before. But Warren had not previously thought of himself and Susie as living virtually separate lives. In his
mind, Susie lived for him. She certainly acted as if she did when they were together. So it was a hard concept
to grasp, that Susie wanted her own life and would not be there for him all the time.
Susie and Warren talked for hours and hours on the phone. Now that he understood, Warren would have
done anything she asked to get her back, submitted to any conditions, met any demands—move to California,
learn to dance. But apparently it was too late. He could not give her what she wanted, whatever that was. She
explained it in terms of her freedom, her need to be separate and to fulfill her needs and find her own
identity. She could not do that while spending all her time taking care of him. So he wandered aimlessly
around the house, barely able to feed and clothe himself. He came to the office most days with a raging
headache. In front of the staff, he maintained his self-control, although he did look as though he was not
sleeping well at night. He was calling Susie every day, weeping. “It was as if they couldn’t live together and
they couldn’t live without each other,” one person said.
Seeing her husband helpless and destroyed, Susie wavered. She told a friend, “I might have to go back.” But
she didn’t. They both had needs. One of her needs was for her tennis coach to move to San Francisco. She
installed him in a tiny separate apartment down the way from her own. His understanding was that this was
temporary and that when Susie got divorced, they would marry.44
While Susie waffled, she made no move to get divorced. “Warren and I don’t want to lose anything,” she told
a friend who inquired about her plans. It wasn’t the money she was talking about; she had enough Berkshire
stock of her own. Susie was the type of person who never subtracted from but only added to her life, and she
never thought of acting differently now.
Meanwhile, she phoned Astrid Menks at the French Café over and over. “Have you called him yet? Have
you called him yet?”45
Susie knew her target well. Born in West Germany in 1946 as Astrid Beaté Menks after her parents “walked
out of Latvia when Russia took it,” Menks had emigrated to the United States at age five with her parents and
five siblings on a converted, broken-down battleship. Her first sight of America as they pulled in to the harbor
was a huge object approaching through a fog bank—the Statue of Liberty.
The Menks family was assigned to sponsors in Verdell, Nebraska, where they lived on a farm with a

potbellied stove and no electricity or indoor plumbing. When Astrid was six, the family moved to Omaha.
Shortly afterward, when their mother was diagnosed with breast cancer, Astrid and her two younger brothers
entered the Immanuel Deaconess Institute of Omaha, an all-purpose facility operated by Lutheran sisters that
included a retirement home, an orphanage, a hospital, a church, and a recreational hall. Her father, who
spoke little English, worked as a maintenance man on the grounds while the children lived at the orphanage.
Astrid’s mother died in 1954. When Astrid was thirteen, she was sent to a succession of three foster homes.
“I can’t say I had wonderful experiences in foster care,” she says. “I felt more secure at the children’s
home.”
After high school, Menks attended the University of Nebraska, until she ran out of money. After a stint at
Mutual of Omaha, for a while she worked as a buyer and manager for a women’s clothing store, although she
dressed herself in thrift-store finds. Eventually she wound up working as a garde-manger in restaurants,
slicing fifty pounds of zucchini and preparing cold foods. She lived in a little apartment downtown in the Old
Market close to work, which was convenient because the rusted-out floor of her Chevy Vega had holes
through to the street.46
She was always broke but knew everybody in the perpetually gentrifying warehouse district, and was one of
a restaurant crowd that would help organize the area’s would-be artists, stray singles, and gay men to put on a
meal or a holiday feast. Small-boned, fair-skinned with ice-blonde hair and refined features, Astrid had a
Nordic beauty with a subtle hard-knocks edge to it. At times she looked even younger than her thirty-one
years. She always made light of her life struggles, but when Susie Buffett got to know her, Astrid was
depressed, empty, and unfulfilled. Nonetheless, when it came to caretaking people in need,47 she could
out-Susie Susie any day.
Faced with all this badgering about calling Warren, Menks wasn’t exactly sure where Susie was headed, so
she was terrified. But finally she made the call.48 Arriving at the door to cook a homemade meal, she found a
cave filled with books, newspapers, and annual reports. Warren, who was incapable of functioning without
female companionship, was desperate for affection; he had been trying to fill the void by taking Dottie to the
movies and spending time with Ruthie Muchemore, a divorcée and family friend. Yet he was obviously still a
lonely, miserable man who had been reduced emotionally to an eleven-year-old boy. He needed feeding. His
clothes were a wreck. Astrid was the least pushy woman imaginable. But—as Susie had known would
happen—when faced with a problem, she knew what to do.
Warren would eventually come to explain why Susie left this way:
“It was preventable. It shouldn’t have happened. It was my biggest mistake. Essentially, whatever I did in
connection with Susie leaving would be the biggest mistake I ever made.
“Parts of it are sort of not understandable. It was definitely ninety-five percent my fault—no question
about that. It may even have been ninety-nine percent. I just wasn’t attuned enough to her, and she’d always
been perfectly attuned to me. It had always been all in my direction, almost. You know, my job was getting
more interesting and more interesting and more interesting as I went along. When Susie left, she felt less
needed than I should have made her feel. Your spouse starts coming second. She kept me together for a lot
of years, and she contributed ninety percent to raising the kids. Although, strangely enough, I think I had
about as much influence. It just wasn’t proportional to the time spent. And then she lost her job, in effect,
when the kids were raised.
“In a sense, it was time for her to do what she liked to do. She did a lot of volunteer things along the way,
but in the end, that never really works that well. She didn’t want to be Mrs. Big the way a lot of wives of
prominent guys in town do. She didn’t like being a prominent woman because she’s the wife of a prominent
guy. She loves connecting with people, and everybody connects with her.
“She loved me, and she still loves me, and we have an incredible relationship. But still…it shouldn’t have
happened. And it’s totally my fault.”

No matter how huge the wound or its reasons, as each day passed Warren discovered that he was still alive.
And so eventually he fell back on the one role that suited him best: the teacher, the preacher. As long as he
had his brains and his reputation, people would listen to him.
In the winter of 1978, Buffett turned with renewed intensity to writing his annual letter. The previous letter
had been a brief, informative report on how the businesses were doing. Now he started drafting a lesson on
how managements’ performance should be measured, an explanation of why short-term earnings are a poor
criterion for investment decisions, a long dissertation on insurance, and a paean to his friend Tom Murphy’s
skills in running Cap Cities. His neediness at the time was of an almost unfathomable depth. He reached out
to Carol Loomis for companionship, partly on the pretext of making her the letter’s official editor. She filled
the hours on trips to New York as together they put a great deal of thought into how he wanted to convey
these lessons to the people who had stayed with him throughout, those who had placed their faith in him: the
shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway.49

42
Blue Ribbon
Omaha and Buffalo • 1977–1983

By early 1978, with encouragement from Susie, Astrid Menks was coming to Farnam Street from time to
time, cooking and caretaking. Susie was calling Astrid to cheer her on, saying, “Thank you so much for taking
care of him.” Gradually, however, the relationship with Menks became something more as Warren began to
accept that Susie wasn’t coming back to him.
At first, he and Astrid spent time at her tiny place down in the old warehouse district. In May she moved in
with him, giving up the apartment where she had played after-hours hostess to la bohème Omaha. By the
time Peter came home from Stanford that summer, she was growing tomatoes in the yard on Farnam Street
and searching for Pepsi at thirty cents off a gallon. After so many months, “I never gave it a thought,” Astrid
says. “It just happened naturally.”1
Astrid “just disappeared” from the downtown scene, says an acquaintance.2 Meeting her, Buffett’s friends
were taken aback at the match. She was sixteen years younger, a blue-collar girl. Nonetheless, she knew
everything that Buffett didn’t about haute cuisine and fine wines, shellfish forks and chef’s knives. In
contrast to Susie’s spending habits and preference for all things modern, Astrid haunted junk shops looking
for bargain antiques. She prided herself on paying the least amount possible for her thrift-shop wardrobe; so
parsimonious was Astrid that she made Buffett look like a wastrel. Far more of a homebody than Susie, her
interests—cooking, gardening, bargain hunting—were narrow compared to Susie’s constantly expanding and
evolving tastes. Although modest, Astrid had a blunt-spoken, provocative wit that bore no resemblance to
Susie’s sly sense of humor and warm-hearted interest in others; Astrid’s down-to-earth manner was as unlike
Kay Graham’s patrician refinement as could possibly be.
The advent of Astrid caused an upheaval in Buffett’s other relationships. The unusual triangle clashed with
Leila’s religious tenets and her sense of public propriety—although of course she had little contact with and
no influence on her son. Peter, on the other hand, knew his father was reaching out for companionship. He
had been raised to take the remarkable in stride, and thought little of it. Howie was bewildered. To Susie Jr.,
it meant the classic stepmother problem: a barrier between her and her father and the problem of accepting
that anyone besides her mother could be good enough for him. To Gladys Kaiser, Warren’s chief protector,
who guarded the office door, answered his phone, and handled his—and now Big Susie’s—money, Astrid’s
arrival meant an additional level of stress, which she resented.3

Susie herself was shocked. This wasn’t what she had had in mind when she stressed to her husband that they
both had needs. In her mind, Warren’s dependence on her was absolute; how could he need a relationship
with anyone else? But it might have been predicted. Warren had searched his whole life for the perfect Daisy
Mae, and whatever he wanted, Astrid did: buy the Pepsi, do the laundry, take care of the house, give him
head rubs, cook the meals, answer the telephone, and provide all the companionship he needed. Astrid never
told him what to do and asked for nothing in return except to be with him. The previous Daisy Mae, Big
Susie, had fled Omaha partly to escape this endless well of neediness. As she adjusted to the shock, she came
to accept the relationship, which did make her new life easier. Susie, however, was possessive by nature. No
matter how she divided her own attention, she did not really want Warren to divide his. And thus it was
Susie’s expectations—not Warren’s—that would come to define all of their roles.
The pieces of Buffett’s life began to come back together into some sort of coherent whole. But he had been
shocked into realizing the truth of Susie’s insistence that sitting in a room making money was no way to
spend a life; he began to see what he had missed. While he was friendly enough with his kids, he hadn’t
really gotten to know them. The reality behind the jokes (“Who is that? That’s your son”4) meant that he
would spend the next few decades trying to repair these relationships. Much of the damage could not be
undone. At age forty-seven, he was just beginning to take stock of his losses.5
Warren, who placed a high value on honesty, was perfectly open about living with Astrid. Everybody knew
(except Doc Thompson). Both Susie and Astrid, however, remained closemouthed about the situation, saying
merely that they liked each other. Warren made only one public statement: “If you knew the people involved,
you’d see that it suited all of us quite well.” That was true, at least if compared to the alternatives. In this
sense and others, the situation bore a resemblance to the life of Warren’s idol, Ben Graham.
In the mid-1960s, Graham had proposed a novel arrangement to his wife, Estey, in which he would live half
the year with his deceased son Newton’s former girlfriend, Marie Louise Amingues, or Malou—ML, as she
was called by the family—and half with Estey. Marriage was a concept that Graham had always honored
more in the breach than in reality, but Estey had her limits, and had reached them. Ever since she said no, the
Grahams had been separated but they never divorced. Ben and ML were in La Jolla and spent part of the
year in Aixen-Provence. Estey lived in Beverly Hills. Ben felt perfectly friendly toward Estey, and ML was
content to live without marriage.6
Graham had succeeded in maintaining both relationships in name only, however, and Buffett was not trying
to emulate him. Buffett did not want two wives; for him it was a real strain to explain the relationships. Much
later he would describe it this way: “Susie put me together, and Astrid keeps me together. They both need to
give, and I’m a great receiver, so it works for them.”7 But the questions never ended, because explanations
like these and statements that the arrangement suited all of them glided past the fundamental problem of all
love triangles: If three weights balance on a scale, they can’t all be equal.
The inequality of this particular triangle was multiplied because in fact it involved two triangles—but only
one of them knew that. In a state of ignorance, Warren thought of Susie as the one who had been wronged.
He tried to square things by placating her in private and showering her with lavish attentiveness in public,
which left Astrid exposed and vulnerable. In a similar state of ignorance, Astrid—who admired and
practically worshipped Susie—accepted that Warren would never marry her, ceded Susie the turf of all social
and business events outside Omaha, and unhappily tolerated being called Buffett’s housekeeper and mistress
so that his marriage to Susie would appear as intact as possible. Buffett would come to rationalize this:
“Astrid knows where she fits with me. She knows she’s needed. That’s not a bad place to be.” And indeed,
her role, however narrowly defined, did give Astrid a security that she had always lacked.
It had taken a literal change in geography for Susie to maintain her aura of the selfless Mrs. Warren Buffett
while simultaneously seeking fulfillment in a life completely outside that role. Yet it was Warren who looked
as though he were getting the best of both worlds, even though the new relationship didn’t compensate for his
loss. He couldn’t defend himself against the impression that he had driven his wife to move out through his
relationship with Katharine Graham or—because some people got the time line wrong—his relationship with

Astrid.
He wanted desperately to hold the remaining pieces together, and would try for the rest of Susie’s life to
make up for what he had done to disappoint her. But of course that didn’t change who he was and obviously
didn’t mean he would stop seeing Kay. Buffett invited Graham to Omaha to visit the Strategic Air Command,
probably as a pretext to introduce her to Astrid. Graham brought her best friend, Meg Greenfield, editorial
page editor of the Post and one exception to Graham’s freely acknowledged weakness—she did not usually
get on well with other women when men were around.8 On meeting an attractive woman, Buffett says,
“Kay’s first thought would be how to get her out of the room.”
Buffett took them all to dinner with Stan Lipsey at the Omaha Club. Kay carried on a spirited conversation
with Warren; Meg and Stan occasionally joined in. The conversation left Astrid, who was not the type to put
herself forward, entirely on her own. Except for ordering, she sat in silence for the entire meal. Mesmerized
as always by Graham, Buffett did nothing to help. A couple of dozen people at a huge table nearby carried on
with a raucous birthday celebration. Finally the celebrants got up, stood in a circle, and started to make
squawking-beak motions, flap wings, and wiggle tail feathers with their hands to the sound of music, doing
the Chicken Dance. Ever Miss Proper, Graham sat staring with a “priceless” look on her face.9
From then on, Buffett almost always saw Graham outside of Omaha. When she called the house and Astrid
answered the phone, Kay had nothing to say.10 She handled the situation mostly by acting as if she believed
that Astrid didn’t exist, except for calling Astrid once to ask how to work her VCR.11
Susie and Astrid were on a wholly different footing; they were perfectly comfortable with each other, and
Astrid even went to San Francisco to visit Susie. Susie’s stark cubicle on Nob Hill now looked like a little
girl’s room, gussied up with dolls and pillows and posters and a Mickey Mouse phone. She used the kitchen
cabinets to store her blouses.12
Susie by now was grateful to Astrid for making her life easier, as long as Astrid accepted the limited public
role that Susie had defined for her. Moving to San Francisco had been difficult enough because she had had
to leave behind so many friends and causes she cared about. Her departure had left shock waves in its wake.
The Future Central Committee, Planned Parenthood, the Urban League, and other civil-rights organizations
regrouped, but all felt a huge hole had been ripped from their center. Her friends and her hangers-on had
coped in varying ways. A few felt abandoned, others simply missed her. Some began going back and forth to
San Francisco, considering it a sort of second home. A couple of them even followed her to San Francisco
and relocated there.13
To many of the Buffetts’ friends, the explanation that Susie needed to live in San Francisco because it
offered her a richer palette that she couldn’t find in Omaha conveyed a vague impression of time spent
visiting art galleries, jazz clubs, and the symphony. But by the late 1970s, San Francisco was not the Paris of
America. A wave of returning war veterans had washed up on the Bay Area’s shores, many of them injured
physically, mentally, and spiritually. The worst-scarred relics fell to the pavement with the winos and the
burned-out addicts left from the days of the skinny-dipping hippies who had blown their minds on LSD and
pot in the Haight. Those still drawn to San Francisco for its hedonism, sexual freedom, and liberation stepped
through a growing puddle of homeless on the streets. The gays had burst from the closet earlier in the decade,
in a celebration of freedom that peaked at the Gay Pride Parade in Golden Gate Park in 1976. But a Florida
singer named Anita Bryant began what became a national campaign of gay-bashing, which culminated in the
murder of San Francisco mayor George Moscone and Supervisor Harvey Milk by a homophobic city
employee in November 1978.14 After the jury accepted the assassin’s insanity defense and returned a verdict
of manslaughter, some of the worst rioting in its history rocked San Francisco.
Among the first of Susie’s new friends were a gay couple, one of whom was a former anesthesiologist who
had left Omaha after a malpractice incident. She added others—musicians, artists, people she met in stores, at
church, while getting her nails done, at the theater, at the Esalen Institute in Big Sur. She soon had a large
circle, many if not most of whom were gay men. The rebel in Susie blossomed in San Francisco’s heady

atmosphere, and her new life liberated her. The former hostess of charity luncheons now threw parties that
felt like being backstage at a rock concert; she opened up her doors and invited in the carnival. But, true to
form, she also took up a cause, once again defying convention. As she worked the soup kitchen lines, she
became the accepting mother that many of her gay friends had never had.
The part of her life that Warren still controlled was the money. She had plenty of Berkshire stock, but under
the deal they had worked out, she wasn’t to sell a share. She fell in love with a Marc Chagall painting and
wanted to buy it for her tiny new apartment. But she told a friend that she couldn’t do it. “It would ruin
everything,” she said. Warren was equally clear: “I don’t want you selling Berkshire shares.” He still covered
all her expenses. Gladys monitored her spending and paid all her bills.
Similarly, it was Warren whom Susie got to lend her friend Charles Washington $24,900. He was an Omaha
activist whom she had championed through thick and thin; he in turn had been one of the protectors who
defended her stoutly to Bud Pagel, the reporter who asked “What Makes Susie Sing?” Buffett thought the
loan was a terrible idea, and probably wouldn’t have agreed to it were he not now so eager to please his wife.
Sure enough, seven months later, Washington missed a couple of payments. Rarely did anything pierce
Buffett’s pleasant demeanor, but if he felt someone was trying to cheat him out of money, his eyes would
flash pain and rage and revenge all at once. Within seconds, at most, the emotion would subside while he
considered a businesslike response. This time, he promptly filed suit against Washington and won a judgment
of $24,450.
The Washington episode symbolized the reality of Warren and Susie’s new relationship; if Susie was to keep
all her stock, his grip on the checkbook had to loosen. Warren gave her an allowance, besides covering all her
bills: This was her giveaway budget. When the children had needs, she took care of expenses that Warren
wouldn’t. Howie had sold some of his Berkshire stock to build a tree house for him and Marcia to live in.
They were struggling with their finances as well as their marriage. “It’s just terrible that Warren won’t pay
for it,” Susie grumbled. “He was going to let the ceiling fall in. He was going to let them lose the house.” But
this was part of their game: Warren knew that Susie would take care of it for them, as she had taken care of
Little Sooz when she was unhappy in her marriage, as she always took care of everything.
Everything, that is, except the money. Making that was Warren’s job, and all these changes and complexities
and mounting bills had come at a time when the family fortunes were declining. Just as Susie was leaving for
San Francisco, Warren had been dragged into court in Buffalo, New York, for a costly battle between two
newspapers. Normally he was competitive enough to roll up his sleeves and relish something like this. But
now, since he was facing a personal crisis, it became an expensive, absorbing episode that shut out the rest
and blunted the pain. The Buffalo Evening News drama would be a protracted battle, one that would threaten
Blue Chip’s value and rank among the most unpleasant of his career. It bore a vivid resemblance to the
conflict he had faced in Beatrice many years before, one he had sworn to himself never to repeat.
In the spring of 1977, he and Munger had finally bought the daily newspaper for which they had been
searching these many years. At $35.5 million this was their biggest purchase ever.15 Rusting, icebound
Buffalo wasn’t the growing one-newspaper town of their dreams, but it was still a good place to own a
newspaper. Buffalo’s citizens left for their factory jobs before dawn and read the paper in the evenings. The
Buffalo Evening News dominated its nearest competitor, the Courier-Express, which was weak financially.
Buffett had developed a well-founded theory of competition in the newspaper industry.
“Kay was always saying how competition made them better and all that stuff. I said, ‘Lookit. The economics
in the business is inevitably leading to one newspaper in a town. Survival of the fattest is what I call it. And
you win. There is no second place. There’s no red ribbon. In the end, there isn’t going to be any competition
because that isn’t the way it works.’”
The Courier-Express’s staff and publisher had also figured out that there was no red ribbon in newspapers.
In 1920, seven hundred cities in the United States had two major newspapers. By 1977, the number was
down to not quite fifty. On weekdays, the Evening News sold twice as many papers as the Courier-Express.
The Courier-Express clung to survival through having the only Sunday paper in town, which made up sixty
percent of its revenues.
