
Normal versus Robust Measures
Test 01/96
to 06/06

Test 02/96
to 04/06

%

CAGR%

51.7%

54.4%

5.2%

MAR ratio

1.31

1.47

12.2%

Sharpe ratio

1.39

1.46

5%

Test 01/96
to 06/06

Test 02/96
to 04/06

%

RAR%

54.7%

4.9%

0.4%

R-cubed

3.31

3.63

9.7%

R-Sharpe

1.58

1.6

1.3%

Normal Measures

Robust Measures

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

As is shown in Table 12-1, robust measures are less sensitive to
change than are the existing measures. The R-cubed measure is sensitive to the addition or removal of large drawdowns but less sensitive
than is the MAR ratio. The impact of a single drawdown is diluted

190 • Way of the Turtle

by the averaging process used in the R-cubed measure. All the robust
measures were much less affected by these changes in data than were
their counterparts. If this test had not changed the maximum drawdown, the R-cubed measure would have shown the same 0.4 percent
change that RAR% shows and the differences between the measures
would have been even more dramatic as the MAR would have
changed 5.2 percent (the same as the CAGR% that is its numerator)
and the R-cubed measure would have changed 0.4 percent.
Another example of how robust measures hold up better can be
seen in the same performance comparison of our six basic systems
from Chapter 7. Recall how the performance dropped considerably
when we included the ﬁve months from July to November 2006.
Tables 12-2 and 12-3 show that robust measures held up much better over the relatively adverse conditions of the last several months.
Table 12-2 shows the percentage changes in RAR% compared with
the percentage change in CAGR% for these systems.
Table 12-2

Robustness of CAGR% versus RAR%

System

CAGR%
06/06

11/06

%

RAR%
06/06

11/06

%

ATR CBO

52.4%

48.7%

–7.0%

54.7%

55.0%

0.5%

Bollinger CBO

40.7%

36.7%

–9.8%

40.4%

40.7%

0.6%

Donchian Trend

27.2%

25.8%

–5.2%

28.0%

26.7%

–4.6%

Donchian Time

47.2%

4%

–0.4%

45.4%

44.8%

–1.4%

Dual Moving
Average

50.3%

42.4%

–15.7%

55.0%

53.6%

–2.6%

Triple Moving
Average

41.6%

36.0%

–13.5%

41.3%

40.8%

–1.2%

Average 

–8.6%

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

–1.4%

On Solid Ground • 191

The RAR% changed less than a sixth as much as the CAGR%
over this time period. This demonstrates that the RAR% measure
is much more robust than CAGR%, meaning that it will be more
stable over time during actual trading. The same holds true for the
risk/reward measure R-cubed compared with its less robust cousin
the MAR ratio. Table 12-3 lists the percentage changes in R-cubed
compared with the percentage change in the MAR ratio for these
systems.
Table 12-3

Robustness of R-Cubed versus the MAR Ratio

System

MAR Ratio
06/06
11/06

%

R4 06/06

11/06

%

ATR CBO

1.35

1.25

–7.4%

3.72

3.67

–1.4%

Bollinger CBO

1.29

1.17

–9.3%

3.48

3.31

–4.9%

Donchian Trend

0.76

0.72

–5.3%

1.32

1.17

–11.4%

Donchian Time

1.17

1.17

–0.0%

2.15

2.09

–2.8%

Dual Moving
Average

1.29

0.77

–40.3%

4.69

3.96

–15.6%

Triple Moving
Average

1.32

0.86

–34.9%

3.27

2.87

–12.2%

Average 

–16.2%

–8.0%

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

The R-cubed measure changed about half as much as the MAR
ratio did for the period indicated.
Robust measures are also less susceptible to the effect of luck
than nonrobust measures are. For example, a trader who happened to be on vacation and avoided the largest drawdown for a
particular type of trading would show a relatively higher MAR

192 • Way of the Turtle

ratio compared with his peers; this would be shown with R-cubed,
since that single event will not have as large an effect on the Rcubed measure. You are more likely to get good test results that
come from lack rather than repeating market behavior which can
be exploited by a trader when you are using nonrobust measures,
and that is yet another reason to use those that are robust.
Using robust measures also helps you avoid overﬁtting because
they are less likely to show large changes caused by small numbers
of events. Consider the effect of the rules added to improve our
Dual Moving Average system in the discussion on overﬁtting. The
rule that was added to cut down the size of the drawdown
improved CAGR% from 41.4 percent to 45.7 percent (10.3 percent) and the MAR ratio from 0.74 to 1.17 (60 percent). In contrast, the robust measure RAR% changes from 53.5 percent to
53.75, or only 0.4 percent; likewise, the robust risk/reward measure R-cubed changes from 3.29 to 3.86, only 17.3 percent. Robust
measures are less likely to show major improvement from changes
in a small number of trades. Therefore, since curve ﬁtting generally beneﬁts only a small number of trades, when you use robust
measures, you are less likely to see major improvements in performance from curve ﬁtting.
Let’s consider a few other factors that affect the reliability of
backtests for predicting system performance in the future.

Representative Samples
Two major factors determine how likely our sample trades and test
results are to be representative of what the future may bring:

On Solid Ground • 193

• Number of markets: Tests run with more markets are more
likely to include markets in various states of volatility and
trendiness.
• Duration of test: Tests run over longer periods will cover
more market states and be more likely to contain sections of
the past that are representative of the future.
I recommend testing all the data to which you have access. It is
much cheaper to buy data than it is to pay for the losses associated
with using a system that you thought worked only because you had
not tested it over a sufﬁcient number of markets or a sufﬁcient number of years. Won’t you feel inept when your system stops working
the ﬁrst time you encounter a market condition that has existed
three or four times in the last 20 years but was not part of your test?
Young traders are particularly susceptible to this sort of mistake.
They think that the conditions they have seen are representative of
those markets in general. They often do not realize how markets
go through phases and change over time, often returning to conditions that previously existed. In trading as in life, the young often
fail to see the value in studying the history that occurred before they
existed. Be young, but don’t be foolish: Study history.
Remember how everyone was a day trader and a genius during
the Internet boom? How many geniuses survived the collapse when
their previously successful methods stopped working? If they had
done some testing, they would have realized that their methods
were dependent on the particular market conditions of that boom,
and so they would have stopped using them when those conditions

194 • Way of the Turtle

were no longer present. Or perhaps they would have employed
robust methods that work well in all conditions.

Sample Size
The concept of sample size is simple: You need a large enough
sample to make valid statistical inferences. The smaller the sample, the rougher the guess provided by those inferences; the larger
the sample, the better the guess provided by those inferences.
There is no magic number; there is only larger is better, smaller is
worse. A sample size of less than 20 will produce a large degree of
error. A sample size of more than 100 is much more likely to have
predictive value. A sample size of several hundred is probably sufﬁcient for most testing. There are speciﬁc formulas and methodologies that will give you speciﬁc answers to the question of how
large a sample is required, but unfortunately, those formulas are
not designed for the types of data encountered in trading, where
we do not have a nice neat distribution of potential outcomes such
as the distribution of women’s height in Figure 4-3.
However, the real challenge does not lie in deciding exactly how
many samples you need. The difﬁculty arises in assessing the inferences from past data when one is considering particular rules that
do not come into effect very often. So, for these types of rules there
is no way to get a large enough sample. Take the behavior of markets at the end of large price bubbles. You can come up with some
speciﬁc rules for those market conditions and even test them, but
you will not have a very large sample on which to base your decisions. In these cases we need to understand that the tests do not tell
us anywhere near as much as they would if we had a much larger

On Solid Ground • 195

sample. The seasonal tendencies I outlined earlier are another area
where this problem arises.
In testing a new rule for a system, you have to try to measure
how many times that particular rule affected the results. If a rule
made a difference only four times during the course of the test,
you do not have a statistical basis for deciding whether that rule
is helping. It is too easy for the effects you see to be random. One
solution to this problem is to ﬁnd ways to generalize the rule
so that it comes into play more often; that will increase the sample size and therefore the statistical descriptive value of tests for
that rule.
There are two common practices that compound the problem
of small sample sizes: single-market optimization and the building
of overly complex systems.
• Single-market optimization: Optimization methods that
are performed separately for each market are much more
difﬁcult to test with a sufﬁcient sample size because a single
market offers much less trading opportunity.
• Complex systems: Complex systems have many rules, and it
becomes very difﬁcult at times to determine how many
times a particular rule may have come into effect or the
degree of that effect. Therefore, it is harder to be conﬁdent
in the statistical descriptive value of tests that are run using a
complex system.
For these reasons, I do not recommend optimizing for single
markets and prefer simple ideas that have stronger statistical
meaning.

196 • Way of the Turtle

Back to the Future
Perhaps one of the most interesting questions in this regard is: How
can you determine what you actually may be able to achieve in real
trading?
The answer to this question makes sense only when you understand the factors that affect performance loss, the need for robust
measures, and the need for a sufﬁcient number of representative
samples. Once you have this, you can start to think about the likely
effect of drift and change in the markets and how even excellent
systems that have been built by experienced traders ﬂuctuate in
terms of their results. The reality is that you do not know and cannot predict how a system will perform. The best you can do is use
tools that provide a sense of the range of potential values and the
factors that affect those values.

Lucky Systems
If a system has performed particularly well in the recent past, it may
have been a matter of luck or there may have been ideal market
conditions for that system. Generally, systems that have done well
tend to have difﬁcult periods after those good periods. Do not
expect to be able to repeat that lucky performance in the future. It
may happen, but do not count on it. You are more likely to experience a period of suboptimal performance.

Parameter Scrambling
A very good exercise one should always perform before considering
trading with any particular system is what I call parameter scrambling. Take a few system parameters and change them by a considerable amount, say, 20 to 25 percent of their value. Pick a point that

On Solid Ground • 197

is considerably down the side of the optimization curves shown in
Figures 12-1 and 12-2. Now look at the results for this test. Using
the Bollinger Breakout system, I decided to see what would happen
when we moved from the optimal values of 350 days and –0.8 for
the exit threshold to 250 days and 0.0 for the exit threshold. This
decreased the RAR% from 59 percent to 58 percent and the Rcubed value from 3.67 to 2.18: A fairly dramatic change. This is just
the sort of dramatic change one might expect to get when going
from testing using historical data to actual trading in the market.

Rolling Optimization Windows
Using rolling optimization windows is another exercise that is more
directly parallel to the experience of going from testing to real trading. To do this, pick a date perhaps 8 or 10 years in the past and then
optimize with all the data before that point, using the same optimization methods you normally would use and making the same sorts
of trade-offs you normally would make, pretending that you have data
available only up to that point. When you have ﬁnished determining
the optimal parameter values, run a simulation of those parameters
using data for the two years after the years of the optimization. How
did the performance for the subsequent several years hold up?
Continue this process with a date a few more years into the
future (about six or eight years in the past). How does this compare
with your original test and the ﬁrst rolling window? How does it
compare with the test using your original parameter values, the
optimal values based on having all the data available? Repeat the
process until you have reached the current time frame.
To illustrate this, I ran an optimization of the Bollinger Breakout system in which I varied each of the three parameters across a

Table 12-4

Rolling Optimization Window Test versus Actual RAR%

Period

MA

Entry

Exit

RAR% Test

RAR% Actual

%

R4 Test

R4 Actual

%

1989 to 1998

280

1.8

–0.8

55.0%

58.5%

6.3%

7.34

5.60

–23.7%

1991 to 2000

280

1.8

–0.5

58.5%

58.8%

0.6%

5.60

5.32

–5.0%

1993 to 2002

260

1.7

–0.7

58.5%

59.3%

1.4%

7.68

3.94

–5.0%

1995 to 2004

290

1.7

–0.6

63.9%

57.7%

–8.3%

5.53

3.90

–29.5%

1997 to 2006

290

1.7

–0.6

55.1%

N/A

N/A

3.90

N/A

N/A

• 198 •

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

On Solid Ground • 199

broad range. I then picked the optimal setting on the basis of the
optimal position, generally near the point where the maximum Rcubed value was achieved. I ran this optimization for ﬁve separate
10-year tests. Table12-4 shows the performance of the rolling optimization for the year after the period indicated.
As you can see from the table, performance varies greatly from
the tested value for each rolling period. Further, the optimal values are different for each time period tested. This illustrates the
imprecision of the testing process and the variability one will
encounter in making the transition from testing to actual trading.

Monte Carlo Simulation
Monte Carlo simulation is one way to determine the robustness of
a system and answer questions such as: “What if the past had been
just slightly different?” and “What might the future bring?” You
could think of it as a way to generate slightly different alternative
universes by using the data from the series of events that represent
the actual past price data.
The term Monte Carlo simulation refers to a general class of
methods that use random numbers to investigate a particular phenomenon. It is most useful with phenomena that are impossible or
difﬁcult to describe with mathematical precision. The name Monte
Carlo comes from the city in Monaco that is famous for gambling
casinos since those casinos offer many games whose outcomes are
determined by random events: roulette, craps, blackjack, and the
like. The method was used during the Manhattan Project by the
scientists who created the atomic bomb, and its name comes from
that era.

200 • Way of the Turtle

Those scientists were trying to determine the ﬁssion characteristics of uranium so that they could determine how much uranium
mass would be necessary to make an atomic bomb. Enriched uranium was incredibly expensive, and so they could not afford to be
wrong in their assessment or they would waste months of time, not
to mention money, if the bomb didn’t explode because there was
not enough uranium. Similarly, if they overestimated and ended
up using more uranium than they needed, it would add months to
the schedule for testing. Unfortunately, the complex interactions
of uranium atoms inside a bomb were impossible to model accurately with the methods of that period and would have required
computing resources that were unavailable until recent times.
To determine the amount of ﬁssionable uranium required, they
needed to know what percentage of the neutrons emitted by an
atom splitting would result in another atom splitting. The famous
physicist Richard Feynman had the insight that they could determine the characteristics of the interactions of particular single neutron by using a team of mathematicians and then could determine
whether that neutron was absorbed by another nucleus or split
another atom. Feynman realized that they could use random numbers to represent the various types of neutrons that would be emitted when an atom split. If that was done thousands of times, they
would be able to look at an accurate distribution of the ﬁssion
characteristics of uranium that would allow them to determine
how much material would be needed. Feynman knew that
although he could not predict the future because the process was
too complex, he could take the parts of the problem he did understand and, using random numbers to simulate neutron properties,
obtain the answer to the problem anyway. So, he could under-

On Solid Ground • 201

stand the nature of the ﬁssion characteristics of uranium without
having to be able to predict exactly what each atom would do at
each point.

Alternative Trading Universes
The markets are even more complex than nuclear ﬁssion reactions.
Markets are composed of the actions of thousands of people who
make decisions on the basis of their own history and brain chemistry, which are much less predictable than neutrons are. Fortunately, as Feynman did with uranium analysis, we can use random
numbers to get a better feel for the potential characteristics of a
trading system even though we cannot predict what the future will
bring. We can examine a set of alternative trading universes that
represent a potential way in which history might have unfolded if
things had been slightly different.
There are two common ways to use Monte Carlo methods to
generate these alternative trading universes:
• Trade scrambling: Randomly changing the order and start
dates of the trades from an actual simulation and then using
the percentage gain or loss from the trades to adjust equity
by using the new scrambled trade order
• Equity curve scrambling: Building new equity curves by
assembling random portions of the original equity curve
Of these two approaches, equity curve scrambling generates
more realistic alternative equity curves because Monte Carlo simulation with random trade reordering tends to understate the possibility of drawdowns.

202 • Way of the Turtle

The periods of maximum drawdown invariably occur at the tail
end of large trends or periods of positive equity increases. At those
times, markets tend to correlate more highly than they normally
do. This is true for futures and stocks. At the end of a large trend
when it breaks down and reverses, it seems that everything moves
against you at once; even markets that normally do not seem correlated become so on those volatile days when a large trend disintegrates.
Because trade scrambling removes the connection between
trades and dates, it also removes the effect on the equity curve
of many trades simultaneously reversing. This means that your
drawdowns show up with less magnitude and frequency in
Monte Carlo simulation than they will in real life. Take a look
at the moves in gold and silver in the spring of 2006. If you happened to test a trend-following system that traded both of those
markets, scrambling the trades would mean that your drawdowns for those two markets would happen at different times,
effectively reducing the effect of each separate drawdown. In
fact, this effect extended to a few other relatively unlikely markets, such as sugar; there was a signiﬁcant period of drawdown
in the sugar market during the 20-day period from mid-May to
mid-June 2006, the same period in which gold and silver were
declining. Thus, trade scrambling is inferior because it understates the drawdowns one is likely to encounter in trading longterm and medium-term systems.
Another example of this phenomenon is the one-day drawdown in the 1987 U.S. stock market crash. On they day of the
large opening gap in eurodollars, many markets that normally
were not correlated also gapped strongly against my positions.

On Solid Ground • 203

Monte Carlo simulation using scrambling of trades tends to
dilute those very real occurrences because it spreads the trades
apart so that they no longer have adverse price movement on the
same days.
Many software packages that implement Monte Carlo simulation offer a way to generate new curves by using equity curve scrambling. However, they do not take into account another important
issue. I also have found through testing and experience that the
periods of bad days at the end of large trends and the magnitude of
those bad days are much worse than one would expect from random events. At those times of major drawdown, the equity curve
for a trend-following system exhibits serial correlation or correlation of one day’s net change with the preceding day’s net changes.
Put more simply, the bad days tend to cluster in a way that one
would not expect to occur randomly.
Using the same recent example of the drawdown in gold, silver,
and sugar in spring 2006, if one scrambled only daily net changes,
the long streak of high-magnitude changes in equity from mid-May
to mid-June would be lost as it would be very unlikely that those
changes would come together if you randomly drew from a distribution or even from the actual equity curve.
To account for this in our simulation software, at Trading Blox
we use equity curve net changes but allow for scrambling by using
multiday chunks of the curve rather than just a single day’s change.
That way the simulated equity curve preserves the grouping of bad
days that one encounters in actual trading. In my testing, I use 20day chunks for equity curve scrambling and ﬁnd that this preserves
the autocorrelation of the equity curve and gives the resulting simulation better real-world predictive value.
