
277

278

The Rule of Multiple Technical Techniques

I

.......... Bullish

..................
.

......

.......i...............i...

.
.
!

Engulfing
............ Pattern and ............................... !...................

I
Jul

EXHIBIT 19.2. Cocoa-Weekly
(Candlesticks with Hedging)

Oct

Jan
1989

i I
~ p r

Jul

Oct

Source: Commodity Trend Service"

hedgers) should have seriously considered placing hedges or adding to
their hedge position.
The next clue came when price lows at areas A, B, and C were not
confirmed by lower momentum values. This revealed the fact that selling velocity was slowing (that is, experiencing diminishing downside
momentum).
The reasons above were more than enough to expect a price bounce,
but there is another added feature. A traditional Western falling wedge
pattern was broken to the upside about the same time the momentum
oscillator crossed into positive territory (see arrow). Based on the falling
wedge, there was a target to where the wedge started. This, depending
on how one views this wedge, could have been the June high near $19
or the May 18 high near $20. On the piercing of the rising wedge, more
long-hedge positions could have been added.

Hedging with Candlesticks

7:29

,

0

CLUO DAILY BAR

:.H=
o=

..

L=

279

1990 CQG INC.

..

......................................... . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

..
........................:.

1900

..
\

'

-.................

1800

..

Bullish .
Engulfing
Pattern

7/24/90
o=
H=

:L=
C=
+400
+200
+O

. ;May .
rn

(23

130

17

114

121

128

iJun
14

.
111

118

125

iJul

.

12

19

-200
116

EXHIBIT 19.3. Crude Oil-September 1990, Daily (Candlesticks with Hedging)

We see by this example that candlestick techniques can provide an
earlier warning of a trend reversal than with Western technical tools.
Also, we see candlestick techniques, in conjunction with Western technical methods, can create a powerful synergy. The more technical signals
confirming each other, the greater the likelihood of an accurate call for a
trend change.

123

CHAPTER

20

HOW I HAVE USED
CANDLESTICKS
f#hiil&&hlgB~>tb
L
" A prudent man has more than one string to his bow"

T h e following are some examples of trades 1 recommended to the Merrill Lynch system over a month-long period. All of them incorporated
some candlestick techniques. Since I track futures, the examples in this
chapter are futures oriented. Also, my bias is short term so the examples
will be keyed off intra-day and daily charts. Each person has their
unique trading style. How you trade is different than how I trade. Thus,
I would not expect you to go through all the same thought processes or
actions that I did in these trades.
My goal in this chapter is not to provide you with a set of trading
rules. It is to show how one person has fused candlestick techniques into
their trading methodology. I hope this chapter can start you on the road
to incorporating candlesticks into your analysis.
Exhibit 20.1 shows that the neckline of a head and shoulders top was
penetrated on May 29. The trend consequently turned down. In Western
technical theory, once a head and 'shoulders neckline is broken you can
expect a bounce to that line before selling pressure resumes. During the
week of June 11, prices were in the process of approaching this neckline.
June 11 was a strong white session. A short sale at that point was not
attractive. I needed proof that the rally was running into trouble. The
market gave a hint of trouble by way of the next session's small black
real body. It signaled that the prior white candlestick's strong session
may not continue.

282

The Rule of Multiple Technical Techniques

EXHIBIT 20.1. Soybeans-November 1990, Daily

On June 13, I recommended a short at $6.27. The stop was above the
neckline at $6.35. The target was $5.90 (this was based on a support area
earlier in the year). The short position looked good for the rest of the
week as the market tumbled. Then on June 18, the market shouted it
was time to cover shorts. The clues were:
The tall white candlestick on June 18 engulfed the prior black real
body. These two candlesticks formed a bullish engulfing line.
The opening on June 18 made a new low for the move by punching
under the early June lows. However, prices bounced right back above
this early June low. This created a spring in which the lows were broken and not held. Based on this spring, I had targeted a retest of the
upper end of the trading range at $6.30.
The candlestick on the June 18 was a strong bullish belt-hold line.
The new price lows were not validated by lower stochastic levels. This
was a positive divergence and it demonstrated that the bears were
losing control.

How I Have Used Candlesticks
8 : 41
O= 8825
-H= 8825 .

@

CFUO DAILY BAR

..

283

1990 CQG INC.

..

. A = -200

4

/

..

Resistance'
................... .
.
.
.... .
.
.
..............Zone
'

:

..
..

Y

..
..

'

9000

..
..
Hararni

-

6/26/90
.
..
..
8825
-H= 8825
.
. L = 8615
.C= 8650 ..........Apr .....................................
May .........................................Jun ................................
, 8500
rn
126
12
19
116
123
130
17
114
121
128
14
Ill
118
125

. O=

..

.

EXHIBIT 20.2. Coffee-September 1990, Daily

The action on June 18 revealed that it was not an environment to be
short. I covered my short the following session at $6.12. This is an example of placing a trade mainly based on Western technical analysis, but
one which also used some candlestick indicators as reasons to change
my mind about the market's trend.
From late May we see a series of lower highs as delineated by the
downward sloping resistance line in Exhibit 20.2. This shows the prevailing trend was down. There was support going back to late March and
early May near $.92. When, on June 14, coffee broke under these lows it
was time to look for an area to short. June 14's long black candlestick
showed the force behind the selling pressure. The market was too oversold to short at this time.
The small real body which followed the long black line created a
harami pattern. This harami pattern told me not to rush with a short
since the prior downtrend had been neutralized. A lateral trading band,
or a rally, could unfold. It turned out coffee had a minor rally. The rally
stopped right where it was supposed to stop-near $.92. What was so
special about $.92 as resistance? Remember the axiom that old support
can become resistance. The late March and May lows were near $.92.

284

The Rule of Multiple Technical Techniques

CLDO 60 MINUTE BAR

7 : 16
n=

7/213:45
1677 .
1678 .
-L= 1663 .
C= 1672 .
I 6/18

.-0=
H=

.

Hammer

@

1990 CDG INC.

:
1 6/25

7/ 2

EXHIBIT 20.3. Crude Oil-August 1990, Intra-day

This level became resistance. Once the market backed down from near
$.92 on the brief rally, I knew the bears were still in charge. The move
on June 20 opened a window. This implied another leg lower. On June
21, when the market failed to move above the window's resistance area,
I recommended a short at $.go15 with a stop above the June 20 high of
$.9175. The objective was for $.8675 (this was based on support earlier
in the year). The market then backed off.
At the time of the chart shown in Exhibit 20.3, crude oil was in a bear
market. So I was looking to short on rallies. A rally started on June 21
with the hammer (note how I did not use this bullish hammer as a time
to buy. Why? Because the major trend was down). Then, a few days
after the hammer, back-to-back bearish engulfing patterns emerged. At
that time, I suggested a short sale. There was a small window opened
between June 15 and June 18. In the belief that this window would be
resistance, I put a stop slightly above it at $17.65. The target was a retest
near the hammer lows. A late rally on June 25 quickly backed off from the
resistance area made by the bearish engulfing pattern and the window.
Exhibit 20.4 shows that on June 4 a hammer and a successful hold-

How I Have Used Candlesticks
0

CZO DRILY BAR

15:10

. O= 2786

285

1989 COG INC.

.H= 2810

. L= 2776

L= 2806~
- A = +16

,

..

,

2700

and Spring

f
2600

..
,

'

. . .

H= 2810
L= 2776

C= 2806
119

rn

126

'Rpr
12

'Jun

'May

I?

116

123

130

17

114

121

129

14

EXHIBIT 20.4. Corn-December 1990, Daily

ing, on a close, of the late April, mid-May lows of $2.65. It was also a
bullish spring since prices made new lows for the move but these new
lows failed to hold.
Although this was a bullish hammer I needed confirmation the next
day before I could recommend to buy since the market was holding the
$2.65 support so tenuously. The day after this hammer the market
proved itself by opening higher. I recommended a buy at $2.68 with a
stop under the support line shown at $2.64. The target was for a test of
the downward sloping resistance line at $2.79. The strong session after
the hammer day made this into a morning star pattern.
Although the trade in Exhibit 20.5 was not profitable, it is a good
example of how candlesticks can help to provide good trade location.
The price action on Friday, March 2 gave some buy signals. First, it was
a hammer line. Next, this hammer's small real body was inside the prior
tall real body creating a harami. This harami meant that the prior minor
downtrend was over. Finally, the hammer session's lows took out support from early February, yet these new lows could not hold. In other
words, the bears tried to break the market and they could not. It was
time to step in and buy.

-

-

286

The Rule of Multiple Technical Techniques

On Monday, March 5, I suggested a buy at $21.38. The target was a
very short-term objective for a retest of the late February highs of $22.
Since the target was so close, the stop was proportionally tight under the
hammer's low at $21.10. On March 5 and 6, the market moved up to the
February 28 and March 1 high's near $21.75. It failed to move above this
short-term resistance area. After seeing this failure, I moved the stop up
to breakeven. I got stopped out in the pullback on March 7. Once prices
pushed under the hammer's lows prices fell in earnest.

CONCLUSION
wwzt-$uBaa
" Step after step the ladder is ascended"

T h i s book, the result of years of study, research, and practical experience, has hopefully opened new avenues of analysis. After spending
some time with candlesticks, I am sure that you, like me, will not trade
without the insights they offer.
I do not use bar charts anymore, I only use candlestick charts. But
that does not mean I only use candlestick indicators. While the candlesticks are a vital medium of market analysis, I use all the technical tools
at my disposal. This is the advantage of candlestick charts. With them
you can use candlestick techniques, Western techniques, or a combination of both. For experienced technicians you will find the union of Eastern and Western techniques creates a wonderfully exciting synergy.
Be flexible about chart reading. Where you stand in relation to the
overall technical evidence may be more important than an individual
candlestick pattern. For example, a bullish candlestick signal in a major
bear market should not be used as a buy signal. A bullish candlestick
formation, especially when confirmed by other technical signals in a bull
market, would be a buying point.
Even though many of you (I hope!) will be using this book as a reference, it does not mean each of you will use its candlestick techniques
in the same way. So I am not worried that if others learn these ancient
investment techniques they will become invalid. This is because candlesticks, as with all other charting methods, require subjectivity:
Two candlestick analysts are like two doctors who went to the same
medical school. Each may have the same knowledge about how the body

288

Conclusion

works, yet each doctor, because of his experiences, philosophies, and
preferences may give a particular patient a different diagnosis and treat
the patient differently--even if the patient's symptoms are the same.
The doctor brings his unique personality and perceptions to the diagnosis. So it is with you and technical analysis. You are a doctor of the market.
How you read and react to the symptoms of the market's health through
candlesticks techniques may not be the same as another candlestick practitioner. How you trade with candlesticks will depend on your trading
philosophy, your risk adversity, and your temperament. There are very
individual aspects.
In addition, each market has its own unique personality. As the Japanese express it, "The pattern of the market is like a person's face-no
two are exactly alike." For example, dark-cloud covers seem to work well
in the daily crude oil charts, while hammers appear with relative frequency in weekly copper charts. By studying your market's personality,
you can uncover the candlestick formations, and variations of these formations, which appear most and work best for that market.
There is a saying, "Fish for me and I will eat for today, but teach me
how to fish and I will eat for the rest of my life." I hope that this book
has taught you how to do a little fishing. That what you discovered in
reading it can be used to unlock some of the secrets of the candlecharts.
Based on centuries of evolution, candlestick charts are unmatched in
their capacity to be used alone or joined with any other technical tool.
This means that each of you, from the technical novice to the seasoned
professional, can harness the power of candlestick charts.

GLOSSARY A
CANDLESTICK TERMS
AND VISUAL DICTIONARY
The descriptions and illustrations below explain and show ideal
examples of what the pattern should be like. These "ideal" patterns
rarely unfold, therefore, use this glossary as a guidepost, since some
subjectivity is required.
Abandoned babya very rare major top or bottom reversal signal. It is
comprised of a doji star which gaps away (including shadows) from
the prior and following sessions' candlesticks. The same as a Western
island top or bottom in which the island session is also a doji.
Abandoned Baby

Advance blocka variation on three white soldiers in which the last two
soldiers (i.e., white real bodies) display weakening upside drive. This
weakness could be in the form of tall upper shadows or progressively
smaller real bodies. It signifies a diminution of buying force or an
increase in selling pressure.
Advance Block

290

Glossary A: Candlestick Terms and Visual Dictionary

Belt-hold line-there are bullish and bearish belt holds. A bullish belt hold
is a tall white candlestick that opens on its low. It is also called a white
opening shaven bottom. At a low price area, .this is a bullish signal. A
bearish belt hold is a long black candlestick which opens on its high.
Also referred to as a black opening shaven head. At a high price level, it
is considered bearish.
Belt Hold Lines
Bullish

Bearish

Candlestick lines and charts-traditional Japanese charts whose individual
lines look like candles, hence their name. The candlestick line is comprised of a real body and shadows. See "Real body" and "shadow."
Candlestick
Line

Shadow

Counterattack lines-following a black (white) candlestick in a downtrend
(uptrend), the rna'rket gaps sharply lower (higher) on the opening
and then closg unchanged from the prior session's close. A pattern
which reflects a stalemate between the bulls and bears.
Counterattack Lines

Glossary A: Candlestick Terms and Visual Dictionary

Dark-cloud cover-a bearish reversal signal. In an uptrend a long white
candlestick is followed by a black candlestick that opens above the
prior white candlestick's high. It then closes well into the white candlestick's real body.
Dark-Cloud Cover

Dead cross-a bearish signal given when a short-term moving average
crosses under a longer-term moving average.
Deliberation pattern-see "Stalled pattern."
Doji-a session in which the open and close are the same (or almost the
same). There are different varieties of doji lines (such as a gravestone
or long-legged doji) depending on where the opening and closing are
in relation to the entire range. Doji lines are among the most important individual candlestick lines. They are also components of important candlestick patterns.
Doji

Doji star-a doji line which gaps from a long white or black candlestick.
An important reversal pattern with confirmation during the next session.
Doji Star

Downside gap tasuki-see

"Tasuki gaps."

291

292

Glossary A: Candlestick Terms and Visual Dictionary

Dumpling Top

Dumpling tops-similar to the Western rounding top. A window to the
downside is needed to confirm this as a top.
Eight or ten new records-after about eight to ten new price highs buying
pressure should end. After such an advance, if a bearish candlestick
indicator appears, selling is warranted. The opposite occurs after
eight or ten new lows.
Engulfing patterns-there is a bullish and bearish engulfing pattern. A
bullish engulfing pattern is comprised of a large white real body
which engulfs a small black real body in a downtrend. The bullish
engulfing pattern is an important bottom reversal. A bearish engulfing pattern (a major top reversal pattern), occurs when selling pressure overwhelms buying pressure as reflected by a long black real
body engulfing a small white real body in an uptrend.
Engulfing Patterns

I Bullish

Bearish

I

Evening Star

Evening star-a major top reversal pattern formed by three candlesticks.
The first is a tall white real body, the second is a small real body
(white or black) which gaps higher to form a star, the third is a black
candlestick which closes well into the first session's white real body.
Evening
Doji Star

Evening doji star-the same as an evening star except the middle candlestick (i.e., the star portion) is a doji instead of a small real body.
Because there is a doji in this pattern, it is considered more bearish
than the regular evening star.
Falling three methods-see "Three methods."
Fry pan bottoms-similar to a Western rounding bottom. A window to the
upside confirms this pattern.
Fry Pan Bottom
I

I

Gapping play-there are two kinds of gapping play:
1. high-price gapping play-after a sharp advance the market consolidates
via a series of small real bodies near the recent highs. If prices gap
above this consolidation it is a buy signal.

Glossary A: Candlestick Terms and Visual Dictionary

293

2. low-price gapping play-after a sharp price decline the market consolidates via a series of small real bodies near the recent lows. If prices
gap under this consolidation it is a sell signal.
Gapping Play
High
Price

Low
Price

0

1d.o
Window

A

Golden cross-a bullish signal in which a shorter-term moving average
crosses above a longer-term moving average.
Gravestone doji-a doji in which the opening and closing are at the low of
the session. A reversal signal at tops. Also a reversal signal at bottoms, but only with bullish confirmation the next session. See the
illustration under "Doji."
Hammer-an important bottoming candlestick line. The hammer and the
hanging man are both the same line, that is a small real body (white
or black) at the top of the session's range and a very long lower
shadow with little or no upper shadow. When this line appears during a downtrend it becomes a bullish hammer. For a classic hammer,
the lower shadow should be at least twice the height of the real body.

Hammer

Hanging man-an important top reversal. The hanging man and the hammer are both the same type of candlestick line (i.e, a small real body
(white or black), with little or no upper shadow, at the top of the session's range and a very long lower shadow). But when this line
appears during an uptrend, it becomes a bearish hanging man. It signals the market has become vulnerable, but there should be bearish
confirmation the next session (i.e., a black candlestick session with a
lower close or a weaker opening) to signal a top. In principle, the
hanging man's lower shadow should be two or three times the height
of the real body.

Hanging Man

Harami-a two candlestick pattern in which a small real body holds
within the prior session's unusually large real body. The harami
implies the immediately preceding trend is concluded and that the
bulls and bears are now in a state of truce. The color of the second
Harami

294

Glossary A: Candlestick Terms and Visual Dictionary

real body can be white or black. Most often the second real body is
the opposite color of the first real body.
Harami cross-a harami with a doji on the second session instead of a
small real body. An important top (bottom) reversal signal especially
after a tall white (black) candlestick line. It is also called a petrifying
pattern.
Harami Cross
I

I

I

High Waves

High wave-a candlestick with a very long upper or lower shadow and a
short real body. A group of these can foretell a market turn.
High-price gapping play-see "Gapping plays."
In-Neck

In-neck line-a small white candlestick in a downtrend whose close is a
slightly above the previous black candlestick's low of the session.
After this white candlestick's low is broken, the downtrend should
continue. Compare to on-neck line, thrusting line, and piercing pattern.
Inverted hammer-following a downtrend, this is a candlestick line that
has a long upper shadow and a small real body at the lower end of
the session. There should be no, or very little, lower shadow. It has
the same shape as the bearish shooting star, but when this line occurs
in a downtrend, it is a bullish bottom reversal signal with confirmation the next session (i.e., a white candlestick with a higher close or
a higher opening).
Inverted Hammer
I

Inverted three Buddha pattern-see "Three Buddha pattern."
Long-legged doji-a doji with very long shadows. This is an important
reversal signal. If the opening and closing of a long-legged doji session are in the middle of the session's range, the line is called a rickshaw man. See illustration under "Doji."
Low-price gapping play-see "Gapping plays. "
Lower shadow-see "Shadows."

Glossary A: Candlestick Prms and Visual Dictionary

295

Mat-hold pattern-a bullish continuation pattern. A white candlestick is
followed by a small black real body which gaps higher. Then there
are two small black candlesticks which are followed by a strong white
candlestick (or a candlestick which gaps open above the last black
candlestick).
Mat Hold
I
