
1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

59

rewards is not hierarchical. The manager of a relatively small unit
can earn far more than the manager of a larger unit if results indicate he should. We believe, further, that such factors as seniority
and age should not affect incentive compensation (though they
sometimes influence basic compensation.) A 20 year-old who can
hit .300 is as valuable to us as a 40 year-old performing as well.
Obviously, all Berkshire managers can use their bonus money
(or other funds, including borrowed money) to buy our stock in the
market. Many have done just that-and some now have large
holdings. By accepting both the risks and the carrying cost that go
with outright purchases, these managers truly walk in the shoes of
owners.
At Berkshire, we try to be as logical about compensation as
about capital allocation. For example, we compensate Ralph Schey
based upon the results of Scott Fetzer rather than those of Berkshire. What could make more sense, since he's responsible for one
operation but not the other? A cash bonus or a stock option tied
to the fortunes of Berkshire would provide totally capricious rewards to Ralph. He could, for example, be hitting home runs at
Scott Fetzer while Charlie and I rang up mistakes at Berkshire,
thereby negating his efforts many times over. Conversely, why
should option profits or bonuses be heaped upon Ralph if good
things are occurring in other parts of Berkshire but Scott Fetzer is
lagging?
In setting compensation, we like to hold out the promise of
large carrots, but make sure their delivery is tied directly to results
in the area that a manager controls. When capital invested in an
operation is significant, we also both charge managers a high rate
for incremental capital they employ and credit them at an equally
high rate for capital they release.
The product of this money's-not-free approach is definitely
visible at Scott Fetzer. If Ralph can employ incremental funds at
good returns, it pays him to do so: His bonus increases when earnings on additional capital exceed a meaningful hurdle charge. But
our bonus calculation is symmetrical: If incremental investment
yields sub-standard returns, the shortfall is costly to Ralph as well
as to Berkshire. The consequence of this two-way arrangement is
that it pays Ralph-and pays him well-to send to Omaha any
cash he can't advantageously use in his business.
It has become fashionable at public companies to describe almost every compensation plan as aligning the interests of manage-

60

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

ment with those of shareholders. In our book, alignment means
being a partner in both directions, not just on the upside. Many
"alignment" plans flunk this basic test, being artful forms of "heads
I win, tails you lose."
A common form of misalignment occurs in the typical stock
option arrangement, which does not periodically increase the option price to compensate for the fact that retained earnings are
building up the wealth of the company. Indeed, the combination of
a ten-year option, a low dividend payout, and compound interest
can provide lush gains to a manager who has done no more than
tread water in his job. A cynic might even note that when payments to owners are held down, the profit to the option-holding
manager increases. I have yet to see this vital point spelled out in a
proxy statement asking shareholders to approve an option plan.
I can't resist mentioning that our compensation arrangement
with Ralph Schey was worked out in about five minutes, immediately upon our purchase of Scott Fetzer and without the "help" of
lawyers or compensation consultants. This arrangement embodies
a few very simple ideas-not the kind of terms favored by consultants who cannot easily send a large bill unless they have established that you have a large problem (and one, of course, that
requires an annual review). Our agreement with Ralph has never
been changed. It made sense to him and to me in 1986, and it
makes sense now. Our compensation arrangements with the managers of all our other units are similarly simple, though the terms of
each agreement vary to fit the economic characteristics of the business at issue, the existence in some cases of partial ownership of
the unit by managers, etc.
In all instances, we pursue rationality. Arrangements that pay
off in capricious ways, unrelated to a manager's personal accomplishments, may well be welcomed by certain managers. Who, after all, refuses a free lottery ticket? But such arrangements are
wasteful to the company and cause the manager to lose focus on
what should be his real areas of concern. Additionally, irrational
behavior at the parent may well encourage imitative behavior at
subsidiaries.
At Berkshire, only Charlie and I have the managerial responsibility for the entire business. Therefore, we are the only parties
who should logically be compensated on the basis of what the enterprise does as a whole. Even so, that is not a compensation arrangement we desire. We have carefully designed both the
company and our jobs so that we do things we enjoy with people

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

61

we like. Equally important, we are forced to do very few boring or
unpleasant tasks. We are the beneficiaries as well of the abundant
array of material and psychic perks that flow to the heads of corporations. Under such idyllic conditions, we don't expect shareholders to ante up loads of compensation for which we have no possible
need.
Indeed, if we were not paid at all, Charlie and I would be delighted with the cushy jobs we hold. At bottom, we subscribe to
Ronald Reagan's creed: "It's probably true that hard work never
killed anyone, but I figure why take the chance."
We made a sizable acquisition in 1991-the H.H. Brown Shoe
Co.[,] ... the leading North American manufacturer of work shoes
and boots, and it has a history of earning unusually fine margins on
sales and assets. Shoes are a tough business-of the billion pairs
purchased in the United States each year, about 85% are imported-and most manufacturers in the industry do poorly. The
wide range of styles and sizes that producers offer causes inventories to be heavy; substantial capital is also tied up in
receivables....
A distinguishing characteristic of H.H. Brown is one of the
most unusual compensation systems I've encountered-but one
that warms my heart: A number of key managers are paid an annual salary of $7,800, to which is added a designated percentage of
the profits of the company after these are reduced by a charge for
capital employed. These managers therefore truly stand in the
shoes of owners. In contrast, most managers talk the talk but don't
walk the walk, choosing instead to employ compensation systems
that are long on carrots but short on sticks (and that almost invariably treat equity capital as if it were cost-free). The arrangement at
Brown, in any case, has served both the company and its managers
exceptionally well, which should be no surprise: Managers eager to
bet heavily on their abilities usually have plenty of ability to bet on.

II.

CORPORATE FINANCE AND INVESTING

We bought all of our [Washington Post Company ("WPC")]
holdings in mid~1973 at a price of not more than one-fourth of the
then per-share business value of the enterprise. Calculating the
price/value ratio required no unusual insights. Most security analysts, media brokers, and media executives would have estimated
WPC's intrinsic business value at $400 to $500 million just as we
did. And its $100 million stock market valuation was published
daily for all to see. Our advantage, rather, was attitude: we had
learned from Ben Graham that the key to successful investing was
the purchase of shares in good businesses when market prices were
at a large discount from underlying business values.
Most institutional investors in the early 1970s, on the other
hand, regarded business value as of only minor relevance when
they were deciding the prices at which they would buy or sell. This
now seems hard to believe. However, these institutions were then
under the spell of academics at prestigious business schools who
were preaching a newly-fashioned theory: the stock market was totally efficient, and therefore calculations of business value-and
even thought, itself-were of no importance in investment activities. (We are enormously indebted to those academics: what could
be more advantageous in an intellectual contest-whether it be
bridge, chess, or stock selection-than to have opponents who
have been taught that thinking is a waste of energy?)15
A.

Mr. Market16

Whenever Charlie and I buy common stocks for Berkshire's
insurance companies (leaving aside arbitrage purchases, discussed
[in the next essay]) we approach the transaction as if we were buying into a private business. We look at the economic prospects of
the business, the people in charge of running it, and the price we
must pay. We do not have in mind any time or price for sale. Indeed, we are willing to hold a stock indefinitely so long as we expect the business to increase in intrinsic value at a satisfactory rate.
When investing, we view ourselves as business analysts-not as
market analysts, not as macroeconomic analysts, and not even as
security analysts.
Our approach makes an active trading market useful, since it
periodically presents us with mouth-watering opportunities. But by
15

[First two introductory paragraphs, 1985.]

16 [1987.]

63

64

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

no means is it essential: a prolonged suspension of trading in the
securities we hold would not bother us any more than does the lack
of daily quotations on World Book or Fechheimer. Eventually, our
economic fate will be determined by the economic fate of the business we own, whether our ownership is partial or total.
Ben Graham, my friend and teacher, long ago described the
mental attitude toward market fluctuations that I believe to be
most conducive to investment success. He said that you should imagine market quotations as coming from a remarkably accommodating fellow named Mr. Market who is your partner in a private
business. Without fail, Mr. Market appears daily and names a price
at which he will either buy your interest or sell you his.
Even though the business that the two of you own may have
economic characteristics that are stable, Mr. Market's quotations
will be anything but. For, sad to say, the poor fellow has incurable
emotional problems. At times he feels euphoric and can see only
the favorable factors affecting the business. When in that mood, he
names a very high buy-sell price because he fears that you will snap
up his interest and rob him of imminent gains. At other times he is
depressed and can see nothing but trouble ahead for both the business and the world. On these occasions he will name a very low
price, since he is terrified that you will unload your interest on him.
Mr. Market has another endearing characteristic: He doesn't
mind being ignored. If his quotation is uninteresting to you today,
he will be back with a new one tomorrow. Transactions are strictly
at your option. Under these conditions, the more manic-depressive
his behavior, the better for you.
But, like Cinderella at the ball, you must heed one warning or
everything will turn into pumpkins and mice: Mr. Market is there
to serve you, not to guide you. It is his pocketbook, not his wisdom, that you will find useful. If he shows up some day in a particularly foolish mood, you are free to either ignore him or to take
advantage of him, but it will be disastrous if you fall under his influence. Indeed, if you aren't certain that you understand and can
value your business far better than Mr. Market you don't belong in
the game. As they say in poker, "If you've been in the game 30
minutes and you don't know who the patsy is, you're the patsy."
Ben's Mr. Market allegory may seem out-of-date in today's
investment world, in which most professionals and academicians
talk of efficient markets, dynamic hedging and betas. Their interest
in such matters is understandable, since techniques shrouded in
mystery clearly have value to the purveyor of investment advice.

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

65

After all, what witch doctor has ever achieved fame and fortune by
simply advising "Take two aspirins"?
The value of market esoterica to the consumer of investment
advice is a different story. In my opinion, investment success will
not be produced by arcane formulae, computer programs or signals
flashed by the price behavior of stocks and markets. Rather an
investor will succeed by coupling good business judgment with an
ability to insulate his thoughts and behavior from the super-contagious emotions that swirl about the marketplace. In my own efforts to stay insulated, I have found it highly useful to keep Ben's
Mr. Market concept firmly in mind.
Following Ben's teachings, Charlie and I let our marketable
equities tell us by their operating results-not by their daily, or
even yearly, price quotations-whether our investments are successful. The market may ignore business success for a while, but
eventually will confirm it. As Ben said: "In the short run, the market is a voting machine but in the long run it is a weighing
machine." The speed at which a business's success is recognized,
furthermore, is not that important as long as the company's intrinsic value is increasing at a satisfactory rate. In fact, delayed recognition can be an advantage: It may give us the chance to buy more
of a good thing at a bargain price.
Sometimes, of course, the market may judge a business to be
more valuable than the underlying facts would indicate it is. In
such a case, we will sell our holdings. Sometimes, also, we will sell
a security that is fairly valued or even undervalued because we require funds for a still more undervalued investment or one we believe we understand better.
We need to emphasize, however, that we do not sell holdings
just because they have appreciated or because we have held them
for a long time. (Of Wall Street maxims the most foolish may be
"You can't go broke taking a profit.") We are quite content to
hold any security indefinitely, so long as the prospective return on
equity capital of the underlying business is satisfactory, management is competent and honest, and the market does not overvalue
the business.
However, our insurance companies own three marketable
common stocks that we would not sell even though they became
far overpriced in the market. In effect, we view these investments
exactly like our successful controlled businesses-a permanent part
of Berkshire rather than merchandise to be disposed of once Mr.
Market offers us a sufficiently high price. To that, I will add one

66

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

qualifier: These stocks are held by our insurance companies and we
would, if absolutely necessary, sell portions of our holdings to pay
extraordinary insurance losses. We intend, however, to manage our
affairs so that sales are never required.
A determination to have and to hold, which Charlie and I
share, obviously involves a mixture of personal and financial considerations. To some, our stand may seem highly eccentric. (Charlie and I have long followed David Ogilvy's advice: "Develop your
eccentricities while you are young. That way, when you get old,
people won't think you're going ga-ga.") Certainly, in the transaction-fixated Wall Street of recent years, our posture must seem
odd: To many in that arena, both companies and stocks are seen
only as raw material for trades.
Our attitude, however, fits our personalities and the way we
want to live our lives. Churchill once said, "You shape your houses
and then they shape you." We know the manner in which we wish
to be shaped. For that reason, we would rather achieve a return of
X while associating with people whom we strongly like and admire
than realize 110% of X by exchanging these relationships for uninteresting or unpleasant ones.
B.

Arbitrage17

[O]ur insurance subsidiaries sometimes engage in arbitrage as
an alternative to holding short-term cash equivalents. We prefer,
of course, to make major long-term commitments, but we often
have more cash than good ideas. At such times, arbitrage sometimes promises much greater returns than Treasury Bills and,
equally important, cools any temptation we may have to relax our
standards for long-term investments. (Charlie's signoff after we've
talked about an arbitrage commitment is usually: "Okay, at least it
will keep you out of bars.")
During 1988 we made unusually large profits from arbitrage,
measured both by absolute dollars and rate of return. Our pre-tax
gain was about $78 million on average invested funds of about $147
million.
This level of activity makes some detailed discussion of arbitrage and our approach to it appropriate. Once, the word applied
only to the simultaneous purchase and sale of securities or foreign
exchange in two different markets. The goal was to exploit tiny
price differentials that might exist between, say, Royal Dutch stock
17

[Divided by hash lines: 1988; 1989.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

67

trading in guilders in Amsterdam, pounds in London, and dollars
in New York. Some people might call this scalping: it won't surprise you that practitioners opted for the French term, arbitrage.
Since World War I the definition of arbitrage-or "risk arbitrage," as it is now sometimes called-has expanded to include the
pursuit of profits from an announced corporate event such as sale
of the company, merger, recapitalization, reorganization, liquidation, self-tender, etc. In most cases the arbitrageur expects to
profit regardless of the behavior of the stock market. The major
risk he usually faces instead is that the announced event won't
happen.
Some offbeat opportunities occasionally arise in the arbitrage
field. I participated in one of these when I was 24 and working in
New York for Graham-Newman Corp. Rockwood & Co., a Brooklyn-based chocolate products company of limited profitability, had
adopted LIFO inventory valuation in 1941 when cocoa was selling
for 5 cents per pound. In 1954 a temporary shortage of cocoa
caused the price to soar to over 60 cents. Consequently Rockwood
wished to unload its valuable inventory-quickly, before the price
dropped. But if the cocoa had simply been sold off, the company
would have owed close to a 50% tax on the proceeds.
The 1954 Tax Code came to the rescue. It contained an arcane
provision that eliminated the tax otherwise due on LIFO profits if
inventory was distributed to shareholders as part of a plan reducing
the scope of a corporation's business. Rockwood decided to terminate one of its businesses, the sale of cocoa butter, and said 13
million pounds of its cocoa bean inventory was attributable to that
activity. Accordingly, the company offered to repurchase its stock
in exchange for the cocoa beans it no longer needed, paying 80
pounds of beans for each share.
For several weeks I busily bought shares, sold beans, and
made periodic stops at Schroeder Trust to exchange stock certificates for warehouse receipts. The profits were good and my only
expense was subway tokens.
The architect of Rockwood's restructuring was an unknown,
but brilliant Chicagoan, Jay Pritzker, then 32. If you're familiar
with Jay's subsequent record, you won't be surprised to hear the
action worked out rather well for Rockwood's continuing shareholders also. From shortly before the tender until shortly after it,
Rockwood stock appreciated from 15 to 100, even though the company was experiencing large operating losses. Sometimes there is
more to stock valuation than price-earnings ratios.

68

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

In recent years, most arbitrage operations have involved takeovers, friendly and unfriendly. With acquisition fever rampant,
with anti-trust challenges almost non-existent, and with bids often
ratcheting upward, arbitrageurs have prospered mightily. They
have not needed special talents to do well; the trick, àala Peter Sellers in the movie, has simply been "Being There." In Wall Street
the old proverb has been reworded: "Give a man a fish and you
feed him for a day. Teach him how to arbitrage and you feed him
forever." (If, however, he studied at the Ivan Boesky School of
Arbitrage, it may be a state institution that supplies his meals.)
To evaluate arbitrage situations you must answer four questions: (1) How likely is it that the promised event will indeed occur? (2) How long will your money be tied up? (3) What chance is
there that something still better will transpire-a competing takeover bid, for example? and (4) What will happen if the event does
not take place because of anti-trust action, financing glitches, etc.?
Arcata Corp., one of our more serendipitous arbitrage experiences, illustrates the twists and turns of the business. On September 28, 1981 the directors of Arcata agreed in principle to sell the
company to Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. (KKR), then and now
a major leveraged-buyout firm. Arcata was in the printing and forest products businesses and had one other thing going for it: In
1978 the U.S. Government had taken title to 10,700 acres of Arcata
timber, primarily old-growth redwood, to expand Redwood National Park. The government had paid $97.9 million, in several installments, for this acreage, a sum Arcata was contesting as grossly
inadequate. The parties also disputed the interest rate that should
apply to the period between the taking of the property and final
payment for it. The enabling legislation stipulated 6% simple interest; Arcata argued for a much higher and compounded rate.
Buying a company with a highly-speculative, large-sized claim
in litigation creates a negotiating problem, whether the claim is on
behalf of or against the company. To solve this problem, KKR offered $37.00 per Arcata share plus two-thirds of any additional
amounts paid by the government for the redwood lands.
Appraising this arbitrage opportunity, we had to ask ourselves
whether KKR would consummate the transaction since, among
other things, its offer was contingent upon its obtaining "satisfactory financing." A clause of this kind is always dangerous for the
seller: It offers an easy exit for a suitor whose ardor fades between
proposal and marriage. However, we were not particularly worried

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

69

about this possibility because KKR's past record for closing had
been good.
We also had to ask ourselves what would happen if the KKR
deal did fall through, and here we also felt reasonably comfortable:
Arcata's management and directors had been shopping the company for some time and were clearly determined to sell. If KKR
went away, Arcata would likely find another buyer, though of
course, the price might be lower.
Finally, we had to ask ourselves what the redwood claim might
be worth. Your Chairman, who can't tell an elm from an oak, had
no trouble with that one: He coolly evaluated the claim at somewhere between zero and a whole lot.
We started buying Arcata stock, then around $33.50, on September 30 and in eight weeks purchased about 400,000 shares, or
5% of the company. The initial announcement said that the $37.00
would be paid in January, 1982. Therefore, if everything had gone
perfectly, we would have achieved an annual rate of return of
about 40%-not counting the redwood claim, which would have
been frosting.
All did not go perfectly. In December it was announced that
the closing would be delayed a bit. Nevertheless, a definitive
agreement was signed on January 4. Encouraged, we raised our
stake, buying at around $38.00 per share and increasing our holdings to 655,000 shares, or over 7% of the company. Our willingness
to pay up-even though the closing had been postponed-reflected our leaning toward "a whole lot" rather than "zero" for the
redwoods.
Then, on February 25 the lenders said they were taking a "second look" at financing terms "in view of the severely depressed
housing industry and its impact on Arcata's outlook." The stockholders' meeting was postponed again, to April. An Arcata
spokesman said he "did not think the fate of the acquisition itself
was imperiled." When arbitrageurs hear such reassurances, their
minds flash to the old saying: "He lied like a finance minister on
the eve of devaluation."
On March 12 KKR said its earlier deal wouldn't work, first
cutting its offer to $33.50, then two days later raising it to $35.00.
On March 15, however, the directors turned this bid down and accepted another group's offer of $37.50 plus one-half of any redwood recovery. The shareholders okayed the deal, and the $37.50
was paid on June 4.
