
Taking a cue from bond investors
One way to estimate the discount rate is by taking the yield being paid on
some of the company’s bonds that mature in five years or longer. The yield
is the return investors would get if they bought the bond at the current price.
The current yield on thousands of companies’ bonds are available for free at
brokerage firms’ Web sites. Bond yields are also available on the free corporate
bond tracking system, TRACE, which is operated by securities regulator FINRA
at cxa.marketwatch.com/finra/BondCenter. Here’s how to get a bond yield from
TRACE in four easy steps:
1. Enter the stock’s ticker symbol in the “Symbol” blank, located under
the light blue bar that says “Quick Bond Search.”
2. Choose the Corporate option next to where it says “Bond Type:”.
3. Select 5 to 10 years in the Maturity space.
4. Click the Search button.

17 506455-ch11.indd 185

9/24/09 10:35:00 PM

186 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
You’ll see a list of the company’s bonds and their yields, giving you an idea
of what returns bond investors are demanding. In early 2009, the average on
P&G bonds was about 4.5%.
Don’t assume that a bond’s yield is equal to the discount rate for a stock. After
all, you’re taking more risk buying a company’s stock than a bond investor
is taking, since you don’t get a guaranteed return. As a result, you must add
anywhere between one to three percentage points to arrive at a discount rate.
In this example, you might assume the discount rate to be 7%. The riskier the
company, the more you’ll want to add to this yield.

Using the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)
So, are you sorry you started reading this chapter yet? Hang in there.
You might not like using a bond yield to approximate a discount rate. After
all, bond buyers are taking much less risk, since they’re guaranteed a return
and get first dibs on the company’s assets in case of trouble.
That’s where the Capital Asset Pricing Model, or CAPM, comes in. This formula
states a company’s discount rate should be relative to the risk taken by investors and what return they could get for taking no risk. The formula looks
like this:
CAPM discount rate = risk free rate + (expected market return –
risk free-rate) × stock’s beta
That’s a scary-looking formula. But it’s not bad if you break it down into its parts:
✓ Risk-free rate: This is the return you’d get for taking very little risk with
your money. Generally, this is the yield on U.S. securities maturing in
10 years. This yield is available on nearly any financial Web site. Yahoo
Finance (finance.yahoo.com) lists it on the top left-hand side of the page
next to the label, 10 Yr Bond (%). The yield was 2.819% in early 2009.
✓ Expected market return: This is the return investors generally expect
from investing in stocks. Generally, investors use the stock market’s
long-term return of 10% as a reasonable long-term expectation.
If you don’t like using the 10% long-term average, you can consider measuring the expected market return by adding the dividend yield to the
earnings yield. If you’d like to find out how to measure dividend yield
and earnings yield, that’s covered in Chapter 8.
✓ Stock’s beta: Some stocks are riskier than others. Beta is a statistical
tool used to quantify how risky a stock is relative to the market. When
a stock’s beta is greater than 1, the stock is considered to be riskier, or
more volatile, than the market. When a stock’s beta is less than 1, it’s
thought to be less risky.

17 506455-ch11.indd 186

9/24/09 10:35:00 PM

Chapter 11: Finding a Right Price for a Stock Using Discounted Cash Flow

187

You can get stocks’ betas from nearly all financial Web sites. For instance,
using MSN Money, money.msn.com, enter the stock’s symbol in the blank in
the upper left-hand corner of the screen and click the Get Quote button. You’ll
see the stock’s beta on the right-hand side of the screen. In early March, P&G
had a beta, for instance, of 0.63.
Still with me? If so, it’s just a matter of doing some plugging and chugging.
The discount rate for P&G looks like:
0.0730 = 0.02819 + (0.1-0.02819) × 0.63
If you multiply 0.073 by 100, you can convert it into a percentage: 7.3%.
When using the CAPM to calculate a discount rate, you must convert all the
interest rates into decimals before inserting them into the formula. You can
do this by dividing the interest rate by 100. For instance, 10% is 0.1, or 10
divided by 100.

Putting it all together
Now that you’ve gathered all the raw data, it’s time to put them into a fullfledged DCM. The primary objective is to estimate a company’s future cash
flows and then figure out what those cash flows would be worth today. This
section will show you do to do this.

Forecasting the cash flows for the first five years
You’ll start by creating a table of what the company’s cash flows will look
like in the future. All you need is the company’s free cash flow from the justcompleted year and its expected growth rate.
Going back to the P&G example, start with the company’s 2008 free cash flow of
$15.8 billion. To estimate what the following year’s free cash flow might be, multiply the previous year’s figure by 10%, or simply by 1.1. So, to estimate 2009’s free
cash flow, multiply 2008’s ($15.8 billion) by 1.1 to get $17.4 billion. And for year
two, just repeat. Multiple the estimated 2009 free cash flow of 17.4 billion by
1.1 to arrive at an estimated 2010 free cash flow of $19.1 billion. Keep repeating
this procedure for five years until you get something that looks like Table 11-1.

17 506455-ch11.indd 187

Table 11-1

Forecasting P&G’s Future Cash Flows ($ billions)

Year

1 (2009)

2 (2010)

3 (2010)

4
(2011)

5 (2012)

Expected free
cash flow in
future dollars

$17.4

$19.1

$21.0

$23.1

$25.4

9/24/09 10:35:01 PM

188 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
Forecasting the cash flows for years five and beyond
You might be wondering how long you have to keep multiplying by 1.1. After
all, P&G will likely be around a very long time. Luckily, though, yet another
formula will bail us out and help us figure out how much the company is
expected to earn in perpetuity, known as its residual value. The formula looks
like this:
Residual Value = Cash flow in year 5 × (1 + long-term growth rate)/
(Discount rate – long-term growth rate)
For P&G, that’s $608.42 billion, as calculated by just plugging the variables
into the formula like this:
= 25.4 × (1 + 0.03)/(0.073 – 0.03)

Discounting all the cash flows to current value
At this point, you’ve estimated how much cash the company is expected to
generate in its lifetime. There’s just one problem. Those cash flows will be
received in the future. And as you discovered above, a cash flow received in
the future is worth less than one received now.
To solve this mind-bending dilemma, you’ll need to discount the future cash
flows using the discount rate. That’s right. That’s a big reason why this whole
tortured exercise is called a discounted cash flow analysis. All you need to
do now is determine the present value of all the future cash flows you’ve
estimated. Starting with the first cash flow, $17.4 billion, you would use this
formula:
Present value = Future value / (1+interest rate) ^ time
By hand, you would calculate the answer, $16.22 billion, by inserting the numbers in the present value formula like this:
Present value = $17.4 / (1+0.073) ^ 1
Had enough of all these formulas and prefer to let your calculator do the
work? Using an HP 12C calculator, you would follow these steps:
1. Set the number of years. Enter 1 and the n key.
2. Set the discount rate. Enter 7.3 and the i key.
3. Enter the future cash flow. Enter 17.4 and the FV key.
4. Calculate the present value. Press the PV key.
If Excel is more your speed, the following formula will do the trick for you:
=PV(0.073, 5, 0, 17.4)

17 506455-ch11.indd 188

9/24/09 10:35:01 PM

Chapter 11: Finding a Right Price for a Stock Using Discounted Cash Flow

189

Be sure to calculate the present value of all five of the years. And when you’re
done with that, don’t forget to calculate the present value of the residual
value. When you calculate the present value of the residual year, in this example, it’s considered to be in year five.
You should get something that looks like what you see in Table 11-2:

Table 11-2

Present Values of Future Cash Flows ($ billions)

Year

1

2

3

4

5

Residual

Present
value

$16.2

$16.6

$17.0

$17.4

$17.9

$417.8

Finally, you add up all the present values to arrive at an intrinsic value of
$502.9 billion. This number can then be compared with the market value to
see whether the stock is cheap or expensive based on intrinsic value.

Comparing intrinsic value to market value
Many investors like to think of stocks in terms of their per-share stock prices.
And now that you have the stock’s intrinsic value, you can finish the analysis by estimating what its intrinsic value, per share, is. To do this, simply
divide the intrinsic value of $502.9 billion by the number of shares outstanding, which you figured at the beginning of this section to be 3.03 billion. The
answer: P&G’s intrinsic value is $165 a share. You then compare the stock’s
intrinsic value to the current stock price, using the rules in Table 11-3:

Table 11-3

Sizing Up Intrinsic Value

If a stock’s intrinsic value is . . .

. . . the stock may be . . .

Greater than the current stock price

Undervalued

Less than the current stock price

Overvalued

At the time this chapter was written, amid the bear market of 2008 and 2009,
P&G’s stock price was $45.71. Using the discounted cash flow analysis, that
would make the stock appear to be very undervalued.
Don’t assume that just because a stock looks undervalued using the DCF analysis, you should run out and buy it. The DCF analysis is highly reliant on the
multiple assumptions and estimates you’ve made, as I’ll explain more at the
end of the chapter. Fundamental analysts use the DCF analysis as one of many
tools before deciding whether or not to buy a stock.

17 506455-ch11.indd 189

9/24/09 10:35:01 PM

190 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
Making the Discounted Cash Flow
Analysis Work for You
Perhaps your brain shut down as soon as you hit the first formula above.
Certainly, the discounted cash flow analysis is one of the more math-intensive
things you’ll do with fundamental analysis.
Don’t let the parade of formulas, though, discourage you from using the
theory of the discounted cash flow analysis. Many people, fearing they’re
paying too much for a stock, love how the discounted cash flow model gives
a framework to measure a reasonable value for a stock. But the math just
scares them away.
And that’s one reason I recommend beginners to use a variety of Web sites
that will help them do the analysis for you.
If you’d like to practice doing another DCF analysis and read through another
explanation, I’ve made one available here: http://www.usatoday.com/
money/perfi/columnist/krantz/2005-06-29-cash-flow_x.htm.

Web sites to help you do a DCF
without all the math
Given just how much calculation goes into the DCF analysis, it’s not surprising
you can just let a computer do all the work for you. A couple of sites worth
checking out include:
✓ Moneychimp’s Cash Flow Calculator (www.Moneychimp.com/articles/
valuation) attempts to turn the DCF analysis into a matter of plugging in the data. The site asks for you to enter a company’s earnings.
However, the analysis works the same if you enter the company’s free
cash flow instead, if you’d prefer. After you fill in the blanks, click the
Calculate button, and the site will calculate the intrinsic value.
✓ Valuation Technologies’ Discounted Cash Flow (www.Valtechs.com/
r2.shtml) takes more of a tutorial approach. There’s quite of bit of text
that coaches you on what to enter, and the site does the calculations for
the DCF analysis.
✓ KJE ComputerSolutions’ Business Valuation tool (www.dinkytown.
net/java/BusinessValuation.html) is made with a fundamental
analyst in mind. You can enter items from the statement of cash flow,
and the site helps you process the data to arrive at the intrinsic value.

17 506455-ch11.indd 190

9/24/09 10:35:01 PM

Chapter 11: Finding a Right Price for a Stock Using Discounted Cash Flow

191

✓ Damodaran Online’s spreadsheet templates (Pages.stern.nyu.
edu/~adamodar). If you click on the Spreadsheets option on the left-hand
side of the screen, you’ll find a treasure trove of financial spreadsheets.
There’s a section on the site, called Focused Valuation Models, which
offers a variety of pre-made valuation tools.
✓ TransparentValue (www.transparentvalue.com) takes a unique
approach with the DCF model. Rather than analyzing a company’s cash
flow, and indicating what the stock price is worth, Transparent Value
tells you how many products a company must sell to justify its current
stock price. For instance, you can find out how many iPods Apple must
sell to justify its valuation, based on the DCF model.
✓ Newconstructs.com (www.newcontructs.com) provides an extremely
powerful DCF tool designed for professionals. The system automatically
calculates companies’ cash flow, so you don’t even have to crack open a
10-K. While the system is designed for professionals, individual investors
may buy reports the company generates using its methodology.

Knowing the limitations
of the DCF analysis
Ever hear the expression, “Garbage in, garbage out?” That’s really the best
way to describe the DCF analysis. While the analysis gives the impression
that you’re measuring a stock’s intrinsic value to the penny, it’s highly based
on the few assumptions you’ve made.
For instance, you can get just about any stock to look cheap if you jack up the
discount rate. And while the discount rate seems like it’s based in science,
that, too, is subject to estimation.

17 506455-ch11.indd 191

9/24/09 10:35:01 PM

192 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis

17 506455-ch11.indd 192

9/24/09 10:35:01 PM

Chapter 12

Using the Annual Report (10-K) to
See What a Company Is Worth
In This Chapter
▶ Understanding what data fundamental analysts should be on the lookout

for in the annual report
▶ Getting a game plan on how to logically read an annual report and find

the things that matter
▶ Pinpointing seemingly minute details that have large meaning for fundamental analysis
▶ Tuning into valuable information auditing firms share about companies

M

ail carriers around the country know exactly who the fundamental
analysts in the neighborhood are. The tip-off? Every spring, hundreds
of companies publish and mail out the annual report to shareholders, which
are hefty documents full of just about everything fundamental analysts search
for. The annual report to shareholders and the closely related official annual
report called the 10-K, for many fundamental analysts, are the single most
important documents a company provides to investors all year. Think of these
annual reports as the company’s printed State of the Union Address, a source
of information of where the business was and where it is headed. And just as
the State of the Union Address is a chance for the president to stir up hopes for
the nation, the annual report is a company’s chance to do a bit of flag-waving
for itself, too.
The annual report to shareholders and the 10-K annual report are so important that I’m dedicating an entire chapter to them. While the 10-K has been
touched on in previous chapters in the book, this chapter will give you a road
map on how to read these massive documents when they arrive.
I’ll share with you techniques used by fundamental analysts to skip past
the fluff in the 10-K and get to the meat. You’ll also find out how to find the
subtle, but important pieces of data buried in annual reports. After reading
this chapter, I hope that you’ll know exactly what to look for when delving
into these sometimes intimidating documents.

18 506455-ch12.indd 193

9/24/09 10:36:06 PM

194 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
Familiarizing Yourself with
the Annual Report
Plunk. The annual report to shareholders for the company you own shares of
has just arrived in your mailbox or in your e-mail. You’ll probably notice scores
of colorful photos and pictures of happy executives and employees at the front
of the document. But if you flip through pages long enough, you’re sure to hit
the meat of the report, which is a pile of financials, legal disclaimers and seemingly endless footnotes. You might feel tempted to stuff the document back into
the mailbox or delete the e-mail and pretend you never got it.
But while it would seem you need some sort of decoder ring to make any
sense out of the annual report to shareholders and 10-K, after a little guidance you’ll know exactly what to do. And if you’re already experienced at
reading annual reports, it’s a good idea to know what kinds of things companies can easily bury in these documents and hope nobody notices.

First, a word on the difference between
the annual report and the 10-K
The term annual report is somewhat of a misnomer. When investors mention
the annual report, they are either confusing or grouping together two separate
documents that have similar purposes. There’s the annual report to shareholders, which is usually just called the annual report, and the annual report
required by regulators, usually referred to by its legal name, the 10-K.
You may notice most fundamental analysts use the terms annual report and
10-K somewhat interchangeably. And that’s usually okay, since both the
annual report to shareholders and 10-K generally contain the same information; they just look different.
When the term annual report is mentioned in this chapter, you can assume I’m
referring to the 10-K unless I state otherwise.

Introducing the 10-K
The 10-K is the annual statement companies are required to file with the
Securities and Exchange Commission. These closely monitored documents
are required as a result of a company being publicly traded, or having shares
of stock trading on a major market exchange. Companies that have more than
500 shareholders may also need to file a 10-K.

18 506455-ch12.indd 194

9/24/09 10:36:06 PM

Chapter 12: Using the Annual Report (10-K) to See What a Company Is Worth

195

The 10-K is a document giving investors and regulators an update on the
company’s financial standing each fiscal year. The 10-K isn’t much to look at.
The document is almost always printed entirely in black and white, and is
very sparse when it comes to graphics and other pretty stuff. The 10-K is the
document both regulators and auditors look over to make sure the company
is disclosing, or informing, investors of all the material, or important, facts
about its business.

Highlighting the annual report to shareholders
The document known as the annual report to shareholders is essentially the
glam version of the 10-K. The annual report to shareholders is usually a slick,
highly produced document companies mail out to investors every year to
kind of show off a little bit. Many companies make an online version, which
features fancy graphics and interactive pages. Generally, the printed version of
the annual report to shareholders looks almost like a magazine, with the first
few pages covered with photos of beaming employees and giddy customers all
beside themselves with happiness about using the companies’ products.
Some companies are trying to remove confusion between the annual report to
shareholders and the 10-K. A growing number of companies are simply using
the 10-K as their annual report to shareholders, a move that is also saving
companies money. But companies, such as Coca-Cola, appear to be making
the annual report to shareholders more of a high-level and highly readable
summary for investors. Coke, for instance, calls its annual report to shareholders its annual review. In addition to pages of beautiful people in many
countries drinking soda, Coke’s annual review summarizes the financials in a
bird’s-eye view.
If you’ve ever read an annual report to shareholders, you’ll notice there’s
kind of a Jekyll and Hyde thing going on. The first part of the annual report is
colorful and fun. Keep reading, though, and the back half gets pretty serious
and no-nonsense. In fact, the back portion of the annual report to shareholders is very often a carbon copy of the 10-K, but printed on nicer paper and in
a more hip font. And in an increasingly common trend, many companies are
simply putting a colorful promotional folder around the 10-K, called a 10-K
wrapper, to create a less expensive annual report.
Some fundamental analysts say the annual report to shareholders is a worthless marketing document. That’s probably a bit of an overstatement, though.
Certainly, the 10-K is where you want to spend most of your time as an analyst.
But the marketing portion of the annual report may contain some useful background to help you understand a company. Just know that the annual report to
shareholders is written to be flattering toward the company and its executives.

18 506455-ch12.indd 195

9/24/09 10:36:06 PM

196 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
Getting your hands on the 10-K
Obtaining a copy of the 10-K annual report is surprisingly simple. The document
is available in several formats, depending on what you’re most comfortable
with, including:
✓ Downloading from the Securities and Exchange Commission: The most
direct way to get the 10-K is from the SEC’s IDEA database. This is the
official database of corporate filings required by the SEC. Downloading
the annual report from IDEA assures you that you’re looking at the same
document as the regulators. You can get step-by-step directions on navigating IDEA in Chapter 4.
✓ Downloading from the company: Most companies will put an electronic
version of their annual report to shareholders on their Web site. You can
either view it online or download a PDF file. Many companies will also
provide access to the 10-K.
✓ Requesting a paper copy from the company: If you’re the kind of person
who likes to take a pencil to paper, you can either call or e-mail most companies’ investors relations departments and request a copy of the annual
report to shareholder or 10-K, or both. Some brokerage firms will
automatically send paper copies of these documents to shareholders.
