
ourselves!

Monsieur de Norpois's

Opinions

Modern times provide us with a depressing story. Self-contradiction is
made culturally to be shameful, a matter that can prove disastrous in
science. Marcel Proust's novel In Search of Time Lost features a semiretired diplomat, Marquis de Norpois, who, like all diplomats before
the advent of the fax machine, was a socialite who spent considerable
time in salons. The narrator of the novel sees Monsieur de Norpois
openly contradicting himself on some issue (some prewar rapprochement between France and Germany). When reminded of his previous
position, Monsieur de Norpois did not seem to recall it. Proust reviles
him:

186

WAX IN MY EARS

Monsieur de Norpois was not lying. He had just forgotten. One
forgets rather quickly what one has not thought about with depth,
what has been dictated to you by imitation, by_ the passions
surrounding you. These change, and with them so do your memories.
Even more than diplomats, politicians do not remember opinions
they had at some point in their lives and their fibbings are more
attributable to an excess of ambition than a lack of memory.
Monsieur de Norpois is made to be ashamed of the fact that he
expressed a different opinion. Proust did not consider that the diplomat
might have changed his mind. We are supposed to be faithful to our
opinions. One becomes a traitor otherwise.
Now I hold that Monsieur de Norpois should be a trader. One of the
best traders I have ever encountered in my life, Nigel Babbage, has the
remarkable attribute of being completely free of any path dependence in
his beliefs. He exhibits absolutely no embarrassment buying a given
currency on a pure impulse, when only hours ago he might have voiced
a strong opinion as to its future weakness. What changed his mind? He
does not feel obligated to explain it.
The public person most visibly endowed with such a trait is George
Soros. One of his strengths is that he revises his opinion rather rapidly,
without the slightest embarrassment. The following anecdote illustrates
Soros's ability to reverse his opinion in a flash. The French playboy trader
Jean-Manuel Rozan discusses the following episode in his autobiography12 (disguised as a novel in order to avoid legal bills). The
protagonist (Rozan) used to play tennis in the Hamptons on Long Island
with Georgi Saulos, an "older man with a funny accent", and sometimes
engage in discussions about the market, not initially knowing how
important and influential Saulos truly was. One week-end, Saulos
exhibited in his discussion a large amount of bearishness, with a complicated series of arguments that the narrator could not follow. He was
obviously short the market. A few days later, the market rallied violently,
making record highs. The protagonist worried about Saulos, asked him at
their subsequent tennis encounter if he was hurt. "We made a killing",
Saulos said. "I changed my mind. We covered and went very long".
It was this very trait that, a few years later, affected Rozan negatively
and almost cost him a career. Soros gave Rozan in the late 1980s 20

CARNEADES COMES TO ROME: ON PROBABILITY AND SKEPTICISM

187

million dollars to speculate with (a sizeable amount at the time), which
allowed him to start a trading company (I was almost dragged into it). A
few days later, as Soros was visiting Paris, they discussed markets over
lunch. Rozan saw Soros becoming distant. He then completely pulled
the money, offering no explanation. What characterizes real
speculators like Soros from the rest is that their activities are devoid
of path dependence. They are totally free from their past actions. Every
day is a clean slate.

path dependence of

beliefs

There is a simple test to define path dependence of beliefs. Say you own
a painting you bought for $20,000, and owing to rosy conditions in the
art market, it is now worth $40,000. If you owned no painting, would
you still acquire it at the current price? If you would not, then you are
said to be married to your position. There is no rational reason to keep a
painting you would not buy at its current market rate - only an
emotional investment. Many people get married to their ideas all the
way to the grave. Beliefs are said to be path dependent if the sequence of
ideas is such that the first one dominates.
There are reasons to believe that, for evolutionary purposes, we may
be programmed to build a loyalty to ideas in which we have invested
time. Think about the consequences of being a good trader outside of
the market activity, and deciding every morning at 8 a.m. whether to
keep the spouse or if it is not better to part with him or her for a better
emotional investment elsewhere. Or think of a politician who is so
rational that, during a campaign, he changes his mind on a given matter
because of fresh evidence and abruptly switches political parties. That
would make rational investors who evaluate trades in a proper way a
genetic oddity - perhaps a rare mutation. Some medical researchers find
that purely rational behavior on the part of humans is a sign of a defect
in the amygdala, that the subject is, literally, a psychopath. Could Soros
have a genetic flaw that makes him rational as a decision maker?
Such trait of absence of marriage to ideas is indeed rare among
humans. Just as we do with children, we support those in whom we have
i heavy investment of food and time until they are able to propagate our

188

W A X IN MY EARS

genes, so we do with ideas. An academic who became famous for
espousing an opinion is not going to voice anything that can possibly
devalue his own past work and kill years of investment. People who
switch parties become traitors, renegades, or, worst of all, apostates
(those who abandoned their religion were punishable by death).

Computing Instead of Thinking
There is another story of probability other than the one I introduced
with Carneades and Cicero. Probability entered mathematics with
gambling theory, and stayed there as a mere computational device.
Recently, an entire industry of "risk measurers" emerged, specializing in
the application of these probability methods to assess risks in the social
sciences. Clearly, the odds in games where the rules are clearly and
explicitly defined are computable and the risks consequently measured.
But not in the real world. For mother nature did not endow us with clear
rules. The game is not a deck of cards (we do not even know how many
colors there are). But somehow people "measure" risks, particularly if
they are paid for it. I have already discussed Hume's problem of
induction and the occurrence of black swans. Here I introduce the
scientific perpetrators.
Recall that I have waged a war against the charlatanism of some
prominent financial economists for a long time. The points are as
follows. One Harry Markowitz received something called the Nobel
Memorial Prize in Economics (which in fact is not even a Nobel Prize as
it is granted by the Swedish central bank in honor of Alfred Nobel - it
was never in the will of the famous man). What is his achievement? By
creating an elaborate method of computing future risk if one knows
future uncertainty; in other words if markets had clearly defined rules which is clearly not the case. Now I explained the point to a cab driver
who laughed at the fact that someone ever thought that there was any
scientific method to understand markets and predict their attributes.
Somehow when one gets involved in financial economics, owing to the
culture of the field, one becomes likely to forget these basic facts.

CARNEADES COMES TO ROME: ON PROBABILITY AND SKEPTICISM

189

An immediate result of Dr. Markowitz's theory was the near collapse
of the financial system in the summer of 1998 (as we saw in Chapters 1
and 5) by Long Term Capital Management ("LTCM"), a Greenwich,
Connecticut fund that had for principals two of Dr. Markowitz's
colleagues, "Nobel" as well. They are Drs. Robert Merton (the one in
Chapter 3 trouncing Shiller) and Myron Scholes. Somehow they thought
they could scientifically "measure" their risks. They made absolutely no
allowance in the LTCM episode for the possibility of their not
understanding markets and their methods being wrong. That was not
a hypothesis to be considered. I happen to specialize in profiting from
the black swans and the breakdown of the system, and make bets
against financial economists. Suddenly I started getting some irritating
fawning respect, along with paychecks from the market. Drs. Merton
and Scholes helped put your humble author on the map and caused the
birth of your humble crisis-hunter's firm, Empirica - as capital started
flowing to people who did the exact opposite of what they did for a
living.
One would think that when scientists make a mistake, they develop a
new science that incorporates what has been learned from it. When
academics blow up trading, one would expect them to integrate such
information in their theories and make some heroic statement to the
effect that they were wrong, but that now they have learned something
about the real world. Nothing of the sort. Instead they complain about
the behavior of their counterparts in the market who pounced on them
like vultures, thus exacerbating their downfall. Accepting what has
happened, clearly the courageous thing to do, would invalidate the ideas
they have built throughout an entire academic career. All of the
principals who engaged in a discussion of the events partook of a
masquerade of science by adducing ad hoc explanations and putting the
blame on a rare event (problem of induction: how did they know it was
a rare event?). They spent their energy defending themselves rather than
trying to make a buck with what they learned. Again compare them
with Soros who walks around telling whomever has the patience to
listen to him that he is fallible. My lesson from Soros is to start every
meeting at my trading boutique by convincing everyone that we are a
bunch of idiots who know nothing and are mistake prone, but happen
to be endowed with the rare privilege of knowing it.

190

WAX IN MY EARS

From Funeral to Funeral
I conclude with the following saddening remark about scientists in the
soft sciences. People confuse science and scientists. Science is great, but
individual scientists are dangerous. They are human; they are marred by
the biases humans have. Perhaps even more. For most scientists are hard
headed, otherwise they would not derive the patience and energy to
perform the Herculean tasks asked of them, like spending 18 hours a
day perfecting their doctoral thesis.
A scientist may be forced to act like a cheap defense lawyer rather
than a pure seeker of the truth. A doctoral thesis is "defended" by the
applicant; it would be a rare situation to see the student change his mind
upon being supplied with a convincing argument. But science is better
than scientists. It was said that science evolves from funeral to funeral.
After the LTCM collapse, a new financial economist will emerge, who
will integrate such knowledge in his science. He will be resisted by the
older ones but, again, they will be much closer to their funeral date than
he.

fourteen

bacchus abandons antony
Montherlant's death. Stoicism, is not the stiff upper lip, but the
illusion of victory of man against randomness. It is so easy to be
heroic. Randomness and personal elegance.

hen the classicist aristocratic French writer Henry de Montherlant was told that he was about to lose his eyesight to a
degenerative disease, he found it most appropriate to take his own life.
Such is the end that becomes a classicist. Why? Because the stoic's
prescription was precisely to elect what one can do to control one's
destiny in front of a random outcome. At the end, one is allowed to
choose between no life at all and what one is given by destiny; we
always have an option against uncertainty. But such an attitude is not
limited to stoics; both competing sects in the ancient world, stoicism and
Epicurianism recommended such control (the difference between the
two resides in minor technicalities - neither philosophies meant then
what is commonly accepted today in middlebrow culture).
Being a hero does not necessarily mean such an extreme act as
getting killed in battle or taking one's life - the latter is only recommended in a narrow set of circumstances and considered cowardly
otherwise. Having control over randomness can be expressed in the
manner one acts in the small and the large. Recall that epic heroes

192

W A X IN MY EARS

were judged by their actions, not by the results. No matter how
sophisticated our choices, how good we are at dominating the odds,
randomness will have the last word. We are left only with dignity as a
solution - dignity defined as the execution of a protocol of behavior
that does not depend on the immediate circumstance. It may not be the
optimal one, but it certainly is the one that makes us feel best. Grace
under pressure, for example. Or in deciding not to toady up to
someone, whatever the reward. Or in fighting a duel to save face. Or in
signaling to a prospective mate during courtship: "listen, I have a crush
on you; I am obsessed with you, but I will not do a thing to
compromise my dignity. Accordingly, the slightest snub and you will
never see me again".
This last chapter will discuss randomness from a totally new angle;
philosophical but not the hard philosophy of science and epistemology
as we saw in Part I with the black swan problem. It is a more archaic,
softer type of philosophy, the various guidelines that the ancients had
concerning the manner a man of virtue and dignity deals with
randomness - there was no real religion at the time (in the modern
sense). It is worthy of note that before the spread of what can be best
called Mediterranean monotheism, the ancients did not believe enough
in their prayers to influence the course of destiny. Their world was
dangerous, fraught with invasions and reversals of fortune. They needed
substantial prescriptions in dealing with randomness. It is such beliefs
that we will outline next.

Notes on Jackie O.'s Funeral
If a stoic were to visit us, he would feel represented by the following
poem.- To many (sophisticated) lovers of poetry, one of the greatest
poets who ever breathed is C.P. Cavafy. Cavafy was an Alexandrian
Greek civil servant with a Turkish or Arabic last name who wrote
almost a century ago in a combination of classical and modern Greek a
lean poetry that seems to have eluded the last fifteen centuries of
Western literature. Greeks treasure him like their national monument.

BACCHUS

ABANDONS

ANTONY

193

Most of his poems take place in Syria (his Grecosyrian poems initially
drew me to him), Asia Minor, and Alexandria. Many people believe it
worth learning formal semi-classical Greek just to savor his poems.
Somehow their acute aestheticism stripped of sentimentality provides a
relief from centuries of mawkishness in poetry and drama. He provides
a classical relief for those of us who were subjected to the middle-class
valued melodrama as represented by Dickens's novels, romantic poetry,
and Verdi's operas.
I was surprised to hear that Maurice Tempelsman, last consort of
Jackie Kennedy Onassis, read Cavafy's valedictory Apoleipein o Tbeos
Antonion (The God Abandons Antony) at her funeral. The poem
addresses Marc Antony, who has just lost the battle against Octavius
and was forsaken by Bacchus the god who until then had protected him.
It is one of the most elevating poems I have ever read, beautiful because
it was the epitome of such dignified aestheticism - and because of the
gentle but edifying tone of the voice of the narrator advising a man who
had just received a crushing reversal of fortune.
The poem addresses Antony, now defeated and betrayed (according
to legend, even his horse deserted him to go to his enemy Octavius). It
asks him to just bid her farewell, Alexandria the city that is leaving him.
It tells him not to mourn his luck, not to enter denial, not to believe that
his ears and eyes are deceiving him. Antony, do not degrade yourself
with empty hopes. Antony,
Just listen while shaken by emotion
imploration and complaints.

but not with the

coward's

While shaken with emotion. No stiff upper lip. There is nothing wrong
and undignified with emotions - we are cut to have them. What is
wrong is not following the heroic, or at least, the dignified path. That is
what stoicism truly means. It is the attempt by man to get even with
probability. I need not be nasty at all and break the spell of the poem
and its message, but I cannot resist some cynicism. A couple of decades
later, Cavafy, while dying of throat cancer did not quite follow the
prescription. Deprived of his voice by the surgeons, he used to randomly
enter undignified spells of crying and cling to his visitors, preventing
them from leaving his death room.

194

W A X IN MY EARS

Some history. I said that stoicism has rather little to do with the stiff
upper lip notion that we believe it means. Started as an intellectual
movement in antiquity by a Phoenician Cypriot, Zeno of Kitium, it
developed by Roman time into a life based on a system of virtues - in the
ancient sense when virtue meant virtu, the sort of belief in which virtue
is its own reward. There developed a social model for a stoic person, like
the gentlemen in Victorian England. Its tenets can thus be summarized
as follows: the stoic is a person who combines the qualities of wisdom,
upright dealing, and courage. The stoic will thus be immune from life's
gyrations as he will be superior to the wounds from some of life's dirty
tricks. But things can be carried to the extreme; the stern Cato found it
beneath him to have human feelings. A more human version can be read
in Seneca's Letters From a Stoic, a soothing and surprisingly readable
book that I distribute to my trader friends (Seneca also took his own life
when cornered by destiny).

Randomness and Personal Elegance
The reader knows my opinion on unsolicited advice and sermons on how
to behave in life. Recall that ideas do not truly sink in when emotions
come into play; we do not use our rational brain outside of classrooms.
Self-help books (even when they are not written by charlatans) are
largely ineffectual. Good, enlightened (and "friendly") advice and
eloquent sermons, do not register for more than a few moments when
they go against our wiring. The interesting thing about stoicism is that it
plays on dignity and personal aesthetics, which are part of our genes.
Start stressing personal elegance at your next misfortune. Exhibit sapere
vivere ("know how to live") in all circumstances.
Dress at your best on your execution day (shave carefully); try to
leave a good impression on the death squad by standing erect and
proud. Try not to play victim when diagnosed with cancer (hide it from
others and only share the information with the doctor - it will avert the
platitudes and nobody will treat you like a victim worthy of their pity; in
addition the dignified attitude will make both defeat and victory feel

BACCHUS

ABANDONS

ANTONY

195

equally heroic). Be extremely courteous to your assistant when you lose
money (instead of taking it out on him as many of the traders whom I
scorn routinely do). Try not to blame others for your fate, even if they
deserve blame. Never exhibit any self pity, even if your significant other
bolts with the handsome ski instructor or the younger aspiring model.
Do not complain. If you suffer from a benign version of the "attitude
problem", like my childhood friend Camille Abousleiman, do not start
playing nice guy if your business dries up (he sent a heroic e-mail to his
colleagues informing them "less business, but same attitude"). The only
article Lady Fortuna has no control over is your behavior. Good luck.

epilogues s o l o n t o l d y o u so

beware t h e l o n d o n t r a f f i c jams

couple of years after we left him looking at John smoking a cigarette
with a modicum of schadenfreude, Nero's skepticism ended up
paying off. Simultaneously as he beat the 28% odds, up to the point of
complete cure, he made a series of exhilarating personal and professional
victories. Not only did he end up sampling the next level of wealth but he
got the riches right when other Wall Street hot shots got poor, which could
have allowed him to buy the goods they owned at very large discounts, if
he wanted to. But he acquired very little, and certainly none of the goods
Wall Streeters usually buy. But Nero did engage in occasional excess.

A

Friday afternoon traffic in London can be dreadful. Nero started
spending more time there. He developed an obsession with traffic jams.
One day he spent five hours moving West from his office in the City of
London towards a cottage in the Cotswolds where he stayed most
weekends. The frustration prompted Nero to get a helicopter flying
license, through a crash course in Cambridgeshire. He realized that the
train was probably an easier solution to get out of town for the
weekend, but he felt the urge for a pet extravagance. The other result of
his frustration was his no less dangerous commuting on a bicycle
between his flat in Kensington and his office in the City.
Nero's excessive probability consciousness in his profession somehow
did not register fully into his treatment of physical risk. For Nero's
helicopter crashed as he was landing it near Battersea Park on a windy
day. He was alone in it. In the end the black swan got its man.

1. This is the Dryden translation of Plutarch's Lives.
2. For an example of pseudoscientific historicism, I suggest Francis
Fukuyama, 1992, The End of History and the Last Man, New York:
Free Press.
3. Richard Dawkins, 1990 (1970), The Selfish Gene, 2nd ed., Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
4. Alan Sokal, 1996, Transgressing the Boundaries: Toward a
Transformative Hermeneutics of Quantum Gravity, Social Text
(spring-summer).
5. www.monash.edu.au
6. Brian Magee, 1997, Confessions of a Philosopher, London: Weidenfeld
& Nicolson.
7. Malachi Haim Hacohen, 2001, Karl Popper, The Formative Years,
1902-1945: Politics and Philosophy in Interwar Vienna, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
8. R. Sullivan, A. Timmerman and H. White, 1999, Data-Snooping,
Technical Trading Rule Performance and the Bookstrap, Journal of
Finance, October.
9. I thank my correspondent Francesco Corielli from Bocconi for his
remark on meta-analysis.
10. Deborah J. Bennett, 1998, Randomness, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
11. Antonio Damasio, 1995, Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason, and the
Human Brain, New York: Avon Books. See also Joseph Ledoux, 1998,
The Emotional Brain: The Mysterious Underpinning of Emotional
Life, New York: Touchstone Books.
12. Jean-Manuel Rozan, 1999, Lefric, Paris: Michel Lafon.
