
CHAPTER 8

Positions, Markets, and Trading Styles

173

Purely derivative instruments, like options and swaps, are dangerous in the hands of marginal traders but pure gold for intellectual
types who understand the impact of volatility on future expectations.
Those markets also solve the thorny question of how to profit when an
underlying instrument does absolutely nothing of interest to the majority
of market players. In fact, the options markets prove the argument that
temperament needs to match risk when it comes to speculation.

Subdividing the Stock Universe
Stock selection needs to follow market phase in order to take advantage
of the best opportunities. It must also respond to rotational forces, which
affect available buying and selling power. Back in the 1990s, sector
rotation evolved over weeks or months. These days, however, it’s normal
for rotation to occur daily, session after session, for weeks at a time. This
constant alternation is a primary feature of the modern market because
quant-driven programs change algorithms daily in response to small inefficiencies. There are sound reasons for the survivalist trader to piggyback
these programs, buying what they’re buying in that session and selling
what they’re selling.
Traders focusing on the equity markets need to understand the characteristics of diverse market groups and how they react to different events
and market phases. For example, semiconductors led the majority of
short squeezes during the bear markets that followed the burst tech and
credit bubbles. A green-glowing PHLX Semiconductor Index, after a big
down opening during those volatile periods, offered a wink and a nod
to market players looking for signals to load up on chips and other high
short interest stocks. However, the same sector tends to fall asleep at the
wheel during beneficial phases in which the major indices are engaged in
secular uptrends.
Here’s a listing of popular market groups and the spaces they fill
within the trading landscape:
• Dow components. A great place to look for opportunities during
choppy market phases. You can always count on a few Dow stocks
bucking the tide and moving higher or lower in well-defined
trends. On the flip side, most components show high overlap in

174

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

their daily ranges, making them unsuitable for most swing trading
strategies.
• Big tech. This popular group comprises the highly liquid issues
most widely held by mutual funds and the investing public. Group
performance is codified in the Nasdaq-100 index and futures
contract. Contrary to popular belief, these issues often yield better
day trades than swing trades due to channeling behavior that
lowers rate of change and exposes stop losses.
• Biotech. Subdivide this group into the liquid blue chips and speculative small caps. The small caps make better short-term trading
vehicles but show a number of unfavorable characteristics. First,
they often hit daily highs or lows at the open, especially in reaction
to research data or analyst grading. This makes them high risk
for momentum entry. Second, they’re highly vulnerable to news
shocks, which can trigger devastating losses. Blue chip biotechs
tend to trend strongly and for long periods. Like precious metals,
these issues move through broad cycles of investor interest and
disinterest. At the higher end of the capitalization scale, they act
more like drug stocks, which are affected by regulatory mechanisms that hamper growth potential.
• Story stocks. Wall Street loves a good story because it helps to sell
stock to the public. Every market environment, good or bad, yields
a handful of issues that trend more sharply than the major indices
because the company possesses a trait, product, or advantage that
is easily understood by the marginal investor. Most times, these
stories wither up and die over time, but occasionally they’ll yield
the next Microsoft, Starbucks, or First Solar.
• Metals. Precious metals trade in long cycles that tend to overshoot
natural support and resistance levels. Many of the underlying
equities are held back, in both directions, by hedging practices
that reduce their exposure to short-term futures movement.
Industrial metals are proxies for economy growth and contraction
worldwide. In recent years, they’ve taken on the role of the canary
in the coal mine for notable shifts in the economic cycle.
• Energy. This sector was a sleeping giant for decades. It woke up
with a vengeance at the start of the 2003 equity bull market and
will remain a major play for the next generation due to climate
change issues. Oil and oil services stocks tend to move with the
underlying commodities during quiet periods and with the broad
indices during volatile periods. Like industrial metals, these stocks
are proxies for worldwide economic demand.

CHAPTER 8

Positions, Markets, and Trading Styles

175

• Transportation. These issues may trade in reverse lockstep with
the energy markets due to hedging plays. This is especially true
with the airline stocks, because profitability is closely tied to fuel
costs. Trucking, shipping, and railroad issues react to economic
shifts and make outstanding plays during the strongest and
weakest phases of the cycle.
• Cyclicals. Building equipment, paper companies, and chemical
manufacturers all share the cyclical label, which yields the
strongest performance in the early stages of a new economic cycle
and the weakest when growth tops out and starts to contract.
Cyclicals respond well to falling interest rates, which loosen up
credit availability and stimulate growth.
• Financials. The sector goes through long phases of quiet boredom,
with mild trends and few opportunities, followed by equally long
periods of rapid growth or compression. Crisis periods are the
exception rather than the rule, despite two historic blowups in the
last 20 years. These stocks tend to trend more sharply near high
and low economic turning points.
• Retail and restaurants. Mall anchors, discount clothiers, and
specialty eateries act as proxies for the consuming public. Open
wallets and free-flowing credit trigger strong uptrends, while
retrenchment and employment anxiety yield equally strong
downtrends. These sectors are also great places to find story stocks
attracting speculative capital.
• The generals. There are always a handful of stocks that characterize an entire bull or bear market, like Apple in the 2003 to 2007
uptrend, or Citigroup in the vicious bear market that followed.
The issues are beloved or hated by Wall Street, triggering strong
trends followed by violent retracements. Timing is everything
with the generals, which make good longs when they’re beaten
into the ground and equally good short sales when they’re universally adored.
Liquidity, as calculated by a 60-day average daily volume, is a major
consideration in choosing your favored plays of the day or week. The
bottom line: it’s best to avoid all stocks that trade less than 200,000 shares
per day, on average. This is especially true in volatile markets because
these issues can swing through wide ranges with an illiquid bid-ask
spread that will hurt badly if a fast exit is required. There’s just no way
to manage risk in this scenario, which makes them unsuitable for the survivalist trader. Alternatively, there’s a sweet spot in the small cap universe,

176

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

between 200,000 and 500,000 shares, which yields a plethora of welldefined trends and manageable price movement. This narrow liquidity
zone often captures the momentum plays being hawked on stock boards
and in chat rooms. Many of these issues can yield outstanding gains over
short periods, when entries are well timed. You can find these winners
simply by pulling up a list of Russell 2000 Index components and sorting
by average daily volume, with a secondary sort by relative strength, using
the Price versus 200-day MA formula outlined in Chapter 4.
Price is as important as liquidity in choosing winning trades.
Single-digit stocks, in particular, represent a unique subset of the market
universe. These issues generally fall along two common threads. First are
the battered stocks that have fallen from grace due to weak earnings, an
out of favor sector, or a bear market environment. These broken issues
can drop under 10 bucks and stay there for years at a time, until the cycle
finally reverses. The trick in finding good plays within this subgroup is to
back up and use the weekly charts to locate major turning points, such as
the completion of a long basing pattern.
The second single-digit thread generally offers better trading opportunities. These are the small stocks, often coming off the pink sheets
and onto national market listings because their capitalization levels are
growing. This group also includes junior biotechs that have interesting
drugs in the pipeline or sugar daddy partners that are funding their
research. All of these issues can produce outstanding profits under the
right circumstances. Sadly though, single-digit stocks can trigger devastating losses as well. Low-priced stocks move through higher daily percentages than more expensive ones. That won’t matter if positions are
sized properly, but that’s less likely to happen with cheap stocks because
it’s easy to get fooled by total exposure, which tends to be small compared
to big tech or blue chip positions. In addition, undercapitalized traders
are attracted to these issues because they fit into their small size accounts,
with less risk of a margin call. This is a double-edged sword because, on
the one hand, we’re smarter than these folks and can often find ways to
profit from their mistakes, but on the other hand, these stocks will go absolutely crazy when these folks panic and try to get out.
Single-digit stocks work best in a basket that includes a good measure
of their higher-priced brethren. In this way, we can give them the running
room they need to generate a decent profit. As a general rule, take the size
you’d really like to trade in these issues and cut it by a quarter or a half,
and then enter the market. This added caution will keep you in the trade
longer, and in a better position to catch the next big rally or selloff in your
favor.

CHAPTER 8

Positions, Markets, and Trading Styles

177

Exchange-Traded Funds
Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) draw intense trader interest for the same
reason that index futures have become so popular in recent years—it’s
completely logical to avoid individual equity exposure and head straight
into the mother lode of index and sector movement. But ETFs suck in a
huge amount of capital that never translates into profits because a majority
of market players forfeit their edge when they decide to play these highly
liquid instruments.
Consider the methodology we use to buy or sell stocks or other
trading vehicles we’ve deconstructed during our careers. The chart sets
up a pretty pattern, with favorable reward:risk. The expected price swing
falls into our time frame of interest and requires a capital commitment
that’s consistent with our trading plans. Finally, the broad market supports
our intended strategy and raises the odds that our risk taking will yield a
profit. In total, this workflow defines the trading edge we’re using to take
money out of the market.
Then consider how most traders play exchange-traded funds. A
macro story or short-term theme emerges, like strong gold or weak tech.
We look for a way to take advantage of the well-publicized trend but find
no particular vehicle of interest. So, instead of waiting for the low-hanging
fruit to set up, we throw money impatiently at related funds because
they’re so damned convenient. Unconsciously, and in conflict with our
discipline, we believe the instrument should capture the emerging trend
because, after all, that’s why it exists.
In the process, however, we’ve thrown our risk management out the
door and made the same mistake as a reactionary crowd that doesn’t know
the difference between a price chart and an earnings report. In reality, there’s
just one valid reason to assume risk in any financial instrument, i.e., our
trading edge will take advantage of its location, direction, and momentum.
In other words, it’s a mistake to trade any exchange-traded fund until it
yields a valid buy or sell signal. This sounds like common sense, but it
isn’t, considering our tendency to overtrade in the least favorable environments. In a way, these popular funds are like Eve’s apple, tempting
us with opportunity when there is none. There’s a simple solution to this
conflict: apply the same discipline to ETF trading as any other financial
instrument. This means engaging in stalking behavior over long periods
and waiting for the patterns to set up properly. Of course, this is easier said
than done in a dull environment when you can’t find good trades in your
preferred vehicles. But, like everything else in the markets, it can be done
successfully.

178

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

The survivalist trader should first establish a consistent track record
buying or selling normal equities and then extend risk exposure into the
more volatile stock derivatives, like exchange-traded funds and options.
Sadly, many folks do the exact opposite because they’re blinded by greed.
In truth, the rock solid discipline gained through profitable equity trading
becomes the foundation for success in the more cutthroat derivative
markets.
The most popular index funds provide a convenient alternative to
the index futures, with far less leveraging. A few hundred shares of the
SPDR Trust (SPY) or Nasdaq-100 Trust (QQQQ) can take advantage of
an emerging trend, with limited risk and excellent survivability during
adverse movement. Commodity sectors are especially well suited to ETF
plays, with useful proxies for gold, silver, and agricultural products. But
not all commodity funds are created equally as traders discovered when
crude oil plunged in the summer of 2008. The U.S. Oil Fund, an extremely
popular instrument during crude oil’s parabolic rally in 2007 and early
2008, failed to bounce at the same percentage as underlying commodities
because of the way it handled spot versus future pricing, a.k.a. contango.
Traders playing the fund got burned badly at that time, finally abandoning the instrument for newer vehicles that tracked futures pricing
more faithfully.
Longer-term moving averages work extremely well with sectorbased ETFs because institutions execute broad strategies that utilize these
price levels. For this reason, it’s a great idea to keep 50- and 200-day EMAs
on all ETF charts and to look for reversals when these levels come into
play. It’s best to avoid highly synthetic instruments, like superleveraged
funds, unless you’re sitting at a professional trading desk. These ETFs
attract two primary crowds, well-oiled hedge funds and undercapitalized
traders mesmerized by the rapid price movement. This conflict sets up
ideal conditions for chronic trapping behavior in which gaps and intraday
rinse jobs routinely take out common support and resistance levels. It
may not be obvious from the daily charts, but the tail wags the dog with
these highly volatile instruments. Simply stated, manipulation of superleveraged funds, especially in the final hour of trading, can reverse or
accelerate trends in the underlying sectors or indices. This is contrary to
the intended purpose of derivative instruments. Also, consider that high
leverage built into these instruments takes that strategic decision out of
our hands. This isn’t a huge problem when we reduce position size and
tighten up stop losses, but the opposite happens with the marginal trader.

CHAPTER 8

Positions, Markets, and Trading Styles

179

There’s also a broad misconception that these funds move in lockstep with
the underlying sector or index over long periods of time. This just isn’t
true because the instruments are aligned with daily price movement, not
weekly or monthly trending. In addition, they carry higher than normal
expense ratios, which feed back directly into price development.

Position Choice
Equity positions that match the current market phase have the highest
odds of profiting from the tradable pattern. Location of the major indices
(or index futures) establishes the current phase through stage analysis. For
example, the S&P 500 selling off, after breaking a topping pattern, denotes
a downtrend phase that will respond well to short sales. The scenario also
favors pullback plays if the downtrend is occurring within the context
of a larger scale uptrend. Chapter 3 of The Master Swing Trader outlined
the progression of these stages and their related opportunities through
lows, bottoms, breakouts, uptrends, tops, breakdowns, and downtrends.
Clearly, the devil is in the details when looking for the most advantageous
position choices of the current phase. The biggest roadblock comes from
false identification, in which you believe you’re trading one cycle segment
when, in fact, another is actually in play. This trend relativity error is exasperated by the three-dimensional nature of trends, which explains why
the pullbacks in a falling market can be so rewarding and so dangerous,
all at the same time.
As I noted in Chapter 6, context is everything in the financial
markets. A proper reading of the cyclical elements, as well as their hierarchal positions within the current phase, is absolutely essential in picking
out the most profitable play for that market in that particular session. Logically speaking, this is easier to accomplish than it sounds because trending
flows from longer into short time frames. In other words, a weekly trend
is more resilient than a daily trend, which, in turn, is more resilient than a
60-minute trend. With this in mind, we should always assume that a daily
selloff will bounce at weekly support, while a 60-minute uptrend will fail
at daily resistance.
The relative placement of current price between active trends generates the vast majority of swing trading strategies. Realistically, when we
have a database filled with promising patterns, just a few will:

PART FOUR

180

Managing Opportunity

• Show the right combination of relative trends.
• Match or converge with the current market phase.
• Trade at or near a targeted entry price.
In many cases, the equities we finally choose for exposure will be
grinding through similar patterns as the index futures, but every market
phase supports diverse strategies and relative trend combinations. The
primary question to ask when you’re staring at a promising pattern is
simple enough: will it work for this market on this day?
Position choice must also respond to the unique attributes of the
trading plan, which has predefined risk tolerance, holding period, and
profit objectives. That document, whether mental or physical, will rule
out otherwise good-looking opportunities that don’t match these primary
filters. Of course, you can change the plan at any time, but doing so just
before the opening bell, because you’d hate to miss out on a big rally, is a
terrible way to run a trading business.
Not all sectors move in lockstep with the major indices. For example,
precious metals often go against the grain, rising on down days and falling
on up days. Small biotech and other speculative plays will ignore the
broad market direction completely and react to research news, upgrades,
euphoria, and even chat room hype. And, as I noted earlier, energy stocks
sometimes trade with the markets and sometimes trade with the commodity futures. Countermarket plays, whatever their source, let traders
uncover good positions in dull or dangerous sessions that don’t offer easy
entry into the usual suspects.

Finding Morning Mavericks
1.	Look for green on the screen after a big down opening. Stocks that
don’t respond to early selling pressure may stay resilient for the
entire session.
2.	Pull up an index component list, and look for the leaders in a
down market and laggards in an up market. This method works
especially well on the Dow Industrials because of massive daily
rotation by index players.
3.	Sort a list of 40 sectors and exchange-traded funds after the first
hour, and see which are bucking the tide in that session.

CHAPTER 8

Positions, Markets, and Trading Styles

181

4.	Make a list of tier one broker upgrades on a down day or downgrades on an up day. These issues often attract a ton of contrary
capital.
5.	Find out which sectors were unusually strong or weak in the
Asian and European sessions. Then focus your attention on similar
groups trading against the morning tide.

Correlation between intraday leadership adds another layer of
actionable data because it generates convergence-divergence relationships.
For example, positive performance in a number of consumer-oriented
sectors, like retailers, restaurants, and hotels, exposes institutional bets on
economic growth three to six months down the road. And a mixed session
in which oil services are higher while coal and natural gas are lower points
to narrow interest in the production side of the energy spectrum, as
opposed to a broad interest in the raw materials sector.
Any combination of sector indices and liquid exchange-traded funds
can be utilized to create your daily sector watch list. Stick with the most
popular corners of the market, and don’t try to include every small segment
of price activity. Expect relative performance to shift quickly during the
first hour, when everyone is looking for what’s working and what’s not
in that particular session. The list should stop jumping around after the
first 90 minutes and settle into obvious categories of buying and selling
pressure. Check open positions at that time, and see whether they align
or misalign with the daily rotation. Major adjustments might be needed,
especially if you’re positioned in trend plays that are being targeted for
intraday pain.
Watch the patterns of sector rotation between sessions. Hedge funds
execute all sorts of mean reversion strategies that utilize standard deviation
measurements in short-term price movement. These are massive plays
that spread long and short positions into hundreds of instruments across
multiple markets. For example, these folks will play a basket of commodity
sectors on the long side, pushing prices as far as they can stretch in a single
session. Then they’ll turn around and sell short the same sectors in the following session, until they hit a median line that points to the normalized
prices for those instruments. Visually, this is akin to pushing price up and
through a Bollinger Band, reversing, and then dropping back down to the
basis line.
