
XVII

was much better and we probably would have an earlier
harvest than usual. When I got the figures of condition and
I saw what we might expect in the way of yield
mathematics I also thought at once of the coal miners'
strike and the railroad shopmen's strike. I couldn't help
thinking of them because my mind always thinks of all
developments that have a bearing on the markets. It
instantly struck me that the strike which had already
affected the movement of freight everywhere must affect
wheat prices adversely. I figured this way: There was
bound to be considerable delay in moving winter wheat to
market by reason of the strike-crippled transportation
facilities, and by the time those improved the Spring wheat
crop would be ready to move. That means that when the
railroads were able to move wheat in quantity they would
be bringing in both crops together the delayed winter and
the early spring wheat and that would mean a vast
quantity of wheat pouring into the market at one fell
swoop. Such being the facts of the case—the obvious
probabilities—the traders, who would know and figure as I
did, would not bull wheat for a while. They would not feel
like buying it unless the price declined to such figures as
made the purchase of wheat a good investment. With no
buying power in the market, the price ought to go down.
Thinking the way I did I must find whether I was right or
not. As old Pat Hearne used to remark, "You can't tell till
you bet." Between being bearish and selling there is no
need to waste time.
Experience has taught me that the way a market
behaves is an excellent guide for an operator to follow. It is
like taking a patient's temperature and pulse or noting the
colour of the eyeballs and the coating of the tongue.
Now, ordinarily a man ought to be able to buy or sell a
million bushels of wheat within a range of ¼ cent. On this
day when I sold the 250,000 bushels to test the market for
timeliness, the price went down ¼ cent. Then, since the
reaction did not definitely tell me all I wished to know, I
245

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

sold another quarter of a million bushels. I noticed that it
was taken in driblets; that is, the buying was in lots of
10,000 or 15,000 bushels instead of being taken in two or
three transactions which would have been the normal way.
In addition to the homeopathic buying the price went
down 1-¼ cents on my selling. Now, I need not waste time
pointing out that the way in which the market took my
wheat and the disproportionate decline on my selling told
me that there was no buying power there. Such being the
case, what was the only thing to do? Of course, to sell a lot
more. Following the dictates of experience may possibly
fool you, now and then. But not following them invariably
makes an ass of you. So I sold 2,000,000 bushels and the
price went down some more. A few days later the market's
behaviour practically compelled me to sell an additional
2,000,000 bushels and the price declined further still; a
few days later wheat started to break badly and slumped
off 6 cents a bushel. And it didn't stop there. It has been
going down, with short-lived rallies.
Now, I didn't follow a hunch. Nobody gave me a tip. It
was my habitual or professional mental attitude toward
the commodities markets that gave me the profit and that
attitude came from my years at this business. I study
because my business is to trade. The moment the tape told
me that I was on the right track my business duty was to
increase my line. I did. That is all there is to it.
I have found that experience is apt to be steady dividend
payer in this game and that observation gives you the best
tips of all. The behaviour of a certain stock is all you need
at times. You observe it. Then experience shows you how
to profit by variations from the usual, that is, from the
probable. For example, we know that all stocks do not
move one way together but that all the stocks of a group
will move up in a bull market and down in a bear market.
This is a commonplace of speculation. It is the commonest
of all self-given tips and the commission houses are well
aware of it and pass it on to any customer who has not
246

XVII

thought of it himself; I mean, the advice to trade in those
stocks which have lagged behind other stocks of the same
group. Thus, if U. S. Steel goes up, it is logically assumed
that it is only a matter of time when Crucible or Republic
or Bethlehem will follow suit. Trade conditions and
prospects should work alike with all stocks of a group and
the prosperity should be shared by all. On the theory,
corroborated by experience times without number, that
every dog has his day in the market, the public will buy A.
B. Steel because it has not advanced while C. D. Steel and
X. Y. Steel have gone up.
I never buy a stock even in a bull market, if it doesn't act
as it ought to act in that kind of market. I have sometimes
bought a stock during an undoubted bull market and
found out that other stocks in the same group were not
acting bullishly and I have sold out my stock. Why?
Experience tells me that it is not wise to buck against what
I may call the manifest group-tendency. I cannot expect to
play certainties only. I must reckon on probabilities and
anticipate them. An old broker once said to me: "If I am
walking along a railroad track and I see a train coming
toward me at sixty miles an hour, do I keep on walking on
the ties? Friend, I sidestep. And I do not even pat myself
on the back for being so wise and prudent."
Last year, after the general bull movement was well
under way, I noticed that one stock in a certain group was
not going with the rest of the group, though the group with
that one exception was going with the rest of the market. I
was long a very fair amount of Blackwood Motors.
Everybody knew that the company was doing a very big
business. The price was rising from one to three points a
day and the public was coming in more and more. This
naturally centered attention on the group and all the
various motor stocks began to go up. One of them,
however, persistently held back and that was Chester. It
lagged behind the others so that it was not long before it
made people talk. The low price of Chester and its apathy
247

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

was contrasted with the strength and activity in Blackwood and other motor stocks and the public logically
enough listened to the touts and tipsters and wiseacres
and began to buy Chester on the theory that it must
presently move up with the rest of the group.
Instead of going up on this moderate public buying,
Chester actually declined. Now, it would have been no job
to put it up in that bull market, considering that
Blackwood, a stock of the same group, was one of the
sensational leaders of the general advance and we were
hearing nothing but the wonderful improvement in the
demand for automobiles of all kinds and the record
output.
It was thus plain that the inside clique in Chester were
not doing any of the things that inside cliques invariably
do in a bull market. For this failure to do the usual thing
there might be two reasons. Perhaps the insiders did not
put it up because they wished to accumulate more stock
before advancing the price. But this was an untenable
theory if you analysed the volume and character of the
trading in Chester. The other reason was that they did not
put it up because they were afraid of getting stock if they
tried to.
When the men who ought to want a stock don't want it,
why should I want it? I figured that no matter how
prosperous other automobile companies might be, it was a
cinch to sell Chester short. Experiences had taught me to
beware of buying a stock that refuses to follow the groupleader.
I easily established the fact that not only there was no
inside buying but that there was actually inside selling.
There were other symptomatic warnings against buying
Chester, though all I required was its inconsistent market
behaviour. It was again the tape that tipped me off and
that was why I sold Chester short. One day, not very long
afterward, the stock broke wide open. Later on we learned
officially, as it were that insiders had indeed been selling
248

XVII

it, knowing full well that the condition of the company was
not good. The reason, as usual, was disclosed after the
break. But the warning came before the break. I don't look
out for the breaks; I look out for the warnings. I didn't
know what was the trouble with Chester; neither did I
follow a hunch. I merely knew that something must be
wrong.
Only the other day we had what the newspapers called a
sensational movement in Guiana Gold. After selling on the
Curb at $50 or close to it, it was listed on the Stock
Exchange. It started there at around $35, began to go
down and finally broke $20.
Now, I'd never have called that break sensational
because it was fully to be expected. If you had asked you
could have learned the history of the company. No end of
people knew it. It was told to me as follows: A syndicate
was formed consisting of a half dozen extremely wellknown capitalists and a prominent banking-house. One of
the members was the head of the Belle Isle Exploration
Company, which advanced Guiana over $10,000,000 cash
and received in return bonds and 250,000 shares out of a
total of one million shares of the Guiana Gold Mining
Company. The stock went on a dividend basis and it was
mighty well advertised. The Belle Isle people thought it
well to cash in and they gave a call on their 250,000 shares
to the bankers, who arranged to try to market that stock
and some of their own holdings as well. They thought of
entrusting the market manipulation to a professional
whose fee was to be one third of the profits from the sale of
the 250,000 shares above $36. I understand that the
agreement was drawn up and ready to be signed but at the
last moment the bankers decided to undertake the
marketing themselves and save the fee. So they organized
an inside pool. The bankers had a call on the Belle Isle
holdings of 250,000 at $36. They put this in at $41. That

249

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

is, insiders paid their own banking colleagues a 5-point
profit to start with. I don't know whether they knew it or
not.
It is perfectly plain that to the bankers the operation
had every semblance of a cinch. We had run into a bull
market and the stocks of the group to which Guiana Gold
belonged were among the market leaders. The company
was making big profits and paying regular dividends. This
together with the high character of the sponsors made the
public regard Guiana almost as an investment stock. I was
told that about 400,000 shares were sold to the public all
the way up to $47.
The gold group was very strong. But presently Guiana
began to sag. It declined ten points. That was all right if
the pool was marketing stock. But pretty soon the Street
began to hear that things were not altogether satisfactory
and the property was not bearing out the high expectations
of the promoters. Then, of course, the reason for the
decline became plain. But before the reason was known I
had the warning and had taken steps to test the market for
Guiana. The stock was acting pretty much as Chester
Motors did. I sold Guiana. The price went down. I sold
more. The price went still lower. The stock was repeating
the performance of Chester and of a dozen other stocks
whose clinical history I remembered. The tape plainly told
me that there was something wrong—something that kept
insiders from buying it insiders who knew exactly why
they should not buy their own stock in a bull market. On
the other hand, outsiders, who did not know, were now
buying because having sold at $45 and higher the stock
looked cheap at $35 and lower. The dividend was still
being paid. The stock was a bargain.
Then the news came. It reached me, as important
market news often does, before it reached the public. But
the confirmation of the reports of striking barren rock
instead of rich ore merely gave me the reason for the
earlier inside selling. I myself didn't sell on the news. I had
250

XVII

sold long before, on the stock's behaviour. My concern
with it was not philosophical. I am a trader and therefore
looked for one sign : Inside buying. There wasn't any. I
didn't have to know why the insiders did not think enough
of their own stock to buy it on the decline. It was enough
that their market plans plainly did not include further
manipulation for the rise. That made it a cinch to sell the
stock short. The public had bought almost a half million
shares and the only change in ownership possible was
from one set of ignorant outsiders who would sell in the
hope of stopping losses to another set of ignorant
outsiders who might buy in the hope of making money.
I am not telling you this to moralise on the public's
losses through their buying of Guiana or on my profit
through my selling of it, but to emphasise how important
the study of group-behaviourism is and how its lessons are
disregarded by inadequately equipped traders, big and
little. And it is not only in the stock market that the tape
warns you. It blows the whistle quite as loudly in
commodities.
I had an interesting experience in cotton. I was bearish
on stocks and put out a moderate short line. At the same
time I sold cotton short; 50,000 bales. My stock deal
proved profitable and I neglected my cotton. The first
thing I knew I had a loss of $250,000 on my 50,000 bales.
As I said, my stock deal was so interesting and I was doing
so well in it that I did not wish to take my mind off it.
Whenever I thought of cotton I just said to myself: "I'll
wait for a reaction and cover." The price would react a
little but before I could decide to take my loss and cover
the price would rally again, and go higher than ever. So I'd
decide again to wait a little and I'd go back to my stock
deal and confine my attention to that. Finally I closed out
my stocks at a very handsome profit and went away to Hot
Springs for a rest and a holiday.

251

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

That really was the first time that I had my mind free to
deal with the problem of my losing deal in cotton. The
trade had gone against me. There were times when it
almost looked as if I might win out. I noticed that
whenever anybody sold heavily there was a good reaction.
But almost instantly the price would rally and make a new
high for the move.
Finally, by the time I had been in Hot Springs a few
days, I was a million to the bad and no let up in the rising
tendency. I thought over all I had done and had not done
and I said to myself: "I must be wrong!" With me to feel
that I am wrong and to decide to get out are practically one
process. So I covered, at a loss of about one million.
The next morning I was playing golf and not thinking of
anything else. I had made my play in cotton. I had been
wrong. I had paid for being wrong and the receipted bill
was in my pocket. I had no more concern with the cotton
market than I have at this moment. When I went back to
the hotel for luncheon I stopped at the broker's office and
took a look at the quotations. I saw that cotton had gone
off 50 points. That wasn't anything. But I also noticed that
it had not rallied as it had been in the habit of doing for
weeks, as soon as the pressure of the particular selling that
had depressed it eased up. This had indicated that the line
of least resistance was upward and it had cost me a million
to shut my eyes to it.
Now, however, the reason that had made me cover at a
big loss was no longer a good reason since there had not
been the usual prompt and vigorous rally. So I sold 10,000
bales and waited. Pretty soon the market went off 50
points. I waited a little while longer. There was no rally. I
had got pretty hungry by now, so I went into the diningroom and ordered my luncheon. Before the waiter could
serve it, I jumped up, went to the broker's office, I saw that
there had been no rally and so I sold 10,000 bales more. I
waited a little and had the pleasure of seeing the price
decline 40 points more. That showed me I was trading
252

XVII

correctly so I returned to the dining-room, ate my
luncheon and went back to the broker's. There was no rally
in cotton that day. That very night I left Hot Springs.
It was all very well to play golf but I had been wrong in
cotton in selling when I did and in covering when I did. So
I simply had to get back on the job and be where I could
trade in comfort. The way the market took my first ten
thousand bales made me sell the second ten thousand, and
the way the market took the second made me certain the
turn had come. It was the difference in behaviour.
Well, I reached Washington and went to my brokers'
office there, which was in charge of my old friend Tucker.
While I was there the market went down some more. I was
more confident of being right now than I had been of being
wrong before. So I sold 40,000 bales and the market went
off 75 points. It showed that there was no support there.
That night the market closed still lower. The old buying
power was plainly gone. There was no telling at what level
that power would again develop, but I felt confident of the
wisdom of my position. The next morning I left
Washington for New York by motor. There was no need to
hurry.
When we got to Philadelphia I drove to a broker's office.
I saw that there was the very dickens to pay in the cotton
market. Prices had broken badly and there was a smallsized panic on. I didn't wait to get to New York. I called up
my brokers on the long distance and I covered my shorts.
As soon as I got my reports and found that I had
practically made up my previous loss, I motored on to New
York without having to stop en route to see any more
quotations.
Some friends who were with me in Hot Springs talk to
this day of the way I jumped up from the luncheon table to
sell that second lot of 10,000 bales. But again that clearly
was not a hunch. It was an impulse that came from the
conviction that the time to sell cotton had now come,
however great my previous mistake had been. I had to take
253

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

advantage of it, It was my chance. The subconscious mind
probably went on working, reaching conclusions for me.
The decision to sell ir Washington was the result of my
observation. My years of experience in trading told me
that the line of least resistance had changed from up to
down.
I bore the cotton market no grudge for taking a million
dollars out of me and I did not hate myself for making a
mistake of that calibre any more than I felt proud for
covering in Philadelphia and making up my loss. My
trading mind concerns itself with trading problems and I
think I am justified in asserting that I made up my first
loss because I had the experience and the memory.

254

XVIII
History repeats itself all the time in Wall Street. Do you
remember a story I told you about covering my shorts at
the time Stratton had corn cornered? Well, another time I
used practically the same tactics in the stock market. The
stock was Tropical Trading. I have made money bulling it
and also bearing it. It always was an active stock and a
favourite with adventurous traders. The inside coterie has
been accused time and again by the newspapers of being
more concerned over the fluctuations in the stock than
with encouraging permanent investment in it. The other
day one of the ablest brokers I know asserted that not even
Daniel Drew in Erie or H. O. Havemeyer in Sugar
developed so perfect a method for milking the market for a
stock as President Mulligan and his friends have done in
Tropical Trading. Many times they have encouraged the
bears to sell TT short and then have proceeded to squeeze
them with business-like thoroughness. There was no more
255

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

vindictiveness about the process than is felt by a hydraulic
press or no more squeamishness, either.
Of course, there have been people who have spoken
about certain "unsavory incidents" in the market career of
TT stock. But I dare say these critics were suffering from
the squeezing. Why do the room traders, who have
suffered so often from the loaded dice of the insiders,
continue to go up against the game? Well, for one thing
they like action and they certainly get it in Tropical
Trading. No prolonged spells of dullness. No reasons
asked or given. No time wasted. No patience strained by
waiting for the tipped movement to begin. Always enough
stock to go around—except when the short interest is big
enough to make the scarcity worth while. One born every
minute!
It so happened some time ago that I was in Florida on
my Usual winter vacation. I was fishing and enjoying
myself without any thought of the markets excepting when
we received a batch of newspapers. One morning when the
semi-weekly mail came in I looked at the stock quotations
and saw that Tropical Trading was selling at $155. The last
time I'd seen a quotation in it, I think, was around $140.
My opinion was that we were going into a bear market and
I was biding my time before going short of stocks. But
there was no mad rush. That was why I was fishing and out
of hearing of the ticker. I knew that I'd be back home when
the real call came. In the meanwhile nothing that I did or
failed to do would hurry matters a bit.
The behaviour of Tropical Trading was the outstanding
feature of the market, according to the newspapers I got
that morning. It served to crystallise my general
bearishness because I thought it particularly asinine for
the insiders to run up the price of TT in the face of the
heaviness of the general list. There are times when the
milking process must be suspended. What is abnormal is
seldom a desirable factor in a trader's calculations and it
256

XVIII

looked to me as if the marking up of that stock were a
capital blunder. Nobody can make blunders of that
magnitude with impunity; not in the stock market.
After I got through reading the newspapers I went back
to my fishing but I kept thinking of what the insiders in
Tropical Trading were trying to do. That they were bound
to fail was as certain as that a man is bound to smash
himself if he jumps from the roof of a twenty-story
building without a parachute. I couldn't think of anything
else and finally I gave up trying to fish and sent off a
telegram to my brokers to sell 2,000 shares of TT at the
market. After that I was able to go back to my fishing. I did
pretty well.
That afternoon I received the reply to my telegram by
special courier. My brokers reported that they had sold the
2,000 shares of Tropical Trading at $153. So far so good. I
was selling short on a declining market, which was as it
should be. But I could not fish any more. I was too far
away from a quotation board. I discovered this after I
began to think of all the reasons why Tropical Trading
should go down with the rest of the market instead of
going up on inside manipulation. I therefore left my
fishing camp and returned to Palm Beach; or, rather, to
the direct wire to New York.
The moment I got to Palm Beach and saw what the
misguided insiders were still trying to do, I let them have a
second lot of 2,000 TT. Back came the report and I sold
another 2,000 shares. The market behaved excellently.
That is, it declined on my selling. Everything being
satisfactory I went out and had a chair ride. But I wasn't
happy. The more I thought the unhappier it made me to
think that I hadn't sold more. So back I went to the
broker's office and sold another 2,000 shares.
I was happy only when I was selling that stock.
Presently I was short 10,000 shares.
Then I decided to return to New York. I had business to
do now. My fishing I would do some other time.
257
