
1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

13

emerged to say that beta does not really measure the investment
risk that matters, and that capital markets are really not efficient
enough to make beta meaningful anyway.
In stirring up the discussion, people started noticing Buffett's
record of successful investing and calling for a return to the Graham-Dodd approach to investing and business. After all, for more
than forty years Buffett has generated average annual returns of
20% or better, which double the market average. For more than
twenty years before that, Ben Graham's Graham-Newman Corp.
had done the same thing. As Buffett emphasizes, the stunning performances at Graham-Newman and at Berkshire deserve respect:
the sample sizes were significant; they were conducted over an extensive time period, and were not skewed by a few fortunate experiences; no data-mining was involved; and the performances were
longitudinal, not selected by hindsight.
Threatened by Buffett's performance, stubborn devotees of
modern finance theory resorted to strange explanations for his success. Maybe he is just lucky-the monkey who typed out Hamlet-or maybe he has inside access to information that other
investors do not. In dismissing Buffett, modern finance enthusiasts
still insist that an investor's best strategy is to diversify based on
betas or dart throwing, and constantly reconfigure one's portfolio
of investments.
Buffett responds with a quip and some advice: the quip is that
devotees of his investment philosophy should probably endow
chairs to ensure the perpetual teaching of efficient market dogma;
the advice is to ignore modern finance theory and other quasi-sophisticated views of the market and stick to investment knitting.
That can best be done for many people through long-term investment in an index fund. Or it can be done by conducting hardheaded analyses of businesses within an investor's competence to
evaluate. In that kind of thinking, the risk that matters is not beta
or volatility, but the possibility of loss or injury from an investment.
Assessing that kind of investment risk requires thinking about
a company's management, products, competitors, and debt levels.
The inquiry is whether after-tax returns on an investment are at
least equal to the purchasing power of the initial investment plus a
fair rate of return. The primary relevant factors are the long-term
economic characteristics of a business, the quality and integrity of
its management, and future levels of taxation and inflation. Maybe
these factors are vague, particularly compared with the seductive

14

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

precision of beta, but the point is that judgments about such matters cannot be avoided, except to an investor's disadvantage.
Buffett points out the absurdity of beta by observing that "a
stock that has dropped very sharply compared to the market ...
becomes 'riskier' at the lower price than it was at the higher
price"-that is how beta measures risk. Equally unhelpful, beta
cannot distinguish the risk inherent in "a single-product toy company selling pet rocks or hula hoops from another toy company
whose sole product is Monopoly or Barbie." But ordinary investors can make those distinctions by thinking about consumer behavior and the way consumer products companies compete, and
can also figure out when a huge stock-price drop signals a buying
opportunity.
Contrary to modern finance theory, Buffett's investment knitting does not prescribe diversification. It may even call for concentration, if not of one's portfolio, then at least of its owner's mind.
As to concentration of the portfolio, Buffett reminds us that
Keynes, who was not only a brilliant economist but also a brilliant
investor, believed that an investor should put fairly large sums into
two or three businesses he knows something about and whose
management is trustworthy. On that view, risk rises when investments and investment thinking are spread too thin. A strategy of
financial and mental concentration may reduce risk by raising both
the intensity of an investor's thinking about a business and the
comfort level he must have with its fundamental characteristics
before buying it.
The fashion of beta, according to Buffett, suffers from inattention to "a fundamental principle: It is better to be approximately
right than precisely wrong." Long-term investment success depends not on studying betas and maintaining a diversified portfolio, but on recognizing that as an investor, one is the owner of a
business. Reconfiguring a portfolio by buying and selling stocks to
accommodate the desired beta-risk profile defeats long-term investment success. Such "flitting from flower to flower" imposes
huge transaction costs in the forms of spreads, fees and commissions, not to mention taxes. Buffett jokes that calling someone who
trades actively in the market an investor "is like calling someone
who repeatedly engages in one-night stands a romantic." Investment knitting turns modern finance theory's folk wisdom on its
head: instead of "don't put all your eggs in one basket," we get
Mark Twain's advice from Pudd'nhead Wilson: "Put all your eggs
in one basket-and watch that basket."

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

15

Buffett learned the art of investing from Ben Graham as a
graduate student at Columbia Business School in the 1950s and
later working at Graham-Newman. In a number of classic works,
including The Intelligent Investor, Graham introduced some of the
most profound investment wisdom in history. It rejects a prevalent
but mistaken mind-set that equates price with value. On the contrary, Graham held that price is what you pay and value is what
you get. These two things are rarely identical, but most people
rarely notice any difference.
One of Graham's most profound contributions is a character
who lives on Wall Street, Mr. Market. He is your hypothetical
business partner who is daily willing to buy your interest in a business or sell you his at prevailing market prices. Mr. Market is
moody, prone to manic swings from joy to despair. Sometimes he
offers prices way higher than value; sometimes he offers prices way
lower than value. The more manic-depressive he is, the greater the
spread between price and value, and therefore the greater the investment opportunities he offers. Buffett reintroduces Mr. Market,
emphasizing how valuable Graham's allegory of the overall market
is for disciplined investment knitting-even though Mr. Market
would be unrecognizable to modern finance theorists.
Another leading prudential legacy from Graham is his marginof-safety principle. This principle holds that one should not make
an investment in a security unless there is a sufficient basis for believing that the price being paid is substantially lower than the
value being delivered. Buffett follows the principle devotedly, noting that Graham had said that if forced to distill the secret of sound
investment into three words, they would be: margin of safety.
Over forty years after first reading that, Buffett still thinks those
are the right words. While modern finance theory enthusiasts cite
market efficiency to deny there is a difference between price (what
you pay) and value (what you get), Buffett and Graham regard it as
all the difference in the world.
That difference also shows that the term "value investing" is a
redundancy. All true investing must be based on an assessment of
the relationship between price and value. Strategies that do not
employ this comparison of price and value do not amount to investing at all, but to speculation-the hope that price will rise,
rather than the conviction that the price being paid is lower than
the value being obtained. Many professionals make another common mistake, Buffett notes, by distinguishing between "growth in-

16

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

vesting" and "value investing." Growth and value, Buffett says, are
not distinct. They are integrally linked since growth must be
treated as a component of value.
Nor does the phrase "relational investing" resonate with Buffett. The term became popular on Wall Street and in the academy
in the mid-1990s, describing a style of investing that is designed to
reduce the costs of the separation of shareholder ownership from
managerial control by emphasizing shareholder involvement and
monitoring of management. Many people incorrectly identified
Buffett and Berkshire as exemplars of this descriptive label. It is
true that Buffett buys big blocks in a few companies and sticks
around a long time. He also only invests in businesses run by people he trusts. But that is about as far as the similarity goes. If
Buffett were pressed to use an adjective to describe his investment
style, it would be something like "focused" or "intelligent" investing. Yet even these words ring redundant; the unadorned term investor best describes Buffett.
Other misuses of terms include blurring the difference between speculation and arbitrage as methods of sound cash management; the latter being very important for companies like Berkshire
that generate substantial excess cash. Both speculation and arbitrage are ways to use excess cash rather than hold it in short-term
cash equivalents such as commercial paper. Speculation describes
the use of cash to bet on lots of corporate events based on rumors
of unannounced coming transactions. Arbitrage, traditionally understood to mean exploiting different prices for the same thing on
two different markets, for Buffett describes the use of cash to take
short-term positions in a few opportunities that have been publicly
announced. It exploits different prices for the same thing at different times. Deciding whether to employ cash this way requires evaluating four common-sense questions based on information rather
than rumor: the probability of the event occurring, the time the
funds will be tied up, the opportunity cost, and the downside if the
event does not occur.
In all investment thinking, one must guard against what Buffett calls the "institutional imperative." It is a pervasive force in
which institutional dynamics produce resistance to change, absorption of available corporate funds, and reflexive approval of suboptimal CEO strategies by subordinates. Contrary to what is often
taught in business and law schools, this powerful force often interferes with rational business decision-making. The ultimate result
of the institutional imperative is a follow-the-pack mentality pro-

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

17

ducing industry imitators, rather than industry leaders-what Buffett calls a lemming-like approach to business.
All these investment principles are animated in Buffett's lively
essays on junk and zero-coupon bonds and preferred stock. Challenging both Wall Street and the academy, Buffett again draws on
Graham's ideas to reject the "dagger thesis" advanced to defend
junk bonds. The dagger thesis, using the metaphor of the intensified care an automobile driver would take facing a dagger mounted
on the steering wheel, overemphasizes the disciplining effect that
enormous amounts of debt in a capital structure exerts on
management.
Buffett points to the large numbers of corporations that failed
in the early 1990s recession under crushing debt burdens to dispute
academic research showing that higher interest rates on junk bonds
more than compensated for their higher default rates. He attributes this error to a flawed assumption recognizable to any first-year
statistics student: that historical conditions prevalent during the
study period would be identical in the future. They would not.
Further illuminating the folly of junk bonds is an essay in this collection by Charlie Munger that discusses Michael Milken's approach to finance.
Wall Street tends to embrace ideas based on revenue-generating power, rather than on financial sense, a tendency that often
perverts good ideas to bad ones. In a history of zero-coupon
bonds, for example, Buffett shows that they can enable a purchaser
to lock in a compound rate of return equal to a coupon rate that a
normal bond paying periodic interest would not provide. Using
zero-coupons thus for a time enabled a borrower to borrow more
without need of additional free cash flow to pay the interest expense. Problems arose, however, when zero-coupon bonds started
to be issued by weaker and weaker credits whose free cash flow
could not sustain increasing debt obligations. Buffett laments, "as
happens in Wall Street all too often, what the wise do in the beginning, fools do in the end."
The essays on preferred stock show the art of investing at its
finest, emphasizing the economic characteristics of businesses, the
quality of management, and the difficult judgments that are always
necessary, but not always correct.
COMMON STOCK

Buffett recalls that on the day Berkshire listed on the New
York Stock Exchange in 1988, he told Jimmy Maguire, the special-

18

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

ist in Berkshire stock, "I will consider you an enormous success if
the next trade in this stock is about two years from now." While
Buffett jokes that Maguire "didn't seem to get enthused about
that," he emphasizes that his mind-set when he buys any stock is "if
we aren't happy owning a piece of that business with the Exchange
closed, we're not happy owning it with the Exchange open." Berkshire and Buffett are investors for the long haul; Berkshire's capital
structure and dividend policy prove it.
Unlike many CEOs, who desire their company's stock to trade
at the highest possible prices in the market, Buffett prefers Berkshire stock to trade at or around its intrinsic value-neither materially higher nor lower. Such linkage means that business results
during one period will benefit the people who owned the company
during that period. Maintaining the linkage requires a shareholder
group with a collective long-term, business-oriented investment
philosophy, rather than a short-term, market-oriented strategy.
Buffett notes Phil Fisher's suggestion that a company is like a
restaurant, offering a menu that attracts people with particular
tastes. Berkshire's long-term menu emphasizes that the costs of
trading activity can impair long-term results. Indeed, Buffett estimates that the transaction costs of actively traded stocks-broker
commissions and market-maker spreads-often amount to 10% or
more of earnings. Avoiding or minimizing such costs is necessary
for long-term investment success, and Berkshire's listing on the
New York Stock Exchange helped contain those costs.
Corporate dividend policy is a major capital allocation issue,
always of interest to investors but infrequently explained to them.
Buffett's essays clarify this subject, emphasizing that "capital allocation is crucial to business and investment management." In early
1998, Berkshire's common stock was priced in the market at over
$50,000 per share and the company's book value, earnings, and intrinsic value have steadily increased well in excess of average annual rates. Yet the company has never effected a stock split, and
has not paid a cash dividend in three decades.
Apart from reflecting the long-term menu and minimization of
transaction costs, Berkshire's dividend policy also reflects Buffett's
conviction that a company's earnings payout versus retention decision should be based on a single test: each dollar of earnings should
be retained if retention will increase market value by at least a like
amount; otherwise it should be paid out. Earnings retention is justified only when "capital retained produces incremental earnings
equal to, or above, those generally available to investors."

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

19

Like many of Buffett's simple rules, this one is often ignored
by corporate managers, except of course when they make dividend
decisions for their subsidiaries. Earnings are often retained for
non-owner reasons, such as expanding the corporate empire or furnishing operational comfort for management.
Things are so different at Berkshire, Buffett said at the symposium, that under his test Berkshire "might distribute more than
100% of the earnings," to which Charlie Munger chimed in
"You're damn right." That has not been necessary, however, for
throughout Buffett's stewardship at Berkshire, opportunities for
superior returns on capital have been discovered, and exploited.
Stock splits are another common action in corporate America
that Buffett points out disserve owner interests. Stock splits have
three consequences: they increase transaction costs by promoting
high share turnover; they attract shareholders with short-term,
market-oriented views who unduly focus on stock market prices;
and, as a result of both of those effects, they lead to prices that
depart materially from intrinsic business value. With no offsetting
benefits, splitting Berkshire's stock would be foolish. Not only
that, Buffett adds, it would threaten to reverse three decades of
hard work that has attracted to Berkshire a shareholder group
comprised of more focused and long-term investors than probably
any other major public corporation.
Two important consequences have followed from Berkshire's
high stock price and its dividend policy. First, the extraordinarily
high share price impaired the ability of Berkshire shareholders to
effect gifts of their equity interest to family members or friends,
though Buffett has offered a few sensible strategies like bargain
sales to donees to deal with that. Second, Wall Street engineers
tried to create securities that would purport to mimic Berkshire's
performance and that would be sold to people lacking an understanding of Berkshire, its business, and its investment philosophy.
In response to these consequences, Buffett and Berkshire did
an ingenious thing. In mid-1996, Berkshire effected a recapitalization by creating a new class of stock, called the Class B shares, and
sold it to the public. The Class B shares have 1I30th the rights of
the existing Class A shares, except with respect to voting rights
they have 1/200th of those of the A shares; and the Class B shares
are not eligible to participate in the Berkshire charitable contributions program. Accordingly, the Class B shares should (and do)
trade somewhere in the vicinity of 1I30th of the market price of the
Class A shares.

20

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

The Class A shares are convertible into Class B shares, giving
Berkshire shareholders a do-it-yourself mechanism to effect a
stock-split to facilitate gift giving and so on. More importantly, the
Berkshire recapitalization would halt the marketing of Berkshire
clones that contradict all the basic principles Buffett believes in.
These clones-investment trusts that would buy and sell Berkshire
shares according to demand for units in the trust-would have imposed costs on shareholders. If held by people who do not understand Berkshire's business or philosophy, they would have caused
spikes in Berkshire's stock price, producing substantial deviations
between price and value.
The Class B shares are designed to be attractive only to investors who share Buffett's philosophy of focused investing. For example, in connection with the offering of the Class B shares,
Buffett and Munger emphasized that Berkshire stock was, at that
time, not undervalued in the market. They said that neither of
them would buy the Class A shares at the market price nor the
Class B shares at the offering price. The message was simple: do
not buy these securities unless you are prepared to hold them for
the long term. The effort to attract only long-term investors to the
Class B shares appears to have worked: trading volume in the
shares after the offering was far below average for Big Board
stocks.
Some expressed surprise at Buffett and Munger's cautionary
statement, since most managers tell the market that newly-issued
equity in their companies is being offered at a very good price.
You should not be surprised by Buffett and Munger's disclosure,
however. A company that sells its stock at a price less than its
value is stealing from its existing shareholders. Quite plausibly,
Buffett considers that a crime.
MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

Berkshire's acquisition policy is the double-barreled approach:
buying portions or all of businesses with excellent economic characteristics and run by managers Buffett and Munger like, trust, and
admire. Contrary to common practice, Buffett argues that in buying all of a business, there is rarely any reason to pay a premium.
The rare cases involve businesses with franchise characteristics-those that can raise prices rather easily and only require incremental capital investment to increase sales volume or market
share. Even ordinary managers can operate franchise businesses to
generate high returns on capital. The second category of rare cases

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

21

is where extraordinary managers exist who can achieve the difficult
feat of identifying underperforming businesses, and apply extraordinary talent to unlock hidden value.
These two categories are extremely limited, and certainly do
not explain the hundreds of high-premium takeovers that occur annually. Buffett attributes high-premium takeovers outside those
unusual categories to three motives of buying-managers: the thrill
of an acquisition, the thrill of enhanced size, and excessive optimism about synergies.
In paying for acquisitions, Berkshire issues stock only when it
receives as much in business value as it gives. Many other buyers,
when not using cash or debt, violate this simple rule. Buffett notes
that sellers in stock acquisitions measure the purchase price by the
market price of the buyer's stock, not by its intrinsic value. If a
buyer's stock is trading at a price equal to, say, half its intrinsic
value, then a buyer who goes along with that measure gives twice
as much in business value as it is getting. Its manager, usually rationalizing his or her actions by arguments about synergies or size,
is elevating thrill or excessive optimism above shareholder
interests.
Moreover, acquisitions paid for in stock are too often (almost
always) described as "buyer buys seller" or "buyer acquires seller."
Buffett suggests clearer thinking would follow from saying "buyer
sells part of itself to acquire seller," or something of the sort. After
all, that is what is happening; and it would enable one to evaluate
what the buyer is giving up to make the acquisition.
If the worst thing to do with undervalued stock is to use it to
pay for an acquisition, the best thing is to buy it back. Obviously, if
a stock is selling in the market at half its intrinsic value, the company can buy $2 in value by paying $1 in cash. There would rarely
be better uses of capital than that. Yet many more undervalued
shares are paid to effect value-destroying stock acquisitions than
are repurchased in value-enhancing stock buy-backs.
In contrast to sensible repurchases of undervalued stock,
which serve owner interests, Buffett condemns management repurchases from individuals at premium prices to fend off unwanted
acquisition overtures. Buffett forcibly shows that this practice of
greenmail is simply another form of corporate robbery.
Nearly as reprehensible, a second Charlie Munger essay in this
collection explains, were the cascades of leveraged buy-outs in the
1980s. Permissive laws made LBOs hugely profitable, Munger tells
us, but the LBOs weakened corporations, put a heavy premium on
