
AU3772_book.fm Page 392 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

392

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

carrying on a stable volume of business, with a long record of successful
operation. And yet, if there are bonds, debentures, preferred stocks, and
other senior obligations, the common stock may be subject to wide fluctuations. Also, if the issue is small, or if a large part of it is closely held, you
will have a “leverage” effect which results in wide swings in the stock.
Therefore, in choosing your stock to chart, you will want to consider the
kind of stock and its character and habits in the market, rather than the
business of the concern it represents. We will come back to this point and
show you how you can shape up a list that will give you the kind of stocks
you want for trading.
Meanwhile, the question “How Many Charts?” has been left hanging.
One answer to this is that the more stocks you chart, the more good opportunities you will have. Many stocks, even of active issues, will go through
long periods when the chart tells nothing — when, indeed, there is nothing
much to tell. In a period of stability, the chart simply indicates that it is a
period of stability, and the only possible trading activity would be purchases
and sales at the Bottoms and Tops of its undulations. The charts are more
informative when a change in the situation occurs; they will signal a change
of trend as soon as (and usually before) the news of the changed conditions
has come out. If you have enough charts, you will always have some stocks
making decisive and clear-cut moves either up or down, at any time.
You should, therefore, keep as many charts as you can. Don’t bite off
more than you can chew, however. A man with only 15 minutes to half an
hour a day for this work might have to confine himself to 20 or 30 charts. It
would be much better if he could have 100. And if he is in a position to give
a major part of his time to the work, he could very well run as many as
300 charts. A most important word of caution is indicated here. Don’t start
anything you can’t finish. It is better to have too few at the beginning than
too many. Then, if you find that you can add others, you will be in a better
position, from your experience, to pick out the ones you want to include.
But if you start with too many charts, begin to run behind with your analyses,
you will not be getting the best use from your portfolio, and it would be
better to cut down at once. EN: Magee’s admonitions are still in effect for the
manual chartist. The modern computer-equipped investor has a different problem.
He can chart every issue in the market every day. The question becomes, how many
can he effectively study and analyze? There is even a computer answer to this
question. Namely, the cybertrader can program the computer to report stocks on an
exception basis. For example, “Computer, show me all the stocks which are above
their 50-day moving average and which have unusual volume.”
From what we have already been over, you know that it is possible to
chart anything that is sold in identical units in a free competitive market.
This includes, of course, all kinds of commodities, bonds, debentures, whenissued contracts, etc., as well as stocks. You may have some special interest
which will call for charting something outside the field of stocks. Well and
good.

AU3772_book.fm Page 393 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-one:

Selection of Stocks to Chart

393

In general, however, you will want to chart active, listed stocks of wellestablished corporations. There is no reason an unlisted stock cannot be
charted, but ordinarily, the only figures you can obtain on it are the bid and
offer prices. On these stocks, you do not have a published statement of the
volume of sales each day or any record of prices at which sales actually took
place, and those are essential to the charting of daily technical action. Therefore, you will usually be charting stocks which are listed on some exchange.
This is also an advantage, since concerns listed on the larger exchanges are
required to meet certain conditions, publish certain information, and comply
with definite rules and practices. In this book, most of the examples have
been taken from stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange. There are
thousands of issues traded on the NYSE, and these stocks represent every
type of security, from the most conservative to the most speculative, from
the cheapest to the most expensive, and they include every principal type
of industry and business. However, there is no reason that stocks should not
be chosen from the American Stock Exchange, the NASDAQ, or from any
other exchange in this country, or for that matter, in some other country. So
far as the chart action is concerned, the patterns and their meanings will be the
same. (Editor’s italics.)
EN9: In general the stocks to watch, or chart, will tend to leap out of the haystack
of stocks. For stock pickers Investors Business Daily is in the constant process of
sifting the markets for nuggets with its CANSLIM system. (Not a recommendation
to use that system, only a recommendation to examine every tool that might be of
use.) Stocks which appear suddenly on the most active lists of prophet.net and
stockcharts.com might bear examination by the chart analyst. Optionable stocks
which suddenly show a radical change in implied volatility. Stocks which pop up
with suspicious volume spikes compared to average volume. And with Internet and
software packages one might construct a filter to be informed by the computer of
stocks breaking their 14, 44, 150, and 200 day moving averages. 14 because some
professionals think the public thinks in this time frame; 44 because some think funds
think in 44 day time frames. The others because everyone thinks they are important.

AU3772_book.fm Page 394 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 395 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter twenty-two

Selection of Stocks to
Chart — Continued
In choosing your stocks, you will probably look for the greatest diversity in
the kind of industry. Since you are not specializing in the detailed study of
a single group, you will try to get stocks from as many different groups as
possible. You will want to include mines and oils, rails and chemicals, liquors
and amusements, airlines, utilities, techs, Internets, biotechs, ad infinitum….
The reason for this is simply that, very often, many stocks in a particular
industrial group will show the same or similar patterns, as the entire industry
is affected by certain Major conditions. You will often find, for instance, that
when Allis-Chalmers (EN: or Dell) makes a Triangle or other Area Pattern,
followed by a sharp upward move, Deere (EN: or Compaq), MinneapolisMoline, Harvester, and Case will make similar Triangles, or possibly Rectangles or some other Consolidation Pattern, followed by a similar upward
move. When Schenley is moving in a long downtrend, you will very likely
find that Distillers — Seagrams, National Distillers, Publicker, and American
Distilling — are also moving in a long downtrend. EN: Metaphorical names,
like the names of Greek gods. Or Ulysses and Leopold Bloom. The present-day reader
may read Intel, Fairchild, and National Semiconductor or 3COM. The idea is the
same.
Therefore, unless you plan to keep enough charts to include several
stocks of each important group, it is best to pick your stocks to make up as
widely diversified a list as possible. In this way, during times when certain
groups are moving indecisively, or are inactive, you will have some representation in other groups which may be active. (Do not infer from this that
all stocks of a group move together at all times. Individual concerns will
frequently move according to special influences that bear on a single company. But where the Major influence is some industry-wide condition, the
group will move more or less as a unit.)
We, therefore, choose stocks representing a wide variety of groups or
basic industries. But, suppose we are limited as to the number of charts, and
we must choose one stock from a group; which stock to choose? Suppose,
for instance, we must choose one stock from the transportation group. EN:
Or Biotech, or Internets. As a matter of fact, you would probably want more
than one because this particular group is so important and so large. But for

395

AU3772_book.fm Page 396 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

396

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

the moment, let us choose just one. EN9: Or, even better, why not one of the
indexes for the desired group. An example of betting on all the horses rather than
trying to pick the winner, and there is no conflict between making both bets.
Should it be a high-priced stock or a low-priced stock? Let us examine
that point first.
If you examine the past records of stocks you will find that, in general,
the lower-priced issues make much larger percentage moves than the higherpriced stocks. It is not unusual for a stock selling around 5 to make a rise of
100%, moving up to 10 sometimes within a few weeks. On the other hand,
you do not find 100% moves in days or weeks among the stocks selling at
100 or 200. The same industry-wide move which carries your $5 stock from
5 to 10 might carry your $100 stock from 100 to 140. Obviously, if you had
put $1000 into outright purchase of the stock at 5, the move would have
increased the value of your stock 100% or $1000. In the other case, if you
had put the same amount into a stock at 100, the move to 140 (although
many more points) would have increased your capital to only $1400. The
gain in the lower-priced stock would be about two- and one-half times as
great.
The authors have worked out and tabulated the percentage moves of
large groups of stocks over long periods of time (cf. Appendix A), and have
set up a table which shows the relative average sensitivity of stocks at different price levels. This table pertains only to the price level of stocks; thus,
the same stock which today sells at 5 and makes wide percentage swings
will not swing so widely when it has moved up to a price level of 20 to 30.
Several questions may come to your mind at this point. Do not the costs
of trading low-priced stocks relative to higher-priced issues have to be taken
into account? EN: Yes, they do. Given the extreme changeability in these costs in
the Internet economy, calculation of those costs here would be tantamount to wasting
trees. This cost question may be researched quickly and easily given availability of
google.com and the Internet.
In selecting the price level of the stocks you prefer to trade in, you cannot
set too arbitrary a limit, since there are other factors to consider, and you
may have to make some compromises on one score in order to get what you
want in some other direction. Stocks from 20 to 30 are in a good trading
price range. Very often, you will find stocks in the 10 to 20 range which are
so interesting you will want to chart them, and trade in them. You will find
good situations in stocks selling at 30 to 40. Furthermore, you will understand, of course, that the stocks which are now selling at 10 may be selling
next year at 40, or vice versa. And since you cannot be changing your
portfolio of charts all the time, you must not be too “choosy” in picking the
price range of your stocks. However, you would not ordinarily pick out a
stock that was selling far above the price range of most stocks of its group,
say at 150, when several others in the same industry were selling at 15, 28,
or 37. For the high-priced stock, as we have said, is likely to be sluggish as

AU3772_book.fm Page 397 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-two:

Selection of Stocks to Chart — Continued

397

136

34

128

32
BALTIMORE & OHIO

BO

30

120

28

112

1945

26

104

24

96

22

UNION PACIFIC

UP

88
80

20

1945

19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12

JAN

FEB

MAR

APR

MAY

JUNE

JAN

FEB

MAR

APR

MAY

JUNE

FIGURES 204 and 205. Low-priced stocks move faster than high-priced stocks.
Here are weekly charts of two rail stocks, charted on ratio scale over the same
6-month period. Baltimore and Ohio during this time advanced from 12⅜ to 28⅞, a
gain of 16½ points, while Union Pacific moved up from 109 to 137, a gain of 28 points.
The advance in “UP,” however, compared to its price, is much less than the advance
in “BO.” A thousand dollars used for outright purchase of “UP” would show you a
capital increase of 25%. On the other hand, if you had put a thousand dollars into
outright purchase of “BO,” your increase would have been 133%, or more than
five times as much.
Bear in mind that low-priced stocks not only go up much faster, but also come
down much faster than high-priced stocks. When you own a low-priced stock, you
cannot safely “put it away in the box and forget it.” For security and stability, you
would do better to buy a few shares of a high-priced, gilt-edge security. But, for
trading purposes, you will want to strike a compromise between the rather sluggish
“blue chips” and the extremely erratic “cats and dogs” in the lowest price bracket.

AU3772_book.fm Page 398 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

398

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

a trading medium. On the other hand, you would not take the very lowestpriced issues of the group, selling at, say, 4 or 2 when others were in the
10 to 30 bracket. You would not only be faced with erratic and tricky chart
action, and much higher percentage costs for commissions; but you might
not be able to operate on margin at all. There are, from time to time, limitations on the amount of margin on stocks at all levels. In the lower-priced
issues, these limits are often more stringent. And in the lowest-priced
stocks, you are sometimes not permitted to trade on margin. EN: Because
these requirements are subject to the vagaries of the Federal Reserve Board, the
investor must inform himself at his personal broker or ECN. For quite some years
the general margin requirement has been 50%. The Fed came in for some sharp
criticism for not dampening speculation in the fin de siècle bubble by raising
margin rates to 100%, and its lack of action exacerbated the blow off of 2000. A
change in margin rates should get the immediate attention of the tecnical analyst.
Something will be up.
Ordinarily, you will get the greatest effective leverage at some point in
the 20s, considering all these factors. And your trading can run down
through the teens and up through the 40s. Above 40 and below 10, you will
have to have strong reasons for trading, which might be, of course, ample
capital. It would therefore be best for the moderately financed investor to
choose a majority of his stocks from the middle price range (10 to 40), plus
only those special situations you are particularly interested in watching
among the very low and very high brackets.
However, if you will go back to the long-time past record of any group
of stocks, you will find that even among stocks moving at nearly the same
price levels today, there are widely different behavior patterns. You will find
that some stocks respond to a severe market setback by reacting, let us say,
20% — that is, if they were selling at 30, they would move down to around
24. And you will find others that will respond to the same setback in the
general market by a reaction of 50% — that is, if they were selling at 30, they
would end up at around 15. And you will notice, if you examine the records,
that the same stocks which make these relatively different reactions in one
setback will make about the same moves, relative to each other, in other
setbacks. Furthermore, the same ones which make only moderate corrections
on declines will make only moderate advances on rises. And the ones that
go down sharply on setbacks will also skyrocket in a Bullish Market. This
has nothing to do with the phenomenon we discussed earlier, by which we
saw that cheap stocks move faster than expensive stocks. This is due to the
habits of particular stocks, and these habits seem to be quite stable over
periods of many years.
We will find, for instance, volatile and speculative issues which make
larger percentage swings than most other stocks at their price level. And, on
the other hand, we will find a stock, selling for much less, that has smaller
percentage swings than most stocks at its price level. This fact may be
obscured, as the comparatively low-priced stock may actually make larger
swings than the higher priced. It is only when we have taken the price level

AU3772_book.fm Page 399 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-two:

Selection of Stocks to Chart — Continued

399

into account that we can see what the individual habit of the stock really is.
Knowing this, we can project that habit to other price levels.
We are not too interested, as we have said before, in stocks which do
not ordinarily make substantial moves. We are very much interested in those
which make the wider moves. We can compute the basic swing power of a
stock, which we call the Sensitivity Index, and will outline the method for
doing this in Appendix A. EN: The procedure Magee speaks of here, of computing
a “Sensitivity Index,” may be regarded as the historical predecessor of what are now
called “betas.” The beta of a stock compares its relative volatility to that of the market
as a whole, so that if the beta of the market is 1.00 and the beta of the stock in
question is 1.50 a move of $1 in the market will probably be matched by a move of
$1.50 in the higher beta stock. The formula for beta will be found in Resources, and
calculated betas at finance.yahoo.com.
So, you will have eliminated from your list stocks at the wrong price
level and stocks without enough swing power (for you want to chart only
those stocks in which you can trade profitably). Of the ones that are left, you
will eliminate others. You will find that some stocks, which make wide price
moves and apparently offer large opportunities for profit, may be very
“thin.” The charts will be spotty, filled with gaps, days of “no sale,” and
moves of several points on only a few hundred shares of business. These
stocks are thin because of a small issue, because of ownership of a large
block of shares by some corporation or by insiders, or for other reasons.
They are difficult to trade in because they are hard to buy and hard to sell;
you stand to lose heavily on the “spread” between bid and offer. It might
be hard to liquidate even 500 shares without driving the price down badly,
to your loss, and sometimes you will see changes of 1 or 2 full points between
sales of single hundreds. These you will want to eliminate, and if you do
not know the habits before you choose your portfolio, you will probably
find it worthwhile to drop any stocks that prove too thin, substituting new
and more dependable choices.
After you have culled the list from all these angles you will find you
have left a choice of a number of stocks, all of them selling in a price range
that is attractive, all of them sufficiently active and responsive to market
trends, and all of them available in sufficient supply to provide a good
trading medium. The final choice of any one (or several) of these stocks is
then a matter of personal preference.
After you pick out your stocks from one group, study the other groups —
the motors group, the amusements, the computers (EN: the Internets) and so
forth, until you have finally made up your selection of stocks to follow. Try
to get as complete and balanced a representation of groups as the number
of your charts will allow. EN: In this context, the process described here is made
infinitely simpler by available software and by the proliferation of group indexes
and indicators. In fact, if the investor desires, rather than trading an individual
stock in an industry group, he may often choose to trade the average or index itself
and cushion his risks. This will almost never be as profitable as a well-chosen
individual issue, but will always be better than a badly chosen individual issue.

AU3772_book.fm Page 400 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

400

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

In this connection, if you are not planning to represent all groups, there
are some groups that are more likely to provide good trading stocks than
others. The foods and tobaccos, for example, are generally less responsive
to market swings than the rails, liquors, and airlines, which are very responsive. Do not worry too much, however, about exactly which stocks to choose.
For even if you took the first 50 or 100 stocks in the listed issues, you would
have among them at least 25 good trading stocks. You can start with almost
any list, and, as time goes on, you will drop some and add others, improving
your portfolio and tailoring it to your own needs.
EN: As additional commentary here it is worth noting that “techs,” “biotechs”
(or whatever the mania of the moment is — probably space hotels and intergalactic
travel in this millennium) will present areas of risk and reward sufficient to excite
the 17th century tulip trader. The centered investor and trader will consider vogues
and manias as he chooses his active portfolio and choose to participate (or not)
depending on his appetite for risk and excitement. Or as the popular maxim has it,
one man’s champagne is another man’s poison. This question is pursued in greater
detail in Chapter 23.
By way of further simplification, the investor may choose to follow only one or
two issues — the SPDRs (SPY) or DIAMONDS (DIA). If it were not only bought,
but also sold, or hedged, the market would be outperformed. This would be a simple
investor’s life indeed.

AU3772_book.fm Page 401 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter twenty-three

Choosing and Managing
High-Risk Stocks: Tulip
Stocks, Internet Sector,
and Speculative Frenzies
Nothing could more vividly illustrate the timeless nature of chart patterns
and situations than the Internet stocks which bloomed at the turn of the
century. These stocks repeated that eternal pattern — the tulipomania, the
gold rush, the can’t-fail-opportunity-to-get-rich-quick.
It is almost impossible to resist comparing the speculative frenzy which
took place in the Internets and technology issues to the famous 17th century
mania which Holland experienced in the famous tulipomania. In MacKay’s
undying classic account (Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of
Crowds), the trading of tulip bulbs replaced sober commerce and business
as the occupation of the country, and enormous fortunes were made trading
the tubers. Blocks of real estate, breweries, assets of real and large value were
traded for one tulip bulb. And MacKay produced my favorite paragraph in
the literature of finance: “A golden bait hung temptingly out before the
people, and one after the other, they rushed to tulip-marts, like flies around
a honey pot. Every one imagined that the passion for tulips would last
forever, and that the wealthy from every part of the world would send to
Holland, and pay whatever prices were asked for them.”
That mania ended in ruin. A better long-term prospect may be in store
for the Internets as there is a basis of technology and economic substance to
the sector. You could not, after all, use your tulip to check the market for
prices. And, in fact there were those, admittedly a small number, who struck
it rich in the California gold rush of 1849. It’s an ill wind, etc….
But as an exercise in rueful perspective, the seventh edition of this book
remarked, in the words of Richard McDermott, “Companies like Lotus or
Microsoft went public and grew into business giants in a short period of
time…. A significant theme stock for the 1990s has been Internet stocks.
Names like America Online, CompuServe, and Netscape have provided
important products and services that allow individuals to ‘surf the net’ for
information around the world.” Young students of the market will search in
vain for Lotus, CompuServe, and Netscape in the lists of stock symbols. The
401
