
8467_Smitten_app_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 303

LIVERMORE ’ S LAWS AND TRADING SECRETS REVEALED

• 303 •

Livermore believed in cycles, life cycles and market cycles. They
are often extreme, rarely balanced. Cycles come like a series of
ocean waves, bringing the high tide when things are good, and the
low tide as conditions recede. These cycles come unexpectedly,
unpredictably. Good or bad, they have to be weathered with temperance and patience. Remember, the skillful speculator knows
that money can be made no matter what the market conditions, if
a speculator is willing to play both sides of the market.
Livermore realized early on that the stock market is never obvious. It is designed to fool most of the people most of the time.
Livermore’s rules are often based on thinking against the grain:
• Cut your losses quickly.
• Be sure to confirm your judgment before you take your full
position.
• Let your profits ride if there is no good reason to close out the
position.
• The action is with the leading stocks, which change with
every new market.
• Keep the number of stocks you follow limited in order to
focus.
• New all-time highs are to be bought on breakouts.
• Cheap stocks often appear to be bargains after a large drop.
They often continue to fall, or have little potential to rise in
price. Leave them alone!
• Use pivotal points to identify changes in trends and confirmations in trends.
• Don’t fight the tape!
The stock market is a study in cycles; when it changes direction,
it remains in that new trend until the momentum weakens—a

8467_Smitten_app_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 304

• 304 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

body in motion tends to stay in motion. Remember, don’t buck
the trend. Don’t fight the tape.
In a free market system, prices fluctuate. They never go up all
the time, and they never go down all the time. This is good for the
alert speculator, since either side of the market can be played.

MARKET-TIMING RULES
Never sustain a loss of more than 10 percent of your invested capital. Livermore learned this in the bucket shops, where he worked
with 10 percent margin and was automatically sold out if his loss
exceeded the limit. This is also a money-management rule.
The big money is made by the sitting, not the thinking. Once a
position is taken, the hardest thing to do is to be patient and wait
for the move to play out. The temptation is strong to take fast profits or cover a trade solely out of fear of losing the profit on a correction. This error has cost millions of speculators millions of
dollars. Be sure you have a good clear reason to enter a trade, and
be sure you have a good clear reason to close your position. It is
the big swing that makes the big money for you.
Play the market only when all factors are in your favor. No one
can play the market all the time and win. There are times when
you should be completely out of the market.
The speculator must know the overall trend of the market—the
line of least resistance—before making a trade. Be sure you know
whether this line of least resistance is upward or downward. This
applies to both the overall market and individual stocks. The basic
thing you need to know before making a trade is which way the
overall market is headed: up, down, or sideways. You have to
decide this before making a trade. If the overall trend of the market is not in your favor, you are playing at an extreme disadvantage.

8467_Smitten_app_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 305

LIVERMORE ’ S LAWS AND TRADING SECRETS REVEALED

• 305 •

Remember, go with the flow, bend with the trend, do not sail into
a gale, and—most of all—don’t argue with the tape!
The only thing to do when you are wrong is to be right by ceasing to be wrong. Cover your losses quickly, without hesitation.
Don’t waste time—when a stock moves below a mental stop, sell
it immediately.
Stocks often act like human beings, expressing different personalities: aggressive, reserved, hyper, high-strung, direct, logical, predictable, unpredictable. Study the stocks as you would study
people; after awhile, their reactions to certain circumstances
become predictable and useful in timing the stock’s movement.
Stocks are never too high to begin buying or too low to begin
selling short.
Failure to take the opportunity to get out of large illiquid positions when the opportunity presents itself can cost you dearly.
Failure to take advantage of a serendipitous act of good luck in
the stock market is always a mistake.
In a market moving sideways in a narrow channel where stock
prices are essentially stagnant, there is a great danger in trying to
predict or anticipate when and in what direction the market will
move. You must wait until the market or the stock breaks out of
this sideways channel in either direction. Don’t anticipate! Wait for
confirmation! Never argue with the tape. Follow the line of least
resistance.
Do not spend a lot of time trying to figure out what moves the
price of a particular stock. Rather, examine the tape. The answer
lies in what the tape says, not in trying to figure out why the tape
is saying it. Behind all major movements in the stock market
there is an irresistible force which will most likely be revealed
later. This is all the successful speculator needs to know.
The stock market goes up, down, and sideways. You can make
money on the up side or the down side—you can buy long or sell

8467_Smitten_app_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 306

• 306 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

short. It should not matter to you what side of the market you are
on. You must be impersonal. When the market goes sideways and
you are confused, take a vacation.
A danger signal to watch out for: the one-day reversal, when the
high of the day is higher than the high of the previous day, but the
close of the day is below the low of the previous day, and the volume of the current day is higher than the volume of the previous
day. Beware!
If the stock you traded is going in the opposite direction from
what you expected, sell it quickly. This means your judgment was
wrong. Cut your losses.
Wait, be patient, until as many factors as possible are in your
favor. It’s the patience that makes the money.
Study the action of a stock that has made a severe break in price,
a precipitous drop. If the stock does not rebound quickly, it will
most likely fall away further. There is an inherent weakness in this
stock; the reason will be revealed at a later time.
The market is operating in future time. It has usually already
factored in current events.
It is the inception of a basic movement, the pivotal point, a
change in trend, which indicates whether to buy or sell. It is this
change in trend that, if caught, yields the most rewards.
There are two kinds of pivotal points. The reversal pivotal
point is defined as the perfect psychological time at the beginning of a major market move, a change in basic trend. It does not
matter if this is at the bottom or the top of a long-term trending
move.
The second pivotal point is called the continuation pivotal point.
The reversal pivotal point marks a definite change in direction; the
continuation pivotal point confirms it.
Be alert—major pivotal points can often be accompanied by a
heavy increase in volume.

8467_Smitten_app_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 307

LIVERMORE ’ S LAWS AND TRADING SECRETS REVEALED

• 307 •

Pivotal points provide an essential timing device, a trigger that
reveals when to enter and when to exit the market.
At the end of a bull market, watch for wild capitalization—good
stocks selling at 30, 40, 50, or 60 times their annual earnings. These
will be the same stocks that had previously traded at much lower
multiples.
Beware of wild speculative stocks that take off for no real reason,
except that they are trendy, currently favored stocks.
New highs are very important for timing. A new all-time high
can mean that the stock has broken through the overhead supply
of stock, and the line of least resistance will be strongly upward.
Many people, when they see that a stock has made a new high, sell
it immediately, then go to look for a cheaper stock.
Group action is the key to timing your move. Stocks do not move
alone when they move. If U.S. Steel climbs or drops in price, then
sooner or later, Bethlehem, Republic, and Crucible will follow
along. The premise is simple: If the basic reasons why U.S. Steel’s
business should come into or go out of favor in the stock market
are sound, then the rest of the steel group should also follow for
the same reasons.
Trade the leading stocks in the leading groups. Buy the market
leader of an industry group.
Watch the market leaders, the stocks that have led the charge
upward in a bull market. When these stocks falter and fail to make
new highs, it is often a signal that the market is turning. As the
leaders go, so goes the entire market.
Confine your studies of stock market movements to the prominent leaders of the day. If you cannot make money out of the leading active issues, you are not going to make money out of the
stock market. That is where the action is and where the money is
to be made. It also keeps your universe of stocks limited, focused,
and more easily controlled.

8467_Smitten_app_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 308

• 308 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

You should have a clear target price at which to sell if the stock
moves against you, a firm stop. And you must obey your rules!
A successful market trader must bet only on the course of highest probabilities. Buy small positions, and probe to test your judgment before you commit to a large position. Do not establish your
full position all at one time. Use probes to confirm your judgment
and timing, and to find the line of least resistance.
The trader must react quickly to the unexpected. If it is a windfall, grab it. If it is bad news, hit the road, and don’t look back or
hesitate—sell out the position.
Beware when volume gets heavy and stocks churn after a long
upward trend. This is a clue, a warning that the end of the move is
near. This is an indication that stocks are going from strong hands
to weak hands, from the professionals to the public. The public
often views this heavy volume as the mark of a vibrant, healthy
market going through a normal correction, not a top or a bottom.
The public tends to believe that the insiders are feeding out
their stock on the upward rise of a stock. They are often wrong.
They are often being fed the majority of the insider or pooled
stock after the stock has crested at new highs and is rolling over,
churning, and starting its decline. This is the time of the highest
volume. This is often the reason why a stock cannot make a new
high—there is simply too much supply hanging over the market.
This is distribution—is not always from insiders, but usually from
larger shareholders, such as mutual funds in today’s markets.

MONEY-MANAGEMENT RULES
Establish stops! You should have a clear target price at which to sell
if the stock moves against you. And you must obey your rules!
Never sustain a loss of more than 10 percent of your invested cap-

8467_Smitten_app_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 309

LIVERMORE ’ S LAWS AND TRADING SECRETS REVEALED

• 309 •

ital. Losses can be twice as expensive to make up—if you lose 50
percent, you must gain 100 percent to get even (see Table 12.1).
This is also a key timing rule.
Never meet a margin call, and never average down in your
buying.
Turn paper profits into real money periodically. Take a percentage of your winnings and put them in a safe place, like the bank,
or bonds, or an annuity. Cash was, is, and always will be king.
Always have cash in reserve. Cash is your ammunition. Livermore’s
biggest mistake was not following this rule more often.
Examine and understand the dimension of time: Time is not
money, because there may be times when your money should be
inactive. Time is time, and money is money. The successful
investor is not invested in the market all the time. There are many
times when you should be completely in cash. Often, money that
is just sitting can later be moved into the right situation once it has
revealed itself. If you are unsure of the direction of the market,
then stay out, and wait for a confirmation of the next move. This
is how to make a fortune. Patience, patience, patience is the key to
success. Don’t be in a hurry.
Take some winnings off the table after the completion of a successful trade.
Use probes to establish your full position. After an initial probe,
do not make a second move until the first probe shows you a
profit. Do not establish your full position all at once—wait until
your first trades, your early probes, have shown you a profit, then
go ahead and fill out your full position.
To be precise: First establish 20 percent of your planned position
on the first purchase, 20 percent on the second, and 20 percent on
the third. Wait for a confirmation of your judgment, then make
your final purchase of 40 percent.
Each of these purchases, or probes, is a crucial factor in establishing

8467_Smitten_app_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 310

• 310 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

your overall position. If at any time the stock moves against you, close
out all your positions, never sustaining a loss of more than 10 percent
of invested capital.
Sell the losers; let the winners ride, provided all the factors are
positive.

EMOTIONAL-CONTROL RULES
Emotional control is the most essential factor in playing the market.
Don’t anticipate! Wait until the market gives you the clues, the
signals, the hints, before you move. Move only after you have confirmation. Anticipation is a killer. Don’t make a decision based on
anticipation. The market always gives you time. If you wait for the
clues, there will be plenty of time to execute your moves.
Do not spend a lot of time trying to figure out why the price of
a particular stock moves. Rather, examine the facts themselves.
The answer lies in what the tape says, not in trying to figure out
why. Most important, never argue with the tape. It can’t hear you.
Stock traders can be convinced to move away from their own
convictions by listening to the advice of other traders, persuaded
that their judgment may be faulty. Or, in the least damaging case,
listening to others may cause indecision and bad judgment. This
indecision may cause a loss of confidence, which may well mean a
loss of money.
“Tips come from all sources—from relatives, loved ones, friends
who have just made serious investments themselves and want to
pass on their good fortune. They also come from hucksters and
criminals. Remember: All tips are dangerous. None should be
taken.
Remove hope from your trading lexicon. Hoping a stock will do
something is truly gambling. If you do not have good, solid reasons

8467_Smitten_app_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 311

LIVERMORE ’ S LAWS AND TRADING SECRETS REVEALED

• 311 •

for holding a stock position, then move on to another more logical
trade. Wishing a stock up or down has caused the downfall of many
stock market speculators. Hope walks hand in hand with greed.
Be aware of your emotions at all times. Don’t get too confident
over your wins or too despondent over your losses.
Nothing ever changes in the market. The only thing that
changes are the players, and the new players have no financial
memory of the previous major cycles—like the panic of 1907 or
the crash of 1929—because they have not experienced them. It
may be new to the speculator, but it’s not new to the market.
Always have a method of speculating, a plan of attack. And
always stick to your plan. Do not constantly change your plan.
Find a method that works emotionally for you, and stick to that
method. Stick to your own customized game.
Speculators are not investors. Their object is not to secure a
steady return on their money over a long period of time. Speculators must profit by either a rise or a fall in the price of whatever
they have decided to speculate in.
Play a lone hand. Make your decisions about your own money
by yourself. Be secretive and silent in your stock trading. Do not
disclose your winners or your losers.
The successful investor is not invested in the market all the time.
There are many times when you should be completely in cash. If
you are unsure of the direction of the market, wait.
Never lose control of your emotions when the market moves
against you. And never become elated with your successes to such
a degree that you think the market is an easy way to make money.
Never fight the tape; the tape is the truth. Seek harmony with
the tape.
Stay in the business you’re good at.
It takes four strong mental characteristics to be a superior market trader:

8467_Smitten_app_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 312

• 312 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

• Observation—The ability to observe the facts without prejudice
• Memory—The ability to remember key events correctly and
objectively
• Mathematics—The ability to calculate numbers easily; being at
home with digits
• Experience—The ability to learn, to retain knowledge gained
through experience and call upon it at will
Subliminal messages, apparent impulses, are nothing more than
the subconscious mind talking to you, calling up years of trading
experiences. On occasion, Livermore let his inner mind lead him,
even if he did not know the reason at the time. He agreed with
Aristotle: “We are the sum total of our experience.”
Emotions must be understood and harnessed before successful
speculation is possible:
• Greed is a human emotion present in all people, defined by
Webster’s dictionary as the excessive desire for acquiring or
possessing; a desire for more than one needs or deserves. We
do not know the origin of greed, all we know is that it exists
in every person.
• Fear lies ready to appear in a single heartbeat, and when it
does, it distorts reason. Reasonable people act unreasonably
when they are afraid. And they become afraid every time they
start to lose money. Their judgment becomes impaired.
• Hope lives hand in hand with greed when it comes to the
stock market. Once a trade is made, hope springs alive. It is
human nature to be hopeful, to be positive, to hope for the
best. Hope is important to the survival of the human species.
But hope, like its stock market cousins ignorance, greed, and

8467_Smitten_app_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 313

LIVERMORE ’ S LAWS AND TRADING SECRETS REVEALED

• 313 •

fear, distorts reason. Hope clouds facts, and the stock market
only deals in facts. It is like the spinning of a roulette wheel—
the little black ball tells the outcome, not greed, fear, or hope.
The result is objective and final, with no appeal.
Beware of ignorance. The market must be studied and learned,
not in a casual fashion but seriously and deeply. The stock market,
with its allure of easy money and fast action, induces people into
the foolish mishandling of their money like no other entity. The
reverse of ignorance is knowledge, and knowledge is power.
The stock market is never obvious. It is designed to fool most of
the people most of the time. These rules are often based on thinking against the grain.
You should not be in the market all the time. There are times
when you should be out of the market, for emotional as well as
economic reasons.
When the tape doesn’t agree with your decision to buy or sell,
wait until it does. Never try to rationalize your position with what
the tape is saying.
Do not give or receive stock tips; just remember: In a bull market stocks go up, in a bear market they go down. This is all anyone
needs to know, or all you need to tell them.
Stock speculators sometimes make mistakes, and know that they
are making them, but proceed anyway, only to berate themselves
later for breaking their own rules. Do not break your rules.
Never become an involuntary investor by holding a declining
stock.
Never think about buying a stock on reactions, or shorting a
stock on rallies.
Do not use the words bullish or bearish. These words fix a firm
market direction in the mind for an extended period of time.

8467_Smitten_app_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 314

• 314 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Instead use upward trend and downward trend when asked the direction you think the market is headed. Simply say: The line of least
resistance is upward, or downward, at this time.
Speculation is a business, and like any other business it takes
hard work and diligence to succeed.

C O N CL USI O N
There is nothing new on Wall Street or in stock speculation. What has happened in the past will happen again and again and again. This is because
human nature does not change, and it is human emotion that always gets
in the way of human intelligence.
Jesse Livermore

8467_Smitten_source_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 315

Sources

A great deal of the information in this book was derived from
extended interviews with Paul Livermore, Jesse Livermore’s
younger son, and Patricia Livermore, wife of Jesse Livermore Jr.
Their first-hand knowledge of Jesse Livermore was integral in
learning many new aspects of Livermore’s trading techniques and
secrets, as well as learning the facts about Livermore, the man.
BO O K S
Fisher, Kenneth L. 100 Minds That Made the Market (Woodside,
Calif.: Pacific Publishing Group, 1995).
Galbraith, John Kenneth. The Great Crash of 1929 (New York:
Time, 1962).
Klingaman, William. 1929:The Year of the Great Crash (New York:
Harper & Row, 1989).
Lefevre, Edwin. Reminiscences of a Stock Operator (New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1994).
Livermore, Jesse. How to Trade in Stocks (Greenville, S.C.: Traders
Press, 1991, 2001).
Wyckoff, Richard D. Jesse Livermore’s Methods of Trading Stocks
Windsor Books (Bright Waters, N.Y.).
N E W SPA PERS
New York Times, Various articles from 1922 to 1940.
Palm Beach Post, Palm Beach, Fla.

8467_Smitten_source_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 316

• 316 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

P E R I ODI CA L S
American Mercury, November 1926.
Brooks, John. “Annals of Finance,” The New Yorker, 6 June 1959.
Cunningham, Thomas N. “The Life and Career of Edward R.
Bradley” (thesis), Florida Atlantic University.
Harper’s Weekly, 20 December 1913.
Newsweek, 9 December 1940.
Saturday Evening Post, 4 January 1930; 11 January 1930.
Time, 9 December 1935.

8467_Smitten_source_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 317

Bibliography

CHAPTER ONE
WALL STREET

THE GREAT BEAR OF

Klingaman, William. 1929:The Year of the Great Crash (New York:
Harper & Row, 1989).
“Livermore Not in Bear Pool,” New York Times, 22 October 1929.
“Livermore Now a Bull,” New York Times, 13 November 1929.
“Stocks Driven Down as Wave of Selling Engulfs the Market,”
New York Times, 20 October 1929.
