
●

Stop orders: Similar to limit orders, stop orders are also used to
enter and exit the market but have a different set of rules attached
to them. They are placed like a limit order at a predetermined price;
however, they turn into market orders when the market reaches the
predetermined price and may be subjected to slippage.
Slippage occurs when you place a stop order at a certain price and
the market moves faster than the broker can execute the order and

CHAPTER 2

INTRODUCTION TO THE FOREX

27

you receive a worse fill. The rule is, when you place a buy order
above the current market price it is called a stop order, and when you
place a sell order below where the current price is it is also called a
stop order. Most stop orders are known as “the order placed to exit
the market at a loss after you enter”—the order used to protect your
principal equity.
●

OCO orders: Before any trader enters the market, they must create a
trading plan and follow it. Every trade should have an entry point, a
predetermined exit point for profit, and a well-thought-out exit point
for minimal loss should the market not go your way. The rule is,
every buy order should have two sells: a sell limit order for profit
and a sell stop order for loss protection. Conversely, every sell order
should have two buy orders: a buy limit order for profit and a buy
stop order for loss protection. Some trading software programs allow
the trader the ability to place an OCO (one cancels the other) order.
This means the moment the market hits either the stop order or the
sell order, it cancels the opposite order. By trading with an OCO
order, you are not left exposed with a working order after either
your stop or limit has been filled and you have been taken out of the
market. An OCO order offers you the opportunity to set a trade and
forget about it. You can literally walk away from your computer and
not be concerned with catastrophic results if you have properly
quantified your potential losses before you placed the trade. No one
knows where the next pip will go, so the best you can do is plan your
trade and trade your plan.

One of the most important and productive habits you can adopt is
properly educating yourself about the Forex before you begin trading.
If you move forward without the proper education, be prepared to lose your
money, much like in a casino. You will be trading off your “gut feel” and
emotion and placing yourself in the same position as that of a reckless
gambler. Just like the casino, the market will be there to take all your
money.
I have learned that to achieve success in trading requires learning to
understand the three critical facets of trading:
1.
2.
3.

The technical education and trading knowledge
The fundamental understanding of what determines market
movement
The psychological side of trading—the most important aspect

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

28

THE MARKET TRADERS INSTITUTE PHILOSOPHY
I founded Market Traders Institute (MTI) in 1994 and am now commonly
known in the industry as “FXCHIEF,” having trained more than 15,000
students since then.
All successful traders learn that working through frustration is the path
to success. Knowing what to do when you get frustrated is critical. Learning to overcome and master your frustrations in life, as well as in trading, is
an important part of a trader’s armor.
Strong people make as many mistakes as weak people. The difference is
that strong people admit their mistakes, laugh at them, and learn from them,
and that is how they become strong. Mistakes are part of being human. We
need to appreciate our mistakes for what they are. Just about all of life’s
important lessons can only be learned the hard way, by making mistakes.
Before you begin trading, you need to create your own mission statement to help you focus on becoming an educated, financially successful,
long-term Forex trader. I want you to think of your journey toward becoming a successful trader as a transformation of thought, a new process of
knowledge build-up, followed by:
1.
2.
3.

Disciplined thought
Disciplined rules
Disciplined action

THE THREE LEVELS OF TRADING
LEVEL 1: THE BEGINNER TRADER
Your focus is on studying, understanding, and beginning to establish your
trader’s constitution, methodology, and trading strategy to match your personality. Practice first on a demo account to become comfortable with the
trading platform before trading with real money.

LEVEL 2: THE COMPETENT TRADER
You acquire conscious competence. You begin to trade with real money,
work through your emotions, and learn to trade within the equity management rules to achieve a consistent financial return.

LEVEL 3: THE EXPERT TRADER
You acquire unconscious competence. You mechanically execute profitable
trades with no emotion. Your decisions are based on your belief,

CHAPTER 2

INTRODUCTION TO THE FOREX

29

education, established rules, and experiences to achieve a consistent
financial return.

THE REALITY OF TRADING
The reality of trading is that less than 10 percent of all traders who attempt
to trade succeed in the market. More than 90 percent of all traders who
attempt to become successful on the Forex fail.
Our professional international team at Market Traders Institute
adamantly believes in proper education first. Knowledge is the key that can
make a big difference in the success of a trader, providing a necessary edge.
In this market:
Knowledge = income
Lack of knowledge = lack of income
Correctly applied, knowledge can = financial freedom!
I cannot stress this enough: the majority of the world is locked into
managing its poverty or mediocrity. Very few people learn how to manage
any kind of success because they are not given any sort of manual or
instruction guide to success. Growing up, we learn how to survive financially from our caregivers and circles of influence. But not all mentors are
successful, leaving many to learn through trial and error.
Thousands of books have been written on how to achieve some sort of
success. I believe that success comes from acquiring the right education
about the opportunity; possessing the right work ethic; implementing the
right productive daily habits; and believing with focus, concentration,
action, and a positive attitude that your dream will come true. Successful
people keep things simple. They find beauty in simplicity. The average person, for some reason, tries very hard to complicate things, even the simplest
processes or procedures. I, on the other hand, have worked hard to take a
very complicated issue, Forex, and simplify it, enabling just about anyone
to understand how the markets work and how to trade them.

THE 21-DAY, 3 PERCENT RULE
The human mind forgets 80 percent of the knowledge it acquires within
the first three days of acquisition. During the next 18 days, it continues
the loss of information until it settles at 3 percent retention of the new
information.

30

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

In other words, “if you don’t use it, you will lose it.” This discovery was
made after years of research and has affected how our company does
business. Our focus at MTI is to provide you with productive practical,
continued education, enabling you to be trading with 90-percent-plus
recall. We provide our clients with the MTI trader’s checklist, enabling
them to cover 100 percent of all the trading issues before they trade, just as
a pilot covers his flight checklist before he takes off.

CONCLUSION
Understanding all successful trading procedures and rules before you trade
is essential for your success. You must practice them over and over again
until they become an unconscious habit. Doctors do not start operating on
their patients after a semester in school, and pilots don’t fly passengers
around the world after a weekend class of learning how to fly. Doctors practice on cadavers first. They practice a long time before they are allowed to
perform any operations—for the simple reason that other people’s lives
depend on their actions. Pilots fly with instructors long before they go solo.
The same reasoning and rules apply to trading: although you might not lose
your life if you don’t know what you are doing when you trade, you most
certainly can lose your financial stability.

C

H

A

3
P

T

E

R

SELFEMPOWERMENT
VIA TRADING
SOFTWARE
THE VALUE OF SELF EMPOWERMENT
Learning to trade successfully on the Forex is about self-empowerment and
independence. I personally believe that self-empowerment is learning how
to fish and that dependency is all about being handed a fish to stay alive. I
know there are many companies out there offering education, trading strategies, and even trading systems that claim to take you from “rags to riches”
in a short period of time. Make no mistake, there is no holy grail! You cannot
buy any indicator or trading system that works 100 percent of the time any
more than the airlines can buy an autopilot system that eliminates the need
for pilots. If you are being courted by any company that is leading you to
believe you can buy a trading system with buy and sell signals that will take
you from “rags to riches,” you will be greatly disappointed.
31
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

32

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

Let us say you created a trading system that worked 95 percent of the
time or that allowed you to double your money every few months just by
following the trading signals. If you created such a trading system, would
you sell it for $1,000? or $3,000, $5,000, $10,000, or even $50,000? I
would think not, because if you could create such a trading system, all you
would need to do is walk into any major financial institution like the Bank
of America or the Royal Bank of Scotland and show proof that your automated system works. If it did, the bank would likely be willing to pay you
$1 billion or more for it.
Just as there is no perfect trading system, there is no autopilot system that works without a pilot. I very much doubt that human beings
will ever put their lives on the line with a computer or autopilot system in
an airplane without a pilot. We all have bought enough electronic equipment in our lives—TVs, VCRs, cameras, and so forth—to know they
all fail eventually. Don’t put your hard-earned money in a get-rich-quick
scheme.
Pilots are educated and trained to fly proficiently before they are even
shown where the autopilot system button is. I will never forget back in
1984 when I got my private pilot’s license. The first time I got into the
cockpit with my instructor I asked him where the autopilot button was. He
looked at me and said, “If you ever ask me that question again before you
get your private pilot’s license, I will throw you out of my class.”
Well, I never asked that question again, even after I got my license. I did
eventually learn how to engage the autopilot function and will have to
say, the autopilot system is not a fail-safe function without the close monitoring of a pilot. As powerful as such systems are, when things start to go
wrong, they cannot make spilt-second decisions in the best interest of
the passengers. They can only do what they are programmed to do, and
there are too many variables in flying to program absolutely everything.
Autopilot systems do not work 100 percent of the time, they have their
limitations.
As a trader, you will learn that, from time to time, the trading environment will be ideal enough to use an autopilot system. There are some good
ones, but they don’t work all the time. You need to realize that the market
can turn turbulent at any time, and if, all of a sudden, it does turn turbulent,
you will have to have the capability to sit in the captain’s chair and bring the
aircraft back to the airport without any major incident. That is truly successful trading.

CHAPTER 3

SELF-EMPOWERMENT VIA TRADING SOFTWARE

33

I will never forget September 11, 2001. I was sitting in my office at
home and had been in a few trading positions for a couple of days on four
different currencies. All of a sudden, they all took off like rockets in the
opposite direction of my positions. Thank goodness I was not using an autopilot trading system or I could have been financially wiped out that day. I
was stopped out on all four currencies and was able to preserve what profit
I had made.
The reality is that to become a successful trader, you must go
through an education process no different than that of becoming a pilot,
a physician, or of any profession that requires a specific discipline to be
mastered.
I never cease to be amazed at all the “marketing gurus” who start
Forex education training companies or attempt to sell Forex “buy and
sell signals” and prey on the ignorant by promising them untold fortunes
on the Forex for the bargain price of $995. I am even more amazed at
the massive amounts of people willing to purchase these products. But I
am never surprised when they call our office and share their experience of
buying a Forex program that failed or disappointed them. These traders
are now pleading for help because with their current system, they keep
on losing money and have no idea how to make it back. Clearly, what they
purchased doesn’t work for them in the market.
I guess experience is what you get when you don’t get what you want.
A fair question is, did the system truly fail or was it the system found
between their ears that failed?
You must be taught how to use the best tools available for whatever
profession you want to pursue. If you are going to be a ditch digger, you
need to be taught how to use a backhoe as well as a shovel and be taught in
which situations one or the other should be used.
Learning to trade on Forex, from someone who is already successful at
trading, is critical. Finding out which trading tools they use is equally
important. Now is not the time to go bargain hunting for tools. Bargain
hunting for free or low-cost trading tools is like learning to navigate on the
ocean with a compass in a 12-foot canoe—clearly the wrong vessel for
the environment. A solid built, 1,100-foot, state-of-the-art cruise ship with
all the latest gauges for weather would be wiser. With so much at stake, do
not take a shortcut on paying for quality trading tools.
When it comes to trading on Forex, I highly recommend the MTI 4.0
charting package (see Figure 3-1).

34

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

FIGURE 3-1 Four Major Currency Pairs on Four-Hour Time Frame
Charts (EUR/USD; GBP/USD; CHF/USD; JPY/USD)

It has more than 150 trading indicators that can be used in creating
trading systems that align with your trading personality. These systems can
be back-tested over many years instantaneously, allowing a trader to see
if their trading strategy is a good one, or if they are working in the
wrong direction. You can create a trading strategy that aligns with your
personality, program it into a system, back-test it, and, if it is productive,
have the trading system send you alerts via e-mail or cell phone when an
entry and or exit signal is triggered (see Figure 3-2).
The most important part about a trading system is that it must be
simple and easy to use. Whether it is done visually or created by a
trading system, your trading strategy must have three very important
components:
1.
2.
3.

It must be able to find the current market direction.
It must have a consistent entry strategy that works consistently.
It must have two very clear exit strategies, one for protecting you
against major losses and one for capturing a profit.

CHAPTER 3

SELF-EMPOWERMENT VIA TRADING SOFTWARE

FIGURE 3-2

35

EUR/USD (One-Hour Chart)

HOW TO DETERMINE MARKET DIRECTION
The MTI 4.0 charting program helps traders determine market direction. In
Figure 3-3, you can see a line that goes above and below the price movement
against time that is monitored by a computer creating a candlestick formation
(candlestick formations are a way of monitoring the open, high, low, and
close market prices in any given time period). This line is called a moving
trend line; a visual indicator of market direction or perhaps the current trend.
When you turn on your computer and begin to review your charts on any time
frame, if the current candle is above that line, the market on that time frame
is in a potential uptrend, and if the current candle is below that line, the market on that time frame is in a potential downtrend.
No matter what time frame you trade in, this simple exercise accompanied with this system can help you determine trend direction.
The indicators on a chart can become like the autopilot button on an
airplane, however, as discussed previously, airplanes don’t fly themselves—
they need pilots. Before you use an autopilot program, you need to understand
how it has been programmed.

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

36

FIGURE 3-3

EUR, CHF, GBP, JPY/USD (Four-Hour Charts)

FIGURE 3-4

Indicators and Oscillators

CHAPTER 3

SELF-EMPOWERMENT VIA TRADING SOFTWARE

37

Indicators and oscillators (which are nothing more than mathematical
equations that are monitoring price movement against time displayed via
lines on a chart; see Figure 3-4) are one way to determine market direction.
Looking at the moving trend line, on any time frame, can help you determine market direction on that time frame.
One mistake traders often make is believing that a trading system created
for a 30-minute chart will work on all time frames, such as a one-hour chart
or a daily chart. Sometimes it does work, but typically, as you move a trading
system from one time frame to another, you may want to adjust the settings
of such a system to optimize its performance on that time frame. It is vital to
find trading software that will not only allow you to change these settings but
also instantaneously back-test the results as found incorporated in MTI 4.0.

USING INDICATORS TO DETERMINE AN ENTRY POINT
Once you have determined market direction, you need an entry trading
strategy that works more times than not. Every trader wants the market to
move in his or her direction from entry—there is nothing worse than getting in a trade and having the market run in the opposite direction. One of
the most important traits of a successful person is that when they are trying
to make a productive, empowered decision, they gather facts. The more
facts they can gather, the more informed their decision.
Trading is 10 percent skill and 90 percent emotion, which is why our
emotions frequently stand in the way of making good decisions. Anytime
you need to make a decision, do yourself a favor and do not make it while
you are in an emotional state. Take the time to calm down and place yourself in a logical state of mind. If you do that, you will open up the left side
of your brain, where all your knowledge is stored, where all your intellectual recall is, and you will have access to everything you have learned in
your past that is productive. You will begin to make an educated, positive,
and productive decision.
Trading indicators can keep you from using the right side of your brain,
where all your emotions are stored. You can program buy and sell signals
that have no emotion, they just monitor price movement against time.
Using different indicators together can create effective entry points,
like the ones found in Figure 3-5, but they need to be manually monitored.
The trading system you are looking at in Figure 3-5 is called the MTI Trend
Scalper.
The two moving lines overlapping the candles are moving trend lines,
which can act as buy and sell signals. The line closest to the candles is a
moving inner trend line and the other one is a moving outer trend line.

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

38

FIGURE 3.5

EUR/USD (Daily Chart)

When the inner trend line crosses over from the north to the south, it is time
to sell, and when it crosses over from the south to the north, it is time to buy.
In Figure 3-5 (top), you can see that if you used the moving trend lines
as your entry and exit signals, right around March 10, 2006, you would
have bought the euro at approximately 1.2000, or when the lines crossed,
and sold it around June 15, 2006, at 1.2800, when the lines crossed again
for an 800-pip gain. That is an $8,000 profit from a $1,000 investment from
a three-month trade (which is considered long-term trading).
But where do you get in if the moving trend lines have already crossed?
Do you have to sit there for another three to six months before they cross
over again to find another trading opportunity? The answer is no. You can
have two options. You either educate yourself how the markets move
without using indicators or you learn to add additional indicators to your
trading system like the waving line you see at the bottom of the chart in
Figure 3-5. This indicator, called the MTI Trend Tracker, monitors the
waves of the market. As the market moves, it resembles the waves of the
ocean. The market does not just take off in one direction, it waves as it
moves, rallying and retracing, ebbing and flowing, three steps up, two steps

CHAPTER 3

SELF-EMPOWERMENT VIA TRADING SOFTWARE

39

back, three steps up, perhaps one and one-half steps back before it goes
back up again as it creates its trend making higher highs and higher lows.
The greatest part about a trading system is that it is constantly monitoring the movement of the market, projecting directions with entry and
exit points 24 hours a day even while you sleep or work. Using a trading
system allows you to control your trading in the market, rather than the
market controlling you, and to come and go, or turn off your computer,
without having to do all kinds of new technical analysis of the market to
catch up from where you left off.
If the lines overlapping the candles crossed while you were away, the
MTI Trend Tracker allows you to enter the market at a price point where the
market will more than likely reverse and rally back up in your buying direction from entry, which is what every trader wants. Look at the MTI Trend
Tracker indicator where you see the bold up-arrows (see Figure 3-5, bottom). When the moving line is going south and then U-turns to the north,
the market should follow. Look at the price movement of the market and
how it began to rally again. This trading system works just as effectively in
a downtrend as it does in an uptrend, as you can see in Figure 3-6. All the
rules are the same but in the opposite direction.
When the lines overlapping the candles cross from the north to the
south, it is time to sell. Once again, if you turn on your charts and the moving trendlines have already crossed, giving a short signal, you can enter
when the MTI Trend Tracker indicator moving north U-turns to the south.
Look at the market movement on the charts after the U-turn toward the
south. Using trading indicators eliminates a lot of the guessing and allows
you to focus on developing a trading strategy that works consistently, on a
time frame that suits your personality. Some traders like fast action and
want to turn their computer into a video game—they want to quickly scalp
the market. In and out, in and out, perhaps 10 times a day. If you’re one of
those traders who enjoys scalping the market, you may want to trade using
5-minute to 30-minute time frames or charts. If you enjoy day trading,
use this trading system on one-hour to four-hour time frames, and if you
enjoy long-term trading, use this trading system on four-hour, daily, or
weekly charts In any of these cases, you let the computer do the majority of
the work.
It looks easy, doesn’t it? Just like an autopilot system. If it were that
easy, however, we would all be living in gated communities and flying our
jets to our beach-house estates every weekend. Of course, it isn’t.
Most traders make their money during trends and lose it when the
market gets turbulent or begins to go sideways. Sideways movement in the
