
Bullish Harmonic Trade Management Model
A

8

C

0.382

0

0.5

2.

0

B

RS

RE

VE

0.618

AL

TR

EN

DL

IN

E

0.61

INITIAL PROFIT OBJECTIVE
(I.P.O.): 0.382 OR 0.618 OF
PATTERN HIGH (A) TO LOW (D)

2
38

TR

L
AI

ER

0.
PROFIT PROTECTION ZONE

D

0.886

(P.P.Z.)

POTENTIAL REVERSAL ZONE

(P.R.Z.)

X

STOP LOSS ZONE

(S.L.Z.)

TIME

TIME
Figure 11.3

(Copyright HarmonicTrader.com, LLC, 2010)

210

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

General Electric
(GE): Daily
The chart in Figure 11.4 was sent with the original trade recommendation to all
HarmonicTrader.com members on October 17, 2003 via the Email Advisory section of the
website. As the chart illustrates, GE was forming a distinct Bullish Bat on the daily chart.

Figure 11.4

In the email, I wrote:
“General Electric (GE) is approximately 1 point from the Potential
Reversal Zone (PRZ) of a Bullish Bat with three numbers between 27.5028. I would look to buy the stock in this PRZ below $28. The stop loss
should be placed at 25.50, risking approximately 2 points in the trade.
This is a short-term trade with an initial profit objective of 32.80.”
(To review the actual recommendation, please go to
http://www.HarmonicTrader.com/members/harmonic/email/
gebatbull.htm.)

Chapter 11 The Harmonic Trade Management System

211

The defining level was clearly the convergence of the 0.886 XA retracement at 27.50
and the 1.618 BC projection at 27.65 (see Figure 11.5). Although the Alternate 1.27 AB=CD
completed at 28.05, the other numbers pointed to the area under $28.

Figure 11.5

Although certain numbers within a PRZ may possess greater significance than others, the
entire range of numbers must be considered more than a single price point. After testing the
entire PRZ, the optimal execution area for the trade will depend upon the nature of the price
action at the pattern’s completion point.

212

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The chart in Figure 11.6 of price action in the PRZ shows an ideal reversal after a complete
test of this range. On November 18, the trade was executed at the 0.886 retracement at 27.50.
GE reversed on this day after slightly exceeding the bottom of the PRZ.

Figure 11.6

Chapter 11 The Harmonic Trade Management System

213

The spread of Fibonacci numbers at the bottom of the chart represents the basic mid-point
time projection completions for the pattern. Although the CD leg completed after the minimum
0.382 time projection, the equivalent (1.0) calculation was not reached until a few weeks after
the reversal was complete (see Figure 11.7).

Figure 11.7

Although GE rallied the day following the reversal, as the stock gapped up and continued
higher, the more substantial breakout move did not occur until after the equivalent time
projection (1.0) was reached.

214

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Figure 11.8 is a classic example of importance of time when assessing the Profit Protection
Zone (PPZ). Up until the equivalent time projection completion, any small profit should have
been defended. Essentially, GE needed to get going beyond the equivalent time projection
completion, if this Bullish Bat was going to yield a significant reversal.

Figure 11.8

After hitting the equivalent time projection completion, the stock started to break out and
rally toward the 0.382 Initial Profit Objective (IPO) at 29.50. The downtrend line from the peak
of the pattern converged with the IPO, confirming the importance of this resistance.

Chapter 11 The Harmonic Trade Management System

215

The first upside target in the $29.50 area was taken out, while maintaining a steady uptrend
from the low. The next target at the 0.618 was quickly reached, as GE rallied impressively and
with a strong bullish continuation. On November 24th, the stop loss was moved from (27.50)
to 28.50, securing 1 point. On December 18th, the stop loss was moved from 28.50 to 30,
securing 3 points, establishing a wider PPZ (see Figure 11.8). Beyond this point, the position
should be held, as long as the uptrend and the 0.382 trailing stop remain intact. The real
work in a valid pattern like this Bullish Bat is monitoring the price action in the PRZ and the
corresponding reaction after the reversal has completed.
In this case for GE, the price and time limits were clearly defined in advance. The setup
possessed a distinct bullish pattern to buy the stock in the 27.50–28 level. The stock reversed
ideally after the entire range of numbers was tested. Beyond the execution, the trade management was quite simple. The Harmonic Trade Management system effectively handled the setup
by allowing the reversal to ride while utilizing a well-defined uptrend line and a 0.382 trailing
stop as the exit strategy.
Although the 0.382 and 0.618 profit targets were exceeded convincingly, it is still important
to monitor the price levels as measured from the pattern’s high point to reversal low to establish
new price objectives, especially as the reversal moves further. Beyond the 0.618, the price
measurements of the 0.786, 0.886, 1.0, 1.27, and so on should be considered as well. The
spread of Harmonic Trading ratios is illustrated in Figure 11.8.

216

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

NASDAQ 100 December 2003 Mini-Contract
(NQ_Z3): 30-Minute
The NASDAQ December 2003 Mini-contract formed the Bullish Crab in Figure 11.9 on a
30-minute chart. I outlined this harmonic support in my pre-market Mini-Room post on
HarmonicTrader.com November 19, 2003. I discussed the importance of the 1360 area for
the NQ stating. In the email, I stated,
“For today’s immediate action, the NQ is up 6 1/2. I expect the NQ to try
to refill today’s upside gap.…I would look to buy the NQ after a reversal
from this retest in the 1360 area for a move back to 1375.”
(To review the actual recommendation, please go to
http://www.HarmonicTrader.com/members/harmonic/home/
miniroom111903.htm.)

Figure 11.9

Chapter 11 The Harmonic Trade Management System

217

The setup possessed a convergence of numbers that defined the 1360 area as critical
short-term support. The most significant number at pattern’s completion point was the 1.618 XA
projection at 1360.40. The 3.618 BC projection at 1362 complemented this harmonic support.
The chart in Figure 11.10 of the price action in the PRZ shows an ideal reversal after a
complete test of this harmonic support range. Although the NQ declined sharply into this PRZ,
it clearly stabilized and reversed almost exactly from the lower range of the harmonic support.

Figure 11.10

The interesting aspect of this reversal was the time consideration at the pattern’s
completion. The chart in Figure 11.10 shows the spread of Fibonacci time calculations, as
measured from the mid-point (B) and projected to the completion of the pattern.

218

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Initially, the CD leg of the Crab pattern completed at the minimum 0.382 time projection.
Although this marked the low in the reversal, the price action required more time to stabilize,
consolidate, and rally from the PRZ. It was not until the equivalent (1.0) time projection was
reached that the reversal started to rally dramatically (see Figure 11.11).

Profit
Protection
Zone (P.P.Z.)

Figure 11.11

The first upside target for the trade was the 1377 area at the 0.382 IPO as measured from
the pattern. The NQ exceeded this target, maintaining a steady uptrend throughout the day.
Despite the impressive rally through the 0.382 IPO, the NQ stalled, as it failed to test the next
target at the 0.618 and violated the intra-day uptrend line (see Figure 11.12).

Chapter 11 The Harmonic Trade Management System

219

Initial
Protection
Objective
(I.P.O.)

Profit
Protection
Zone (P.P.Z.)

Figure 11.12

Such a lack of continuation and violation of a distinct trend line are clear signs of a stalling
reversal. In this case, especially in a day trade, the long position should be covered.

220

Harmonic Trading: Volume One
STOP LOSS ZONE (S.L.Z.)

X
D

0.886

POTENTIAL REVERSAL ZONE

(P.R.Z.)

PROFIT PROTECTION ZONE

(P.P.Z.)

0

VE

0

38

2

RS

2.

0.

RE

0.5

0.382

TR

AL

B

TR

0.618

A
IL
ER

EN
DL
IN
E

0.6

C

18

A

TIME

INITIAL PROFIT OBJECTIVE
(I.P.O.): 0.382 OR 0.618 OF
PATTERN LOW (A) TO HIGH (D)

TIME

Bearish Harmonic Trade Management Model
Figure 11.13
Copyright HarmonicTrader.com, LLC, 2010

Chapter 11 The Harmonic Trade Management System

221

Standard and Poor’s 500 September 2003
Mini-Contract
(ES_U3): 15-Minute
The Standard and Poor’s 500 September 2003 Mini-contract formed this Bearish Gartley on the
15-minute chart shown in Figure 11.14. The setup possessed a convergence of three numbers
between 1018 and 1019.25 that defined critical short-term resistance.

Figure 11.14

The contract reversed after testing all of the numbers in the PRZ, including the most
significant number of the pattern, the AB=CD completion point at the 1018 level. The 0.786 XA
retracement and the 1.618 BC projection just under the 1020 level complemented this
harmonic resistance nicely.

222

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

I outlined this harmonic support in my pre-market Mini-Room Advisory post on
HarmonicTrader.com on September 15, 2003.
“I would look for an early short position in this 1018 area.”
(To review the actual recommendation, please go to
http://www.HarmonicTrader.com/members/harmonic/home/
miniroom091503.htm.)

Figure 11.15

The chart in Figure 11.15 of price action in the PRZ shows an ideal reversal after a
complete test the harmonic resistance. The ES stalled briefly following the initial test and
declined sharply soon after violating the lower range of the PRZ.

Chapter 11 The Harmonic Trade Management System

223

The interesting aspect of this reversal was the time consideration at the pattern’s
completion. The chart in Figure 11.16 shows the spread of Fibonacci time calculations, as
measured from the mid-point (B) and projected to the completion of the pattern. Initially, the
CD leg of the Gartley pattern completed at the minimum 0.382 time projection. Although the
initial test occurred at this minimum time constraint, the price action required more time to
consolidate before the ultimate reversal. Although the ES already reversed sharply by the time
the equivalent (1.0) time calculation was reached, the 0.382 time objective was an effective
minimum time filter to validate the pattern’s completion.

Figure 11.16

It is important to remember that the time requirement for a pattern’s completion is not as
important as the price objective. The key is to execute in the PRZ, as long as the minimum
0.382 time objective has been reached.

224

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

As the ES reversed, the IPO for this trade was set at the 0.382 retracement at 1015.68, as
measured from the pattern. The ES exceeded this target, maintaining a steady downtrend
throughout the day. Despite the impressive decline through the 38.2% IPO early in the session,
the ES stalled for the rest of the day until the after-market (see Figure 11.17).

Figure 11.17

Chapter 11 The Harmonic Trade Management System

225

In this situation, the trade could have been covered after the 0.382 IPO was tested.
Although the ES sank nominally lower later in the day, the lack of downside continuation in
these situations should signal a warning that the reversal may not trade much past the IPO.
The ES possessed a nice downtrend after the reversal was complete. The price action dropped
sharply at the open and continued lower to the 0.382 IPO until midday (see Figure 11.18). The
trend line and the 0.382 trailer were not broken until the overnight session the following day.

Figure 11.18

Although the sharp sell-off toward the end of the day traded down to the 0.618 profit target,
the stalling action at the 0.382 I.P.O. triggered the short position to be covered in the1015 area.
The violation of the trend line and the 38.2% retracement were distinct indications that this
Bearish Gartley was likely to yield only a small profit. Despite the lackluster reversal, this trade
in the ES exemplifies the entire Harmonic Trading process. A clear pattern was defined, the
trade was executed in the PRZ, and the Harmonic Trade Management rules effectively guided
the decision to cover the short position at a profit.
Furthermore, it is important to understand that harmonic patterns are not “end-all-be-all”
price structures. I believe a common misconception is that harmonic patterns signal monster
reversal every time. This is just not the case. In fact, this example of the ES is probably more
common for most harmonic setups than the “home-run scenario.” Especially with intra-day
patterns, it is important to aggressively take partial profits at the IPO targets and apply the
trade management rules strictly.

226

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Dow Jones Industrial Diamonds
(DIA): 30-Minute
The Dow Jones Industrial Diamonds formed this intra-day Bearish Butterfly on a 30-minute
chart (see Figure 11.19). The setup possessed a convergence of numbers that defined the 96
level as critical short-term resistance. The Diamonds reversed exactly at the most significant
number at the pattern’s completion point—the 1.27 XA projection at 96.07. The AB=CD and the
2.24 BC projection complemented this harmonic resistance in the 96 area.

Figure 11.19

Chapter 11 The Harmonic Trade Management System

227

This chart in Figure 11.20 of price action in the PRZ shows an ideal reversal after a
complete test of this harmonic resistance. The Diamonds quickly reversed from this zone and
declined sharply following the completion of the pattern.

Figure 11.20

228

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Figure 11.21 shows the spread of Fibonacci time calculations, as measured from the
mid-point (B) and projected to the completion of the pattern. The CD leg rallied sharply into
this PRZ but reversed exactly at the equivalent (1.0) time calculation. Perfect! Not only did
the 1.0 time calculation result in the exact reversal point, but the PRZ defined the precise
resistance level for the trade. Quite simply, it does not get any more ideal within the Harmonic
Trading approach than this!

Figure 11.21

The Diamonds reversed sharply from this harmonic resistance and continued convincingly
lower. The first downside target, the 0.382 IPO at 95.70 was easily taken out, as the reversal
established a decisive downtrend from the pattern’s high point. The next target at the 0.618 was
quickly reached, as the Diamonds declined rapidly through this next target area. In fact, after
the Diamonds hit the 0.618 target, the selling intensified, as the price action quickly tested the
0.886 and broke down past the pattern low.
The strong bearish continuation was particularly evidenced by the consistent formation of
lower lows and lower highs formed by each price bar. In addition, throughout the day of the
reversal, the Diamonds failed to break above any of the prior 30-minute highs.

Chapter 11 The Harmonic Trade Management System

229

After the pattern was complete, a steady sell-off ensued. This situation exemplifies the
“home-run” reversal. The price action reversed exactly from the PRZ and possessed a
magnificent bearish continuation. Each profit objective was clearly violated—even beyond the
1.618 extension of the pattern (see Figure 11.22). After the IPO targets at the 0.382 and
the 0.618 had been exceeded, the most important consideration in the trade management
of the position was the trend line from the reversal.

Figure 11.22

In this situation, the Diamonds formed a distinct downtrend that was eventually violated
several days after the reversal was complete. The final trigger to cover the short occurred when
the Diamonds took out the 0.382 trailing stop at 94.25.

230

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

It is important to note that not all valid harmonic patterns yield such a reversal. However,
the Harmonic Trading Trade Management System is designed to allow enough “breathing
room” for these reversals to assert themselves. In this case, the exact reversal and strong
bearish continuation were the critical elements that identified this price action as a significant
move (see Figure 11.23).

Figure 11.23

Chapter 11 The Harmonic Trade Management System

231

Partial Trade Management
As I mentioned previously, depending upon your trading preference, it can be advantageous
to divide each position into two (or sometimes three) portions, securing partial profits at each
target level while holding a portion of the original position for a larger move. I believe that this
strategy is quite effective, especially when price action is volatile. One suggestion in this
strategy is to place limit orders to cover a predetermined amount of the entire position exactly
at the 0.382 and 0.618 IPO targets.
For simplicity’s sake, I demonstrate the Harmonic Trade Management System with only a
two-unit strategy. I typically secure a portion of the position when I get a trend line or 0.382
trailer violation, and cover the remainder at a more significant price objective depending upon
the continuation of the reversal trend. I believe all traders have their own preference regarding
this approach, and I leave it up to you to consider the best method for securing profits.
However, I believe it is most advantageous to manage profitable trades in a multi-position
manner.

Trade Management Tips
Identifying harmonic patterns is not a difficult skill to master. After studying the various patterns
and applying the Fibonacci ratios, the trade as defined by the pattern completion point is usually quite clear. However, each position must be must be handled properly to maximize profits
and minimize losses. Although two harmonic trades may possess the same patterns with identical Fibonacci ratios, their outcomes can be completely different. Therefore, there are some
simple guidelines to follow during the management stage of a trade after it has been executed:
• Be prepared for anything. Although the clearest setups can indicate excellent trading
opportunities, it does not relieve the responsibility of monitoring the trade and assuming
everything will automatically work out. Therefore, it is critical to monitor price action
closely.
• Follow the trade management rules (execute in the PRZ). The trade management
rules are based upon years of harmonic research. Although they serve more as general
guidelines, these strategies seek to optimize decisions in the trade management
process by reducing relative risk while maximizing profit opportunities.
• Respect the price bars at the harmonic levels. The most critical information in a
harmonic setup is derived from the price action at the convergence of numbers at a
pattern’s completion point. It is essential to closely examine how price action is
responding when it hits a harmonic area. The nature of price action in well-defined
pattern completion zones typically will indicate the overall validity of a setup. However,
price action that fails to reverse in this area indicates that the predominant trend is quite
strong.
• Look for continuation. After price action has reversed from a pattern’s completion
point, it should clearly continue in that direction. Price action that merely stalls or fails to
move convincingly in the reversal trend usually indicates a potential failure.

232

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

• Losses are a part of the business. Although a majority of harmonic setups provide
some degree of tradable reactions on the initial test of distinct pattern completions, a
percentage of trades will fail. It is just a fact of the business of trading. The key is to cut
the losses to a minimum and move on to the next trade. Trade executions will improve
as experience develops the ability to quickly read the early signs of a reversal.
Recognizing such failures, and reacting quickly to violated trade setups, preserves
capital and prevents small losses from turning intro disastrous draw downs!
• If in doubt, get out! If you don’t feel right about a trade or a position, close it out or
don’t take the trade. It is much safer to miss out on an opportunity than it is to anguish
over a situation that is not inherently correct.
Trade management strategies of harmonic patterns require discipline and patience. Although
this system attempts to maximize potential reversals, actual trade situations can involve many
external factors that can influence the decision-making process. These rules are effective in
allowing the market to offer the necessary price signals to validate reversals. Although there
is room for discretion within this trade management system, these guidelines offer effective
methods for handling trades and deciphering price action to maximize profits and minimize
losses after a trade has been executed.

Chapter 12

Pattern Violations

When distinct harmonic patterns form, the anticipation of a valid reversal can frequently create
a biased perspective of the assessment of the opportunity. For example, a perfect Bearish Bat
could indicate a great selling opportunity. However, strong price action can blow out distinct
patterns like these and trigger a continuation of the predominant trend. As the section “Warning
Signs in the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)” in Chapter 10 illustrated, these situations frequently provide clear indication regarding the potential failure of a pattern. When this happens, there
are defined strategies that can capitalize on the continuation of the predominant trend. The key
to profiting from these situations is to utilize a strict trade management strategy with tight stop
loss limits. After the pattern has been violated, the focus of any reversal pattern trade should
examine the price action beyond the PRZ.
When trading a failed pattern setup, the trade management rules are more important, as this
strategy leaves little room for anything other than the sharp continuation of the predominant
trend beyond the violated PRZ. In addition, the reversal play can be tricky and frustrating, as
frequent stop-outs can occur before the price continues in the predominant trend. Despite
the potentially volatile price action associated with a failed pattern, these situations—when
identified correctly—do offer excellent trading opportunities.
As I discussed previously, harmonic patterns define critical price levels within the
predominant trend. Although patterns can accurately identify such pivot points, it is common
for the predominant trend to eventually violate these defined price levels. These situations often
provide ample opportunity to assess the validity of a particular pattern and offer specific price
action signals that direct trading decisions.
The idea of trading a failed pattern bases its logic in the predominance of the existing trend.
Since price bar warning signs frequently indicate potentially flawed harmonic patterns, they
conversely can signal another opportunity of trading with the trend. Because pattern failures
are a sign of an overwhelming predominant trend, these technical events can serve as
important continuation signals. Instead of getting locked into the anticipation of a reversal at
the completion of the pattern, this strategy takes more of a neutral approach. Trading executions are not limited to executing simple pattern completions. Moreover, strategies that take
