 His bread and butter was unusual-risk auto insurance, but Ringwalt was willing to insure any risk—bootleggers, lion tamers, you name it—that nobody else wanted, since the premiums on such were typically higher. He was known for underwriting radio station treasure hunts in cities around the country. Typically, a station would broadcast a series of clues, hinting at the location of a $100,000 bank draft. Ringwalt was liable if the draft was discovered—quite unlikely, given that it was Ring-wait who hid them, usually in a lipstick container underground. His clues were obscure, along the lines of “A dandelion is not a rose; you are within a block when you pass by Joe’s.” 31 He had to pay up only once, in San Francisco. 
 Ringwalt stated his philosophy in simple terms: “There is no such thing as a bad risk. There are only bad rates.” 32 This was an insight worth its weight in gold. Buffett, who had learned this truth at the racetrack, felt that Ringwalt was another of his guys. Each liked to take risks, but only when the odds favored them. Ringwalt also was possibly the cheapest of the long line of tightwads in Buffett’s acquaintance. He even left his coat in the office when he went downtown for lunch so as to avoid a coat check. 
 In 1967, Buffett asked if Ringwalt could stop by Kiewit Plaza to discuss a matter that Buffett said would take only fifteen minutes. By then, Buffett had learned from Charles Heider, an Omaha broker, how much it would take to persuade Ringwalt to part with National Indemnity. 
 “How does it happen that you never sold your company?” Buffett asked. 
 “Because only crooks and bankrupt people have wanted it.” 
 “What other reason?” 
 “I would not want the other stockholders to take less per share than I would receive myself.” 
 “What else?” Buffett prodded him. 
 “I would not want my employees to worry about losing their jobs.” 
 “What else ?” Buffett insisted. 
 “I would want it to remain in Omaha.” 
 “What else?” 
 “Isn’t that enough?” 
 “What is your stock worth?” Buffett asked, getting to the point. 
 “The market value is $33 per share, but the stock is worth $50 per share.” 
 “I will take it,” Buffett said. 33 
 The total price was $8.6 million. The apparent riddle was why a New Bedford fabric mill would want to acquire an Omaha insurance company. But Buffett did not think of Berkshire as necessarily a textile company, but as a corporation whose capital ought to be deployed in the greenest possible pastures. 
 Whereas textiles, which required reinvestment in plant and equipment, were cash-consuming, insurance was cash -generating . Premiums were collected up-front; claims were paid out only later. In the interim, an insurance company could invest the funds, known in the trade as the “float.” 
 Traditionally, insurers had managed their float conservatively, keeping far more capital than needed. But Buffett, who had thought long and hard about insurance since his early fling with GEICO, thought that float from insurance could be as dynamic as rocket fuel. Float was merely money, and an insurance firm was, in effect, a conduit for in-vestable cash. 
 Buffett’s view would soon be a commonplace, but at the time, insurance was a backwater. ‖ Many insurance companies didn’t even bother to publish their earnings, and few investors were interested in seeing them. Charles Heider, who brokered the deal, said, “Buffett understood float before anyone in the country.” 
 Once Buffett had gobbled up National Indemnity, Berkshire had a stream of funds for him to play with. In successive years, Berkshire acquired Sun Newspapers of Omaha Inc., a group of weekly papers in Omaha, and the far bigger Illinois National Bank & Trust, in Rockford, Illinois. The Rockford bank was run by Eugene Abegg, who had taken charge in 1931, when it was virtually worthless and when other banks in town were failing. He was another of the nose-to-the-grind-stone, Depression-schooled, Grandpa Buffett-type figures that Buffett seemed to produce from central casting whenever he bought a business. From his 1930s beginnings, Abegg had proceeded to build a $100 million base of deposits and an earnings-to-assets ratio (the key measure in banking) that was close to the highest among large commercial banks. 34 
 Most older entrepreneurs such as Abegg are eager to retire when they sell out, and the new owners (while praising their storied careers) usually are anxious to show them the door. Buffett was different. Running a bank, a claims office, or a retail chain was out of his arc, and he had no desire to try. Indeed, he felt, if he didn’t like the way the business was run, why buy it? 
 He looked for a type: the self-starter with a proven record. What is interesting is that they stuck with him. Abegg, who was seventy-one when he sold to Buffett, continued to manage under Buffett’s ownership—as did Jack Ringwalt at National Indemnity and Ben Rosner at Diversified. (Abegg would run the bank until he was eighty.) 
 None of these multimillionaires needed to work, but Buffett understood that most people, regardless of what they say, are looking for appreciation as much as they are for money. He made it clear that he was depending on them, and he underlined this by showing admiration for their work and by trusting them to run their own operations. 
 One time, a discontented fabric buyer at Sears, Roebuck called Buffett and tried to pull an end run around Ken Chace. The buyer reminded Buffett that they had a common friend from college, and asked him to change the salesman on his account. Buffett despised the old-boy routine (it appealed to sentiment, not reason) and bluntly told the man from Sears that such matters were up to Chace. 35 Naturally, such shows of loyalty only increased Chace’s dedication to Buffett. 
 But as Buffett plowed Berkshire’s capital into insurance, banking, and publishing, he continued to siphon it out of textiles. In 1968—three years after promising to sell the same goods from the same plants—he closed the smaller of Berkshire Hathaway’s mills, in Rhode Island, which was irreversibly tied to cotton fabrics and was doomed by the dwindling market for such niceties as petticoats and dress stiffeners. The onetime king of cotton was down to a single mill—the factory in New Bedford. A year later, even the Cove Street plant stopped spinning cotton, the business launched by Horatio Hathaway, leaving only rayon linings and synthetic curtains. 
 And Buffett was keeping his thumb on every capital outlay down to the office pencil sharpener. The minutes of Berkshire’s “finance committee”—convened, one summer, over the telephone between New Bedford and Buffett’s vacation haunt in California—suggest that no expense was too trifling to escape his scrutiny: 

 Voted: To approve the purchase of a secondhand Reiner Warper and Creel at an approximate cost of $11,110. 
 Voted: To approve the purchase of 50 secondhand 64 inch XD looms at an approximate cost of $71,160, installed. 
 Voted: To approve the repair of office building roofs at an approximate cost of $9,340, and the repair of the shipping room floor at an approximate cost of $9,940. 36 

 Corresponding with Chace on the risk of deadbeats, Buffett specifically reminded him not to trust in anything but cash: 

 Also, let’s look at all of our customers especially hard so that no one gets into us too heavily. If anyone is slow in paying, let’s make sure we don’t ship them more goods until they pay whatever amount is past due, and the check has cleared. 37 

 Buffett made no exceptions, even for a very “special” customer. Susie came to Berkshire’s New York office in the early seventies to buy some draperies. Ralph Rigby, the salesman, said, “We gave her the highest price we could. It was a good thing. Buffett called and asked what we had charged.” 
 In 1970, with the dissolution of Buffett Partnership, Buffett personally became the owner of 29 percent of Berkshire’s stock. He installed himself as chairman and, for the first time, composed the letter to shareholders in Berkshire’s annual report. 
 Writing to the investors, Buffett used the same yardstick as he had in private with Ken Chace: the return on equity capital—that is, the percentage profit on each dollar invested. Buffett was extremely consistent abut such things. He did not have one yardstick in Kiewit Plaza, another in New Bedford, and another for the public. 
 Moreover, in measuring investments, Buffett was absolutely unwilling to relax his standards. Many a portfolio manager has been known to explain, “This doesn’t look so hot, so we’re only investing a little.” Buffett refused to make such compromises, and he could be brutally honest about shooting down a prospect. Scotty Hord, his Omaha Data Documents cohort, discovered this in the period that Buffett was reinventing Berkshire. Hord had gotten a cash windfall, and he was hoping to buy a business of his own. Buffett offered to check out any prospects before he went ahead. Hord recounted: 

 I brought him four or five companies. I went to his house each time. One of them made a new product—a kind of dispenser of thin sheets of paper for hospitals, restaurants. They wanted me to put up $60,000. Buffett said, “What do you think the odds of this thing making it are?” I said, “Pretty good. One out of two.” He said, “Do you think that’s good? Why don’t you go up in an airplane with a parachute that opens one out of every two times and jump?” I brought him another one—Jubilee Manufacturing Co. It made novelty automobile horns. I said, “Do you think enough of it to invest with me?” He said, “No.” I said, “Do you think enough of me to invest in it with me?” He said: “No.” He said it that quick. It was so refreshing to hear, without all kinds of excuses. 

 Buffett increasingly believed that textiles amounted to the same sort of wishful parachute drop. No matter how much they invested, manufacturers couldn’t raise prices, because the product was a commodity and usually in oversupply. Thus they never recouped their investment. 
 In 1970, Berkshire’s profits from textiles were a laughable $45,000. Meanwhile, it earned $2.1 million from insurance and $2.6 million from banking, both of which, at the start of the year, were working with roughly the same amount of capital as textiles. 
 In his annual report, Buffett saluted Ken Chace’s attitude and effort, but noted that textiles were “swimming against a strong tide.” Pointedly, he noted that Berkshire’s return was 10 percent, merely average for corporate America, and that “it is considerably in excess of what would have been achieved had resources continued to be devoted exclusively to the textile business.” 38 
 Of course, the question of whether Buffett, an outsider, would close the mill had hung over him from the start. Malcolm Chace claimed that he knew from day one that Buffett “didn’t have any intention of putting more money into the brick and mortar of textiles.” Jack Stanton, watching bitterly from the sidelines, concluded that Buffett was merely a liquidator. 
 But from time to time Buffett did reinvest modest amounts. He did not want to be known for closing New Bedford’s last mill. In a final letter to his partners he had written: 
 I like the textile operating people—they have worked hard to improve the business under difficult conditions—and, despite the poor return, we expect to continue the textile operation as long as it produces near current levels. 39 
 He felt a debt to Ken Chace, who had provided him the cash to diversify, and in whom Buffett saw the qualities he most admired: frankness and self-reliance. Once, when Chace put himself down, Buffett threw him a look. He said, “Ken, you worked your way up from nothing.” 
 He was stingy about paying Chace, who made less than competitors at other textile mills. 40 In 1970, after Chace had been at the helm for five years, his salary was $42,000 a year. Also, Buffett tightened up considerably—as did other textile companies—on the pension plan. “Warren had a strong negative feeling about management benefiting at the expense of shareholders,” Chace noted. 
 Yet Chace deeply appreciated his autonomy under Buffett and was extremely devoted to him. This says a lot about Buffett’s effect on people. Though he wouldn’t loosen his wallet, he was uncanny as a motivator. 
 Chace wondered whether Buffett would shut him down, but he sensed that his overseer did not want the tumultuous upheaval of a mill closing. Buffett, he knew, did not like change. “Warren tends to hang on,” Chace noted. “He keeps his old friends.” 
 According to Buffett’s capitalist credo, he probably should have closed the mill. But viscerally, he felt an affection for this relic of a factory, whose past seemed oddly more alive than its future. 41 He was willing to tolerate a mediocre return, as long as the mill didn’t become a drain on cash and require him to put in more capital. Spiritually, though no longer financially, the Hathaway mill embodied the New England work ethic that Buffett revered. So Buffett made a Faustian pact between his conscience, his comfort, and his wallet. Textiles would be bled to the bone, but the looms on Cove Street would continue to hum. 

 * Green, a shipping heiress, was said to have wrapped herself in papers to keep warm in the winter. She died in 1916, reputedly the world’s richest woman, with a $100 million fortune. 
 † The company had no relation to Hathaway shirts. 
 ‡ Buffett later said, “I must have been in the bathroom” when the dividend was declared. He never paid another. 
 § Ringwalt’s memoir, Tales of National Indemnity Company and Its Founder , is a hilarious romp past the characters, not always savory, in the back alleys of the insurance business. 
 ‖ Within a year or two of the National Indemnity deal, Buffett was imitated by financial operators such as Saul Steinberg, Carl Lindner, Harold Green, Maurice Greenberg, and Larry Tisch, all of whom pursued insurance-company takeovers.

Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist 

 Chapter 8 RETURN OF THE NATIVE 

 Now is the time to get rich . 
 W ARREN B UFFETT , 1974 

 Coming off the golf green with his chum Bob Billig in the summer of 1970, Buffett noticed a commotion by the club patio and asked what was going on. “That’s your fortieth birthday celebration, watching us,” Billig said dryly. As Buffett stood uncertainly, the crowd approached, bursting into the familiar refrain. Though he kept his composure, Buffett was deeply touched. Now at midlife, he was mildly celebrated. In Omaha, he was a somebody: chairman of the weekly Sun, a director of the Omaha National Bank. As a visitor observed on a walk through downtown Omaha, Buffett could “rattle off the financial characteristics of every building and business he passes.” 1 
 Yet with his partnership liquidated, Buffett no longer had a full-time job. Keeping a vigil over Ken Chace and the Hathaway mill took only so much time. His three children were teenagers. A profile in the Lincoln Journal & Star portrayed him as a man in limbo, monitoring his investments from a four-room suite and living a “pretty easy life.” To a younger money manager who had sought his counsel, Buffett curtly replied, “I am no longer in the investment management business and, therefore, have had to decline all requests, including yours”—sounding as if Wall Street were not to hear from him again. 2 
 After his fortieth birthday, Buffett reconvened the Graham group, in Williamsburg, Virginia, this time without Graham. Oddly, Buffett was the only one not active in stocks. The market was unattractively high, and he was asking quite natural questions—such as, with $25 million, what was the point of accumulating more? Writing in Fortune , his friend Carol Loomis said Buffett had “a strong feeling that his time and wealth should now be directed toward other goals than simply the making of more money.” 3 Bill Ruane urged him to run for President. 
 In fact, Buffett was thinking seriously of public service. He did not want to run; he was far too private—and, he admitted, thin-skinned—for that carnival test. 4 But he was dabbling backstage. He supported Democratic presidential hopefuls, such as Harold Hughes and Allard Lowenstein. He was getting chummy with politicians, such as Senators Frank Church and Richard Clark and Governor Jay Rockefeller. Geoffrey Cowan, a Village Voice writer, had dinner at the Buffetts’ along with John Culver, a candidate for U.S. senator. Strangely, the talk at this multimillionaire’s dinner table was all about liberal politics. 
 Howard Buffett had championed America as a finished product, as a sort of perfect, closed society unneedful of change. Warren, who had the American sympathy for the underdog, identified with the up-and-coming Ben Rosners and Ken Chaces. Like his father, he hated free riders (e.g., his disdain for stock options), but he saw more of them within the country clubs and boardrooms than without. Once, at a formal dinner, when a guest complained about the cost of welfare programs for the poor, Buffett replied tartly, “I’m a lot more concerned about welfare for the rich.” 5 
 This was reflected in Buffett’s lifestyle. He lived more or less on the $50,000 salary that he received from Berkshire. His children went to public schools, and Warren encouraged them to do something that they enjoyed, irrespective of what they would earn. In fact, Peter realized the extent of his father’s fortune only when he read of it in the newspaper. Young Susie said: 

 We didn’t live any differently from anyone else. I could charge clothes and never get in trouble—that was the only difference. I didn’t have a car. I had to get a job at sixteen—at the Carriage Shop, as a salesperson. 

 Buffett generally tried to make light of his money. When his wealth attracted publicity, alarming his family, Buffett joked, “We’ll just put a sign on the door that says it’s Bill Scott’s [his assistant’s] night to keep the money.” Or, he would crack, “And to Peter, who wants to be mentioned in my will: ‘Hi, Pete!’ ” Of course, this was not really a joke. Warren had strong feelings about his money and warned his kids that they should not expect a penny of it. He seemed to fear that even a droplet of his money would spoil them. 
 This may have been obsessive, but as a consequence, the Buffett household had an unmoneyed, informal spirit and an egalitarian air. At a Halloween apple-bobbing party, the Buffetts invited in every passing trick-or-treater—a gesture one would not have expected from a J. P. Morgan or a Henry Kravis. 6 People dropped in unannounced to use Buffett’s racquetball court, and in such numbers that he took to calling it the “YMCA.” 
 Under the influence of the hip elder Susie, the house became a refuge from Woodstock-era generational conflict. Layne Yahnke, a friend of little Susie’s, said it was a “safe house.” People could just walk in and raid the fridge. “If the snow fell and the city stopped—that’s where you went,” Yahnke recalled. “Sitting in the family room was so damned nice.” 
 Susie had done the house in her trademark sunshiny oranges and yellows. There were paintings by artists that she had taken under her wing, and Aquarius-age posters such as the ubiquitous War Is Unhealthy for Children and Other Living Things . The man of the family might come down to make some popcorn, but—“retired” from money management or not—he was generally upstairs, working. Again, Layne Yahnke: 

 Saturday nights the family room would be full of kids. Mrs. Buffett would be there; we’d be playing our music for her; she’d be playing music for us. Long about twelve-thirty in the morning you’d hear “ Susan-O —you coming up?” There were never any rules. When he went to bed, we turned down the music. 

 In 1971, “big Susie” talked Warren into buying a $150,000 vacation home in Laguna Beach, south of Los Angeles. It was near the ocean but not fronting it, as the more expensive homes were, and was casually furnished with rattan chairs. The first summer, thirteen teenagers stayed there. Buffett would get a daily package of papers from his office and go off by himself, but he was pretty tolerant of his kids’ friends. One evening he took a big crew of them to dinner. After the meal, the waiter came back with his credit card and said, “You’re at your limit.” Buffett arched his eyebrows at his wife and handed the waiter a second card, without so much as a word to suggest that he was, indeed, good for the bill. 7 
 While Warren was pondering a political role for himself, Susie was spending a lot of time in north Omaha, the black quarter (and the birthplace of Malcolm X). Besides being president of a local volunteer agency, she would make the rounds of schools and always seemed to have an errand or a mission on the north side. (Tom Rogers, a nephew, satirized her thusly: “Oh, are you black? Are you poor?—How much do you need?”) 
 Encouraged by Susie, Warren put his toe in the water. Their private trust, the Buffett Foundation, began to provide more than fifty scholarships a year to black college students. 8 In the early seventies, Rodney Wead, a friend of Susie’s who was promoting black-run business ventures, asked Warren to get involved. In particular, Wead, who had visions of “black capitalism,” thought Buffett would be just the guy to help him get his Community Bank of Nebraska off the ground. 
 Buffett agreed. He and Nick Newman (his country-club co-conspirator) joined the bank’s advisory board and devoted a fair amount of time to it. Buffett also made a nominal investment—1.4 percent of the bank’s capital. 9 However, unlike Susie, Warren was far from an innocent. He repeatedly warned the bank’s directors that a disproportionate number of minority banks had failed because of bad loans. As the bank was getting under way, Buffett sent the board a nervous note, enclosing a copy of a newspaper story about a similar bank in Denver that had failed. 
