
From Retail Trader to Professional Trader

15

There is another emotion that is just as insidious but probably twice
as bad as fear and greed. On the surface you can comprehend fear, a selfpreservation instinct, and greed, our need to attain more. But when these
two emotions fuse together to fuel the emotion of ego, watch out.
WordNet defines ego as "an inflated feeling of pride in your superiority
to others."
Dealing with this type of ego in your trading is dangerous and is the
place where retail traders get stuck in their transition to trading like a pro.
We touched a little bit on how the ego wants to be right about the markets
as opposed to being profitable. There is also a need for the ego to want to
prove its superiority, but this is difficult to do when you are dealing with
an amorphous entity like the markets.
Bizarre things begin to happen. The ego can force you to engage in
irrational behavior. You may attack the markets when you lose money;
this is known as revenge trading, which is usually counterproductive to
your goals of being profitable. Since the markets have no memory of
what happened yesterday, today, or tomorrow, the logical solution for
any trader is to come to the markets with a clean slate. The ego, which
feels slighted, will look for a way to get the market back for every little
transgression.
The ego doesn't stop there; once it has decided that the position it has
taken regarding a market is the right one, it will look for every piece of
supporting evidence, no matter how small, all of which may be contrary to
what is happening on the screen right in front of your eyes.
The ego also likes to feel like it can outsmart what is happening, so it
will often take an outright contrarian view of the markets and their direction to show its superiority over the industry or its peers.
Finally, the ego will tell you that you are smarter than the system you
created. It will tell you that you are the creator so you are better than the
rules, trading plan, and back testing that you may have conducted in order
to get where you are. It will make sure you don't trust the paper trading
you have done to get where you are now, and that real trading is somehow
different.
The ego is the ultimate enemy of the trader, because it will tell you that
you are good and you will forget that your successes have been all about
luck. The ancient Roman philosopher Seneca said, "Luck is what happens
when preparation meets opportunity." By being properly prepared for the
trade (win, lose, or breakeven), when an opportunity arises you will be
there to take advantage of it.
The ego requires that it make everything happen. Somehow the ego
believes that only its most aggressive actions take precedence, while sometimes trading simply needs the right set of circumstances for the opportunity to appear. If the ego is allowed to run amok there may never be enough

16

DESIGNING T HE TRAD E

capital left over to be able to take advantage of the various opportunities
that come your way.
The ego can make it difficult for the retail trader to succeed. The best
way to combat your ego is to have a plan and a way to document your
activity. The ego needs to know the difference between the facts and its
opinion of the facts. This is a crucial distinction that can only be brought to
light with due diligence. AE time progresses, the ego begins to know what
the truth is and its own effects become diminished.
This is one of the most difficult situations to overcome, but once accomplished can make your transition to pro style trading seamless.

SUCCES SFUL PROFESSIONAL TRADE RS
The shift from retail trader to professional trader is not easy. Although developing strategies and techniques to make the transition can be difficult,
it is not impossible to develop the proper makeup to emulate. While there
have been several major professional trader blowups, those instances have
been the exception, not the rule. Professional traders break up their approach to the markets in three components: discipline, loss control, and
planning.

Discipline
There are several great books discussing the minds of professional traders.
One of the earliest books that attempted to give a glimpse into this rarefied world is The Merchant Bankers by Joseph Wechsler (Little Brown,
1966). This book breaks down every major banking family throughout history. What makes the book particularly relevant to today's environment is
a small anecdote regarding a young banker.
A new young banker executed a trade to impress the partners. Soon
the position began to lose. Instead of getting out of the position right
away, the young banker held on to it. AE the trade continued to collapse, to the tune of 1 million pounds, the young banker, wringing his
hands, finally decides to approach one of the managing partners. AE he
begins to relate his tale of loss and is on the verge of handing in his
resignation, the partner stops him and asks him why he didn't come to
him sooner when the loss was manageable. The young banker had no
response.
The partner tells the young banker that he could have put the company
in serious jeopardy, and then reveals a secret to him. He had been watching
the young banker all along and had already put the necessary protective

From Retail Trader to Professional Trader

17

trade in place, so that what looked like a 1 million pound loss for the young
banker was actually a small profit because the partner had already put a
counter hedging position into play earlier.
How many times have we been the young banker, caught in a losing
trade, not getting out when the losses are manageable, all the while
spiraling down in flames of deeper despair? Unfortunately, there is no
benevolent trading partner looking over our shoulder ready to correct our
mistakes to protect us from ourselves. We must divide our psyche up and
be both the young banker willing to take a chance and the managing partner able to see the devastating results that a potentially big loss can have
on us and our account.
Professional traders, CTAs, are required by law to be disciplined at
all times in their trading. They must operate as the managing partner 2417
because of the obligations that they have taken on. CTAs who are disciplined enough to consistently apply the same techniques to their trades,
no matter what the market is doing or the number of trades they have
executed, are the ideal role models for retail traders who are willing to
take their trading seriously. Transitioning from the young banker, wringing
your hands in fear, requires that traders take the responsibility of sticking to their trading rules and risk management strategies, just as CTAs do
every day.
CTAs from the outset have a set of rules that cover entries, exits, and
risk levels that they must adhere to in order to optimize their success and
minimize their losses. Adhering to these parameters requires a high level of
discipline and focus that comes from multiple layers of responsibility. They
have a responsibility to their investors, regulators, and even their families.
What makes the successful CTAs unique is that they don't profit unless
their clients profit. This is what encourages CTAs to stick to their plan,
particularly if they believe it has worked in the past and can continue to
work in the future.
Retail traders must have a mental paradigm shift and see themselves
just like the CTAs. Identical to the setup that CTAs have, the vast majority of retail traders are only paid when there is a profit. Therefore, retail
traders can benefit from treating capital that they place in the markets the
same way that CTAs do. It is important that CTAs and retail traders both
optimize every opportunity by consistently adhering to their trading plan
and strategies.
This is the only way to succeed in the long run. The more faith you
can develop in your trading plan the easier it is to be disciplined to follow
it. The essential discipline also comes from the ability to be your own inner trading manager; in spite of your hopes that a trade may succeed, the
proper preparation to protect yourself from loss long before the situation
becomes dire is important.

18

DESIGNING THE TRADE

Loss Control
It is no secret that when it comes to trading losses, the better you can

control them, the easier it will be for you to chase down potential profits.
As losses rack up you need more and more spectacular returns to recover
and then get into the green.
When the trading losses are unleveraged and straightforward, as in
stock trading, a 10 percent loss represents a need to gain 11 percent just to
get back to even (90 percent x 111 percent = 100 percent). If your leverage
is as high as 5 to 1 then that same 10 percent loss represents a 50 percent
loss. This means that you need a return of at least 200 percent (50 percent x
200 percent = 100 percent) just to get back to breakeven.
This means that your need to minimize your losses as quickly as possible becomes imperative, if you hope to achieve any success. CTAs typically
attempt to control their loss at a fixed percentage of no more than 2 percent
on any given trade. For accounts in the millions that can easily be done.
For smaller accounts, depending on the market and amount of leverage
you use, that can translate into as little as a 10 percent to as much as a 20
percent move in your actual account.
CTAs' conscious decision to minimize their losses dovetails directly
into how they calculate the success of their trading programs. When CTAs
set out to calculate their potential losses, they always attempt to find the
worse possible scenario of their trading program. They do this by calculating their drawdowns and their maximum drawdowns.
Drawdown is defined as the peak-to-trough decline during a specific
record period of an investment, fund, or commodity. A drawdown is usually quoted as the percentage between the peak and the trough.
The maximum drawdown is the largest drawdown experienced
by a strategy during a given time period (both definitions are from
Investopedia).
The drawdown and the potential maximum drawdown are numbers
that are consistently used by CTAs to help refine their trading programs and
to develop loss management strategies to help them protect themselves,
while at the same time maximizing their potential for trading returns. The
various percentages that can be developed by running multiple scenarios
and measuring possible drawdown amounts can be tremendously helpful,
but are not meant to be the gospel of your trading.
While on the surface these drawdown percentages can seem to be an
efficient way to determine how bad a program can fail you, there are a
few flaws. The primary one is that "past results are not indicative of future returns," so while past drawdowns can be calculated, shifts in supply and demand can alter how future drawdowns and yet unseen potential
maximum drawdowns can occur. It becomes very important to understand

From Retail Trader to Professional Trader

19

how the CTAs manage their losses while they are trading, not just pay attention to what they do when the worst case scenarios pop up; it is less
important to know how they react to the markets when a fundamental shift
in the marketplace has already occurred.
In spite of the problems that relying on drawdown calculations have,
retail traders rarely incorporate an understanding of how much of a return
on their investment they need when they lose, nor do they understand the
potential maximum drawdown facing them when they trade a market. This
is a huge oversight on their part that needs to be corrected.
Professor Thomas A. Hieronymous, an agricultural economist and the
grandfather of farm marketing through futures, conducted a study on speculative (retail) trading accounts in the late sixties. Professor Hieronymous
came to a few disturbing conclusions in this study. The first assessment he
made was that 92 percent of the one-time traders would lose their money,
never to be heard from again. He then narrowed down his field of what
he called regular traders to those with more than 10 trades in a year and
losses or gains that exceeded $500. That left him with a total of 462 trading accounts to analyze. In this group of accounts 298 had losses and 164
accounts showed a profit.
Based on this data the statistics for retail accounts are not promising.
Ninety-two percent of one-timers lose their money, then of those who are
left, two thirds of them have losing trades, and one third of them make a
profit. While these figures were compiled back in 1969 (excerpted from The
Futures Game: Who Wins? Who Loses and Why? by Richard J. Teweles
and Frank Joseph Jones), they still have relevance today.
Just as we looked at the effects that leverage has on the increased need
for an account to do exceptionally well after a loss, and we have developed
an understanding on how knowing your drawdown percentages can play
a factor in mitigating those losses, it is no wonder that the average retail
trader would rather shoot from the hip than figure out these key numbers
ahead of time. The problem with the shoot-from-the-hip approach is that it
is hazardous to the long-time survival of retail traders.
Another study, The Rockwell Study, followed a period of 18 years. Beginning with 1947, it was observed that small speculators (retail traders)
lost in 11 of their 18 trading years, their average loss being $15.1 million
and their average profits reaching $23.7 million. The large speculators, on
the other hand (CTAs-the pros), show a profit in 15 of their 18 trading
years. Their average yearly profit was approximately $13 million and their
average annual loss is only $3.4 million. The large speculators had over
twice as many winning years.
Another study was conducted by Bard Barber, DC Davis, and Terrance
Odean, DC Berkeley. In their 2004 white paper entitled "Do Individual Day
Traders Make Money?" they analyzed the accounts of 130,000 investors in

20

DESIGNING THE TRADE

Taiwan, the twelfth largest financial market in the world, from 1995 to 1999.
Based on their research they discovered that in a typical six month period
more than eight out of ten day traders lose money. The core reason for the
traders' losses revolved around their basic inability to cut their losses and
ride their profits.
Even though the study itself focused on day trading stocks, it clearly
showed the lack of success of retail traders in the largest statistical group
sample ever compiled. While day trading stocks and commodities/forex
may have few similarities as trading instruments, the way in which stocks
are day traded parallels the time constrained nature of futures and forex
trading. It can be assumed that the sense of urgency found in futures and
forex contract expirations along with their leverage component is very
similar to day trading, and had the study been conducted on futures and
forex, it most likely would have yielded similar if not worse results than
Odean's study.
The reality is that for the past 60 years, from 1947 until the present,
retail traders from aU genres of trading have consistently lost more and
done worse than their professional counterparts. This can be primarily attributed to their completely different (or lack of) approach to controlling
their losses. If retail traders would take a similar view of loss to that of
their professional counterparts, they would not only improve their trading,
but actually tum trading on its ear.

Planning
The success of professional traders is not by accident-it is by design. By
focusing on mitigating the various ways that they can lose money, they
develop the necessary plans for success. Their stop losses and protective strategies take into account their account value, drawdowns, maximum drawdowns, and leverage. By combining each of these components together, a clear picture of their risk versus reward comes into
focus .
Professional traders are constantly developing plans and contingency
plans that incorporate various ways to minimize their losses. Since futures and forex is known as a zero sum investment, losers pay the winners directly, the professional traders step up to the plate to make sure
they give themselves as many genuine opportunities to transfer wealth
to themselves, as well as minimizing the transfer of wealth away from
themselves.
This requires a fundamental understanding of all of the players
(hedgers, large speculators, and small speculators), as well as the tools at
their disposal (cash, OTe, forex, options, and futures) . By watching the
footprints of their competitors and utilizing every tool in their arsenal,

From Retail Trader to Professional Trader

21

professional traders are light years ahead of retail traders in protecting
their day-to-day survival.
The great news is that the techniques that professional traders use easily found and, in fact, if you ask them nicely, they will give you the documents necessary to see behind the scenes in their programs. Then it is a
matter of incorporating what they do right into your retail activity to help
you get to the next level.

Outside Accountability
While professional traders have different motivations, attitudes toward
money, and general psychological makeup from their retail counterparts,
it took an act of Congress to get them there. In 1936 the Commodity Exchange Act was implemented as a response the U.S. Supreme Court's decision to declare the original Future Trading Act as an unconstitutional use
of the Congress's taxing power. In 1974 the act was amended to create the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), an independent agency
of the U.S. government.
By creating the CFTC Congress effectively replaced the Commodity
Exchange Act. In 1982 the CFTC appointed the National Futures Association (NFA) as a self-regulatory body that deals with licensing, auditing, and
monitoring CTAs and professional traders who exceed various maximum
contract reporting requirements.
Professional Traders are forced to keep their records transparent to
the NFA and the CFTC, both organizations that take their fiduciary responsibility very seriously. Various companies that have been shut down for
engaging in unfair practices can be seen every day on the CFTC web site.
Professional traders are not able to set up shop unless they take several precautionary steps. First they must file disclosure documents. The
disclosure documents are the professional CTAs' way of revealing their
trading secrets, past results, hypothetical results, and responsibilities to
their clients. The disclosure document is the number-one stepping stone
for retail traders to gain insight into how professional traders trade the
markets.
Which markets CTAs trade, whether they buy or sell options, if they
have a long or short strategy, the number of contracts traded per particular
cash amounts, monthly and maximum draw, commission fees, along with
the maximum losses that are used to halt trading for a client, are disclosed.
Since the CTA has a legal responsibility to their clients and prospective
clients in following their disclosure documents to the letter, a lot of information can be revealed.
Retail traders have none of these outside responsibilities. Their successes, losses, and strategies need not be revealed or monitored by anyone.

22

DESIGNING THE TRADE

With zero required accountability, it is no surprise that retail traders fail in
their fiduciary responsibility to themselves. The majority of them lack a
written trading plan and feel that a stop loss is money management and
risk management all wrapped up into one.
Is it any wonder that 92 percent of first-time traders lose all of their
money?
Professional Traders, on the other hand, are constantly being monitored by the government, and many of them take the next step and become
monitored by private parties such as Barclays and Autumn Gold. These
sites rank eTAs according to their annual returns. In much the same way
that the scientific community keeps itself honest through peer review, the
private monitoring sites allow other eTAs and potential clients to compare
similar money managers to each other.
You can see how the various eTAs who trade currencies, S&P, and
the like compare against others in their asset class, as well as how they
rank in their overall returns against all eTAs. Those who are doing well
must send you their disclosure document just as readily as the ones who
are not doing well. This type of research becomes invaluable in helping
you determine the realistic returns that you can receive in your trading
program and to discover what professionals are doing it right and which
ones are doing it wrong.

TIGHTENING UP YOUR APPROACH
TO THE MARKETS
When making the transition from operating like a retail trader to operating
like a professional trader, retail traders need to go from being haphazard
in their approach to taking control of their trading destiny. It is easy to
become a trading statistic that falls by the wayside. What isn't easy is developing the necessary winning attitude that will help you make the mental
transition to trading like a pro.
This will require that you step outside yourself and take a critical look
at your strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) to your
trading capital. Writing up a formal SWOT analysis as the first step to
developing your trading plan is an empowering act. It has the ability to
clarify your trading thinking and allows you to build on your strengths
and opportunities while minimizing the impact of your weaknesses and
threats.
A proper SWOT analysis will not only help you perfect your approach
to the markets, it is essential for you to establish realistic trading goals.
Trading goals can be established on a monthly, quarterly, and annual basis.

From Retail Trader to Professional Trader

23

These goals should encompass not only profit goals, but the number and
amount of draw downs
Forming your own trading club or joining an established trading club
can also help you tighten your approach to the markets. It will help you develop accountability while eliminating lonely trader syndrome. This type of
peer review forces you to be honest with yourself and your trading results.
This will make it easier for you to make your transition to a professional
trader.

,

C II \.- T ..: R 2

Markets
and Margin

The one who adapts his policy to the times prospers,
and likewise . .. the one whose policy clashes with the
demands of the times does not.
-Niccolo Machiavelli, The Prince

he futures and commodities market was originally established in the
United States in the late 1800s. The original intent was to help smooth
out major price fluctuations that occurred when there were either
shortages or surpluses in the marketplace. At the time, international commerce on the scale that it has reached in the past two hundred years
was unfathomable. Today, trillions of dollars in raw materials and finished
goods traverse the globe at a frenetic pace.
While the United States was not the first to lead the world in the industrial revolution, it became the key architect in the development of the
world's international commerce that we enjoy today. The United States' influence has brought about a financial model that is being emulated across
the globe. Countries all over, such as the economically motivated European
Union, as well as India and the politically communist but economically capitalist China, are developing their market economies as quickly as they can.
While these countries are important, they are just the tip of the iceberg in
the number of countries working hard to build up their burgeoning market
economies.
In the wake of this robust global economic growth, the once-humble
beginnings of the U.S. futures and commodities exchanges have taken
on a new role. As raw materials from various countries must compete
against one another, currency rate fluctuations, and the economic reality
