
AU3772_book.fm Page 10 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

10

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

dealings, a sharp pencil, and a few minutes of time. EN: Alternatively, numerous data services are available for use with computer software packages, not to
mention Internet sites (which are mentioned in Resources). The use of this technology eliminates the burden of manual chart keeping altogether. If there is a drawback
to this technology it might be in the loss of the “feel” the investor gets through
manual charting.
It is customary in preparing ordinary daily stock charts to let the horizontal axis represent time, with the vertical cross-lines (or as some prefer,
the spaces between them) from left to right thus standing for successive days.
The vertical scale is used for prices, with each horizontal cross-line then
representing a specific price level. Space is usually provided at the bottom
of the sheet to plot volume, i.e., the number of shares which change hands
each day. The newspapers publishing complete stock market reports give
the day’s turnover or volume (exclusive of odd-lot transactions which may
for our present purpose be disregarded), the highest and lowest price at
which each stock sold during the day, the closing price (which is the price
at which the last sale effected during the day was made), and usually the
opening or first sale price. On our charts, the daily price range is plotted by
drawing a vertical line connecting the points representing the high and the
low. Then a short horizontal “tick” is added, either crossing the vertical range
line or extending out to the right from it, at the level of the closing price.
Sometimes all transactions in a stock during a day take place at one and the
same price; the high, low, and close are thus all on a level and the only mark
on our chart will then be the horizontal dash representing the closing figure.
Volume is depicted by drawing a vertical line up from the base line of the
chart.
The opening price need not be recorded.* Experience has shown that it
seldom, if ever, has any significance in estimating future developments,
which is all that ordinarily should interest us. The closing price is important,
however. It is, in fact, the only price which many casual readers of the
financial pages ever look at. It represents the final evaluation of the stock
made by the market during the day. It may, of course, be registered in the
first hour of trading, provided no other sales are subsequently effected, but,
it becomes, nevertheless, the figure upon which a majority of prospective
traders base their plans for the following day. Hence, its technical significance, which will appear in various contexts in later chapters.

Different Types of Scales
Many specific suggestions as to the details of charting are deferred for
discussion in the second section of this book, but there is one chart feature
which may well be considered here. Until recent years, nearly all stock price
* EN: Edwards considered the opening price unimportant. Some technicians, myself included, do observe
it to be of use. And in some charting systems it is indispensable, for example, candlestick charting where
it is accorded enormous importance.

AU3772_book.fm Page 11 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter two:

Charts

11

charts were kept on the common form of graph paper ruled to what is known
as plain or arithmetic scale. But more and more chartists have now come to
use what is known as semilogarithmic paper, or sometimes as ratio or percentage paper. Our own experience indicates that the semilogarithmic scale
has definite advantages in this work; most of the charts reproduced in this
book employ it. The two types of scale may be distinguished at a glance by
the fact that on arithmetic paper, equal distances on the vertical scale (i.e.,
between horizontal lines) represent equal amounts in dollars, whereas on
the semilogarithmic paper, they represent equal percentage changes. Thus,
on arithmetic paper the distance between 10 and 20 on the vertical scale is
exactly the same as that from 20 to 30 and from 30 to 40. On the logarithmic
scale the difference from 10 to 20, representing an increase of 100%, is the
same as that from 20 to 40 or from 40 to 80, in each case representing another
100% increase.
Percentage relations, it goes without saying, are important in trading in
securities. The semilogarithmic scale permits direct comparison of high- and
low-priced stocks and makes it easier to choose the one offering the greater
(percentage) profit on the funds to be invested. It facilitates the placing of
stop-loss orders. Area patterns appear much the same on either type of paper
but certain trendlines develop more advantageously on the ratio scale.
Almost anyone can quickly become accustomed to making entries on semilogarithmic paper. We recommend its use. However, its advantages are not
so great as to require one to change, one who, because of long familiarity
and practice, prefers an arithmetic sheet. Such percentage calculations, as
may seem to be required, can, after all, be made on another sheet or in the
head and the results then entered on the arithmetic chart if a record is desired.
Several firms specializing in the manufacture of graph paper and other
engineers’ and architects’ supplies now offer sheets specifically designed for
stock charting, on which heavier lines to define the business week mark each
sixth day on the time scale, and the price scale is subdivided into eighths to
represent the standard fractions of the dollar in which stocks are traded on
all American exchanges. (EN9: Eighths went the way of the New Haven and now
decimals reign.) These sheets are available in various sizes and with either
arithmetic or logarithmic price and volume scales. EN: This paper of course is
only of interest to the manual chartist, as modern software, as detailed in Appendix
D on Resources, enables the computer chartist to easily switch between price scales
and methods of charting. References to such paper are also found there.
On weekly charts, each vertical line represents a week’s trading. The
price range for the week is plotted thereon and usually the total volume, but
the closing price may or may not be omitted. The range extends, of course,
from the highest price at which the stock sold on any day during the week
to the lowest price at which it sold on any day; these two extremes might,
and sometimes do, occur on the same day, but the weekly chart makes no
distinction as to day. Monthly charts are prepared in the same way but do
not, as a rule, record volume. These two — often referred to as long-term or
major charts — are used chiefly for determining important Support and

AU3772_book.fm Page 12 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

12

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Resistance Levels and marking long-term trends. Weekly charts — if the
reader prefers to keep his own — can be posted easily from the Sunday
morning editions of those daily newspapers (e.g., The New York Times or
Barron’s Business and Financial Weekly) that publish a summary of the previous
week’s transactions.
In concluding this chapter on the construction of the charts that we shall
study in succeeding chapters, it can well be said that there is no special
virtue, certainly no magic, in the chart itself. It is simply a pictorial record
of the trading history of the stock or stocks in which we may be interested.
To the man possessed of a photographic memory, no chart work is necessary;
his mind records all the necessary data — he carries his charts in his head.
Many of the expert “tape-readers” who have no use for charts are gifted
with that rare memory talent which renders reference to graphic records
unnecessary. But most of us are not so blessed; to use the chart is necessary
and useful because it lends itself conveniently to the type of analysis which
indicates future probabilities.
There is a saying on Wall Street to the effect that “there is nothing wrong
with charts — the trouble is with the chartists,” which is simply another
way of expressing the truth that it is not the chart itself but its interpretation
that is important. Chart analysis is certainly neither easy nor foolproof. Yet,
it is not at all uncommon for some casual investor who has no idea whatever
of market technics to pick up a chart by chance and see in it something which
he had not hitherto suspected, something perhaps which saves him from
making an unfavorable commitment.
If you have never used stock charts, never paid much attention to them,
you may be surprised at some of the significant things you will quickly
detect as soon as you begin to study them seriously.
EN9: Surprise and astonishment are the words to describe the reactions of even
professionals when they are fully exposed to a coherent presentation of the methods
of Edwards and Magee. I have often commented that no understanding of other
(non-chart) methods of technical analysis is possible without a firm grasp of the
concepts and principles of this book.
Some other comments are worth noting relevant to Edwards’ discussion above.
For manual charting semi-log remains the superior scale. Given the ease of changing
scale and time frames on Internet sites (e.g., prophet.net and stockcharts.com) and
in the stand alone software one may switch from a close up of a month to a long
range perspective of years. In this process it is important to maintain perspective.
Multiyear log charts of large ranges lose graphic importance at the top as chart
intervals shrink. This distortion must be countered by breaking the time frame into
smaller increments. So instead of 5 years of a chart which spans a range of 10 to
200 we look at five charts of a year each as well as the 5-year chart.

AU3772_book.fm Page 13 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter three

The Dow Theory
The Dow Theory is the granddaddy of all technical market studies. Although
it is frequently criticized for being “too late,” and occasionally derided (particularly in the early stages of a Bear Market) by those who rebel at accepting
its verdicts, it is known by name to nearly everyone who has had any
association with the stock market, and respected by most. Many who heed
it in greater or lesser degree in determining their investment policies never
realize that it is purely and simply “technical.” It is built upon and concerned
with nothing but the action of the stock market itself (as expressed in certain
“averages”), deriving nothing from the business statistics on which the fundamentalists depend.
There is much in the writings of its original promulgator, Charles H.
Dow, to suggest that he did not think of his “theory” as a device for forecasting the stock market, or even as a guide for investors, but rather as a
barometer of general business trends. Dow founded the Dow–Jones Financial
News Service and is credited with the invention of stock market averages.
The basic principles of the theory, which was later named after him, were
outlined by him in editorials he wrote for The Wall Street Journal. Upon his
death in 1902 his successor, as editor of the Journal, William P. Hamilton,
took up Dow’s principles and, in the course of 27 years of writing on the
stock market, organized them and formulated them into the Dow Theory as
we know it today.
Before we proceed to an explanation of the theory itself, it will be necessary to examine the stock averages which it employs. Long before the time
of Dow, the fact was familiar to bankers and businessmen that the securities
of most established companies tended to go up or down in price together.
Exceptions — stocks that moved against the general financial tide — were
rare, nor did they as a rule persevere in that contrary course for more than
a few days or weeks at a time. It is true that when a boom was on, the prices
of some issues rose faster and farther than others, and when the trend was
toward depression, some stocks declined rapidly while others would put up
considerable resistance to the forces that were dragging the market down,
but the fact remained that most securities tended to swing together. (They
still do, needless to say, and always will.)

13

AU3772_book.fm Page 14 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

14

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

This fact, as we have said, has long been commonly known and
accepted — so completely taken for granted that its importance is usually
overlooked. For it is important — tremendously important from many angles
in addition to those which come within the province of this volume. One of
the best of all reasons for a student of market technics to start with the Dow
Theory is because that theory stresses the general market trend.
Charles Dow is believed to have been the first to make a thorough effort
to express the general trend (or, more correctly, level) of the securities market
in terms of the average price of a selected few representative stocks. As finally
set up in January of 1897, in the form which has continued to date, and used
by Dow in his studies of market trends, there were two Dow–Jones Averages.
One was composed of the stocks of 20 railroad companies only, for the
railroads were the dominant corporate enterprises of his day. The other,
called the Industrial Average, represented all other types of business, and
was made up, at first, of only 12 issues. This number was increased to 20 in
1916 and to 30 on October 1, 1928.

The Dow Averages
The stocks included in these two Averages have been changed from time to
time in order to keep the lists up to date and as nearly representative as
possible of their respective groups. Only General Electric, of the present
30 industrial stocks, was included in the original Industrial Average, and
that was dropped at one time (in 1898) and subsequently reinserted. In 1929,
all stocks of public utility companies were dropped from the Industrial
Average and a new Utility Average of 20 issues was set up; in 1938 its number
was reduced to 15. The 20 rail, 30 industrial, and 15 utility stocks are now
averaged together to make what is known as the Dow–Jones Stock Composite. The history of these Averages, the various adjustments that have been
made in them and their method of computation, is an interesting story in
itself which the reader may want to look up elsewhere. EN: Cf. Resources for
references. Note also that there is now a proliferation of Dow–Jones Averages. For
our present purpose, it remains only to add that the Dow Theory pays no
attention to the Utility or Composite Averages; its interpretations are based
on the Rail and Industrial Averages only. EN: “Rails” now known as “Transportation.”
In recent years, the values of the Dow–Jones Averages have been computed for the end of each hour of trading as well as the end of the day.
EN: Now computed in real time and available over the Internet. These hourly figures
are published in The Wall Street Journal as well as on all market tickers. In fact
presently the Averages are computed in real time, a necessity for options and futures
trading which takes place based on them. The Wall Street Journal also prints in
each issue a summary of the important highs and lows of each average by
date for the preceding two or three years. Their daily closing prices are
reported in many other metropolitan daily newspapers.

AU3772_book.fm Page 15 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter three:

The Dow Theory

15

Basic Tenets
To get back to the Dow Theory itself here are its basic tenets:
1. The Averages Discount Everything (except “Acts of God”) — Because they reflect the combined market activities of thousands of
investors, including those possessed of the greatest foresight and the
best information on trends and events, the Averages in their
day-to-day fluctuations discount everything known, everything foreseeable, and every condition which can affect the supply of or the
demand for corporate securities. Even unpredictable natural calamities, when they happen, are quickly appraised and their possible
effects discounted.
2. The Three Trends — The “market,” meaning the price of stocks in
general, swings in trends, of which the most important are its Major
or Primary Trends. These are the extensive up or down movements
which usually last for a year or more and result in general appreciation or depreciation in value of more than 20%. Movements in the
direction of the Primary Trend are interrupted at intervals by Secondary Swings in the opposite direction — reactions or “corrections” that
occur when the Primary Move has temporarily “gotten ahead of
itself.” (Both Secondaries and the intervening segments of the Primary Trend are frequently lumped together as Intermediate Movements — a term which we shall find useful in subsequent discussions.) Finally, the Secondary Trends are composed of Minor Trends
or day-to-day fluctuations which are unimportant to Dow Theory.
3. The Primary Trends — These, as aforesaid, are the broad, overall,
up and down movements which usually (but not invariably) last for
more than a year and may run for several years. So long as each
successive rally (price advance) reaches a higher level than the one
before it, and each Secondary Reaction stops (i.e., the price trend
reverses from down to up) at a higher level than the previous reaction, the Primary Trend is Up. This is called a Bull Market. Conversely,
when each Intermediate Decline carries prices to successively lower
levels and each intervening rally fails to bring them back up to the
top level of the preceding rally, the Primary Trend is Down and that
is called a Bear Market. (The terms Bull and Bear are frequently used
loosely with reference, respectively, to any sort of up or down movements, but we shall use them in this book only in connection with
the Major or Primary Movements of the market in the Dow sense.)
Ordinarily — theoretically, at least — the Primary is the only one of
the three trends with which the true long-term investor is concerned.
His aim is to buy stocks as early as possible in a Bull Market — just
as soon as he can be sure that one has started — and then hold them
until (and only until) it becomes evident that it has ended and a Bear

AU3772_book.fm Page 16 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

16

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Market has started. He knows that he can safely disregard all the
intervening Secondary Reactions and Minor Fluctuations. The trader,
however, may well concern himself also with the Secondary Swings,
and it will appear later on in this book that he can do so with profit.
4. The Secondary Trends — These are the important reactions that
interrupt the progress of prices in the Primary Direction. They are
the Intermediate Declines or “corrections” which occur during Bull
Markets, the Intermediate Rallies or “recoveries” which occur in Bear
Markets. Normally, they last for 3 weeks to many months, and rarely
longer. Normally, they retrace from one third to two thirds of the
gain (or loss, as the case may be) in prices registered in the preceding
swing in the Primary Direction. Thus, in a Bull Market, prices in
terms of the Industrial Average might rise steadily, or with only brief
and minor interruptions, for a total gain of 30 (or 300) points before
a Secondary Correction occurred. That correction might then be
expected to produce a decline of not less than 10 points and not more
than 20 points before a new Intermediate Advance in the Primary
Bull Trend developed.
Note, however, that the one third/two thirds rule is not an
unbreakable law; it is simply a statement of probabilities. Most Secondaries are confined within these limits; many of them stop very
close to the halfway mark, retracing 50% of the preceding Primary
Swing. They seldom run less than one third, but some of them cancel
nearly all of it.
Thus we have two criteria by which to recognize a Secondary
Trend. Any price movement contrary in direction to the Primary
Trend that lasts for at least 3 weeks and retraces at least one third of
the preceding net move in the Primary Direction (from the end of
the preceding Secondary to the beginning of this one, disregarding
Minor Fluctuations) is labeled as of Intermediate Rank, i.e., a true
Secondary. Despite these criteria, however, the Secondary Trend is
often confusing; its recognition, its correct appraisal at the time it
develops and while it is in process, poses the Dow theorist’s most
difficult problem. We shall have more to say about this later.
5. The Minor Trends — These are the brief (rarely as long as 3 weeks —
usually less than 6 days) fluctuations which are, so far as the Dow
Theory is concerned, meaningless in themselves, but which, in toto,
make up the Intermediate Trends. Usually, but not always, an Intermediate Swing, whether a Secondary or the segment of a Primary
between successive Secondaries, is made up of a series of three or
more distinguishable Minor Waves. Inferences drawn from these
day- to-day fluctuations are quite apt to be misleading. The Minor
Trend is the only one of the three trends which can be “manipulated”
(although it is, in fact, doubtful if under present conditions even that
can be purposely manipulated to any important extent). Primary and

AU3772_book.fm Page 17 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter three:

The Dow Theory

17

Secondary Trends cannot be manipulated; it would strain the resources of the U.S. Treasury to do so.
Right here, before we go on to state a sixth Dow tenet, we may well take
time out for a few minutes to clarify the concept of the three trends by
drawing an analogy between the movements of the stock market and the
movements of the sea. The Major (Primary) Trends in stock prices are like
the tides. We can compare a Bull Market to an incoming or flood tide which
carries the water farther and farther up the beach until finally it reaches
high-water mark and begins to turn. Then follows the receding or ebb tide,
comparable to a Bear Market. But all the time, during both ebb and flow of
the tide, the waves are rolling in, breaking on the beach, and then receding.
While the tide is rising, each succeeding wave pushes a little farther up onto
the shore and, as it recedes, does not carry the water quite so far back as did
its predecessor. During the tidal ebb, each advancing wave falls a little short
of the mark set by the one before it, and each receding wave uncovers a little
more of the beach. These waves are the Intermediate Trends, Primary or
Secondary, depending on whether their movement is with or against the
direction of the tide. Meanwhile, the surface of the water is constantly agitated by wavelets, ripples, and “cat’s-paws” moving with or against or across
the trend of the waves — these are analogous to the market’s Minor Trends,
its unimportant day-to-day fluctuations. The tide, the wave, and the ripple
represent, respectively, the Primary or Major, the Secondary or Intermediate,
and the Minor Trends of the market.
