
QO? - creat deal.

A: I cashed out everything. I had a house in college that I bought
as a repossession from a bank, fixed it up, cashed it out. And that,
along with my savings, was my day-trading ticket.

Q.: How much was your seed capital when you started trading?

A: Thad around $75K liquid at that point, and I think I put $40K
or $50K in my first trading account.

: You left the other $25K for monthly expenses. You had no
rent, so basically you were just paying food?

A : T helped out with bills and chipped in some, I could have
funded more in the account, but I like not having my back against
the wall, psychologically.

Q:s0 how was your girlfriend feeling about this little venture at
the time?

A : She was probably skeptical, but she had seen the Houston
offices as well. I was really interested. I thought if it works, great,
if not, I can sleep at night knowing I tried it and just go back to
being a broker. That was the game plan. Okay maybe it was a small
setback financially if I lost some money, but no family, no kids and
no mortgage; it was an ideal time in my life to try it.

247


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: What about your parents, any feedback from your parents on
starting this up?

A : They've always been really supportive—probably more
shocked than anything. But they weren’t really scared that I was
going into hock and might lose everything. They thought it would
be a good time to try it as well.

Q.: You have a $40,000 grub stake. You have $25,000 in the bank
for expenses. Youre living on the couch and you walk into a trading
firm in Chicago, what happens then?

A : Oh it was horrible [laughter]. I went to interview at all these
different shops and pretty much went with the one that didn’t
charge a seat fee. The shop I chose claimed they gave some good
training before you started trading. So I thought great because
I know nothing. I knew a little about fundamental and technical
analysis from college, but not enough to be a professional trader. So
I was hungry to learn, and I was also conservative with my capital.
Some of these seat fees were $500 to $1,000 bucks a month, which
I thought was just crazy. In hindsight, I probably would have been
better off going through a different shop that charged a fee.

Q.- why?

A : Because the shop I ended up going to had so many IT
problems.

Q: s0 execution was terrible. You were not able sometimes to
get in and out of positions because the computers went down?

A : Oh yeah, it was just misery. I mean [laughter] the worst place
to come in. The traders there were more swing-oriented, I think,

248


THE GREAT ADAPTER

just because maybe the software wasn’t lightening fast like some
of these other shops, where the guys were just in and out, in and
out, moving thousands and millions of shares per day.

Q : They would hold positions for an hour or two, sometimes
even overnight?

A : Yes. Guys were holding stocks for weeks. At the time, that was
the thing to do and they made thousands of dollars [laughter]. So
it was a horrible place to start, but it all worked out.

Q.: How long did you stay there?
A : [Sigh.] Let’s see, I stayed there probably a good two years.

Q_.: Really? As tough as it was, what happened in the first, let’s
say, two months? Were you down substantially?

A : Training class was me and probably 10 others. This was pretty
common. There were probably more than 100 people in the firm,
but it was a revolving door. New blood rolled through weekly. For
every one guy who was hitting it hard, there were 10 or 15 leaving.
Everybody from my class was gone in a couple of months. My
training class had a big thick manual and a lot of stuff I probably
shouldn’t have even been taught because it clutters the thinking.
And when my trainer got done, he said you're going to trade next
to me for the first couple of weeks. So I would put on 100 to 200
shares, do nothing crazy, and after about a week I was like, “This
is nuts.” These guys around me were throwing around big size,
trading tech stocks, making all this money. I was just prodding
around, not really making any money. So my trainer had to go to
Austin for a week for training [Laughter]. And after he left, there I
was putting on a thousand of everything, and it was a horrible two

249


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

weeks. I was holding stuff overnight, doing everything I shouldn’t
have been doing. When the branch manager walked up, I'd hide
my position blotter. I’m like, “Oh, everything's fine.” He’s like,
“Are you sure?” Yeah. He’d walk away. Of course, he knew the
P&L of everybody in the whole firm [laughter]. But, yeah, I took
a bath my first three to four months where I probably drew down
close to $20K—half my account.

: That’s still not bad given the fact that you were trading 1,000
share lots. At that time stocks were dropping a point a minute, so
you could have been hurt much worse.

A : Yeah, well mostly everything was going up five bucks every
hour [laughter]. Yeah, this was fall of 99.

Q.: 0, you would get long and strong, just buy everything, and

hope the market would rescue you?

A : Yes, but the stuff I was willing to get into wasn’t that good. It
wasn’t the big name stuff, and I didn’t know what I was doing.

Q.: what kind of stocks were you trading at that time and why
did you choose those stocks instead of the high flyers?

A : Good question. Probably because they were the cheaper price,
and I thought I could get maybe 1,000 or 2,000 shares on when
there was only 2 to 1 buying power. So it was a big thing if you
wanted to trade Qualcomm or Yahoo!. They were all premium
stocks at that time and tied up buying power. Additionally, the
moves were vicious to an inexperienced trader. So I was hunting
smaller, techie stuff. But obviously I didn’t pick the right ones
[laughter]. The first four months were misery in terms of trading,
and I had no business trading.

250


THE GREAT ADAPTER

Q.: What were you thinking throughout that time? Every day
you would come back home, you’d be beaten up, what was going
through your mind?

A : Horrible. I’d come up here [Chicago], and I was losing a lot
of money. I could have been back home earning money, growing
my other business, and know what I was doing. It just didn’t make
sense. So I said, I’m going to draw the line in the sand, if it gets to
this point, I’m just done.

Q.:s0 what was your time stop? Was it six months?

A: Well I think I started in August, so I was going into the end of
the year and I figured somewhere through the holidays and maybe
an extra month beyond that would be my max if it continued the
way it was going.

Q.: What made you keep on going?

A : I got lucky [laughter], extremely lucky. I started building a
little portfolio of these tiny biotech stocks—$3 to $5 stocks—a
few thousand shares of each. You could hold stuff like that,
and I was getting margin calls here and there. But there was
a service that met your margins calls for x amount of dollars
[laughter].

Q.- this sounds like the traders book of what not to do.

A : Oh yeah, to the T. I mean, I could have written that book.
So yes, I got lucky. Things really started booming, late ’99, early
2000 before the bubble burst in the spring. Suddenly these teeny
little things started running I was jumping on these trades and just
holding them instead of getting in and out of them.

251


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q - How long were you holding them for?

A : Usually from all day to maybe a couple or a few days. At times
I held them for a few weeks.

QO: How big were the runs? Let’s say it was a $3 stock, how big
would it run in two to three weeks?

A : Anywhere from 3 to 7 to 10 bucks or something.

Q:s0 you had a chance to sometimes triple your initial stake?

A : Yes. I probably went from somewhere in the ballpark of a
$30K account in 1999 to $120K by February 2000.

: And was this primarily based on holding positions in these tiny
biotech stocks that really started to run and were able to quadruple

your equity?

A : Right. That was a big chunk of it and some tech stocks. Better
guys trading around me held 15 to 30,000 shares by just holding it,
and I’m like, “Ifthey can hold that much, I can surely hold 3,000.” I

might make a few points on it, which at the time was huge. So that’s
kind of how I fit in the game. I still had no business being a trader.

Q. That is a good story, you hit the lottery.
A: Small lotto.

Q_; Now you are very decently capitalized. You’re at $120K.
We're in February, but we are on the precipice of the largest dive
in Nasdaq history. So what happens?

A : Yeah, it was high times, I was walking tall. I even started giving
my roommates some rent money [laughter].

252


THE GREAT ADAPTER

QO): Were you finally ready to leave your couch?

A : Yeah. Actually, you can only stay on a good couch for so long
[Laughter], longer than I should have. Obviously the bottom fell
out, and it didn’t kill me. But it put a little crimp on the easy
money. I had maybe lost 10 or 20 percent drawdown from highs,
but nothing I couldn’t recover from.

: At that point, it was an utter, sheer collapse. Did you learn to
take losses? Or did you simply not put on large positions?

A : Yeah. As I saw the bubble pop, something inside me said,
“Relax.” Everybody was still buying them, and it would sort of
bounce here and there. But overall, guys were just getting crushed
left and right around me. It was pretty sad to see. There were
guys—kids that made a million, two million over the last year—and
they were just giving it away at an alarming pace. The bells and
whistles went off at that point, and I started to look around the
firm and look for guys that weren't big traders taking these huge
swings. I tried to find anybody who was making consistent money.
There was one guy. He kept pretty private, but a nice guy. So I got
to talking to him. He said he always made around five grand, day in
and day out, no matter whether the market went up or down. He
said, “I’m not going to make $20K or $50K like that guy sitting next
to you. But I’m never going to lose money.” I said, “Wow, how do
you do that?” [laughter.] So that was when the light went on and
I said, “Okay this guy is an actual trader, not a buyem and hold’
em and hope for the best guy.” He’s actually trading stocks up and
down. I never really went short anything prior to that point. If you
wanted to trade—scalp—them both ways effectively, you had to
put on some conversions to enable selling on the downtick.

Q.- Lets just step back and explain what conversion is. At that
time you would basically be allowed to buy a put, right?

A : Yeah, it was a married put.

253


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q:a married put that would allow you to short the stocks because
you would be synthetically always long. So he sort of taught you
that there were two ways to go in the market—that you could make
money on the short side. So did you sit by his desk, observing him
for a while?

A : No. Once in a while I would watch him, but he was a pretty
private guy. He sat on the floor, but it was always hard to tell what
he did. He just traded a few stocks he liked, looked at the chart,
and if it moved around every day for a few points, it’s probably a
good one that you can get in and out of and trade up and down. So I
picked about four or five names to put conversions on. BroadCom,
Seibel, and Brocade were three of them.

Q.: very familiar names.

A : Yeah. I just started trading like 500 shares of them, up or down.
The first couple weeks were horrible because I was teaching myself.
I probably lost five or ten grand trying to do this.

Q.: Prior to this you're basically building positions. So you're not
really having too much daily turnover. You're not doing a hundred
round turns a day, right?

A: No, I wasn't.

Q:s0 now you slow down the size. You go down to 500 shares.
Clearly you have to do a lot more turnover to generate revenue.
How many round turns a day were you doing and were commissions
starting to become a much bigger factor on a cost basis at that
point?

A : Iwas doing 50 round turns. Ballpark.

254


THE GREAT ADAPTER

Q.: Right. At a 1,000 shares, how much commission were you
paying at that point?

A : Oh, it was horrible, a penny and a half maybe. I’m trading at a
third of that now [laughter]. Every hundred-thousand shares was
$1,500 bucks.

Q.- Right.

A : Outrageous, but we were making a lot more money because
we were still trading in fractions.

Q.: And fractions made it a lot easier to flip over. So, for the first
two weeks, you're trying to get the feel of it. It’s a lot harder than
it looks. What’s going on there?

A : [was thinking maybe I made a mistake, maybe this guy is just
really good and he’s got some secret that he’s not willing to give
up, because this is pretty hard. But the more I kept doing it, I kept
figuring out little things. I think it was more building a familiarity
with the stock. How the stock moved and really watching what
the overall market was doing in tandem. These stocks were pretty
highly correlated. So I would just short them, hold some wiggles,
and learn how to catch one or two point moves.

Q.: How long did it take you to become profitable?

A : A month to six weeks.

Q.: How much risk per trade would you allow yourself at that
point?

A : Well, there were occasional ones when I got stubborn. But
usually around a half point, I was getting out for sure—if I could.

255


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.:on those occasions when you got stubborn, what’s the worst
loss you took?

A : Doing regular scalping probably a grand or two. I did get
stubborn with overnights sometimes—that I would do on the side
after I had built up my account. Those were my worst trades. I
ended up losing 10 or $20K, on some overnight positions.

Q:s0 you would give back, sometimes, a week’s worth of work
on an overnight trade?

A: Yeah, and I would ask myself, “What am I doing?” I can make
money every day, why am I doing this overnight business? And a
few months later I find myself in another one,

Q.: What was the thing that attracted you to the overnights?

A : I think it was just the charts were so beat up and had these
huge ranges, and I tried to go in and bottom-pick some stuff.

QO. Except they kept going down. Did you average down on those
trades?

A : I would on occasion. But most of them were smaller-price
stocks, around 20 bucks. If they were at $150 and they came down
to $20 or so, I thought, “Wow, how much how lower can they really
go?”—and I found out [laughter].

Q.- you found out it can go to zero [laughter].

A: I never held something to zero. But I held stuff definitely way
beyond where I should have got out.

256


THE GREAT ADAPTER

OQ: 50, when you were day trading, would you go for a half a point

to a point on your winning trades for these 500-share positions?

A : That’s pretty safe to say. At that point I'd say a lot of my money
came from the open, where stuff would just scream two, three, four
points either way—sometimes both ways within an hour- to two-
hour period. So that was probably where 80 percent of my profit
was coming.

: And did you learn to read the open? You learned how to
successfully trade the open, which is what gave you the profitability
edge, is that right?

A. Yes. I knew it was essential. If you were going to spend a hard
two hours working, that was time to do it.

Q.: would you trade preopen, would you watch the activity

preopen?

A: I pretty much just walked in, had my coffee, the bell rang, and
I'd start to work. I really didn’t do any, pre- or postmarket analysis.
At that point I was trading as a scalper. I didn’t care about much
outside of Level 2.

Q.:s0 you really learned how to read Level 2?

A : Right. My style is momentum based. I never really tried to
fight the overall market either.

Qui it was screaming up, did you buy the offers?

A : If thought I was early enough—those days with fractions
you could—there could be a quarter- or half-point spread in some
of these things. If you entered 1,000 shares you're down $250 out
of the gate. But sometimes you just get the feel for the way the

257


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

markets and these stocks were moving. It was only by trading four
or five stocks that I developed a feel and was in-sync with how they
move.

Q.: But generally you try to always buy the bid, sell the offer?

A : When I could, but when stuff started moving, I realized it cost
you more if you didn’t go in and get it early versus watching it run
a point or two.

Q.: Right. And then you would try to offer out, right? You would
at least try to make half of the spread by just trying to get yourself
lifted on the offer?

A : Yes, I’d always try and get out and make the spread. I would
refrain from exiting to bid or offer. But on the flipside, when things
turn, they would turn fast. So it was a quick decision, whether I
want to try to make an extra dime or quarter—or if I should just
get out and lock in a winner.

Q.: Now most of this kind of trading was really not software
driven. What we mean by that is when you get into a trade, you
didn’t have a predefined stop-loss automatically in your software.
You would have to physically take yourself out of the trade, right?

A : Right.

: So a huge amount of this was very reactive. You had to make
lightening-fast decisions based upon the movement in Level 2?

A : Right. As fast as our software would let us [laughter], which
at times, was brutal.

258


THE GREAT ADAPTER

Q, : sometimes you would just get stuck in queue and the whole
thing would spin forever, and you wouldn’t know if you got out of
position or not, right?

A : Oh, it was horrible.

Q.: what do you think made you different, made you success-
ful in this kind of very instinctive, seat-of-the—pants type trading
that most people absolutely fail at miserably because the speed,
the pressure and the ability to quickly make decisions is just over-
whelming?

A : [ think it’s the same reason that I’m still around today. I just
got done saying I was pretty undisciplined and could have done
things a lot better back then. But I was still, I think, above the rest
of the guys in the room in terms of self-discipline and patience.
Additionally, I moved to a better software platform.

: In other words, you would be selective about your trades and
you would be disciplined about getting out of the trades?

A : Right. Taking winners was part of it. You know there were
plenty of trades where, if held them a little bit longer, I would
have made more. But there are plenty of trades where, if they did
the same thing and I just waited another minute to exit because I
thought it might go in my favor, I would have lost a lot more. So
I came to understand that you can’t pick the top and the bottoms
of your trades. You have to be willing to take money while it’s still
in your favor and cut your losers small. It sounds simple, but most
can't do that.

Q.- Right.

A : Lock in your winners and keep losers small. But that was so
hard for some guys to do. They were just losing, bleeding thousands
and thousands around me. It was really sad to see.

259


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q..we can imagine.

A : Some of these guys were good friends.

Q.: That was the one thing that really kept you in the game—just
protecting your capital?

A : Yeah. I found a system that worked consistently. So, pretty
much day in and day out, I was making money.

Quits this the core of a system you still use today?

A : Exactly. And it’s changed a lot because of the markets. The
stocks and prices have changed. It’s been a game of adaptation
ever since, but the core remains the same.

Q.: without revealing the key algorithms behind your system,
what’s the cornerstone of it? Can you share some of the broader
philosophical principals behind it?

A. I would say it’s still momentum based. I still follow the market.
I don’t try and fight it.

There are great traders out there that fade stocks. The market
is screaming up. They're getting short and waiting for that rollover
when it happens. They bank sometimes really well. But I tried
to fade stuff and [laughter] you can start fading way too early
and build up a sizeable loser. I'd rather wait for a reversal and
join.

Q.: The other thing we want to ask you is just on a mechanical
basis. Are you a single-entry, single-exit type of a trader? Or do you
scale out?

260


THE GREAT ADAPTER

A : I would say I try and scale most of the time. But then there
are times it’s clear that I’m going to lose or need to bail quickly. I
don’t really scale out when I’m losing. I just bang out.

Q.:s0 you don’t average down? You just take your loss and go,
right?

A : Right.

Q.- But if you're in the money, you give up maybe half the position
to bank some profit and then try to milk the rest?

A : Yeah. Over the years I’ve been able to enter and sometimes
add to the winners.

Q.: Really?

A. Before, when I held a position and it was going my way, I always
used to lock it in, bid out, offer out. Now if it’s early enough, and I
think I’m really right and see something shaping up, I will add to
it early on.

Q.: when you add, do you typically add same amount of size,
half the size, or do you have any kind of parameters as to what size
you would add on when scaling up?

A : The smaller stuff, anywhere from half to doubling my position.
The higher price stuff, half at most.

Q.:s0 this way if it comes in, if it starts to go back against you,
you can at least get out or break even, right?

A : Right. I mean, obviously, there are cases where breakeven
doesn’t appear [laughter].

261


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: Right. You never want to turn a winner into a loser. How often
does that happen? When you add up to the position, it’s always
the danger point of that kind of strategy. But how often does that
happen where you know you're right, you think it’s going to go, you
add, and then it just viciously turns and the winner becomes a loser?

A : On occasion. The key is being disciplined to scratch it or take
a small loser. All losers start small.

Q:s0 you basically never let it go below breakeven on average-up
trade, right?

A : Try not to, unless there’s something really big telling me to
hold it, maybe a nickel, 10 cents below my entry.

: But really, no more than dime below your entry, that’s your
uncle point?
