food frenzies and all that fatness pointed to a more fundamental
problem. Costs were most out of control in the mortgage department.
Who cared? Revenues had always been what mattered. "You're going to
go and change the rules on us now?" was the response of a few traders.
There had been so much revenue in the mortgage department between
1981 and 1986 that costs were a trivial issue. But as revenues subsided,
costs all of a sudden mattered, too. A managing director of government
sales was moved to the mortgage department in late 1985 and
simultaneously put in charge of Salomon's expense committee. That
wasn't just a coincidence. Someone had to control these people!
Many mortgage traders felt that since they were underpaid to begin
with, and their boss agreed they were underpaid, the Salomon Brothers'
expense account could be used as a soft-dollar compensation system.
They developed bad habits. "We used to send firm limos to pick up
friends at the airport. We'd lend our telephone charge cards out to
friends. For Christ sake, people would use Salomon limos to take their
wives shopping on the weekends," says one of the traders. "I have the
ultimate expense story," says a woman from the mortgage finance
department. "One of the people in the department put through enough
phony expense reports from fictitious trips to visit clients to buy
himself a Saab with the proceeds." This irked the Strauss family.
Voute's feelings toward Ranieri were more a mystery than Strauss's.
But, then, Voute himself was more a mystery. While the other managing
directors swarmed across the forty-first-floor trading room, Voute was
an invisible link high in the chain of authority. He had an office on the
fortieth floor, he appeared occasionally in the newspapers, but one never
actually saw him. The one time I laid eyes on him he was standing beside
his limousine in a photograph over a 1987 article in Business Week. The
short article underneath said how Bill Voute would sure like to be
chairman of Salomon Brothers. In spite of his reclusiveness, the initial
move to dismantle the mortgage department came from his corporate
bond family.
At the insistence of Voute and Strauss, a corporate bond managing
director named Mark Smith entered the mortgage department at the
end of 1985. "You could call him a spy," says one mortgage trader. "You
might call him a Trojan horse," says another. "You can't call him a Trojan
horse," says a third, "because we all knew what was inside, but Michael

wouldn't listen." In fairness, Mortara didn't have much choice but to let
the horse through the gates. He could hardly resist the demands of
Voute and Strauss. Only Ranieri could have done that. The question
which had been on the tips of mortgage tongues was voiced for the first
time: Where was Lewie?
Mark Smith was the first Big Swinging Dick to be seconded to the
mortgage department from some other part of the firm (excluding Ranieri). The department had always been a family characterized by internal
solidarity. Six months after Smith joined them, the first internal
squabbles occurred. Smith persuaded Mortara to move Jeff Kronthal off
the mortgage desk (Ranieri's protege off the mortgage desk!) and into
the corporate bond department. Smith then insisted on bringing Larry
Stein, a government salesman, into the mortgage arbitrage trad ing unit,
which consisted of Nathan Cornfeld, Wolf Nadoolman, and Greg Hawkins.
Stein agreed to move on the condition Nadoolman be fired. Nadoolman
was a profitable trader, but more important, he was a loyal member of
the Ranieri family. Stein belonged to the Strauss family. Nevertheless,
at the end of 1986, Mortara fired Nadoolman. The air was poisoned.
MERRILL HAS $250 MILLION LOSS ON UNAUTHORIZED TRADING,
announced a headline in the Wall Street Journal of April 29, 1987. And
then the small print: "Executives at Merrill Lynch privately identified
the trader as Howard A. Rubin, 36 years old, who had been the firm's
head mortgage trader. They said he had far exceeded his limits in
acquiring mortgages that were packaged into a particularly risky form of
securities. The package involves splitting off the interest payments on
the mortgages from the principal and selling each separately. They are
known as 'interest-only/principal-only' securities, orlOPOs."
Wall Street reporters were frantically trying to find out both who this
man, Howie Rubin, was and what was meant by lOPOs. And though they
eventually learned, how Howie Rubin lost more money on a single trade
than anyone on the history of Wall Street remained one of the most
beguiling mysteries on Wall Street. Not only had he seemed until that
point to be one of those people who always landed on their feet, but he
had been a raw talent. In the words of Lewie Ranieri, "Howie Rubin was
the most gifted trader I have ever seen." The story Merrill Lynch gave
to the press was that Rubin had deceived them. A Merrill executive told

the Wall Street Journal that Rubin "just put them [the bonds, the
lOPOs] in his drawer. We didn't know he owned them." Just put them in
his drawer? Could the upper management of a leading
firm like Merrill Lynch be caught so entirely off guard?
A couple of weeks before the loss was announced, Rubin had lunched with
a large buyer of mortgage bonds, Ernie Fleischer of Franklin Savings &
Loan in Ottawa, Kansas. Thrift management, in general, was slowly
improving, and Fleischer was at the vanguard of the change. He prided
himself on beating Wall Street at its own game. Rubin explained IDs and
POs to Fleischer (remember that they are a mortgage bond split in two.
The interest goes to one investor; the principal to another). Fleischer
liked what he heard. And while they were still at the lunch table,
Fleischer asked Rubin to sell him five hundred million dollars of lOs.
In agreeing, Rubin took a flier. He sold Fleischer the interest payments
on five hundred million dollars' worth of bonds. That left him with the
principal portion of the same bonds. The deal was consummated over
dessert. Fleischer returned to Ottawa, and later boasted how he had
made ten million dollars taking the other side of a trade that cost the
Wall Street slickers a fortune.
The problem for Howie Rubin was how to dispose of his five hundred
million dollars of POs. No bond plummets faster when interest rates go
up than an PO (for reasons not really worth going into; believe me).
Rubin's risk was, therefore, that the bond market would fall before he
had a chance to sell the POs. The bond market, when he returned from
lunch, felt jittery. And he tried to off-load his POs through the Merrill
Lynch sales force. But it was unable to sell them. Then the market
collapsed. After a couple of days Rubin found himself with a loss too
large to admit. Some say that at this point he bought more POs, doubled
up his bet. Though it would certainly have been in character, there's no
evidence he did anything of the kind. No one seems to know why things
got out of hand. Yet everyone has an opinion. And what all of Rubin's
former Salomon teammates swear, from Lewie Ranieri on down, is that
Howie Rubin didn't hide the bonds in any drawer. The only version of the
story they accept is that the management of Merrill Lynch hadn't a clue
what a PO was, hadn't established any rules for its use, had permitted
Rubin to assume a huge risk, and then used him as a scapegoat for its
ignorance. In the newspaper stories that followed the incident,

anonymous traders from Salomon Brothers were quoted repeatedly
defending Howie Rubin. It was as if he were still part of the Ranieri
family.
To split a mortgage bond into its interest and principal components, the
bond must first be registered with the Securities and Exchange
Commission. SEC registration is a public event. The rest of Wall Street
therefore saw Howie Rubin at Merrill Lynch register to issue five
hundred million dollars of lOPOs. Mark Smith, Voute and Strauss's man
in the mortgage department, took note. He argued that Salomon
Brothers should follow suit.
On the face of it, his suggestion made sense. The Merrill Lynch package
of IDs and POs was overpriced. Smith figured that if Merrill could sell
the fragments of mortgage bonds for such high prices, then Salomon,
with its stronger sales force, should have no problem with a similar,
cheaper deal. What he didn't know, of course, is whether Howie Rubin
had actually sold his entire deal. But investment banks love nothing more
than to undercut one another. So Salomon did the deal. Salomon issued
$250 million worth of lOPOs.
By pointing out that the Salomon POs were cheaper than the Merrill
Lynch POs, the Salomon sales force managed to move the dreaded things
out the door to investors before the market collapsed. Of course, this
completely undermined Howie Rubin's efforts to escape disaster. That
left Salomon Brothers in a position similar to Ernie Fleischer; it owned
lOs, which rose in price when the bond market went down. That was fine;
everyone at Salomon expected the market to crash. And instead of
offering the lOs to the public, the firm kept them on as a bet. The
mortgage arbitrage group—consisting of Greg Hawkins, Nathan Cornfeld,
and Nathan Low—bought $125 million of the things. And the group of
traders managed by Liar's Poker champion John Meri-wether bought the
rest. Only one trader on the forty-first floor of Salomon Brothers
seemed to have a view that differed from the rest: Mark Smith. In his
trading account he, like Howie Rubin, owned hundreds of millions of
dollars of POs (bought weeks before).
Smith was known around Salomon as an able speculative trader. His nose
told him the bond market was due for a rally. He felt so sure of his bet
that he told Hawkins, Cornfeld, and Low how stupid they were to bet
against him. He occasionally wandered past John Meri wether's boys to

tell them that he, not they, had made the right gamble. The bond market
felt good; it was going up.
When the market first dropped, it dropped slowly. But it was enough to
wreak the havoc at Merrill Lynch that made the front page of the Wall
Street Journal. A few days before the story, a market rumor alerted
Salomon Brother's that Merrill Lynch was sitting on hundreds of millions
of dollars of POs it needed to sell. After a couple of days of decline,
Smith, who had lost a small fortune but was still in the market, took a
body count and decided that it was time to buy a few more POs. After
all, Merrill Lynch was panicking, and that, as we all know, presents a
chance to buy cheaply. So he bought more POs, and though they were not
precisely the ones Howie Rubin owned, his position was virtually identical
to Rubin's. For the next few days the market stayed calm.
When the market resumed its decline, it fell famously, like the apple
from the tree. Both Meriwether's boys and the mortgage arbitrage
department very quickly made tens of millions of dollars. Smith, however,
began to lose even more millions of dollars. Estimates of his losses by
four people close to the situation range between thirty-five and seventyfive million dollars. But it didn't matter. Meanwhile, the mortgage
arbitrage traders kept their lOs, and their profits were growing. That
gave Smith, a veteran schemer, an idea for how to get his money back.
He began by telling people in high places that all along his bonds had been
meant to be bundled together with the bonds held by the mortgage
arbitrage group—Hawkins, Cornfeld, and Low. He said it often enough,
and he was senior enough (a managing director) that the right people
apparently chose to believe him. After all, he was effectively a boss of
mortgage trading. He then informed the mortgage arbitrage traders
that their profitable lOs actually belonged in his trading account. He said
he had planned to package his POs at his purchase price with their lOs at
their purchase price and sell them off to investors. So the mortgage
arbitrage profits were swallowed up by Smith's losses!
Smith was stealing profits from other traders. What was worse, in the
view of the mortgage traders, Smith was a corporate trader. It was a
signal to everyone that something was very rotten in Salomon Brothers.
A member of the arb group recalls that "it got so we'd come in in the
morning and say, 'Oh, we made another two million dollars on the lOs.
Guess Smith will take that, too.' " Later, much later, Smith would be

severely reprimanded in Gutfreund's office for what he had done. But
that would be too little too late. Cornfeld quit and joined Shearson
Lehman. Low quit and went to work for Bear Stearns. Even Larry Stein,
whom Smith had introduced to the mortgage department, quit in disgust.
For a brief time there were calls from around the firm for Smith's
head, but that ended when the rest of the mortgage trading department
was fired. Where had Lewie been?
Although it was not widely known, while Smith was poaching profits from
the mortgage arbitrage books, Ranieri was, in his mind anyway, no longer
officially in charge of mortgage trading. "In December 1986 John came
to me and said, 'I want to dismantle the mortgage department. I want
you to help manage the firm as a whole,' " says Ranieri. "The department
didn't exist as a separate entity. It was a part of fixed income trading,"
he says.
In May 1987 John Gutfreund told Salomon's 112 managing directors at
the annual managing directors' weekend in New York, "We created an
Office of the Chairman because running Salomon Brothers is beyond the
scope of any one man. As with any team, the challenge is to share the
tasks, bring a diversity of opinions and insights, and yet work with a
singularity of purpose. / am very pleased with how the group is gelling.
Over time, the other three members will gravitate to fewer direct line
responsibilities in order to have more time for Firm Management."
Two months later, on July 16, 1987, he fired Ranieri. Ranieri had been on
business on the West Coast when he heard from Gutfreund's secretary
that Gutfreund wanted to see him. He was told to meet Gutfreund in the
midtown offices of Wachtell, Lipton, the prominent securities law firm.
"We met up there in Marty's [partner Martin Lipton] office when we
didn't want to create a fuss and there was an emergency," says Ranieri.
"I thought the South Africans—i.e., Minorco— wanted out of their
shares. I had no idea what was up."
The meeting lasted about ten minutes and left Ranieri stunned. When
asked why he was fired, Ranieri says, "I still don't know." Gutfreund gave
Ranieri three reasons at the time, all of which Ranieri (and others) found
absurd. He started out by telling Ranieri, "No one likes you anymore."
Then he said that Ranieri was "a disruptive force" and that he'd became
"too big for Salomon Brothers." When Ranieri moved to adjourn the
meeting and drive downtown to collect his belongings, Gutfreund told him

he wouldn't be permitted in the building. Clearly the thought of a coup or
a general strike had crossed Gutfreund's mind, as large numbers of
Salomon employees owned their chief allegiance to Ranieri. Ranieri's
secretary was to be allowed to pack his personal
effects in the company of a Salomon security guard.
"When news reached the mortgage desk that Lewie'd been fired,
D'Antona was visibly shaking," says one mortgage trader still at Salomon.
It was clear to everyone—to Lewie; to Wolf Nadoolman, now at Dillon
Reed; to Nate Cornfeld, now at Shearson Lehman; to Andy Stone, now at
Prudential-Bache; to everyone left on the mortgage desk— what would
happen next. The Ranieri family would be purged. Over a period of a few
months the firm fired what was left of the old guard on the mortgage
trading desk, beginning the next day with the head of training, Michael
Mortara. Then John D'Antona, Ron Dipasquale, Peter Marro, and Tom
Gonella. The lone trader of Italian descent left on the desk was Paul
Longenotti, who appeared at work one day wearing a button that said,
"Fire me, I'm Italian."
The sole trace of the origins of one of the most unusual and profitable
businesses in the history of Wall Street is a picture. It hangs in Jim
Massey's office, and it shows Gutfreund, Ranieri, and Bob Dall, crossing
hands to signify the founding of their joint venture in 1978. Jeff
Kronthal and Mason Haupt were allowed to stay, as co-heads of mortgage
trading, presumably because no one else at Salomon Brothers knew
enough to do the job. The following year, however, Kronthal quit to
become vice-chairman of L. F. Rothschild, a New York investment bank
recently purchased by, of all people, thrift manager Ernie Fleischer. That
left Mason Haupt as the only man at Salomon Brothers expert in
mortgage securities. The ignorance about mortgage bonds at the top of
the firm was truly remarkable. After the purge Gutfreund, Voute, and
Strauss arranged to have a private seminar given by the head of Salomon
bond research, Marty Leibowitz. The subject: an introduction to
mortgage securities. Voute was eventually named head of mortgage
trading.
Ranieri had accomplished what he set out to do: put the mortgage
department on equal footing with corporate and government bonds. The
U.S. mortgage market is now the largest credit market in the world and
may one day be the single largest bond market in the world. Ranieri's

creation signaled a shift in the focus of Wall Street. Wall Street,
historically, had dealt with only one side of the balance sheet: liabilities.
Mortgages are assets. If home mortgages could be packaged and sold, so
could credit card receivables, car loans, and any other kind of loan you
can imagine.
Salomon Brothers expertise fertilized the rest of Wall Street. Michael Mortara became the head of mortgage trading at Goldman Sachs—
the leader in mortgage bond trading in the first half of 1988. Peter
Marro heads mortgage trading at Morgan Guaranty. Andy Stone heads
mortgage trading at Prudential-Bache. Steve Baurn heads mortgage
trading at Kidder Peabody. Tom Kendall heads mortgage trading at
Greenwich Capital Markets. Steve Joseph heads mortgage trading at
Drexel Bum-ham Lambert. Jeff Kronthal heads mortgage trading at L. F.
Rothschild. Wolf Nadoolman, Nathan Cornfeld, Nathan Low, Bill Esposito,
Eric Bibler, and Ravi Joseph are senior mortgage traders for,
respectively, Security Pacific, Shearson Lehman, Bear Stearns,
Greenwich Capital markets, Merrill Lynch, and Morgan Stanley. That is a
handful of the most visible Salomon mortgage traders on Wall Street.
Beneath them in their corporations are thousands of people who now
make their living in mortgage bonds.
Of course, the most curious of all former Salomon Brothers mortgage
traders is Howie Rubin. Soon after being fired by Merrill Lynch, Rubin
was hired by Bear Stearns. Rumor had it that Bear Stearns called him
the morning that news of his $250 million loss hit the Wall Street
Journal. Outside Merrill Lynch, Rubin's loss was taken in stride, even
with humor. A pair of Bear Stearns mortgage traders nailed shut his new
desk drawers, so that he couldn't "just put them in his drawer" again. A
Salomon mortgage trader telephoned to suggest that Rubin volunteer for
an American Express card commercial. "Hi, you don't know me, but I lost
more money trading than anyone in the history of Wall Street. So I know
the meaning of credit. And when I get in trouble ... I pull out this little
card. ..."
Lewie Ranieri opened his own firm half a mile north of Salomon Brothers.
(This one really is called Ranieri & Co.) Soon after his dismissal a
confused Ranieri had lunch with the man who had dragged him kicking and
screaming into mortgages, Bob Dall. Dall says, "I have two theories why
John fired Lewie so soon after he had promoted him. One is that John

realized all of a sudden he had made a huge error—that Lewie was too
parochial and would put his department first, even if he was vicechairman of the firm. The second theory is that the office of the
chairman got sick of listening to Lewie. Lewie dominates a meeting. He's
not the kind of guy who likes to hear himself talk, but he has all these
passionate beliefs. It's too bad that Strauss, Voute, and Gutfreund
couldn't take it, because they could have benefited from listening to
Lewie."
Ranieri himself refuses to believe he was done in by the man who had
protected him when times were tough, the man he called "my rabbi." He
believes that Tom Strauss managed to obtain control and that Voute was
willing to bide his time, while giving Strauss enough rope to hang himself
(as it happened, the truth, if anything, was the opposite. Voute quit
Salomon in December 1988, leaving Tom Strauss as the sole pillar
beneath the teetering Gutfreund). Ranieri has never relinquished his
notion of the firm, formed when the faceless, nameless partner paid his
wife's hospital bills for no reason other than it was the right thing to do;
when the firm was run by men who said, "It is more important to be a
good man than a good manager," and meant it. Ranieri prefers to think of
Salomon Brothers as temporarily in the hands of strangers to its culture.
"The only way you can understand what happened," says Ranieri, "is that
John Gutfreund was not in control. Strauss was in control. Tommy wanted
absolute power. They managed to destroy a colossus in a year. John
would have never done that to himself if he were making the decisions. I
can't imagine what they [Strauss and Voute] said to John to get him to
do what he did. They never understood that the greatness of the firm
was its culture. They shattered the culture. Or as the people say, they
broke the covenant. They branded themselves for-evermore." And with
that, a nineteen-year journey from a Wall Street mailroom to a Wall
Street boardroom ended.
Chapter Eight
From Geek to Man
Men in general judge more by the sense of sight than by the sense of
touch, because everyone can see but only a few can test by feeling.
Everyone sees what you seem to be, few know what you really are; and
those few do not dare take a stand against the general opinion.

-Niccolo Machiavelh, The Prince
I'M NOW CONVINCED that the worst thing a man can do with a
telephone without breaking the law is to call someone he doesn't know
and try to sell that person something he doesn't want. On my lap, as I
began my young career in sales in London, sat a book full of funny French
names I couldn't pronounce. My boss, my jungle guide, a native of Bald
Knob, Arkansas, named Stu WLllicker, had told me to get my butt on the
phone and start earning a living. "Call everyone in Paris," he said. "And
smile."
He didn't actually mean everyone in Paris. That was just for effect. I
was meant to call only French money managers with fifty million dollars
or more. That whittled the field down from the white p-ages of the Paris
phone book. I had found another book for the purpose., called The
Euromoney Guide. To get your name listed in something called The
Euromoney Guide, I figured, you needed to have some money. The first
name listed was F. Diderognon. What was that? Man or woman? I asked
my American jungle guide how it should be pronounced.
"How should I know? I thought you spoke French," he said. "No, that was
just on my resume," I said.
"Oh," he said, and scratched his head for a minute, figuratively. "That's
all right, the frogs all speak English anyway."
I was stumped. No choice but to dial. But that didn't solve the problem:
F. Diderognon. Might it not rhyme with onion? Was the first part like the
name of the philosopher? I decided to try "Diderot's Onion," quickly. My
jungl-e guide was staring at me, as if I must be some mistake. I dialed.
"Oui," said a male frog.
"Uh, puis-jeparle a F. Diderognon?" I asked.
"Quoi? Qui?" said the frog.
"F. Diderognon. Di-der-o-onion," said I.
The man on the other end covered the receiver with his hand. I heard
only muffled background conversation, but it sounded suspiciously like
"Frank, there's some American broker who can't pronounce your name on
the phone. Do you want to talk to him?"
Then another voice: "Find out who he is."
"Hey, who are you?" the man asked.
"My name is Michael Lewis, and I'm with Salomon Brothers in London," I
said.
