
22

FIGURE 2.4 Japanese Yen with Breakdown

Trend Analysis

23

So, in this case, we go short on a break of the first swing low and place
a protective stop loss just above the most recent swing high, which, in this
case, is the second high on the chart.
The market then sells off and we are off to a good start on our short
position. However, the fourth swing low turns out to be a higher low as you
can see in Figure 2.5. I’ve marked it as a higher low.
Now, we didn’t know that low was a higher low until the close of the
next day. We need to see that extra day to let us know that day was a
swing low. So we now see at the end of the day after the swing low that the
swing low was, indeed, a swing low! We look back at the two most recent highs and see that the market is still making lower highs but we are
now making higher lows. That is one of the definitions of a neutral market and our rule is that we must be on the sidelines whenever there is a
neutral market. We exit the position on the open the next day for a modest
profit.
We are now flat on the open of the day after the day after the swing low.
We now look at the chart and notice that a break to below the most recent
swing low would turn the market bearish. We put in a sell order to sell on
a break of the most recent swing low. This move occurs later that day and
is marked in the chart with a downward pointing arrow. We don’t know
when we will make a new swing low but we do know that it is guaranteed
to occur so we go short. Our protective stop on this trade is way above the
current market at the most recent swing high, which is the second high on
the chart and was also our protective stop on the first trade. Remember,
we don’t need to actually see a lower low; we just have to know that one
is guaranteed to come. And that guarantee comes when we break the most
recent swing low.
We then make a lower swing low the following day and a lower swing
high four days after getting short. We now get to lower our protective stop
to just above the new lower swing high. Four days later, we make an even
lower swing high so we lower our protective stop to just above that level.
The market then collapses, putting us into a nice profit position. Notice
that we don’t lower our stop at all until we finally make a lower high in midOctober. We go over two weeks with the old stop.
This is one of the interesting features that you will have to deal with as
a trader. Remember that we want all stops to fulfill two conditions. First,
we don’t get stopped out on some random move and, second, we don’t
want to exit a position until after we know we are wrong. Trend analysis
often gives the trader lots of room to work so that he or she is only stopped
out when those two conditions are in place.
It can be psychologically difficult to watch a market drop dramatically,
producing a big profit, yet the stop is not moved closer in the hopes that a
bigger profit is to come. It is better to sometimes sit back and let the market

24

FIGURE 2.5 Japanese Yen with Second Breakdown

Trend Analysis

25

run. Here’s what legendary trader Jesse Livermore said in Reminiscences
of a Stock Operator (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1994):
And right here let me say one thing: After spending many years in
Wall Street and after making and losing millions of dollars I want
to tell you this: It never was my thinking that made the big money
for me. It always was my sitting. Got that? My sitting tight! It is no
trick at all to be right on the market. You always find lots of early bulls
in bull markets and early bears in bear markets. I’ve known many
men who were right at exactly the right time, and began buying and
selling stocks when prices were at the very level which should
show the greatest profit. And their experience invariably matched
mine—that is, they made no real money out of it. Men who can
both be right and sit tight are uncommon. I found it one of the
hardest things to learn. But it is only after a stock operator has firmly
grasped this that he can make big money. It is literally true that
millions come easier to a trader after he knows how to trade than
hundreds did in the days of his ignorance.
That’s right: Sitting is how he made his money. The point here is that
traders should stick with positions that are making money. Don’t exit them
prematurely. I’ll talk more about this in a later chapter.
Going back to Figure 2.5, we see that the market continues to drop off
a cliff to the circled swing low seen in late October. Two sharp up days
create a new lower swing high and we get to lower our protective stop to
that new swing high. We then get stopped out for a significant profit five
days later.
This sequence of swing highs and lows and the resulting trades gives
you a clear idea of how to trade the trend in the market. It is technical
analysis stripped down to the absolute essentials.
Let me repeat the rules. Go long the moment the market moves into a
pattern of higher highs and higher lows. Note that all four points don’t have
to exist to get long but three of them do have to exist and the fourth must
be in the process of being formed. The reverse is true for bearish markets.

MEGAPHONES AND PENNANTS
There are two neutral market formations to look out for: megaphones and
pennants. You want to be looking out for them because it is harder to see
entry points when the market is in a neutral phase than when it is in a bull
or bear phase. Also, it will save you time if you can identify a megaphone
formation because there is no entry possible with this formation while it is

26

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

very likely that you will be filled soon on entering the market when there is
a pennant formation.
A megaphone formation occurs when the market is making higher
highs but lower lows. As a result, it looks like a megaphone if you draw
a line connecting the highs and a line connecting the lows. Okay, it may
look like a funny-shaped megaphone but you get the idea.
Take a look at the first swing high in November, shown in Figure 2.5.
We have just put in a new swing high that is higher than the previous swing
high of a week earlier. Note that the two most recent swing lows are forming lower lows. In sum, we are making higher highs and lower lows and
thus forming a megaphone formation. This means that there is no possible
way to enter the market. We can’t be a buyer or a seller. We can’t buy if
we make a new high because it is still a neutral market because we are still
making lower lows. We can’t sell if we make a new low because it is still a
neutral market because we are still making higher highs. Don’t waste time
looking at this pair if there is a megaphone formation because there is no
way that you can get long or short. Go look at something else! Don’t waste
time here!
On the other hand, a pennant formation is an excellent sign that a new
trade is imminent. You should be able to get long or short quickly. Let’s look
at an example. In Figure 2.5, start at the beginning of October and look to
the left or back in time. Note that the two most recent highs are making
lower highs. Note that the two most recent lows are making higher lows
(the most recent low is just barely higher than the previous low).
In this case, we can put in two orders: (1) buy on a break of the most
recent high, and (2) sell on a break down below the most recent low. It
is likely that one of these two orders will be filled soon since a pennant
formation is a formation where prices are winding up into a narrower and
narrower range. It usually doesn’t take long for the market to break out of
the range and start to trend in one direction or the other.
A megaphone formation occurs when there is no direction in the market and a lot of volatility. I don’t want to trade in a market like this. There
is too much risk, due to the lack of direction yet high volatility.
A pennant formation occurs when the market comes into balance. Neither the bulls nor the bears have enough power to get the market to trend.
That means that prices wind into a narrower and narrower range. At some
point, either the bulls or the bears will gain enough strength to push the
market out of the range and into a trend. We will be ready for this breakout
no matter what direction it occurs. We will have orders to buy on a break
of the most recent high and orders to sell on a break of the most recent
low. Notice also that the stop on a pennant formation is likely to be fairly
close to the market. Keep an eye out for pennant formations! You are about
to make a trade!

Trend Analysis

27

AVERAGE DIRECTIONAL INDEX
I think that I have the greatest mentoring clients. I provide a mentoring
service through the Investment Mentoring Institute. One of the great joys
is that I get to learn a lot. My students are diligent about making money
so they intensely investigate the markets. One of them came up with an
improvement on what I was teaching and I want to share it with you.
First, let me tell you about average directional index (ADX). Here is
how StockCharts.com (recommended for stock traders!) describes ADX:
J. Welles Wilder developed the Average Directional Index (ADX) to
evaluate the strength of a current trend, be it up or down. It’s important to determine whether the market is trending or trading (moving sideways), because certain indicators give more useful results
depending on the market doing one or the other.
The ADX is an oscillator that fluctuates between 0 and 100. Even
though the scale is from 0 to 100, readings above 60 are relatively
rare. Low readings, below 20, indicate a weak trend and high readings, above 40, indicate a strong trend. The indicator does not grade
the trend as bullish or bearish, but merely assesses the strength of the
current trend. A reading above 40 can indicate a strong downtrend
as well as a strong uptrend.
ADX can also be used to identify potential changes in a market
from trending to non-trending. When ADX begins to strengthen from
below 20 and moves above 20, it is a sign that the trading range is
ending and a trend is developing.1
J. Welles Wilder constructed ADX as an indicator that measured how
strong a trend was no matter if it was up or down. The idea was not to
identify the trend but the strength of whatever trend was in place. I won’t
go into how the index is constructed because there is plenty of information
on the Internet.
I’ve tried many ways to use ADX but virtually everything didn’t work.
All of the commonly explained ways to use it aren’t successful. So here are
the two ways that you can use ADX to enhance your profitability.

ADX Filters
This is the method my student shared with me. I was going along teaching trend analysis and channel breakouts (discussed in Chapter 3) and my
1
http://stockcharts.com/school/doku.php?id=chart school:technical indicators:
average directional

28

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

student used ADX as a filter for the trades I was teaching him. He used
ADX to identify which trend analysis and channel breakout trades to take
and which ones to leave alone. Guess what? His filter improved the performance of the basic techniques.
Stop and think about it. Trend analysis is a trend-following technique.
We will make the most amount of money when the trends are strong and
even lose money when the market is not trending.
The filter takes trend analysis trades only when the ADX is higher than
it was the prior day. Don’t take the signal if the ADX is lower than the day
before. It’s that simple. What this does is to take out any trades that may occur while the market is not trending. A declining ADX means that the market is not trending so the filter is taking us out of trades when the market
is not trending. Only getting into trades when the ADX is climbing means
that we are getting into markets that are already trending in our direction.
This increases the potential size of the winning trade while also reducing
the chances of a losing trade.
This filter will sometimes eliminate a winning trade but it eliminates
far more losing trades to create a net improvement to the bottom line.

THE BISHOP
The second way that I use ADX is for a technique I call the Bishop because
it is almost infallible. This is an exit-only strategy. It is so simple that everyone always seems to make it more complicated than it is.
Take a look at Figure 2.6. Across the bottom you will see the ADX
indicator. Actually, there are two lines on the chart but you should only
look at the line that is more volatile. The other line is a smoothing of the
first line.
I look for the ADX line to be above 40 and then turn down. I then exit
my trend-following positions in all the techniques that I teach in this book,
including trend analysis and channel breakouts.
I never look at the ADX if it is below 40. I exit my positions on the first
down day, no matter how small a downtick, in the ADX. Let me repeat: I
don’t care about any other pattern or level. I only care that ADX is above
40 and ticks lower. I’m only concerned with the day of the downtick after
being above 40. I don’t care about the day after the day it turns down. Don’t
complicate this indicator! Keep it simple.
There is one Bishop signal on this chart. Notice the peak in the ADX
near the end of October. The ADX is above 40 and then turns down
one bar after the lowest bar on the chart. We would then exit all of our

29

FIGURE 2.6 Japanese Yen with ADX Indicators

30

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

trend-following positions in trend analysis, channel breakout, and CoFlex
and go flat.
This signal was a great signal at the time, as it got us out of the market
the day after the low in the market at that time. We were able to take some
great profits in the various method.
We don’t get many Bishop signals but they tend to be great when we
do. I find that about half of the signals are astounding and get me out at or
near the end of a trend. The others get me out at a good time but I end up
getting back in later.
One of the issues of trend following is that you generally have to give
back a fair portion of the profits when you finally exit the position. Trend
following is designed to get you to take out the middle of the move of a big
trend.
The Bishop is a major enhancement of classic trend following because
it allows you to take profits at or near the end of the trend in many cases.
Not all cases but a good percentage of times.

THE BOTTOM LINE
Trend analysis is a solid profitable performer. It is a method that will get
you into bull and bear markets of intermediate length. It guarantees that
you will make money while the market is trending strongly but it will also
enable you to profit from a short-term trend.

CHAPTER 3

Channel
Breakouts
The Trend Is Your Friend

robably more money has been made using channel breakout techniques in forex than with any other technique. This is a pretty strong
statement. But you can look at the 10 largest CTAs or public forex
trading companies and you will see that virtually every one of them is using
some form of channel breakouts.
This incredible precept should make every trader stand up and pay
very close attention; it should be a core technique for every forex trader.

P

THE BEGINNINGS OF
CHANNEL BREAKOUTS
The first real description of channel breakouts came from investing pioneer
Richard Donchian. Donchian was the creator of the first publicly traded
futures fund, in 1948. He was an innovator in the field of technical analysis.
His ideas form the basis for some of the most successful traders of all time.
He was the person who first coined the term trend following and was one
of the most important technical analysts of all time.
One of his most famous and successful ideas was his Four-Week Rule.
He designed it for trading stocks and futures but the concept works for
forex. The basic rules are incredibly simple to follow.
You buy the currency pair when it makes a new four-week high or sell
when it makes a new four-week low. If you get long, then you reverse and
go short if it makes a new four-week low. If you get short, then you reverse
and go long if it makes a new four-week high. That’s it! Simple!
31

32

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

Turns out that this simple system has been consistently profitable
since he first wrote about it in the 1960s. However, there have been many
enhancements by others to the basic rules outlined by Donchian.
There has been a lot of research into channel breakouts in the intervening years. Channel breakouts became perhaps the most dominant form
of trend following in the 1980s. Famous traders, such as Richard Dennis,
became incredibly rich and famous using channel breakouts. Now, billions
of dollars are being traded using channel breakouts.
I think that the basic premise behind channel breakouts was that prices
would drift sideways unless a new fundamental environment came into
play. New fundamental data would cause the market to need to discount
that new information and cause the price to move in one direction or another. This movement caused by a change in the fundamentals would trigger a buy or sell signal on the channel breakout. The channel breakout was
not predicting a change in prices but was adept at identifying them.
Another way to look at it was to consider what must be happening in
a market to cause the price to make a new one-month high. Something, we
don’t know what, must be happening that is significant in order to cause
the price to move to a new one-month high. Note that generally bigger
fundamental factors are necessary to break longer channels. It is likely
that something far more significant is happening when a pair makes a new
three-month high than if it makes a three-day high.
This is a critical concept. Generally, we can gauge the power of the
move by the length of the breakout. It takes a bigger fundamental change
in a market to make a new 52-week high than a new five-day high. I pay
much more attention to new 52-week highs than five-day highs. Take note
of this concept!
I’m going to show you how to trade channel breakouts, including my
own enhancements.

WHAT IS A CHANNEL BREAKOUT?
A channel breakout is simply a breakout of the high or low of a certain
number of days in the past. For example, to find the entry and exit points
for a 20-day channel breakout, you look back over the last 20 days of price
and identify the highest price and the lowest price during that period of
time. Those are your initial buy or sell points. You put in a buy order just
above the 20-day high and a sell order just under the 20-day low.
Let’s assume you are not filled on the first day. On the next day, you go
back 20 days and again identify the high and low for that period. Most days,
the 20-day high and low will not change. You do this every day to define a

Channel Breakouts

33

new 20-day high price and a 20-day low price. Every day, you would put in
a new buy order just above the new 20-day high and a sell order just below
the new 20-day low.
Eventually, you will be filled on either the long or the short side. Your
initial stop is the entry order on the other side of the channel. For example,
you are trading EUR/USD and the 20-day high is 1.50 and the 20-day low
is 1.40. I like to buy three pips above the breakout level. So in this case,
you enter an order to buy at 1.5003 and an order to sell at 1.3997. The price
trades up to 1.5003 and you are filled on the long side. Your original stop
loss is 1.3997, which means that the original sell order now acts as your
stop loss. You don’t have to do anything. Just leave that original sell order
with your broker.
Once you are filled on the long side, in this example, place a new order
to sell at 1.3997. Now you will have two orders to sell at 1.3997. You need to
do this because the first order there will exit the long position but you need
the second order to get you short. Classic channel breakouts are always in
the market, either long or short.
Let’s look at Figure 3.1 to bring this to life. I’ve selected this chart because it shows both trending and nontrending markets. It shows both typical winning and losing trades.
The chart shows the British Pound from March through November. I’ve
put a 20-day channel on the chart. Remember, the 20-day channel on any
given day is simply the highest and lowest price for the previous 20 days. At
the end of every day, you will put in orders to buy slightly above the 20-day
high and sell slightly below the 20-day low.
Early in April, the Pound dropped below the 20-day low, thus triggering
a sell signal getting us short on the Pound. We already have in an order to
buy above the 20-day high but we add another similar order to make sure
that we get long if the Pound rises above the 20-day high. Remember, we
are always in the market using the classic channel breakout technique. So
if the price traded up to above the 20-day high, we would get stopped out
on our short position but also go long. That means that we need to have
two buy orders above the 20-day high.
The market continued down over the next week and our trade looked
good. Note that our stop at the 20-day high doesn’t change for almost
two weeks. That’s because the highest price for each of those days didn’t
change. However, in mid-May, the top line representing the 20-day high
finally started to drift lower. You would lower the protective stop and the
long buy order each time that the 20-day high moves lower.
The Pound then drifted sideways through the end of April but broke
down again in early May. The price of the Pound started to rally in mid-May.
It rallied almost up to the top line of the channel but never surmounted
it. The Pound then dipped down to the 20-day low in mid-June. That dip

34

FIGURE 3.1 British Pound

Channel Breakouts

35

was followed by a rally that eventually caused a break of the 20-day high
line near the end of June. You would be stopped out of the previous short
position and would also get long. You would have lost about 250 pips on
the short position and be long with a stop at the 20-day low line.
We get a few days of follow-through but the market then turns lower
into early July. The market then hits a new high in mid-July and we are
thinking we are genius traders. We also are raising our stop just about every
day during this time as the 20-day low line increases.
However, the market then starts to drop and we get stopped out and
go short very early in August. This trade loses us about 200 pips.
The market then plunges at the beginning of September. The stop loss
is starting to move lower but is still very high above the current price. We
are up about 1,900 pips on a mark-to-market basis. But then a sharp rally
starts in the early part of September that hits the top of the 20-day channel
in the third week of September where we are stopped out with a profit of
about 1,000 pips and go long at the same time.
That position would then be stopped out in the first week of October
for a loss of about 1,200 pips and we would also go short at the same time.
We would still be short with an open profit of about 2,200 pips at the end
of the chart.
This technique would be called the 20/20 system because we use the
20-day high/low to enter the position and the 20-day high/low to exit the position. Note that the 20/20 is essentially Donchian’s four-week rule (4WR),
since there are 20 days in four weeks.
We would have ended up being profitable during this period of time but
it would have been an aggravating profit. We’ll make some enhancements
to the system to improve it.
I don’t recommend using this system. I just wanted to show the concept
of channel breakouts using the simple four-week rule. The 20/20 system is
profitable, but there are other superior methods you can use.
