
Investor Education at Its Best
“I have gone to great lengths to learn about investing. I attended business
school as an undergraduate and graduate student, and worked for a retail
brokerage firm and for a small-cap research firm that supported institutional
clients. Even after all this experience, it wasn’t until I read How to Make
Money in Stocks that I began to understand how to succeed in the market.”
Andrew M, New York, Vice President
“My students were participating in the Stock Market Game and struggling
with losses. Then they started using Investor’s Business Daily. IBD helped
my students reverse big losses and win third place in the Stock Market
Game. IBD has helped motivate my students to get great information in an
easy-to-use format. It’s given them the tools to research and make investment decisions, and become their own independent investors.”
Stephen D., New York, High School Teacher

Success Stories

“I’ve been a subscriber to Investor’s Business Daily since 1991. This is
investor education at its best. I fired my broker two weeks after I got IBD. I
told him I didn’t need him anymore. I trade over 150,000 shares each year.
I used to have no savings, but because of IBD, my net worth is well over 1
million dollars. I run it as a business. I’m just an average guy, I’m not a
genius, but I study a lot and use IBD. That’s how I succeed. It’s more than a
newspaper; it’s a working document.”
George G., Georgia, Pilot Trainer
“Investing in the stock market would be impossible for me without William
O’Neil’s incredible books, Investors Business Daily, and Investors.com. The
new additions to the newspaper are a terrific place to search for potential
buys in top sectors. I also look forward to watching the Daily Stock Analysis
and Market Wrap videos every day at Investors.com as part of my ongoing
learning. Thank you for an educational newspaper full of incredible financial
wisdom and levelheaded thinking in the editorial section. The newspaper
incorporates facts, history, and what is best for our nation in its daily articles.
Bravo for a job so well done.”
Amy S., California, Individual Investor
“My stock life before IBD had no direction. I had no idea there was anything
to learn. Life after IBD opened my eyes, and my mind. I don’t ever expect
to stop learning!”
Marilyn W., Ohio, Retired
“Investing without the IBD is like trying to live without water. The IBD will
give you the proper structure to make informed and assessed decisions
about the general market or a particular stock issue, intelligently. I have
taught the principles of the paper to several hundred of my college students
over the past four years, and they have had fantastic results. They do not
invest without it, and neither do I.”
James D., Florida, College Instructor
“Spend a year learning everything there is to learn in IBD. It’s like getting
your doctorate in investing without going to four schools. It’s the easiest,
quickest way to become a savvy investor, regardless of how much you have
to invest.”
Julie P., Colorado, Author, Nutritionist
“I have been subscribing to IBD since first studying stocks about 1990 and
would not do without it. I read it every day, and it is like my right hand.”
Averie M., Florida, Retired
“Over my 18 years of teaching junior high, high school, and college, I have
used a wide variety of texts, videos, Web sites, newspapers, magazines, computers, and board games in teaching my students about investing. Without
question, IBD has been the most exciting and pertinent resource I have ever

433

434 Success Stories
used on the basis of student success in investing as well as student motivation to use the resource.”
Mike S., Texas, Teacher

Real Performance
“After six months with a broker and no results, I found Investor’s Business
Daily. I started with $50K. When I sold everything, I had $174K. Thanks so
much.”
Larry R., Illinois, Doctor
“I figure I’ve made more money in stocks using IBD as my daily resource
than I’ve made as a CPA over the last 10 years.”
Robert F., Illinois, CPA
“With Bill O’Neil’s guidance, I was able to reach my goal. I now can enjoy
and support my 12-year-old twin sons, trading stocks as a single, work-athome Dad. Bill’s stock wisdom allowed me to grow and protect my hardearned money plus enabled me to live a more rewarding lifestyle.”
Tim K., California, Chief Investment Officer
“I’ve been reading IBD since its inception. I started with $5,000, and three
years later, it escalated to $50,000. Why? Because of IBD. Need I say more?”
Fred B., New York, Arbitrator
“Since I started using CAN SLIM and IBD, and now Investors.com, I was
able to make 359% on my original investment! IBD has so many features
that help me find the great stocks. I’m grateful for all the work you do to
help investors.”
Kathleen P., California, Individual Investor
“I subscribed to Investor’s Business Daily for the first time after I retired. I
started using it for my stock portfolio because I wasn’t happy with my brokers. With them, my portfolio was racking up losses. With IBD’s help, over
time I was able to get my portfolio back in the green with 20% and 30%
gains. I took a portfolio of $400,000 to $700,000 thanks to IBD. I love IBD.
I talk it up wherever I go.”
Don R., Washington, Restaurant Owner
“For more than ten consecutive years, we’ve realized a compounded
57% annual return. CAN SLIM and IBD played a preeminent role in that
success.”
Florence R., Texas, Investor
“I started investing more than ten years ago. I was not very consistent until I
was introduced to Investor’s Business Daily. I’ve been profitable ever since.”
Ash M., Hawaii, Business Owner

Success Stories

“After reading IBD, learning the CAN SLIM investing system, and reading
IBD founder Bill O’Neil’s books, I’ve become successful enough to be a stayat-home Dad. Thanks to IBD and CAN SLIM, my dreams have come true.”
Eric K., Illinois, Individual Investor
“I have been reading IBD since the late 1990s. I’ve employed the CAN
SLIM rules, and they allowed me to comfortably retire last May. This is the
only paper I read for financial investment advice. I continue to recommend
IBD to all my investor friends.”
Frederick D., Michigan, Retired
“How about an investor up over 130% in 2008? Investors Business Daily is
where I look to make it happen!!!”
John B., Illinois, Real Estate Broker
“By following IBD’s rules, I have quadrupled my account since May 2003.
IBD has also helped me remain flat this year in a severe bear market. The
best thing is that the rules are very easy to learn and follow, and I have lost
money only when I tried to put my own ‘wrinkles’ on them.”
Edward K., Arizona, Retired Doctor
“Thanks to Investors Business Daily and Mr. O’Neil’s CAN SLIM, my
401(k) is still +10%. I have continually kept my losses at less than or equal to
8%. This with taking 20–25% gains with the occasional larger take has
resulted in investment success. Thank you.”
Don B., Michigan, Retired Anesthesiologist
“Starting in 1999 with $5K in savings and $7K in wedding presents, I used
the CAN SLIM system to make over seven figures by 2008.”
Jonathan S., Tennessee, Individual Investor
“I am glad to say I have kept almost all of my profits from the 2003 bull run
thanks to your publication. . . . IBD is an excellent data source about the
markets and can help individuals and professionals make better decisions
about how to invest their money.”
Bruce W., California, Attorney
“With my knowledge from IBD, I have experienced excellent performance
in my investing from the late 1990s to October 2007.”
Bob K., Hawaii, Mechanical Engineer
“Between the dot-com bust and 9/11, my portfolio lost nearly half its value
over two years. Though I subscribed to the Wall Street Journal at the time,
it did not prevent my loss. I subscribed to Investor’s Business Daily and
found it much more informative on investing. Soon, I found myself reading
IBD rather than the WSJ. It was more to the point and was tailored to individual stocks rather than worldviews and mutual funds. I have never looked
back. Using the knowledge I gained from IBD on reading stock charts and

435

436 Success Stories
trends, I bought into stocks for triple-digit gains among many other doubledigit-gain stocks. IBD has paid for itself many times over with what I have
learned from CAN SLIM and other resources available. Thanks, IBD! I will
be a lifetime subscriber.”
Kenneth G., Michigan, Utility Planner
“I believe in results: I made my monthly salary in three days using IBD. I’m
a believer! I’ve looked at several investing sources. IBD and Investors.com
are the only ones that made me more money than I spent learning it.”
Kent J., California, Manager
“I sold a business, and after a couple of years with GS money management,
I decided that I must manage my money myself. It wasn’t long before we
realized that IBD is the only daily publication that sincerely wants to help
people make money in the market. That’s why we’re so loyal to the paper.
We don’t look at any other sources of information of any kind because it only
confuses the issue. It’s tough to shut down those media inputs. IBD has been
wonderful for us. It works very well, and every year we’re doing better
because we see the results in the portfolio. In our second year using IBD we
had a 26% gain, and it’s only gone up substantially since there.”
Michael D., California, Retired
“In 2006 I used a number of newly acquired CAN SLIM skills to buy into
Hanson Natural and to pyramid and force-feed my growing position to the
point where I had nearly 80% invested in HANS. Following CAN SLIM
principles, I sold my entire position May 11, 2006, for near perfect timing.
This one trade made my year and enough to cover for lean years the following two years. I would not have traded with this success without using IBD.”
Joseph S., Pennsylvania, Executive
“Investors Business Daily is one of the best things that has happened to our
family from a financial point of view.”
Roger D., Iowa, Teacher

Tools That Work
“The ‘Big Picture’ keeps me focused on proper interpretation of general
market averages. I also use the IBD 100 for confirmation that stocks I might
be interested in are seen in the same light by the experts at IBD. I like the
entire B section: ‘Stocks on the Move’ shows where the action is; industry
group rankings let me know where to focus research; the stock research
tables grouped by leaders make it easy to see what stocks are leading. I could
keep going. The A section is excellent for keeping up on important news.
The paper is so well organized.”
Mark R., Washington, Individual Investor

Success Stories

“I love reading the IBD newspaper—the ‘Big Picture,’ ‘IBD’s Top 10’ news
stories, and many more. It keeps me focused on what’s happening with the
stock market and the economy. While IBD provides a superior wealth of
information for finding good stocks, this newspaper is also an excellent
space- and time-saver. It makes it so easy to take anywhere I go. Thanks to
the IBD staff for their great work.”
Paul C, Maryland, Investor
“The IBD 100 is the foundation of my portfolio. It provides a list of stocks
that I assess from a fundamental and technical basis. The quality of the
stocks maximizes the probability of a trade.”
Steve M., Colorado, Equity Trading Manager
“The ‘Big Picture,’ ‘Investor’s Corner,’ ‘NYSE & NASDAQ Stocks in the
News,’ along with the Market Wrap and Daily Stock Analysis videos, ‘Stock
Checkup.’ and ‘IBD University’ at Investors.com, are the features I use the
most to help me stay on top of the market, select strong stocks, and learn to
become a better stock investor. All are invaluable.”
Alex J., California, Student
“I read the ‘Big Picture’ first because it is the starting point for getting a feel
for how the market is going. Once you have that information, you can make
informed decisions on how to proceed with investing decisions. IBD is the
premier investing document that provides everything for everyone, from the
beginning investor to the most advanced investor. Taking full advantage of
all of the many features will give you the best chance of success.”
Cliff B., Texas, Retired U.S. Air Force

The Confidence to Win
“IBD changed my life in that it gave me full confidence as a self-directed
investor, and it presented the right information that has allowed me to grow
and preserve my portfolio. What began as an education blossomed into a
passion, and this was the real life change for me.”
Mary L., Tennessee, Realtor
“I’m a beginning investor who knew nothing about the stock market.
Through Bill O’Neil’s How to Make Money in Stocks, 24 Essential Lessons,
and the excellent coverage, education, and tips provided in IBD and
Investors.com, I find myself more knowledgeable than most people I know
who’ve been investing for years.”
Kim P., California, Individual Investor
“William O’Neil enabled me to do something even my CPA was not able to
do: master my finances.”
Mike H., Florida, CPA

437

438 Success Stories
“I got started in the market in 1990 after reading I believe it was your second edition, and what it did for me is truly unbelievable. You really explain
every aspect of the market so well. I also have been a subscriber to the
Investor’s Business Daily since that year and spend two hours per day on it.
Thanks for helping to make me secure in investments.”
Ruth B., California, Individual Investor
“Using Investor’s Business Daily—both the newspaper and Investors.com,
along with the Daily Graphs and my own research—I am extremely confident of continuing to make money in the markets.”
Daryl T., Texas, Computer Programmer
“IBD and Investors.com have been a tremendous teacher & tool for me.
IBD is one of the few resources I’ve found that not only gives information in
an understandable way but also includes instruction on deciphering information that makes sense. Thank you for taking the intimidation out of
investing!”
Sherrie C., Nevada, Investor
“IBD and CAN SLIM empower me with the information I need to manage
my money more successfully. I’m in charge of my money, so it’s important
that I understand how to invest it. And IBD is so good for that. Knowledge
is power, and that’s why I read IBD.”
Carol M., Oregon, Planning Commissioner

Oldies but Goodies
The third edition of How to Make Money in Stocks featured IBD readers
who achieved investing results or shared how they learned to use the IBD
and CAN SLIM system. We thought we should reprint a few of these comments in hopes they might provide helpful insights for you.
“Labor Day, 2001
Dear Mr. William O’Neil and Investor’s Business Daily,
As a huge enthusiast of Investor’s Business Daily and all of your written
material, I can’t write enough explaining how much your works have
changed my life.
I first came across How to Make Money in Stocks in the fall of 1997
through reading reviews of it on Amazon.com. I was living and teaching in
Guatemala at the time, and was looking to get involved in investing and the
stock market. Consequently, I ordered How to Make Money in Stocks and a
few other books, but it was your book, based on historical research, that
intrigued me the most. I reasoned that you had seen both great times and
rough times in your over 40 years of trading, while most other books had

Success Stories

research based only from the 1990s. In addition to that, you used both technical and fundamental analysis rather than concentrating on just one
method. The other books I read advocated either one analysis or the other.
I was further convinced that your system of trading was for me when you
wrote how David Ryan and Lee Freestone had won U.S. Investing Championships using the CAN SLIM system.
What complements How to Make Money in Stocks perfectly is Investor’s
Business Daily. I had clipped out the coupon in the back of your book for a
free two-week subscription to IBD, and when I received the paper for the
first time, the whole system made sense to me. Finding the CAN SLIM
stocks was so much easier to do using IBD, and the paper had so many other
great articles, including Leaders & Success, The New America, Stocks in the
News, and my favorite, Investor’s Corner, that further enhanced my insights
into trading. I immediately subscribed to it, even though $180 was a lot for
me at the time. Then, even though the paper would arrive in Guatemala
three days late each day, I could still use its valuable information for
research.
I read everything I could in the paper and decided to use it in my profession of teaching. That year, as I was teaching English as a Second Language
in Guatemala, I also taught one class of fifth-grade gifted and talented
students.
I introduced them to IBD, and they ate it up. These students, and my
other students later, especially loved the stock tables because each stock is
graded like they are graded, using 1–99 and A through E or F. Students were
always coming up to me and saying things like, “Look at this one! It’s got a
99, 99, and AAA.” I have even taught my students to look for cups with handles, and they have enjoyed the challenge of that, too.
I moved back to Denver in the summer of 1998 and continued using IBD
both personally and professionally. I had the same success here, with many
of the same student reactions as I did in Guatemala. Then, last year, during
the 2000–2001 school year, I taught a sixth- through eighth-grade afterschool business club. Using IBD, I helped my students participate in the
Denver Post annual stock market competition. One team, a group of two
Ethiopian boys and one boy from the Philippines, all of whom had only been
in America for a year, won second prize in the state! In fact, the only problem I’ve had using IBD in my classroom is when these students fought over
who got IBD’s “Your Weekend Review” section on Fridays.
As a result of this success utilizing IBD in my classroom, I have a lot of
other ideas for using IBD in education. If you ever think about creating a
curriculum outreach program, I’d love to share them with you. There is so
much in IBD that would be great for schools!
As far as my own investing, I still read IBD daily and subscribe to Daily
Graphs Online. I am more confident now and strongly feel that when this
bear slowly turns itself into a bull, I will be able to find and buy, at the pivot

439

440 Success Stories
point, the next Qualcomm, JDSU, or Qlogic. (The pivot point took me about
three years to completely appreciate!) At first, I was the typical beginner
with no discipline. I would cheat on the CAN SLIM rules, simply buying
anywhere and anytime regardless of what the chart showed. I also bought
Internet stocks simply because they were Internet stocks. And I tried many
other methods looking for instant profit and success. All in all, during my
first two years of investing, I “nickeled and dimed” my account to very low
points, dragging my ego down with it.
Finally, I disciplined myself and made a CAN SLIM checklist. I swore
that I wouldn’t violate any of the system’s rules. As a result, my successes
have increased. And even though the market during the last year and a half
has been rough, I did make a few nice trades, such as with Techne, Skechers, International Gaming, and Direct Focus. I have read and reread Chapter 10 [“When to Sell and Take Your Profit”] in How to Make Money in
Stocks about 20 times so that I can remain focused for the next rally. I’ll be
shooting for the stars like you did from 1962 to 1963.
In conclusion, I would also like to express my appreciation for your love
and respect of America. I have taught and traveled in many countries, and it
is easy to say that America isn’t perfect, but I feel, as you do, that if you work
hard in America, great things will come. My father came to America as a
poor, young immigrant in 1950 and has built up a great mason business, all
through hard work. He always told me that if you work hard and remain positive, you can achieve anything you want. I feel that you and IBD express this
same sentiment every day. And believe it or not, I bought my father a subscription to IBD for his birthday, and now he loves it, quotes from it, and
reads it every day!
Most importantly, however, I want to thank you for the great work you do
and the great information you print daily. It is greatly appreciated!
Sincerely,”
David C., Investor
Dr. Larry R., Pastor:
“I started studying the market in March 1999.
After six months with a broker and no results, I went to the library, found
Investor’s Business Daily, and decided to learn to invest on my own. I
started last September with $50K. When I sold everything in March after
reading your latest book, I had $174K. Made most of my money on cupwith-handle formations and reading your book, How to Make Money in
Stocks. I am a minister and want to use the money to start churches here in
Illinois. My goal is to start 13 churches in the next few years. Thanks so very
much for sharing your strategy with others.”

Success Stories

Ed S., Investor
“Our son financed a trip around the world through his investing. A lot of the
knowledge he gained was learned from IBD. I would describe it as a tool in
your ongoing education on what investing can do for you. New investors
need to understand that education is what will take you forward . . . not a hot
stock tip. . . . IBD gives them that education.”
Michael G., Investor
“I would like to take this opportunity to thank you all for making it possible
for me to invest in not only the various markets but the future of my family.
I have found your information to be interesting, easily understood, and,
when used correctly, profitable. The results have been the same for those of
my friends and family who have chosen to read and subscribe to IBD. Your
complete approach to investing is excellent, from mind-set to execution.
Whenever I have been able to successfully apply information/insight you
provide (industry, EPS/RS, chart pattern, etc.), I have traded successfully.
The greater my understanding of your information, the more successful the
trade. I have now been taught the tools to recognize when a trade may not
go as planned, and, most importantly, when to sell. That lesson alone has
been invaluable.”
Marilyn E.
“I saw Bill O’Neil on CNBC in the late 1980s and tracked his market calls,
and he was accurate! An eye-opener! In learning Mr. O’Neil’s CAN SLIM
system, my husband and I have been able to retire early and build the house
of our dreams, and look forward to years of travel in Europe . . . a life we
never dreamed we could achieve before we had IBD in our lives. We have
now happily become accustomed to annual 100% returns in our portfolio in
up markets and appreciate being safely on the sidelines in the bear markets.
Thank you!”
