reasons to be away from the house most of the time, the hubbub began to dim, her hangers-on hung out with
Susie elsewhere, and the rhythm of the house slowed from its all-day carnival atmosphere. Peter, never much
attuned to his parents’ lives, noticed only the growing silence, not its cause. When he got home from school,
he petted Hamilton, made something for himself for dinner, and headed downstairs to the darkroom.42
Warren’s conception of his marriage had never changed, even though the marriage itself was changing
inexorably. When he was home, Susie still seemed just as devoted to him as ever. He saw how active and
busy she was and wanted her to be fulfilled, as long as she continued to take care of him—which he assumed
was fulfilling to her. As far as he knew, the balancing act that had always worked for them still did.
***
The “retired” Warren was investing at full throttle ahead in late 1973, in the midst of a market swoon.
Between Cap Cities and the Washington Post and his growing friendship with Kay Graham, his interest in
media over the past few years had permutated into a deep understanding of the subject at all levels. One night
at dinner in Laguna Beach, he and Carol Loomis started strafing Buffett’s friend Dick Holland, who worked
in advertising, with questions about the advertising business. “Whenever he did that,” Holland recalls, “I
always knew something was cooking.” The four of them talked business while Susie and Mary Holland, in
purdah, entertained themselves. Sure enough, as a secondary way to play media, Buffett got on the phone to
his trader and plunked down almost $3 million for the stocks of advertising agencies Interpublic, J. Walter
Thompson, and Ogilvy & Mather, stocks so distressed he paid less than three times their earnings.
While he was buying, however, most of the stocks that Buffett had accumulated were faltering. As 1974
began, stocks for which he had paid $50 million had lost a quarter of their value. Berkshire, too, started to
slide, down to $64 per share. Some of the former partners who had kept the stock began to worry about
whether they had made a mistake.
Buffett saw it just the opposite way. He wanted to buy more Berkshire and Blue Chip. But “I’d run out of
gas. I had used all the $16 million of cash I got out of the partnership to buy stock in Berkshire and Blue
Chip. So all of a sudden I woke up one day and had no money at all. I was getting $50,000 a year salary
from Berkshire Hathaway and some fees from FMC.43 But I had to start my personal net worth over again
from zero.”
He was now very, very rich but cash-poor. The companies he controlled, especially Berkshire Hathaway, had
cash to buy stocks, however. To move some of Berkshire’s money to Diversified, Buffett set up a reinsurance
company—a company that insures other insurers44—in Diversified. This company, Reinsurance Corp. of
Nebraska, agreed to take part of National Indemnity’s business, receiving premiums and covering losses.
Because National Indemnity was so profitable and generated so much “float”—premiums paid ahead of
claims, i.e., cash—sending part of its business to Diversified was like sending a pipeline into a river of money.
As time passed, it would give Diversified millions more dollars to invest.45
Buffett began to buy stocks for Diversified. Principally he followed the Wattles model and bought stock in
Blue Chip and Berkshire Hathaway. Soon, Diversified owned ten percent of Berkshire. It was almost as
though Berkshire was buying back its own stock—but not quite. Diversified’s owners and Berkshire’s
weren’t the same. Buffett still forbade his friends to buy Berkshire—whereas he, Munger, and Gottesman
were partners in Diversified.46
At the time, even though the three did each other business favors and swapped stock ideas on occasion, their
interests didn’t necessarily align. Asked later under oath if he was Buffett’s “alter ego,” Munger said no. He
acknowledged similar mannerisms and ways of speech. But “I’ve never chosen a role of being a junior
partner,” he said. “I like the idea of having a sphere of activity” of my own.47 On one occasion, Munger said,
he had found a block of Blue Chip stock that he and Gottesman wanted to buy for Diversified. Buffett
wanted to take the block away from them and buy it for Berkshire Hathaway. After “a discussion”—clearly

about who needed it more—the combined strength of Munger and Gottesman had somehow overpowered
Buffett, and Diversified got the stock.48 At least that way they kept a little share.
Still, Buffett did own forty-three percent of Diversified, so its purchases of Berkshire had added almost five
percent to his personal ownership. Buying through Diversified was particularly attractive in that it tended not
to ratchet up Berkshire’s stock price. Hardly anybody was paying attention.49
But why did he want it at all?
“Berkshire was not worth more than forty bucks as a business. You couldn’t have sold the textile mills and
insurance business for more. And half the money was in a lousy business, I mean a really lousy business:
twenty bucks a share of the forty bucks. And I didn’t know what I was going to do, I literally didn’t. I mean,
I was rich enough already. But in effect, I was betting that I could do something. I was betting on myself.
And though it sounds egotistical, anybody who might have thought it was worth more than forty bucks was
purely paying for me. Because the company was not worth that.”
He didn’t know what he was going to do, except invest. Verne McKenzie, who had returned from New
Bedford to become Berkshire’s controller, thought that to Buffett, it simply “looked like an interesting game.
All he was doing was solidifying his control.” That he was, and doing so in the manner in which he always
approached investing—as a collector, one who bought in secrecy to avoid tipping off other bargain hunters.
But as the chairman of Berkshire Hathaway and Diversified, he was once again mostly buying from sellers
who had been his former partners. Although perfectly legal, it was not exactly sporting conduct. But their
willingness to sell, in his mind, ended his special obligation to them.
Buffett had also been buying Blue Chip Stamps all along, though so far, Blue Chip had remained primarily
Munger’s province. It owned the best of the businesses, however, namely See’s. Now Buffett began to
pursue Blue Chip stock like a great white shark after a well-fed seal. Since he had far greater financial
resources, Buffett’s ownership percentage of Blue Chip quickly surpassed the combined interest of his
partners in that stock, Munger and Rick Guerin—Munger’s associate from the Pacific Coast Stock Exchange,
who now ran an investment partnership of his own.
Buffett bought Blue Chip wherever he could get it. He bought from Blue Chip’s management and from other
directors. One of these, Z. Wayne Griffin, asked $10.25 to Buffett’s bid of $10. Reaching an impasse on the
phone, Buffett recalls that Griffin suggested they flip a coin. He was taken aback by Griffin’s willingness to
do this, sight unseen. From that fact alone, Buffett realized not only that Griffin trusted him, but that he had
already Buffetted himself. Griffin called it heads. Obviously, if he made such a bet, he was willing to take the
ten bucks, which he did.
Buffett’s accumulation of all these stocks, however, differed from his buying in the era of cheap cigar butts.
Two large question marks hung over Blue Chip, Diversified, and Berkshire. As Buffett solidified control, all
that money pouring in to both Berkshire and Diversified from the insurance business would have to be put to
good use. And the bet on Blue Chip’s legal problems would have to work out.
By year-end 1973, Blue Chip had settled eleven lawsuits.50 All that remained was the Justice Department’s
ruling that it divest one-third of its business. That would not be easy because “the President’s freeze on food
prices is another knee in the groin for us,” Don Koeppel wrote. “The grocers are screaming, predicting huge
losses, bankruptcy in some cases.”51 Inflation had run rampant, President Nixon had frozen prices on
commodities to try to halt it, and commerce had entered a new era of trying to match rising costs to frozen
consumer prices.
The stamp business was dead, but Buffett, the implacable acquirer, had his stock. After this series of trading
gyrations, Blue Chip had Wattled its way into the set of Russian dolls. “It was the same principle,” Buffett
says. Including all the pockets in which he had bought shares indirectly, he owned more than forty percent of
Berkshire and more than twenty-five percent of Blue Chip Stamps. Even though these stocks traded at
depressed prices, he could fund more deals and buy more stocks because all of the dolls had their own

self-charging batteries, “float,” cash that could be invested in advance of paying claims. This innovation
dramatically improved the deal.
The operating businesses themselves had also improved since the dismal days of windmills and fire maps.
Along with See’s, Berkshire owned not only the whopping float-generator National Indemnity but also a
clutch of little insurance companies that Buffett hoped would eventually turn into small power-houses, even
though he was struggling to whip them into shape. Meanwhile, the deadweight of Hochschild-Kohn had
disappeared and Buffett kept shrinking the textile mills.
But in the bigger picture, what Berkshire, Diversified, and Blue Chip really possessed were two things. The
first was the homeostatic business model—the idea of grafting float onto a holding company so that it could
respond internally to the changing environment. The second was the power of compounding, as float and
investments doubled and redoubled over time.
The novelty and strength of Buffett’s model cannot be overstated. Nothing else like it existed, or would for
years to come. “That was the golden period of textbook capital allocation,” he says.
The timing was stupendous. Capital from the insurance companies was pouring into Berkshire and DRC at
the same time that the market was collapsing, the environment that Buffett liked best. While he had not yet
decided exactly what to do with the collective enterprise he had built by the end of 1974, of two things he
was certain. One was the business model’s power, and the other his skill in using it. Above all, he had
confidence in himself.
“Always,” he says. “Always.”

39
The Giant
Omaha and Los Angeles • 1973–1976

Howard Buffett was one of those rare people who prospered in the aftermath of the 1929 stock market
crash. Now his son’s star was rising during the second great crash of the century.1 But the world had
changed; stardom, even in business, now meant fame. Buffett had closed his partnership during a media
explosion in the United States in which cable had transformed television, newspaper companies were going
public, and advertising was still in a golden age of selling to a monolithic audience in which virtually the
whole nation sat down together on Tuesday nights and watched Happy Days.
Buffett had entered the media world as an investor drawn to the business by a natural affinity. But as he
embarked on a new, post-partnership phase of life, through the publicity he got from the Forbes story in 1969
and then from the Supermoney profile, he began to enjoy the fruit of the discreet use of profile-raising press.
Now he was a subject of media interest, not just a media investor; and no less a personage than Katharine
Graham was paying him attention and taking him seriously, which had brought him into the orbit of one of
the most important newspapers in the United States.
As was her habit with powerful men, Graham reached out to him for help. Buffett needed little
encouragement.
“The first time she was going to speak to the New York Society of Security Analysts, I went over there to her
apartment in New York on a Sunday morning to help her write her speech. She was a basket case. She was
terrified that all these men were going to be there and she was going to have to stand up in front of them.

Public speaking was something that was very hard for her always. The funny thing is, she had a great sense
of humor, she was smart, but she tended to freeze in front of a crowd. Particularly if she thought they were
going to question her about numbers.”
As Robert Redford had said in an interview after first meeting her to discuss the Watergate movie All the
President’s Men, Graham had a “tight-jawed, blue-blooded” quality that demanded that her privacy not be
invaded. Why, therefore, Redford asked himself, “did she keep making speeches and accepting awards?”2
—particularly since it terrified her to do it.
Buffett sat down in the living room of Graham’s large apartment situated on an upper floor of the modern UN
Plaza, overlooking New York City’s East River. Surrounded by Asian art and antiques from Agnes Meyer’s
collection, they started to work.
“She kept imagining these questions they were going to ask, like how much are you paying for your
newsprint per ton? She thought it was a quiz. And I said it doesn’t make any difference. You’re paying what
other people are paying for newsprint, so what? But that was a big thing. She was just convinced. I kept
trying to get her away from trying to remember facts. Just have a theme.” Graham wanted to say that good
journalism makes good profits. Buffett snorted to himself over this notion and refocused her. “You know,
good journalism is not inconsistent with good profits, or something like that. The hell with all the other
stuff. I just tried to convince her that she was a hell of a lot smarter than all those dumb males that were out
there. That’s what really sort of bonded us initially.”
In an ironic turnabout, Buffett became Kay Graham’s personal Dale Carnegie instructor. He, of all people,
could sympathize with someone who tended to freeze in front of a crowd. Moreover, thanks to Susie’s gentle
tutelage over the years, he had learned a subtler way of dealing with people. He knew how to anticipate their
reactions and to phrase things in a nonthreatening way. His letters, which had always been self-conscious,
were now more deftly worded and empathetic. He had learned to listen and show interest in other people and
to converse on topics other than stocks. It helped that he was genuinely fascinated by Graham.
After they finished preparing and rehearsing, Graham said she was going to a party at the Agnellis’ that night.
“You might find the sightseeing entertaining,” she said. “Why don’t you come with me?” Buffett always
stressed how uncomfortable and out-of-place he felt at glamorous events and how uninterested he was in
attending them. So he told Graham that, yes, he would go. That evening he left his room at the Plaza to pick
up Graham and ride to the Upper East Side.
“We were this very improbable couple—her mid-fifties, me early forties, and we got to this apartment,
which was more than an apartment, it was like a triplex, it was huge. And everybody was bowing and
scraping to Kay. There was every character from the party scene in the film La Dolce Vita. I was the
required walk-on, the potted plant. You wanted it to go in slow motion so you could see everything. Gianni
Agnelli, the head of Fiat, and his wife, Marella, weren’t there. It was almost like a costume party, except it
wasn’t.”
Buffett returned to Omaha afterward having seen a new side of Graham. As he continued getting to know her
on a personal level, he saw her as a bundle of paradoxes. “Fearful but willful. Patrician but democratic.
Wounded by the people she cared most about.” He was surprised how much she still talked about her former
husband a decade after his suicide.
“When you first met her, she would often get off on the subject of Phil very quickly, almost like Charlie
getting off on a subject. And she described him in terms that were sort of hard to believe, considering how
badly he treated her. But after I got to know her better, she told me everything about him and the
relationship. She had found it impossible to conceive of herself as being in the same league as him. She felt
she was a fraud, almost, even pretending to be in the same room with him. They used to hang out a lot with
the Kennedys, and she just felt that she shouldn’t be there. Anything he said was funny, anything he did was
right. When he used to chop up the children right in front of her, she wouldn’t stop him—I mean, the whole
thing.”

That he and Graham—who showed the aftereffects of an upbringing by a cruel, neglectful mother and years
of abuse by a sadistic husband with untreated bipolar disorder—would be mutually attracted seems almost a
foregone conclusion given Buffett’s own childhood experiences. He knew how to behave around her in a
way that wasn’t threatening. By the spring of 1974, she began to switch her allegiance from her other
advisers to him. In turn, he seized the chance to tutor the CEO of the Washington Post Company about
business as if he had been waiting to play Pygmalion all his life: his very own Eliza Doolittle. More patient
than Henry Higgins, he coached her gently and sent helpful, interesting articles to Kay and to her son Don.
As Buffett’s influence grew stronger, Graham noticed that the words “Warren says” brought shudders from
some of her board members.3 But Buffett himself was hoping to be invited onto that board. When Tom
Murphy had approached him to join the Cap Cities board, Buffett told him no, he was holding out for the
Post.4 Murphy dutifully spilled this news to Graham, who “felt dense” for not having figured it out herself.5

Susie thought that instead of taking on more business responsibilities, her husband should sell some of their
stock and use it for a higher cause. Riding with him in a taxi in Washington, D.C., she pointed out
philanthropist Stewart Mott, who was running the Stewart R. Mott Charitable Trust, which gave money to
peace, arms control, and population and family-planning causes. The Buffetts were now richer than Mott,
who had started with $25 million. “Why don’t you quit?” Susie said. “Stewart Mott is doing all these other
things now and he doesn’t have to work every day.” But Warren was incapable of quitting; he fell back on
his philosophy that $50 million today would be worth $500 million someday. Nonetheless, he was not entirely
disengaged from his family nor insensitive to his wife. He had picked up some vibrations from Susie, a sense
that she wanted more from her life. With Peter moving along in high school, Warren told her, “Susie, you’re
like someone who has lost his job after twenty-three years. Now what are you going to do?”

Photo Insert Two

Image 24
In 1945, Warren and Lou Battistone “lusted after” Abbye “Pudgy” Stockton, the pioneer in women’s
weight-lifting.

Image 25
Warren sang and played the ukulele every morning before work at an employee “pep rally” in the
basement of JC Penney’s, where he sold menswear and men’s furnishings in 1949.

Image 26
Warren pretends to pick the pocket of his fraternity brother Lenny Farina in 1948.

Image 27
In 1951, Warren dated Vanita Mae Brown, who was “Princess Nebraska” in the 1949 National Cherry
Blossom Festival, as well as Miss Nebraska 1949.

Image 28
Susan Thompson and Warren Buffett beaming at their wedding, April 19, 1952.

Image 29
Susie Thompson as a preschooler.

Image 30
Warren posing as a prisoner on his honeymoon, April 1952.

Image 31
An undated photograph of Graham-Newman partners Jerome Newman and Benjamin Graham.

Image 32
Warren teaching one of his early investing classes, probably Sound Investing in Stocks, at the University
of Omaha, 1950s.

Image 33
Susie Buffett in New York City, holding daughter Susie Jr. during a visit with Ben and Estey Graham.
Estey is holding the Buffetts’ new baby, Howard Graham Buffett.

Image 34
Susie with, clockwise, Peter, Howie, and Susie Jr., in the mid-1960s.

Image 35
Charlie Munger as a baby in his father Al Munger’s arms, already wearing his trademark skeptical
expression.

Image 36
Buffett and his partner Charlie Munger in the 1980s. Buffett calls them “Siamese twins, practically.”

Image 37
First meeting of the ”Graham Group” at the Hotel del Coronado in San Diego, 1968. Left to right:
Buffett, Robert Boorstin (a friend of Graham’s), Ben Graham, David “Sandy” Gottesman, Tom Knapp,
Charlie Munger, Jack Alexander, Henry Brandt, Walter Schloss, Marshall Weinberg, Buddy Fox (in
profile), and Bill Ruane. Roy Tolles took the photograph and Fred Stanback could not attend.

Image 38
The Buffetts in the mid-1970s. Left to right, Howie (holding Hamilton), Susie, Peter (behind Susie),
Warren, Susie Jr.

Image 39
Susie Buffett glows in sequins before one of her singing performances at Omaha’s French Café, shortly
before she moved to San Francisco.

Image 40
The Buffetts celebrate the Pulitzer Prize awarded to the Sun Newspapers after the Boys Town exposé.

Image 41
Susie Buffett Jr. at her November 1983 wedding to Allen Greenberg, who later became executive director
of the Buffett Foundation.

Image 42
Buffett and Washington Post publisher Kay Graham began a close, lifelong friendship in 1973.

Image 43
Astrid Menks in 1974, age 28. Four years later Susie Buffett encouraged her to take care of Warren, and
she ended up moving in with him.

Image 44
Russian immigrant Rose Blumkin overcame hardship to build the largest furniture store in North
America. She worked until age 103, a benchmark Warren often cites for himself.

Image 45
Buffett at home in his kitchen, wearing a favorite threadbare sweater.

Image 46
Buffett playing bridge with George Burns in 1991, at Burns’s 95 birthday at the Hillcrest Country Club in
Los Angeles. Not shown: Charlie Munger and a sign reading: “No smoking by anyone under 95.”

Image 47
Throwing out the first pitch before the Omaha Royals’ home opener, April 11, 2003.

The answer, she said, was sing. Her nephew Billy Rogers had made her some instrumental guitar tracks so
that she could tape herself and listen to her performances. Rogers had been playing jazz guitar at Mr. Toad’s,
Spaghetti Works, and other clubs in Omaha, and along with him, Susie was now a familiar face in the local
music scene. But when she first started practicing, “I was scared, really scared,” she said. “I was bad.” The
last time she had performed in public was ten years before at a charity benefit at Central High. So she got
