
Pinpointing a downtrend
A downtrend is a series of down-day bars (a close lower than yesterday) characterized by lower lows and lower highs in a preponderance of the bars. For
example: Look at the down days in Figure 6-3. After the first day, each of these
bars has a close lower than the close the day before. Day 3 has the same high
as the day before, but a lower low. On Day 3, you start to get the idea that this
may be the beginning of a downtrend.
When identifying a downtrend, a series of lower highs is a good confirming
indicator to the series of lower lows. The same psychology applies as when an
uptrend starts, only in reverse. Sellers see that new lows are occurring — somebody must know something negative about the security. Traders aren’t willing
to hold a falling asset, and they unload it at ever-lower prices. Meanwhile, fans
of the security can’t give it support at yesterday’s low — selling pressure is
too great.

Wading through Murky Bar Waters
Reading bar charts isn’t always a clear-cut process. In bar terms, a trend has
two identifiers — a series of higher highs (or lower lows) and a series of up
days (or down days). (See previous sections in this chapter.) Technical analysis doesn’t offer a hard-and-fast rule on which identifier is more important.
Traditional technical analysis emphasizes that you need higher lows to confirm the higher highs in an uptrend, but candlestick analysis, which I cover
in Chapter 8, says that the position of the close trumps every other factor,
including a new high or low.

www.pdfdummies.com

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 6: Reading Basic Bars: Showing How Security Prices Move
In practice, you find that the weight you place on the position of the close
is a direct function of how far out in time you want to extend your forecast.
Traditional bar chart reading generally has a longer forecasting time frame
than candlestick chart reading and a longer expected holding period over
which you plan to own the security. In traditional bar analysis, you may
accept two, three, or even more days of countervailing bars (bars that don’t
confirm the trend). In other words, in a long-term time frame, you can have
several down days in a valid uptrend. In candlestick analysis, you may accept
only one day or none because the trading style associated with candlestick
analysis is very short term.
So how should you approach bar reading to break through the muck? In this
section, I suggest sticking to attributing supply-and-demand analysis to the
high and low of the bar.

Paying heed to bar series
Most of the time, a series of higher highs with higher lows or a series of lower
lows with lower highs does mean that a trend is emerging, even if the close
is not yet in the right position to confirm it. Higher closes are the logical
outcome of new highs if they persist in a series, just as lower closes are the
outcome of a series of lower lows. The mind of the market isn’t hard to read.
Market players start wondering why new highs or lows are occurring. They
know a new high or a new low can occur only if some trader decides to buy
or sell there — so what does he know that other traders don’t know?
New highs and lows arouse emotions in the following ways:
✓ A new high or low makes market participants nervous. A sufficiently
large number of new highs triggers greed — better buy now so you don’t
miss out, even if you don’t know why the new high is occurring. The
result is a higher close as buyers pile in near the end of the day.
✓ New lows scare just enough traders that they sell their positions, even in
the absence of any fresh news that would justify it. Sellers are unwilling
to hold a falling asset and so sell, causing a lower close.
But sometimes it’s the other way around — you get a series of up days without getting a series of higher highs. In other words, the close today is higher
than the close yesterday, but the high today isn’t higher than the high yesterday. Pay attention anyway because new highs may start to appear. These new
highs may happen solely because so many people are aware of the meaning of
up days and down days. In other words, so many people look at technical indicators — and a series of up days or down days is a basic indicator — that they
anticipate higher highs or lower lows. By acting on that expectation — buying
or selling ahead of the actual appearance of a higher high or lower low — they
make it happen. You can observe this type of self-fulfilling prophecy often in
technical analysis.

www.pdfdummies.com

105

106 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
Understanding relativity
The textbook uptrend is a series of up-day price bars (close higher than
yesterday) that have higher highs and higher lows in a preponderance of
the bars. A downtrend is a series of down-day bars characterized by lower
lows and lower highs in most of the bars. Your task is to define when a lower
low from the day before is relatively harmless and when a higher high is
relatively significant. But markets are not neat and tidy, and not every bar is
going to qualify on all three criteria.
See Figure 6-4. This chart depicts an uptrend — even though not every bar
qualifies as belonging to an uptrend. You see lower lows as well as several
days on which the bar is a down day. Down days are colored black, and up
days are gray. This figure demonstrates two points where textbook definitions of trends are relative.

60

30
Figure 6-4:
Relative
higher
highs.

20

SIGNIFICANT HIGHER HIGHS

10

What is relatively harmless or significant is a subjective judgment. Try to
make the effort to think about what highs and lows are saying about immediate supply and demand for the security:
✓ Significance: What is a significant high? You determine the answer to
that question. You can judge significance by eyeing the chart, or you can
specify rules, such as “a significant high is one that is x percent higher
than the average of the past y highs.” You can use software to develop
a “filter” that defines criteria like a “significant high.” In Figure 6-4, two
significant higher highs stand out. They each represent a 50 percent gain
from the previous up day high. Note also that every high is higher than
the day before, but every significant high is higher than the highs that
came before.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 6: Reading Basic Bars: Showing How Security Prices Move
✓ Preponderance: In addition to revealing that some bars in an uptrend
can be net down days, Figure 6-4 illustrates that not every high in an
uptrend has to be higher than the one before. You just need to identify
a preponderance of higher highs and a preponderance of higher lows.
Preponderance generally means “majority.” For example, a preponderance of higher highs may mean a simple majority, say six of ten bars,
accompanied by six of ten higher lows. However, determining a preponderance is your call. Maybe you like seven out of ten. You can eyeball
it or use software to develop a precise definition and backtest it on
historical data.
If you use charting software to look at charts, turn on the feature that lets you
visually differentiate between up days and down days. A standard practice is
to make up days green and down days red. It takes no practice to see where a
trend is interrupted by bars that don’t qualify.

Avoiding misinterpretation
A series of price bars isn’t always trended, of course, but sometimes you can
misinterpret what you’re seeing if you aren’t careful. You may see a series of
higher highs but forget to make sure that each bar has a higher low and is an
up day. Or you see a series of lower lows but forget to check that the high is
lower or that the bars are all down days.
You may see a price series where every day brings a new high but every day
also brings a close lower than the day before and a low that is lower than the
lows on preceding days. This situation is shown in Figure 6-5.

Figure 6-5:
Higher highs
with lower
lows.

DAY 3

Figure 6-5 reminds you that it’s not enough to have a series of higher highs in
an uptrend — you also have to have higher lows. This set of bars is a series
of down days (the close is lower than the close the day before). It’s hard

www.pdfdummies.com

107

108 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
to swallow, but this figure displays a downtrend emerging at the third bar.
Your eye may want to see an uptrend, but when you look more closely and
analyze the bars for all three conditions, you have only one uptrend condition (higher highs) that is more than offset by the two downtrend conditions
(lower lows and lower closes). Appearances can be deceiving.
You may never know for sure why such a strange series of bars develops.
However, here are a few theories:
✓ Some traders plan to exit at the end of the day no matter what (I
describe the exit-on-close strategy earlier in the chapter). This is a riskmanagement decision, not a commentary on the price.
✓ Some group in the market wants to see this security make higher highs,
and so they buy near the highs, hoping that a new high will “create
demand,” as in an auction. Such buyers may be insiders or option traders trying to trigger a specific price level.
✓ A trader may be trying to test a support or a resistance line (which I
describe in Chapter 10).

Knowing when bar reading doesn’t work
Some price series are unreadable. You can’t figure out what the market is
thinking because the market is changing its mind just about every other day.
Figure 6-6 is such a chart. The series of gray up days is a minor uptrend and
the following series of black down days is a minor downtrend — but then
things fall apart. You see higher highs followed by lower lows and no consistency in the placement of the close (up day or down day).
What do you do in a case like this? Nothing — at least not anything based on
interpretation of the bars. When bars are in a chaotic mess like in Figure 6-6,
the probability of picking the right direction (up or down) is very low. You’d
just be guessing. And although you have to accept imperfection and a certain amount of ambiguity in bar-chart analysis, the whole purpose of technical analysis is to obtain a higher probability of making the right decision.
Guessing defeats the purpose.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 6: Reading Basic Bars: Showing How Security Prices Move
0.745

0.740

0.735

0.730

0.725

0.720

0.715

Figure 6-6:
Nontrending
bars.

0.710
24

31

7

14

21

April

Looking at Data in Different Time Frames
In preceding sections, I talk about the price bar as a daily bar. In practice,
you find that looking at data in a different time frame is often useful when you
are facing a trading decision. You can zoom out to a higher time frame (such
as weekly) or zoom in to a shorter time frame (hourly).
Price bars are fractal, meaning you can’t tell by looking at a chart what
time frame the bars represent. A chart of 15-minute price bars can’t be distinguished from a chart showing daily bars. They both show the same bar
components acting in the same ways. If a chart isn’t labeled, you can usually
assume that the bars are daily bars. No matter what time frame you select,
everything in this book (including the following sections) about the price bar
and its components is valid.

Using daily data
Most beginners start with the daily price bar. Daily data is widely available
and free or cheap. Daily data is the standard because

www.pdfdummies.com

109

110 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
✓ Most of the commentary in newspapers, magazines, and Web sites refers
to daily bars. It’s the “base case.”
✓ Embracing daily price bars puts you on the same page with the majority
of people in the market.
✓ Even people who use intraday data (such as hourly bars) also look at
the daily price bars.
Technical analysis writers are sensitive to the increased use of intraday data,
and today usually speak of periods rather than days. Changing the vocabulary
has the unfortunate effect of making some technical analysis writing sound
formal or pompous — but it’s more accurate.

Zooming out to a higher time frame
You can display prices in a weekly or monthly format. Mutual fund bars containing all the components are available only weekly. Quarterly and annual
charts are seen less often. The universality of standard bar notation isn’t
hard to understand — after all, a week has an opening price (the first trade
on Monday morning) and a closing price (the last trade on Friday afternoon),
with a high and a low somewhere in between. The weekly close is a summary
of the sentiment of the majority of market participants for the week, just as
the daily closing price summarizes sentiment for the day.
You can often see trends and patterns over longer time frames that are hard
to see on a daily chart. If you’re using charting software, make the habit of
toggling the chart from a daily time frame to the weekly and monthly time
frames to see whether anything pops out at you. In addition, you can use, say,
a weekly chart to confirm a new trend that you discover on a daily chart.

Zooming in to a shorter time frame
Many traders today track and trade prices on shorter time intervals, like
the 60-minute bar. The following sections outline how you, too, can get your
hands on the data and select the best interval after you have the numbers.

Getting the data
Live, real-time data used to be too expensive for the little guy and only big
firms could afford to buy it for their professional traders. Now anyone can
buy it for a few hundred dollars per year. With a 10- or 15-minute time delay,
you can get intraday price bars for free on many Web sites. Most brokers give
you free live data in return for your opening an account.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 6: Reading Basic Bars: Showing How Security Prices Move
When you subscribe to a data service, you can organize intraday data in any
interval you like — 5-minute bars, 15-minute bars, 60-minute bars, and so on.
You could have 7-minute bars or 73-minute bars, if you really wanted to. The
notation is the same as in daily bars, though. The opening price is the price
of the first trade during the period, and the closing price is the last trade
done during the period, and so on. You can also see tick bars, a somewhat
weird way of looking at prices in which a bar is created every 20 or 50 ticks
no matter how much time it takes.

Choosing an interval
If you start using intraday price bars, how do you select the interval? Experts
are reluctant to give advice on this point. Leading data vendor eSignal offers
standard intervals of 1, 3, 5, 10, 13, 15, 30, and 60 minutes, as well as daily,
weekly, monthly, or custom intervals of your choice. (You have to wonder
why users told eSignal they wanted the 13-minute interval.) In foreign
exchange, you may often see traders use bars covering 240 minutes (four
hours) or 360 minutes (six hours), a tidy way of keeping track in a 24-hour
market as it travels around the globe.
The only logical way to select an interval is to treat it like a new pair of jeans.
Try them all on your favorite security and see how they look. Selecting the
interval to use in displaying bars is subjective. Sometimes you may want to
use an odd number of minutes (like 13 or 73) because those bars regularly
show patterns that give you insights. Remember, bar reading is a visual art.
Other times you may prefer to look at what everyone else is looking at, on the
principle that following the crowd is usually the right way to forecast.
You want an interval that accurately represents activity in the security and
suits your needs at the same time. If you’re trading an equity that has trading volume of only 10,000 shares during the day and all of that is done in 5
trades, spacing your bars at 3-minute or 15-minute intervals is silly. Your
result would be a chart that is mostly blank, and every trade looks like it
gapped from the one before. (For an explanation of gaps, see Chapter 7.)
If you’re watching a traditionally heavily traded security, such as IBM,
though, you get a complete bar for every 1-minute interval, and each bar contains the open, high, low, and close of that minute. Be careful not to sabotage
your analysis by selecting a time frame that’s out of sync with the normal
flow of trading in the selected security.
The key to selecting the right interval is the liquidity of the security you’re
trading. Liquidity refers to potential volume in this context — kind of like a
bench of buyers waiting around for their chance at bat, meaning a price that
pleases them, with an opposing bench of sellers willing to throw balls until
somebody takes a swing. A liquid security has lots of buyers and sellers,

www.pdfdummies.com

111

112 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
with some of them active at all times. Liquidity results in real trades that are
measured as volume. A security with only one or two interested parties is
not liquid, as you may have discovered if you ever tried to sell a thinly traded
penny stock.
Select intraday bar intervals that are proportional to the minimum volume of
the security being charted. How do you judge what is proportional? You
match the interval to your purpose. If you’re trading on a daily time frame in
which you make two decisions per day, one to buy and one to sell, you want
to see bars that have enough substance to convey real information. If a
1-minute or 3-minute bar chart produces just a dot, you need to increase the
interval. If 15-minute bars are big enough to read, perhaps you can stop there.
But try the 30-minute and 60-minute bars while you are at it. You may like
them better.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 7

Reading Special Bar
Combinations: Small Patterns
In This Chapter
▶ Keying in on market psychology in simple bar combinations
▶ Comprehending common and uncommon bar combinations
▶ Getting the lowdown on gaps
▶ Understanding the significance of the high-low range

T

he price bar is the basic building block of technical analysis, and a series
of price bars on a chart is your basic workspace. (For the basics of the
price bar, see Chapter 6.) Charts contain endless combinations of bar configurations, and you can’t possibly memorize all the combinations and permutations. Being able to identify a few special cases, however, is useful because
you see these cases often enough that they serve as signposts to guide your
interpretation of what the price is going to do next.
“Special bars” are a small series of two to five bars — called combinations or
configurations — that stand out on a chart. You can see them immediately,
and so can everyone else. All the special bars and configurations are either
trend-confirmation or trend-reversal patterns. Over the years, traders have
interpreted these special bar combinations in specific ways, which I describe
in this chapter. Knowing how other traders feel toward specific bar configurations can help you make your own trading decisions.
As a general rule, you want to “go with the flow” — trade with the conventional wisdom about the meaning of the configurations. If you’re a very shortterm trader (three to five days), a good time frame to trade when you’re new
to technical analysis, the special-case configurations literally tell you how to
trade. If you’re a longer-term trend trader, the earlier you use these configurations to identify a new trend, continuation of the trend, or the end of an existing trend, the more profit you make. Check out the following sections in this
chapter for more details on configurations.

www.pdfdummies.com

114 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
Finding Clues to Trader Sentiment
You use price bar combinations to determine whether your security is starting a trend, staying on a trend, or losing its grip on the trend. The start of a
new trend is sometimes the end of an old one, called a reversal. In this section, you can figure out how these price bar combinations give you clues
about general market sentiment in order to anticipate your next move.

Tick and bar placement
In Chapter 6, I define an uptrend as a series of bars featuring higher highs
together with higher lows, and a downtrend as a series of lower lows together
with lower highs. An uptrend also features bars that have a close higher than
the day before — up days. A downtrend contains mostly down days (closes
lower than the day before). A fourth factor you want to consider is whether
the close is above the open (or below the open in the case of a downtrend).
You hardly ever see a series of bars where every single one of these factors
confirms the trend. Because prices never move entirely in a straight line, you
have to accept that some bars in a trend don’t fall into line with all the trend
criteria. You may have one or two bars in an uptrend that don’t have higher
highs or a few bars where the close is lower than the day before. Such variations in tick placement (the horizontal line marking the open and close) and
bar placement (position of a price bar relative to the bars that precede it) are
normal in even the best-behaved trend.
Some bars are just a little out of line, but sometimes you see bars that really
stand out. It takes almost no practice at all to differentiate ordinary out-ofline bars from special configurations that traders consider to be associated
with specific interpretations.
In a series of three bars, each having four components, you can get any one
of 2,463 permutations of configuration. When you specify joint conditions,
such as higher high together with higher low, the number of combinations
reaches into the millions — and that’s just with three bars! So, when you see
the special cases, you know that you’ve got a valuable clue to upcoming price
behavior. This is why, by the way, we can dismiss charges that technical
analysis is not “proven” scientifically. The computational power to prove the
validity of any single bar configuration does not yet exist. That doesn’t mean
that the majority of human beings do not respond the same way to the same
patterns on a chart in the year 2020 as in the year 1920.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 7: Reading Special Bar Combinations: Small Patterns
Even so, the interpretation guidelines aren’t 100 percent right at all times. In
fact, nobody can tell you even roughly what percentage of the time the standard interpretation is correct, because it may be correct all the time in one
security but only 10 percent of the time in another, or correct 75 percent of
the time in one year but only 50 percent in another.
A bar component or even the placement of the entire bar can be random.
Random highs and lows, and even a few random bars, are caused by a “greater
fool” making a trade at a sucker price or a whole batch of traders mistakenly
believing a false rumor. Often you never know the reason for some weird bar
configuration. Some securities have a high number of known configurations,
and some are prone to out-of-whack (meaningless) configurations. The orderliness and regularity (or lack of regularity) is a function of the crowd that trades
each security, and should be a consideration when you’re choosing what
securities to trade. See Chapter 14 on volatility.
