
Price, Volume, and Volatility

105

FIGURE 6.3 Volume declined as price pulled back
Source: TeleChart 2007®

trending stock. Rather than chasing the stock as it is rallying (or declining in a
downtrend), the trader can use the interruption of the trend to enter at a point
where an initial protective stop can be placed closer to the entry price.
Longer-Term Analysis When analyzed in conjunction with price action, volume
can help us gauge the strength (or weakness) of a trend. Table 6.1 summarizes the

Table 6.1 Price-Volume Relationships
Price-Volume
Relationship

Implication
for the Trend

Price is rising
Volume is rising

Strong Uptrend

Price is rising
Volume is declining

Uptrend Weakening

Price is declining
Volume is rising

Strong Downtrend

Price is declining
Volume is declining

Downtrend Weakening

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

106

2/21/08

11:38 AM

Page 106 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

general price-volume relationships that can be gleaned from
intermediate- and long-term trends. The emphasis here is
divergence
on the trend of price and volume. The focus should be on
the peaks, with less regard for each individual bar between
A scenario
the peaks.
where the
Figure 6.4 shows a daily chart of Riverbed Techprice of an
nologies Inc. (RVBD). During May–July 2007 price
asset moves in
was in an uptrend. Notice that volume was heavy durthe opposite
ing the rallies that occurred early in the trend. As the
direction of an
trend matured, even though price was still forming
indicator. When
higher peaks, the level of market participation had diminprice continues
ished, as evidenced by the volume pattern (declining
to form higher
dotted line). Although this type of price-volume pattern
peaks in an
does not guarantee that the trend will change direction,
uptrend, while
it does indicate a divergence between price and volume,
the peaks in
which should elicit caution among traders who hold
an indicator
long positions. On July 24, price closed below a strong
begin to
up trendline accompanied by heavy volume, which
decline, it sigsent a stronger message that the trend direction may be
nals a negative
changing.
divergence,
If you choose to expand your study of Western
and the uptechnical analysis, you’ll inevitably be introduced to
trend may be
many Western continuation and reversal patterns. There
weakening.
are some small Western bar patterns, such as key reversals
When price is
and the inside and outside days referenced in Chapter 3.
making lower
Flags and pennants also form in a short amount of time.
bottoms in a
Many of the Western patterns, though, are larger patterns
downtrend,
that form over a period of several weeks or months. It is
but the indicahelpful to study the trend of volume as those large pattor bottoms
terns form. For instance, a head-and shoulders is a fairly
are rising, it
reliable top reversal pattern. An ideal head-and-shoulders
indicates a
has the following volume pattern: volume is strong as the
positive diverleft shoulder is formed; volume is usually still strong as
gence and an
the head is formed; volume declines noticeably as price
early warning
pushes up to form the peak of the right shoulder.
that the downTechnical analysis is a broad field of study, one
trend may be
area of which includes Western chart patterns, such as
weakening.
head-and-shoulders, triangles, and wedges, just to
name a few. Many technical analysis books touch on
this topic, but none that I have found delve into this area as thoroughly as

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

2/21/08

11:38 AM

Page 107 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

107

Price, Volume, and Volatility

FIGURE 6.4 Divergence between price and volume preceded a
breakdown
Source: TeleChart 2007®

Thomas Bulkowski does in his books. His latest book Getting Started in
Chart Patterns (John Wiley & Sons, 2006) is an excellent resource for those
who wish to add an understanding of chart patterns to their knowledge base.

Example

Figure 6.5 shows a head-and-shoulders top on the daily chart of
Continental Airlines (CAL). Volume was above average as a peak
formed the left shoulder (this pattern actually had a double left
shoulder). Price pulled back and then rallied again on above-average
volume to form the head. As price rose up to form the right shoulder,
volume remained below average. There was not enough momentum
to push price to a new high.
(continues)

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

2/21/08

11:38 AM

108

Page 108 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

Example

(continued )

FIGURE 6.5 Volume may provide conﬁrmation of a chart pattern
Source: TeleChart 2007®

Volatility
High volatility means that a stock’s price can change dramatically over a short period of time in either direction.
volatility
Low volatility means that a stock’s price does not fluctuate dramatically. Volatility does not just apply to stock
The tendency
prices, but to other trading instruments and markets as
for price to
well.
ﬂuctuate.
Volatility is not static—it may be highly variable
over time. There is typically an ebb and flow that can
be seen on a chart. Periods of low volatility are often followed by periods of
high volatility, and vice versa. Traders must learn to recognize when volatility
moves to one extreme or the other. Great trading opportunities can be found
by implementing adequate focus on volatility.

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

2/21/08

11:38 AM

Page 109 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Price, Volume, and Volatility

109

Smart Investor Tip
Bollinger Bands can be effective for drawing attention to periods of
low or high volatility. The setting I use for this indicator is that which
is recommended by its creator, John Bollinger: a 20-period simple
moving average of price with the bands plotted at two standard
deviations from the moving average.

Example

When price makes a directional move, the Bollinger Bands will diverge
(expand), indicating a period of higher volatility. When price pulls back
or moves sideways, the bands will converge (contract). If price moves
sideways long enough, the bands will constrict around price, sometimes
very tightly. This is referred to as a Bollinger squeeze. This contractionexpansion phenomenon can be seen on the daily chart of Immersion
Corp. (IMMR) shown in Figure 6.6.

FIGURE 6.6 Contraction is followed by expansion and vice versa
Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

2/21/08

11:38 AM

Page 110 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

110

EAST MEETS WEST

The term volatility may conjure up negative thoughts for those who do
not understand or respect its role. A certain amount of volatility is necessary in
order for stocks, and markets, to survive. And yet too much volatility can be
frustrating and treacherous for traders, especially for those who do not yet have
a lot of experience trading a volatile stock or market. As is the case with most
trading-related concepts, it is usually not so much the volatility itself that is
dangerous or risky, but rather the trader!
Measures of Volatility

There are various methods of measuring volatility. One measure is standard deviation, which measures the dispersion of data from the mean. In other words,
it compares a stock’s current volatility to its average. Bollinger Bands are constructed using standard deviation. Beta is another commonly used measure,
which compares a stock’s volatility to that of the market. The S&P 500 largecap index is commonly used as a market benchmark.
After you have developed a strong foundation in charting, you may wish
to expand your study of beta and standard deviation, or other measures of
volatility, in order to further your understanding of this important concept. For
now, though, consider using the logarithmic scale as a quick and easy method
of gauging a stock’s volatility.
Logarithmic Scale

Prices are displayed on the vertical axis (y-axis) on a chart. In most charting programs, horizontal division lines called gridlines are displayed in the chart window. They line up with the price scale (see Figure 6.7).

FIGURE 6.7 Logarithmic scale
Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

2/21/08

11:38 AM

Page 111 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Price, Volume, and Volatility

111

There are two commonly used methods of scaling: arithmetic and logarithmic. The arithmetic scale displays the price change from one horizontal division
line to the next in equal increments (points). The logarithmic scale displays the
price change as a percentage. The scaling method you choose is up to you. Many
seasoned traders use logarithmic for charting stocks, which is also my preference.
When the logarithmic scale is selected, the percentage change between each
gridline should be displayed in the chart window of your charting program, for
example, below the price column as shown in Figure 6.7. That percentage indicates that if price moves up or down one gridline, it is a move of approximately x
percent for that stock, with x being the percentage indicated, for instance, 1.29
percent. The percentage shown is not static; it indicates the current volatility.
That percentage can change over time as volatility increases or decreases.
The percentage between the gridlines can provide a gauge of a stock’s current volatility. It can also be used to compare the stock’s volatility to other
stocks. Generally speaking, the higher the percentage displayed, the higher the
current volatility of the stock, and vice versa.

Smart Investor Tip
In order to ensure that you are making a proper comparison, be sure to
use a consistent horizontal compression (zoom) for all the stocks being
analyzed. In TeleChart, zoom 5 shows about ﬁve months of data on a
daily chart. Don’t compare one stock using zoom 5 to another using
zoom 3, which shows about 10 months of data, because the percentage
adjusts as the stock is compressed. If your charting program allows for
vertical compression, that can also impact the scale.

Looks can be deceiving. What may appear visually to be about the same distance move on the chart of two different stocks can actually be significantly different from a percentage standpoint. If you have ever been shocked by the change
in your unrealized profit or loss on a trade after what appeared to be a small move
on the chart, it was a volatile stock—or at least a volatile period for that stock.
Example

Figure 6.8 shows a daily chart of Western Digital Corp. (WDC) from
April through mid-July 2007. The stock gained about 40 percent during
that time. The daily chart of Hoku Scientific (HOKU) in Figure 6.9 looks
like it had a similar run up; however, it gained almost 250 percent during
that uptrend. Clearly, HOKU, at approximately 11 percent between
gridlines, was a much more volatile stock than WDC, at approximately 3
percent between gridlines.

(continues)

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

2/21/08

11:38 AM

112

Page 112 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

Example

(continued )

FIGURE 6.8 Stock gained approximately 40 percent in about
four months
Source: TeleChart 2007®

FIGURE 6.9 Stock gained approximately 250% in about two months
Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

2/21/08

11:38 AM

Page 113 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Price, Volume, and Volatility

113

Smart Investor Tip
There are times when it is helpful to view the arithmetic scale, though,
for example, when viewing market indicators such as the McClellan
Summation Index where the index has a baseline of zero. Additionally,
in some cases when checking for a price retracement, it is best to view
the arithmetic scale. Thus, it is wise to become familiar with the
method in your charting program for shifting from logarithmic to
arithmetic and back, so you can quickly change the scale if needed.

As you continue your review of the remaining chapters, reference will be
made several times to a stock’s volatility, for example, when determining
whether the reward of a trade outweighs the risk, or when determining if a
stock is better suited for swing trading or for a long-term position.

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

2/21/08

11:38 AM

Page 114 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

11:39 AM

Page 115 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

7
Chapter

Trend Analysis

he primary role of technical analysis is the study of trends. You may be
familiar with some of the well-known axioms that have arisen over the
decades regarding trends, such as: “The trend is your friend” and “Don’t
fight the trend.” The phenomenon of trends is one of the major organizing
principles of technical analysis. In order to become a skilled chartist, it is essential to learn how to identify and evaluate trends.
Numerous trading strategies have been developed
around the fact that markets tend to move in trends.
trend
Trend followers strive to identify a new trend as early as
The direction
possible in its formation and ride that trend until it runs
of a price
out of steam and changes direction. Therefore, much of
move. A trend
technical analysis is devoted to the identification of
may move up
trends and gauging their strength or weakness so traders
or down and is
can implement the appropriate trading strategies.
often classiﬁed
A trend signifies the direction that the market is
by its duration
moving. In addition to the trend direction, traders also
as either short,
attempt to measure the duration, magnitude, and mointermediate,
mentum of the trend. These concepts will be covered in
or long term.
this chapter.

T

115

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

11:39 AM

116

Page 116 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

Trend Direction
Markets move in trends. A stock or market may trend up or it may trend down.
There may also be periods in which price moves sideways. While it might seem as
if the direction of the trend should be quite obvious, that is not always the case,
since trends do not develop in a linear fashion. The following discussion addresses
some technical tools and methods to help determine the direction of a trend.
Moving Averages

The moving average is one of the oldest and most widely used technical indicators. Moving averages are trend-following indicators designed to catch major
price moves. They are most effective when used in trending markets and fairly
ineffective when price moves into a prolonged trading range. Moving averages
are not precise timing indicators. While they do a good job of pointing out the
direction of the trend, moving averages “lag” price, so they will be late at calling
the turning points when a trend changes direction.
There are various ways to utilize moving averages.
For the purposes of this discussion, we’ll focus on the
role of moving averages in helping determine the direcmoving
average
tion of the trend. In Chapter 9, you’ll learn how they
A trendalso play a role as support and resistance. Novice traders
following
are encouraged to pursue additional study of moving avindicator that
erages, as well as other technical indicators that are besmoothes out
yond the scope of this book.
price action by
A trend does not develop in a straight line. Price
averaging price
typically zigs and zags its way across the chart’s landover a desigscape. Plotting a moving average over price helps to
nated period
smooth out those fluctuations and distortions that are
of time.
inherent in most trends. It provides a clearer picture of
the primary direction of the trend (see Figure 7.1).
Smart Investor Tip
As a general rule, a rising moving average indicates an uptrend, and a
declining moving average indicates a downtrend. Think of a moving
average as sort of a moving trend line.

In order to construct a simple moving average of price, the first step is to
calculate the average. An average (or mean) of a set of values is determined by

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

11:39 AM

Page 117 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Trend Analysis

117

summing the values and dividing the result by the total number of values in the
set. For stocks, the closing price is most often used in the calculation. To produce a moving average, the average is recalculated each new period. The newest
bar’s closing price is added to the calculation, and the oldest bar’s closing price is
dropped. The process is repeated with each new bar resulting in a line that represents a moving average of price.
Example

To compute a 20-period simple moving average, the closing prices of the
last 20 bars are added together and divided by 20. When a new bar
forms, the closing price of the 20th bar is dropped from the calculation
and the closing price of the new bar is added.

Fortunately, modern charting programs do all the calculating for us.
Traders need only to select the length for the moving average, and it will be
plotted in the chart window, as shown in Figure 7.1.
One or more moving averages may be plotted in the chart window. The
10- and 20-period are popular short-term moving averages. Longer moving

FIGURE 7.1 20-period simple moving average smoothes out
the ﬂuctuations in price
Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

11:39 AM

118

Page 118 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

averages will lag farther behind the current price, since there are more values included in their calculations. The 50-period is a popular intermediate-term moving average. Price often finds support at or near this moving average on a deep
pullback in an uptrend, and vice versa in a downtrend. The 200-period is a longterm moving average that is watched closely by traders. Price often finds support
(or resistance) at or near this moving average during a correction of a trend.

Smart Investor Tip
At a minimum, I suggest plotting a 20-period simple moving average
of price to help determine the direction of the current trend. The 20period moving average represents approximately one month of trading
on a daily chart and has proven to be a robust setting. It also tends to
perform well on other time frames. As a general rule, price will stay
above the 20-period moving average most of the time during an
uptrend, and below it most of the time while in a downtrend.

Peaks and Bottoms

As price moves up and down in the general direction of the trend, a series of
peaks and bottoms is formed on the chart. A peak is formed after a price advance when price stops making higher highs and makes a lower high. A peak
includes three bars, with the middle bar’s high being higher than those of the
two bars on either side of it (Figure 7.2). A bottom is formed after a price decline when price stops making lower lows and makes a higher low. It includes
three bars, with the middle bar’s low being lower than the bars on either side of
it (Figure 7.3). Peaks and bottoms show where price turned, resulting in at least
a temporary change in direction.

FIGURE 7.2 Peak (swing high)

FIGURE 7.3 Bottom (swing low)

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

11:39 AM

Page 119 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Trend Analysis

119

A peak is often referred to as a swing high and a bottom as a swing low.
These events show us the turning points of price moves. Some of the swing
points will be prominent, while others will be minor. The prominent formations will draw your attention to the direction of the trend, as shown in Figure
7.4. An uptrend is comprised of a series of higher swing highs and higher swing
lows. Conversely, in a downtrend, lower swing highs and lower swing lows are
evident. You’ll see several examples of peaks and bottoms on the charts shown
in Figures 7.6 through 7.11.
Candlesticks are excellent for short-term timing signals. After a directional price move, it is fairly common to see a candlestick reversal pattern form
at the swing high or the swing low. Even if no reversal pattern forms, you’ll often see other indications that the move is running out of steam, such as spinning tops or long shadows.
Trend Lines

A trend line is one of the simplest charting tools available; but don’t let its simplicity take away from its value. Trend lines can be very helpful for determining
the trend direction. Most charting programs provide a trend line–drawing feature, allowing users to draw lines in the chart window.
Classic trend lines are drawn on the chart connecting the turning points of
the peaks or bottoms. The trend line should touch as close as possible to the

FIGURE 7.4 Prominent peaks and bottoms (circled) help deﬁne
the uptrend
Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

120

11:39 AM

Page 120 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

trend line
A straight line
drawn on a
chart to determine the direction and slope
of the current
trend, or to
identify the
boundaries of
a consolidation
area.

actual turning point (the high of a peak bar or the low of
a bottom bar). There will be times when the trend line
will not quite touch the pivot, or will breach one or more
bars. It is okay to clip one or more shadows if it means
touching the trend line to more turning points; however,
be careful about drawing the line through one or more
real bodies as doing so may result in an invalid trend line.
There must be at least two turning points (touches)
to draw a valid trend line. Ideally, there are three or more
touches on the line. Trend lines with three or more
touches are more significant than those with only two.
A common mistake traders make is attempting to
draw a trend line across the highs or lows of individual
price bars and neglecting to touch the line to two or more
peaks or bottoms. The result is in an invalid trend line.

Example

Figure 7.5 shows two trend lines. The lower trend line is valid because it
connects the turning points of three rising bottoms. It was necessary and
acceptable to clip the lower shadow of the second bottom in order to
touch the third bottom. The steeper trend line is not valid because it
touches rising lows, not rising bottoms.

FIGURE 7.5 Valid versus invalid trend line

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

11:39 AM

Page 121 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Trend Analysis

121

In an uptrend, the primary trend line is a rising support line drawn below, and connecting, the rising bottoms (see Figure 7.6). Once an uptrend
starts to emerge, there must be two bottoms formed on the chart before a
support trend line can be drawn. You may also be able to draw a parallel, rising resistance line above the rising peaks. It is common for price to rise in a
channel.
In a downtrend, the primary trend line is a declining resistance line drawn
above and connecting the declining peaks (see Figure 7.7). You may also be able
to draw a parallel, declining support trend line below the declining bottoms if
the stock is descending in a channel.
As the trend progresses, the primary trend line (and the parallel channel line if applicable) can be adjusted slightly and extended. Sometimes there
will be more than one strong support or resistance trend line. In the example
of Immucor Inc. (BLUD) shown in Figure 7.7, the downtrend accelerated in
June 2007, resulting in a sharper angle of the declining peaks. Both resistance lines shown are valid. The tighter line is more indicative of the most
recent price action and will be broken more quickly if the trend changes
direction.
