 The Positives . The earliest empirical work on the behavior of stock prices, going back to the early 1900s, found that a sequence of random numbers had the same appearance as a time series of stock prices. But even though the earliest studies supported a general finding of randomness, more recent work indicated that the random-walk model does not strictly hold. Some patterns appear to exist in the development of stock prices. Over short holding periods, there is some evidence of momentum in the stock market. Increases in stock prices are slightly more likely to be followed by further increases than by price declines. For longer holding periods, reversion to the mean appears to be present. When large price increases have been experienced over a period of months or years, such increases are often followed by sharp reversals. 
 Two possible explanations for the existence of momentum have been offered: the first is based on behavioral considerations; the second, on sluggish responses to new information. Robert Shiller, one of the leaders in the field of behavioral finance, emphasized in 2000 a psychological feedback mechanism imparting a degree of momentum into stock prices, especially during periods of extreme enthusiasm. Individuals see stock prices rising and are drawn into the market in a kind of “bandwagon effect.” The second explanation is based on the argument that investors do not adjust their expectations immediately when news arises—especially news of company earnings that exceeded (or fell short of) anticipation. Some investigators have found that abnormally high returns follow positive earnings surprises as market prices appear to respond only gradually to earnings information. 
 While there is some evidence supporting the existence of short-term momentum in the stock market, other studies have documented negative serial correlation—that is, return reversals—over longer holding periods. A considerable amount of the variation in long holding period returns can be predicted in terms of a negative correlation with past returns. 
 Some studies have attributed this forecastability to the tendency of stock-market prices to “overreact.” They argue that investors are subject to waves of optimism and pessimism that cause prices to deviate systematically from their fundamental values and later to exhibit reversion to the mean. They suggest that such overreaction to past events is consistent with behavioral factors, where investors are systematically overconfident of their ability to forecast either future stock prices or future corporate earnings. These findings give some support to investment techniques that rest on a “contrarian” strategy, that is, buying those stocks, or groups of stocks, that have been out of favor for long periods of time. 
 The Negatives . However, the findings of short-term momentum and longer-term reversion to the mean are not uniform across studies and are quite a bit weaker in some periods than in others. Moreover, it may not be possible to profit from the tendency for individual stocks to exhibit return reversals. A study of mine simulated a strategy of buying stocks over a thirteen-year period that had particularly poor returns over the preceding three to five years. The study found that stocks with very low returns over the preceding three to five years had higher returns in the next period and that stocks with very high returns over the preceding three to five years had lower returns in the next period. Thus, there was very strong statistical evidence of return reversals. However, the returns in the next period were similar for both groups. A contrarian approach, therefore, did not yield higher-than-average returns. There was a statistically strong pattern of return reversal, but not one that implied an inefficiency in the market that would enable investors to make excess returns. 
 Portfolio Examples . There are investment funds and ETFs that tilt the portfolio toward stocks that are exhibiting relative strength compared with the whole market. The fund AMOMX, sponsored by the investment firm AQR, invests in large-cap and mid-cap companies traded on a principal U.S. exchange or the over-the-counter market that are determined to have positive momentum. Positive momentum is often considered to be strong relative to performance over the preceding twelve months (not including the most recent month, to allow for any short-term return reversals). 
 4. Low Volatility Can Produce High Returns 
 The Positives . In order to understand the rationale for various low-volatility “smart beta” strategies, we need to refer back to the capital-asset pricing model (CAPM), covered in chapter 9 . According to CAPM, risk and return are related to beta, a measure of the relative volatility (or nondiversifiable risk) of any stock or portfolio. According to the theory, the higher the beta (risk) of any stock or portfolio, the higher should be the return. As was shown in chapter 9 , however, the empirical support for the theory is weak. High-beta portfolios do not produce higher returns than low-beta ones. The relationship between beta and return is relatively flat both in the United States and internationally. 
 Investors can use this fact to fashion a variety of “betting against beta” portfolio strategies. For example, suppose very low beta portfolios have a beta of ½ (they are half as volatile as the broad market portfolio) but produce the same return as the market, which by definition has a beta of 1. Suppose the market return was 10 percent. By buying a low-beta portfolio on margin (putting up fifty cents for each dollar of market value), an investor could double the beta and double the return of the low-beta portfolio as is illustrated below. 

 * To keep the illustration simple we assume zero interest is paid on the margin loan. 
 It is easy to see how the margin borrowing increases both the return and the volatility of the portfolios. For every $100 of value purchased, the investor puts up only $50 and borrows the other $50. The $100 portfolio increases 10 percent, to $110. But the investor’s ownership stake increases 20 percent as shown below. 

 Of course, the enhanced gain is realized at the expense of double the volatility. If the portfolio value decreased by 10 percent, to $90, the investor’s stake would be reduced to $40, a 20 percent decline. Therefore, the low-volatility portfolio (with a beta of ½) will have double the underlying volatility of the stocks held. 
 The Negatives . There are other flavors of the low-volatility strategy. For example, an investor might buy (go long) the 10 percent of the stocks with the lowest volatility and sell short the 10 percent of the stocks with the highest volatility. Whichever strategy the investor employs, she ends up with quite a different and less diversified portfolio than if she bought and held the market portfolio, the strategy favored in this book. Low-volatility portfolios tend to be concentrated in utility stocks as well as in large pharmaceutical companies. Relatively undiversified portfolios are a characteristic of all the “smart beta” strategies. 
 Portfolio Examples . Low-volatility ETFs hold portfolios of stocks with the lowest measured volatility relative to their benchmarks. For example, the SPLV ETF sponsored by PowerShares holds the 100 least-volatile stocks in the S&P 500. It does not adjust for resulting sector biases and thus holds nearly one-third of its portfolio in utility stocks. An investor could buy SPLV on margin to replicate a strategy of leveraging the portfolio up to a beta of 1. 
 Blended Flavors and Strategies 
 Dimensional Fund Advisors Funds. Dimensional Fund Advisors (DFA) offers mutual funds sold through investment advisers. The funds are formed by selecting stocks quantitatively based on the Fama-French criteria of value and size discussed in chapter 9 . The DFA funds contain stocks having the lowest ratios of price-to-book value, as well as those with the lowest market capitalization (size). The DFA large-cap value fund (DFLVX) is a value-tilted portfolio of large-cap stocks. DFSVX is a value-tilted portfolio of small-cap stocks designed to capture both the “size” and the “value” effects. The Fama-French work suggests that the effects exist not only in the United States but internationally as well. Thus, DFA offers international funds and domestic ones. DFA states that they may also blend other flavors into their portfolios, such as “quality,” when conditions warrant. 
 RAFI “Fundamental Indexes.”™ The firm Research Affiliates has designed both domestic and international portfolios based on “trademarked indexes” it believes are vastly superior to standard indexes, which are capitalization weighted. The RAFI ETF PRF weights stocks in the Russell 1000 Index not by total capitalization but by their “economic footprint.” The RAFI Fundamental Index TM weights each stock by fundamental measures of worth such as sales, earnings, and book values, rather than by total capitalization. 
 In fact, the RAFI procedures tilt the portfolio toward the same value and size factors that are present in other “smart beta” portfolios. Consider two companies with equal earnings, but company A sells at 25 times earnings while company B sells at 12 ½ times earnings. With capitalization weighting, company A gets twice the weight of company B. Under Fundamental Indexing they both get the same weight. Thus, value stocks (with low P/Es) and small-capitalization stocks are overweighted relative to their weights in standard cap-weighted indexes. 
 Equal-Weighted Indexes. As the name implies, these portfolios give equal weight to all the stocks contained in the index. The ETF EWRI sponsored by Guggenheim Investments gives equal weight to each of the stocks in the Russell 1000 large-cap index. As with the RAFI portfolio, this procedure introduces both a size and a value tilt to the ETF. 
 “SMART BETA” FUNDS FLUNK THE RISK TEST 
 Appraisal of “Smart Beta” 
 All “smart beta” strategies represent active management rather than indexing. Capitalization-weighted portfolios are the market. If you believe a subset of securities will give you superior returns, you are counting on some “dumb” investors to hold portfolios producing poorer returns. Some “smart beta” advocates have been quite explicit in suggesting who these dumb investors might be. They claim that the investors in traditional capitalization index funds are the dumb beta investors, since by holding the broad index they will be holding a number of overvalued growth stocks. But that argument must be false . The holder of a broad-based index fund will by definition achieve the average return for the market. If “smart beta” funds generate above average returns, it can’t be at the expense of traditional index-fund investors—it must be at the expense of all active managers who do not hold the market portfolio. 
 • To the extent that “smart beta” funds do generate excess returns, it is most likely because they are assuming greater risks. By tilting in one direction or another—small size, for example—investors will be less diversified and exposed to greater risk than those associated with the broad-market portfolio. Managers such as DFA readily admit that whatever higher returns such funds may generate are simply compensation for the extra risks assumed. Over its history, the entire above-market returns for the RAFI Fundamental Index TM portfolio were achieved during 2009, when the proportion of bank stocks in the portfolio was more than twice as large as the weight in the benchmark index and almost 15 percent of the portfolio was invested in two stocks, Citigroup and Bank of America. The “bet” worked but was certainly risky, since it was unclear whether banks would avoid nationalization and a “zeroing out” of the banks’ shareholders. “Smart beta” portfolios may not have high betas, but they do carry considerable risk. 
 • When “smart beta” portfolios are assessed with multifactor risk models (such as the Fama-French three-factor model or extensions of it), the typical finding is that no excess risk-adjusted performance is demonstrated. “Smart beta” portfolios do not produce alphas. 
 • “Smart beta” funds require periodic rebalancing. For example, in order for an equally weighted fund to maintain its equal weighting, stocks that have gone up more than average must be pared back. In a rising market, the trading involves transactions costs and short-term capital gains taxes. “Smart beta” funds and ETFs also carry considerably higher management expenses than traditional capitalization-weighted index funds. 
 • All “smart beta” portfolios have undergone long periods of underperformance. There is considerable evidence of “reversion to the mean,” and periods of excess performance are often followed by periods of disappointing results. 
 • Mutual funds (and ETFs) designed to capture momentum and low-beta effects have not demonstrated superior performance. Often real money results differ from those simulated returns demonstrated in academic studies. 
 • Whether “smart beta” strategies will perform well in the future depends crucially on the market valuations existing at the time the strategy is implemented. “Value” strategies performed extraordinarily well coming out of the Internet bubble when high-tech “growth” stocks were priced extremely richly relative to “value” stocks. Similarly, small-company stocks did particularly well when they were inexpensively priced relative to large-cap stocks. Particularly as these strategies become increasingly popular, the stocks favored by those techniques will become more richly priced, and results could prove disappointing. No strategy will be effective irrespective of valuation relationships. 
 • Finally, many of the “smart beta” ETFs are more costly to buy and sell than their traditional cap-weighted brethren. Plain vanilla, such as S&P 500, index ETFs trade at prices essentially the same as their net asset values because any differences tend to be quickly arbitraged away. Many “smart beta” ETFs follow nonstandard indexes that are far more difficult to hedge against. Hence, their prices are more likely to deviate from fair value and often trade at significant premiums or discounts from the value of their underlying holdings. Moreover, the successful “smart beta” funds offered by DFA can only be purchased from investment advisers, adding an additional layer of fees. 
 HOW WELL HAVE FACTOR TILTS WORKED IN PRACTICE? 
 Mutual funds and exchange-traded funds are available that allow investors to implement each of the “smart beta” strategies considered above. Here we will examine the actual records of some of the funds and ETFs that mimic each of the four major strategies (portfolio flavors or tilts) that have been advocated, as well as some that employ blended flavors. Information about each of the funds or ETFs listed can be found in the Random Walker’s Address Book included as an appendix. 
 Value and Size Tilts 
 Mutual Fund and ETF Portfolios . The strongest academic evidence supporting “smart beta” portfolios is the tendency of “value” stocks to outperform “growth” stocks and the tendency of “small-cap” portfolios to outperform “large-cap” ones. Here is where the academic literature is unambiguously supportive. 
 But we must remember that the results of published studies—even those done over decades—may still be time dependent, and we must ask whether the return patterns of academic studies can actually be generated with real money. The chart that follows presents average actual returns generated by mutual funds classified by either their “growth” or their “value” objectives. “Value” funds are so classified if they buy stocks with low P/E multiples and low P/BV ratios. We see that over a period going back to the 1930s, it does not appear that investors could actually have realized higher rates of return from mutual funds specializing in “value” stocks. Indeed, the chart suggests that the period studied by Fama and French from the early 1960s (demonstrating a strong “value” effect) may have been a unique period in which “value” stocks rather consistently produced higher rates of return. 
 The top chart on the next page was compiled from the records of actively managed funds. For more-recent periods, we can repeat the analysis with “smart beta” indexed ETFs, which now exist. The bottom chart shows the exact same pattern repeated with indexed ETF portfolios that were available during the ten years from 2004 to 2013. Investors looking for a decade of outperformance with “value” ETFs would have been disappointed. Neither the mutual funds nor the ETFs with a “value” mandate would have produced above-average returns. 

 The chart shows the return of “Value” mutual funds divided by the return of “Growth” mutual funds. A number above (below) 1 indicates that “Value” is outperforming (underperforming) “Growth.” 
 Source: Bogle Research Institute. 

 The chart shows the return of “Value” mutual funds (Value ETF) divided by the return of “Growth” mutual funds (Growth ETF). A number above (below) 1 indicates that “Value” is outperforming (underperforming) “Growth.” 
 Source: Bogle Research Institute. 
 A somewhat similar story can be told about the “small-cap” effect. The long-run tendency for investment in smaller firms is to produce higher rates of return than investments in larger companies. There has been substantial volatility in the relative returns of small-cap and large-cap portfolios. For example, the chart below shows the thirty-year history of the Russell 2000 small-cap index and the Russell 1000 large-cap index containing the 1,000 largest companies in the market. Note that the thirty-year returns are almost identical for the two indexes, and there is no evidence of consistent outperformance of either index. Data over the ten-year period from 2004 to 2014, when investable ETFs have been available for the Russell 1000 (ticker IWB) and 2000 (ticker IMB) indexes, also show considerable reversion to the mean, although smaller companies have produced average annual returns almost 1 percentage point greater than the returns for larger companies during this period. 

 Russell 2000 Average Annual Return (since 04/02/1984): 8.31% 
 Russell 1000 Average Annual Return (since 04/02/1984): 8.78% 
 IWM 2000 Average Annual Return (since 04/01/2004): 8.07% 
 IWB 1000 Average Annual Return (since 04/01/2004): 7.97% 
 The chart shows the returns of the Russell 2000 index (ETF) divided by the returns of the Russell 1000 index (ETF). A number above (below) 1 indicates that the Russell 2000 is outperforming (underperforming) the Russell 1000. 
 Source: Morningstar. 
 BLENDED HYBRID STRATEGIES 
 We have called blended strategies those that depart indirectly from capitalization weighting in an attempt to benefit from the factor tilts of “value” and “size” that have figured prominently in the academic literature. The two principal strategies are those of equal weighting and the Research Affiliates Fundamental Index TM . Both give the portfolio a (small) “size” and “value” tilt. 
 The Dimensional Fund Advisors (DFA) Portfolios . DFA funds have experienced somewhat better performance than many of the other “smart beta” offerings available to investors. They are generally low cost with expense ratios only moderately higher than the fees of broad-based capitalization-weighted ETFs. However, they are sold only through investment advisers. The investment advisers from whom DFA funds are available are “fee only”—that is, they do not collect extra commissions for placing investors in particular funds. Thus, these advisers tend to be unconflicted, unlike other advisers. Nevertheless, they charge advisory fees that could range up to 1 percent or more, and therefore the extra returns that have been available from many DFA funds need to be reduced by these advisory fees. Do-it-yourself investors who do not need the hand-holding services of an adviser can avoid this substantial extra layer of costs by buying standard index funds. 
 On page 278 we show the performance of two DFA funds over a ten-year period ending in April 2014. Note that both the DFA small-cap value fund (ticker DFSVX) and the large-cap value fund (ticker DFLVX) have outperformed their benchmarks by over 1 percentage point. Again, however, we need to emphasize that DFA is quite explicit that any extra returns represent an appropriate compensation for the added risk of the portfolios. Note also that the DFA funds, like all the “smart beta” funds, experience periods of underperformance. 

 DFLVX Benchmark: IWD        DFSVX Benchmark: IWN 
 DFA Large-Cap Value Annual Return (since 04/01/2004): 8.92% 
 Russell 1000 Value Annual Return (since 04/01/2004): 7.65% 
 DFA Small-Cap Value Annual Return (since 04/01/2004): 9.12% 
 Russell 2000 Value Annual Return (since 04/01/2004): 7.49% 
 The chart shows the return of the “smart beta” strategy divided by the return of the benchmark index. A number above (below) 1 indicates that the “smart beta” fund is outperforming (underperforming) the benchmark index. 
 Source: Morningstar. 
 Research Affiliates Fundamental Index TM (RAFI) 
 By the criterion of commercial success, the RAFI “smart beta” funds are among the most impressive of all the new fund offerings. The founder of Research Affiliates, Robert Arnott, is able to hold audiences spellbound as he argues that cap weighting implies that holders of such portfolios will always be holding too big a share of overpriced growth stocks. He avoids this problem by adjusting the weight of each stock to its economic footprint such as earnings, assets, and the like. Of course, this weighting gives the RAFI portfolios a tilt toward value and small size. As of the start of 2014, Research Affiliates managed $1.66 billion of assets. 
 The RAFI ETF (ticker PRF) has indeed outperformed its benchmark, the Russell 1000 Index, by about 1 percentage point over its seven-year history to early 2014. Research Affiliates claims the excess return results from its avoidance of the overpriced stocks in the benchmark that have higher market capitalizations than are justified by “fundamental” valuation metrics. An analysis of the RAFI’s results suggests, however, that the excess performance results from the assumption of higher risk. 
 The chart below shows the quarterly excess return of the RAFI portfolio (PRF) over its benchmark portfolio, the Russell 1000 Index (ETF IWB). The chart indicates that there are usually small quarterly differences over time that are more likely to represent underperformance by RAFI rather than excess performance. There is, however, one notable exception during 2009 when PRF delivered extraordinary excess returns that were entirely responsible for the seven-year RAFI excess return. 
