
IX

Anaconda was only quarter stock—that is, the par of the
shares was only twenty-five dollars. It took four hundred
shares of it to equal the usual one hundred shares of other
stocks, the par value of which was one hundred dollars. I
figured that when it crossed $300 it ought to keep on
going and probably touch $340 in a jiffy.
I was bearish, remember, but I was also a tape-reading
trader. I knew Anaconda, if it went the way I figured,
would move very quickly. Whatever moves fast always
appeals to me. I have learned patience and how to sit tight,
but my personal preference is for fleet movements, and
Anaconda certainly was no sluggard. My buying it because
it crossed $300 was prompted by the desire, always strong
in me, of confirming my observations.
Just then the tape was saying that the buying was
stronger than the selling, and therefore the general rally
might easily go a bit further. It would be prudent to wait
before going short. Still I might as well pay myself wages
for waiting. This would be accomplished by taking a quick
thirty points out of Anaconda. Bearish on the entire
market and bullish on that one stock! So I bought thirtytwo thousand shares of Anaconda—that is, eight thousand
full shares. It was a nice little flyer but I was sure of my
premises and I figured that the profit would help to swell
the margin available for bear operations later on.
On the next day the telegraph wires were down on
account of a storm up North or something of the sort. I
was in Harding's office waiting for news. The crowd was
chewing the rag and wondering all sorts of things, as stock
traders will when they can't trade. Then we got a quotation
the only one that day: Anaconda, $292.
There was a chap with me, a broker I had met in New
York. He knew I was long eight thousand full shares and I
suspect that he had some of his own, for when we got that
one quotation he certainly had a fit. He couldn't tell
whether the stock at that very moment had gone off
another ten points or not. The way Anaconda had gone up
117

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

it wouldn't have been anything unusual for it to break
twenty points. But I said to him, "Don't you worry, John. It
will be all right to-morrow." That was really the way I felt.
But he looked at me and shook his head. He knew better.
He was that kind. So I laughed, and I waited in the office
in case some quotation trickled through. But no, sir. That
one was all we got: Anaconda, $292. It meant a paper loss
to me of nearly one hundred thousand dollars. I had
wanted quick action. Well, I was getting it.
The next day the wires were working and we got the
quotations as usual. Anaconda opened at $298 and went
up to 302-¼, but pretty soon it began to fade away. Also,
the rest of the market was not acting just right for a further
rally. I made up my mind that if Anaconda went back to
$301, I must consider the whole thing a fake movement.
On a legitimate advance the price should have gone to
$310 without stopping. If instead it reacted it meant that
precedents had failed me and I was wrong: and the only
thing to do when a man is wrong is to be right by ceasing
to be wrong. I had bought eight thousand full shares in
expectation of a thirty or forty point rise. It would not be
my first mistake; nor my last.
Sure enough, Anaconda fell back to $301. The moment
it touched that figure I sneaked over to the telegraph
operator they had a direct wire to the New York office and
I said to him, "Sell all my Anaconda, eight thousand full
shares." I said it in a low voice. I didn't want anybody else
to know what I was doing.
He looked up at me almost in horror. But I nodded and
said, "All I've got!"
"Surely, Mr. Livingston, you don't meant at the
market?" and he looked as if he was going to lose a couple
of millions of his own through bum execution by a careless
broker. But I just told him, "Sell it! Don't argue about it!"
The two Black boys, Jim and Ollie, were in the office,
out of hearing of the operator and myself. They were big
traders who had come originally from Chicago, where they
118

IX

had been famous plungers in wheat, and were now heavy
traders on the New York Stock Exchange. They were very
wealthy and were high rollers for fair.
As I left the telegraph operator to go back to my seat in
front of the quotation board Oliver Black nodded to me
and smiled.
"You'll be sorry, Larry," he said.
I stopped and asked him, "What do you mean?"
"To-morrow you'll be buying it back."
"Buying what back?" I said. I hadn't told a soul except
the telegraph operator.
"Anaconda," he said. "You'll be paying $320 for it. That
wasn't a good move of yours, Larry." And he smiled again.
"What wasn't?" And I looked innocent.
"Selling your eight thousand Anaconda at the market; in
fact, insisting on it," said Ollie Black.
I knew that he was supposed to be very clever and
always traded on inside news. But how he knew my
business so accurately was beyond me. I was sure the
office hadn't given me away.
"Ollie, how did you know that?" I asked him.
He laughed and told me: "I got it from Charlie Kratzer."
That was the telegraph operator. "But he never budged
from his place," I said.
"I couldn't hear you and him whispering," he chuckled.
"But I heard every word of the message he sent to the New
York office for you. I learned telegraphy years ago after I
had a big row over a mistake in a message. Since then
when I do what you did just now—give an order by word of
mouth to an operator—I want to be sure the operator
sends the message as I give it to him. I know what he sends
in my name. But you will be sorry you sold that Anaconda.
It's going to $500."
"Not this trip, Ollie," I said.
He stared at me and said, "You're pretty cocky about it."
"Not I; the tape," I said. There wasn't any ticker there so
there wasn't any tape. But he knew what I meant.
119

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

"I've heard of those birds," he said, "who look at the
tape and instead of seeing prices they see a railroad timetable of the arrival and departure of stocks. But they were
in padded cells where they couldn't hurt themselves."
I didn't answer him anything because about that time
the boy brought me a memorandum. They had sold five
thousand shares at 299-¾. I knew our quotations were a
little behind the market. The price on the board at Palm
Beach when I gave the operator the order to sell was $301.
I felt so certain that at that very moment the price at which
the stock was actually selling on the Stock Exchange in
New York was less, that if anybody had offered to take the
stock off my hands at $296 I'd have been tickled to death
to accept. What happened shows you that I am right in
never trading at limits. Suppose I had limited my selling
price to $300? I'd never have got it off. No, sir! When you
want to get out, get out.
Now, my stock cost me about $300. They got off five
hundred shares—full shares, of course at 299-¾. The next
thousand they sold at 299-⅝. Then a hundred at ½; two
hundred at ⅜ and two hundred at ¼. The last of my stock
went at 298-¾. It took Harding's cleverest floor man
fifteen minutes to get rid of that last one hundred shares.
They didn't want to crack it wide open.
The moment I got the report of the sale of the last of my
long stock I started to do what I had really come ashore to
do that is, to sell stocks. I simply had to. There was the
market after its outrageous rally, begging to be sold. Why,
people were beginning to talk bullish again. The course of
the market, however, told me that the rally had run its
course. It was safe to sell them. It did not require
reflection.
The next day Anaconda opened below $296. Oliver
Black, who was waiting for a further rally, had come down
early to be Johnny-on-the-spot when the stock crossed
$320. I don't know how much of it he was long of or
whether he was long of it at all. But he didn't laugh when
120

IX

he saw the opening prices, nor later in the day when the
stock broke still more and the report came back to us in
Palm Beach that there was no market for it at all.
Of course that was all the confirmation any man
needed. My growing paper profit kept reminding me that I
was right, hour by hour. Naturally I sold some more
stocks.
Everything! It was a bear market. They were all going
down. The next day was Friday, Washington's Birthday. I
couldn't stay in Florida and fish because I had put out a
very fair short line, for me. I was needed in New York.
Who needed me? I did! Palm Beach was too far, too
remote. Too much valuable time was lost telegraphing
back and forth.
I left Palm Beach for New York. On Monday I had to lie
in St. Augustine three hours, waiting for a train. There was
a broker's office there, and naturally I had to see how the
market was acting while I was waiting. Anaconda had
broken several points since the last trading day. As a
matter of fact, it didn't stop going down until the big break
that fall.
I got to New York and traded on the bear side for about
four months. The market had frequent rallies as before,
and I kept covering and putting them out again. I didn't,
strictly speaking, sit tight. Remember, I had lost every cent
of the three hundred thousand dollars I made out of the
San Francisco earthquake break. I had been right, and
nevertheless had gone broke. I was now playing safe
because after being down a man enjoys being up, even if
he doesn't quite make the top. The way to make money is
to make it. The way to make big money is to be right at
exactly the right time. In this business a man has to think
of both theory and practice. A speculator must not be
merely a student, he must be both a student and a
speculator.

121

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

I did pretty well, even if I can now see where my
campaign was tactically inadequate. When summer came
the market got dull. It was a cinch that there would be
nothing doing in a big way until well along in the fall.
Everybody I knew had gone or was going to Europe. I
though that would be a good move for me. So I cleaned up.
When I sailed for Europe I was a trifle more than threequarters of a million to the good. To me that looked like
some balance.
I was in Aix-les-Bains enjoying myself. I had earned my
vacation. It was good to be in a place like that with plenty
of money and friends and acquaintances and everybody
intent upon having a good time. Not much trouble about
having that, in Aix. Wall Street was so far away that I never
thought about it, and that is more than I could say of any
resort in the United States. I didn't have to listen to talk
about the stock market. I didn't need to trade. I had
enough to last me quite a long time, and besides, when I
got back I knew what to do to make much more than I
could spend in Europe that summer.
One day I saw in the Paris Herald a dispatch from New
York that Smelters had declared an extra dividend. They
had run up the price of the stock and the entire market had
come back quite strong. Of course that changed everything
for me in Aix. The news simply meant that the bull cliques
were still fighting desperately against conditions—against
common sense and against common honesty, for they
knew what was coming and were resorting to such
schemes to put up the market in order to unload stocks
before the storm struck them. It is possible they really did
not believe the danger was as serious or as close at hand as
I thought. The big men of the Street are as prone to be
wishful thinkers as the politicians or the plain suckers. I
myself can't work that way. In a speculator such an
attitude is fatal. Perhaps a manufacturer of securities or a
promoter of new enterprises can afford to indulge in hopejags.
122

IX

At all events, I knew that all bull manipulation was
foredoomed to failure in that bear market. The instant I
read the dispatch I knew there was only one thing to do to
be comfortable, and that was to sell Smelters short. Why,
the insiders as much as begged me on their knees to do it,
when they increased the dividend rate on the verge of a
money panic. It was as infuriating as the old "dares" of
your boyhood. They dared me to sell that particular stock
short.
I cabled some selling orders in Smelters and advised my
friends in New York to go short of it. When I got my report
from the brokers I saw the price they got was six points
below the quotations I had seen in the Paris Herald. It
shows you what the situation was.
My plans had been to return to Paris at the end of the
month and about three weeks later sail for New York, but
as soon as I received the cabled reports from my brokers I
went back to Paris. The same day I arrived I called at the
steamship offices and found there was a fast boat leaving
for New York the next day. I took it.
There I was, back in New York, almost a month ahead of
my original plans, because it was the most comfortable
place to be short of the market in. I had well over half a
million in cash available for margins. My return was not
due to my being bearish but to my being logical.
I sold more stocks. As money got tighter call-money
rates went higher and prices of stocks lower. I had
foreseen it. At first, my foresight broke me. But now I was
right and prospering. However, the real joy was in the
consciousness that as a trader I was at last on the right
track. I still had much to learn but I knew what to do. No
more floundering, no more half-right methods. Tape
reading was an important part of the game; so was
beginning at the right time; so was sticking to your
position. But my greatest discovery was that a man must
study general conditions, to size them so as to be able to
anticipate probabilities. In short, I had learned that I had
123

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

to work for my money. I was no longer betting blindly or
concerned with mastering the techniques of the game, but
with earning my successes by hard study and clear
thinking. I also had found out that nobody was immune
from the danger of making sucker plays. And for a sucker
play a man gets sucker pay; for the paymaster is on the job
and never loses the pay envelope that is coming to you.
Our office made a great deal of money. My own
operations were so successful that they began to be talked
about and, of course, were greatly exaggerated. I was
credited with starting the breaks in various stocks. People
I didn't know by name used to come and congratulate me.
They all thought the most wonderful thing was the money
I had made. They did not say a word about the time when I
first talked bearish to them and they thought I was a crazy
bear with a stock-market loser's vindictive grouch. That I
had foreseen the money troubles was nothing. That my
brokers' bookkeeper had used a third of a drop of ink on
the credit side of the ledger under my name was a
marvelous achievement to them.
Friends used to tell me that in various offices the Boy
Plunger in Harding Brothers' office was quoted as making
all sorts of threats against the bull cliques that had tried to
mark up prices of various stocks long after it was plain that
the market was bound to seek a much lower level. To this
day they talk of my raids.
From the latter part of September on, the money
market was megaphoning warnings to the entire world.
But a belief in miracles kept people from selling what
remained of their speculative holdings. Why, a broker told
me a story the first week of October that made me feel
almost ashamed of my moderation.
You remember that money loans used to be made on
the floor of the Exchange around the Money Post. Those
brokers who had received notice from their banks to pay
call loans knew in a general way how much money they
would have to borrow afresh. And of course the banks
124

IX

knew their position so far as loanable funds were
concerned, and those which had money to loan would send
it to the Exchange. This bank money was handled by a few
brokers whose principal business was time loans. At about
noon the renewal rate for the day was posted. Usually this
represented a fair average of the loans made up to that
time. Business was as a rule transacted openly by bids and
offers, so that everyone knew what was going on. Between
noon and about two o'clock there was ordinarily not much
business done in money, but after delivery time—namely,
2:15 P.M.—brokers would know exactly what their cash
position for the day would be, and they were able either to
go to the Money Post and lend the balances that they had
over or to borrow what they required. This business also
was done openly.
Well, sometime early in October the broker I was telling
you about came to me and told me that brokers were
getting so they didn't go to the Money Post when they had
money to loan. The reason was that members of a couple
of well-known commission houses were on watch there,
ready to snap up any offerings of money. Of course no
lender who offered money publicly could refuse to lend to
these firms. They were solvent and the collateral was good
enough. But the trouble was that once these firms
borrowed money on call there was no prospect of the
lender getting that money back. They simply said they
couldn't pay it back and the lender would willy-nilly have
to renew the loan. So any Stock Exchange house that had
money to loan to its fellows used to send its men about the
floor instead of to the Post, and they would whisper to
good friends, "Want a hundred?" meaning, "Do you wish
to borrow a hundred thousand dollars?" The money
brokers who acted for the banks presently adopted the
same plan, and it was a dismal sight to watch the Money
Post. Think of it!

125

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

Why, he also told me that it was a matter of Stock
Exchange etiquette in those October days for the borrower
to make his own rate of interest. You see, it fluctuated
between 100 and 150 per cent per annum. I suppose by
letting the borrower fix the rate the lender in some strange
way didn't feel so much like a usurer. But you bet he got as
much as the rest. The lender naturally did not dream of
not paying a high rate. He played fair and paid whatever
the others did. What he needed was the money and was
glad to get it.
Things got worse and worse. Finally there came the
awful day of reckoning for the bulls and the optimists and
the wishful thinkers and those vast hordes that, dreading
the pain of a small loss at the beginning, were now about
to suffer total amputation—without anaesthetics. A day I
shall never forget, October 24, 1907.
Reports from the money crowd early indicated that
borrowers would have to pay whatever the lenders saw fit
to ask. There wouldn't be enough to go around. That day
the money crowd was much larger than usual. When
delivery time came that afternoon there must have been a
hundred brokers around the Money Post, each hoping to
borrow the money that his firm urgently needed. Without
money they must sell what stocks they were carrying on
margin sell at any price they could get in a market where
buyers were as scarce as money and just then there was
not a dollar in sight.
My friend's partner was as bearish as I was. The firm
therefore did not have to borrow, but my friend, the broker
I told you about, fresh from seeing the haggard faces
around the Money Post, came to me. He knew I was
heavily short of the entire market.
He said, "My God, Larry! I don't know what's going to
happen. I never saw anything like it. It can't go on.
Something has got to give. It looks to me as if everybody is
busted right now. You can't sell stocks, and there is
absolutely no money in there."
126

IX

"How do you mean?" I asked.
But what he answered was, "Did you ever hear of the
classroom experiment of the mouse in a glass-bell when
they begin to pump the air out of the bell? You can see the
poor mouse breathe faster and faster, its sides heaving like
overworked bellows, trying to get enough oxygen out of the
decreasing supply in the bell. You watch it suffocate till its
eyes almost pop out of their sockets, gasping, dying. Well,
that is what I think of when I see the crowd at the Money
Post! No money anywhere, and you can't liquidate stocks
because there is nobody to buy them. The whole Street is
broke at this very moment, if you ask me!"
It made me think. I had seen a smash coming, but not, I
admit, the worst panic in our history. It might not be
profitable to anybody if it went much further.
Finally it became plain that there was no use in waiting
at the Post for money. There wasn't going to be any. Then
hell broke loose.
The president of the Stock Exchange, Mr. R. H. Thomas,
so I heard later in the day, knowing that every house in the
Street was headed for disaster, went out in search of
succour. He called on James Stillman, president of the
National City Bank, the richest bank in the United States.
Its boast was that it never loaned money at a higher rate
than 6 per cent.
Stillman heard what the president of the New York
Stock Exchange had to say. Then he said, "Mr. Thomas,
we'll have to go and see Mr. Morgan about this."
The two men, hoping to stave off the most disastrous
panic in our financial history, went together to the office of
J. P. Morgan & Co. and saw Mr. Morgan. Mr. Thomas laid
the case before him. The moment he got through speaking
Mr. Morgan said, "Go back to the Exchange and tell them
that there will be money for them."
"Where?"
"At the banks!"
127

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

So strong was the faith of all men in Mr. Morgan in
those critical times that Thomas didn't wait for further
details but rushed back to the floor of the Exchange to
announce the reprieve to his death-sentenced fellow
members.
Then, before half past two in the afternoon, J. P.
Morgan sent John T. Atterbury, of Van Emburgh &
Atterbury, who was known to have close relations with J.
P. Morgan & Co., into the money crowd. My friend said
that the old broker walked quickly to the Money Post. He
raised his hand like an exhorter at a revival meeting. The
crowd, that at first had been calmed down somewhat by
President Thomas' announcement, was beginning to fear
that the relief plans had miscarried and the worst was still
to come. But when they looked at Mr. Atterbury's face and
saw him raise his hand they promptly petrified
themselves.
In the dead silence that followed, Mr. Atterbury said, "I
am authorized to lend ten million dollars. Take it easy!
There will be enough for everybody!"
Then he began. Instead of giving to each borrower the
name of the lender he simply jotted down the name of the
borrower and the amount of the loan and told the
borrower, "You will be told where your money is." He
meant the name of the bank from which the borrower
would get the money later.
I heard a day or two later that Mr. Morgan simply sent
word to the frightened bankers of New York that they must
provide the money the Stock Exchange needed.
"But we haven't got any. We're loaned up to the hilt,"
the banks protested.
"You've got your reserves," snapped J. P.
"But we're already below the legal limit," they howled
"Use them! That's what reserves are for!" And the banks
obeyed and invaded the reserves to the extent of about
