
How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

“Stocks in the News”

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

A section that I also check every day is what I call the “mini-charts” in the
“NYSE Stocks in the News” and “Nasdaq Stocks in the News” sections. We
used to show 20 or more charts in this screen, but we’ve now limited it to 10
because we’ve refined and improved the sorting mechanism. And what
we’ve learned is that, once you’re in any future bull market, these two lists
will materially outperform the S&P 500 and any new names on the charts
will be well worth your checking.
If you’re in a bear market, don’t expect these lists to work. Three out of
every four stocks will be going down in such an environment, and growth
situations can have significant corrections. But if you know you’re in an
uptrending market, and this is confirmed by the “The Big Picture” column,
these mini-charts—each of which is packed with 20 key statistics—can be a
source of high-probability new ideas. They won’t all work. But when you’re
in a positive market, you follow up on the ideas that work. Sooner or later, if
you’re patient, a market will develop into a strong bull market. And when
that happens, these are definitely screens you want to check out thoroughly.
If you do your homework, you then have a better chance of materially
improving your performance.
Over time, I’ve found that the first six or seven sectors in our stock
tables will contain most of the new leaders. I’ve also found that just

365

366 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
because some of the sectors in the back half haven’t been leaders recently
doesn’t mean that some of them won’t later possibly become turnarounds.
Lower-ranked and poor-performing sectors in this issue are Computer—
Hardware, Savings & Loans, Apparel, Machinery, Media, Steel, Real
Estate, and Semiconductors.
These rankings can shift over a period of weeks or months. But it pays to
know what’s leading now and which names within each sector have the best
fundamental and market-action variables. That’s where you want to concentrate your research.
These tables may take a little time to get used to. But after a few weeks,
you’ll know where your stocks are listed. To make it easier, we also have a
table that lists all of IBD’s 197 subindustries and tells you which of the 33
broad sectors each subindustry belongs to.
One thing that most of us fail to do, but that I would highly encourage you
to do, is read the box (usually on page B7) that explains the various ratings
and measures and how they’re computed and used. By doing this, you will
understand how best to utilize these advanced, very sophisticated tables
that could hold the key to dramatic success or improvement in your future.
Below the how-to-read box is a short list of “do’s and don’ts”—in other
words, what you should be doing to avoid the classic errors people sometimes make when they’re investing without doing their due diligence.
IBD Timesaver Table

The “IBD Timesaver Table” on the same page is a feature many busy people like to use because it picks up all the high-ranking stocks that were up or
down in price in a short table that includes volume and some other rankings.
I always check this and take particular note of the “Stocks Down” list. I want
to be aware of the stocks that have been hit hard because this could affect
others in the same industry. If a stock shows up repeatedly on this list, it
could be that it has topped and is headed for more trouble.
I’ve mentioned that we have 10 different ways you can zero in on the
leading groups. We also have little sector charts under the heading “Leading Market Indexes.” Each has a daily price and volume chart. Hi-tech,
Junior Growth, Leisure, and Consumer Sectors now top the list.
Alongside, we have the “New Highs” list. This list has also been reorganized. We weren’t interested in just showing which stocks made new highs
and which made new lows. We list them in order of the industry sectors that
had the largest number of stocks making new price highs. When you get into
a strong bull market and find that, say, the medical sector continues to lead,
it will probably be among the top one, two, or three sectors with the most
stocks making new highs.

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

When high technology was leading in the bull market of the 1990s, the
computer sector was number one for a year and a half. Stocks like Cisco and
Dell were constantly on the new-high list. If you knew what you were looking for, and you understood the significance of a stock’s displaying new highs
in a bull market, maybe you too could have participated when these stocks
were going up 10 times or more. There’s a lot you can learn by studying past
markets. We are historians.
In other words, it’s hard not to notice the real action and the real leaders
in the market. They are as obvious as the elephant that jumps into the bathtub and splatters water all over the place. When a whole sector is moving,
the sheer volume and broad-based activity cannot be hidden. We saw this in
the energy sector from 2004 to 2007, when virtually all oil and gas stocks
were moving up dramatically.
At some point, all sectors change. And when they do, the 10 different
ways we have to pick up leaders and laggards will point you in a direction
where you can say, “Those stocks are no longer leading the way they did
before.” If you just go on emotions and your attachment to a stock, you can
get into a lot of trouble. You need precise measurements to tell you if this
sector or that security is really behaving properly.

367

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

368 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL

One last thing: earnings are what drive a stock, and the rate of earnings
improvement is more important than the P/E ratio. So, you want to make
sure you check the “Company Earnings Reports” that come out at certain
times during a quarter. You can discover a company that’s suddenly showing
much better earnings than in the past.
It helps to be up on stocks that come through with better-than-expected
earnings—what the Street refers to as “earnings surprises.” What we have
learned to watch for are stocks whose earnings estimates are constantly
being raised and that show an acceleration in their percentage rate of
increase in earnings quarter by quarter. As a mentioned earlier, the bigger
the earnings increase, the better. And we don’t fall into the trap of eliminating any stock just because it’s P/E ratio looks high.
To wrap up the paper, we cover more futures and options than most publications. There’s a column on the bond market, several interest-rate charts
and tables, and no fewer than 36 charts on commodities futures.

369

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

370 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL

“Investor’s Corner” and IBD 100

Among other IBD features, “Investor’s Corner” is a popular daily educational
column for anyone who wants to learn more about investing. And every Monday we show the IBD 100, with charts on 100 high-ranked potential prospects.

How to Use Investors.com
Investors.com is the online companion to Investor’s Business Daily’s print
edition. Like the newspaper, it helps you quickly and confidently apply the
investing strategy outlined in this book. Whether you have just a few min-

How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

utes each day or you’re investing full-time, you can develop an effective
routine that fits your schedule using the tools and features found on
Investors.com.
We discussed the ways Investor’s Business Daily starts the research
process with an efficient assessment of the market, industry groups, and
stocks. Here are some additional ways to dig deeper in your research with
IBD’s specially designed screening tools and charts.
If you’re reading this book to hone your investing skills, going through
these tools in the following manner will help you develop an easy daily system for reviewing the market, top industries, and, finally, the top stocks.
The IBD Stock Research Tool on the home page of Investors.com is
structured to let you do just that from one central location. As you can see
from the graphic on this tool, you can use it to follow “Market Direction”
and to “Find,” “Evaluate,” and “Track” leading stocks. Following this
approach will help you find the best stocks, will let you know the right time
to buy and sell, and could materially improve your results.
The key is to take some time to become familiar with the investing tools
and features on Investors.com. The CAN SLIM chapters in this book will
help you understand the rationale for IBD’s investing tools, which are programmed to search for companies with the performance characteristics typical of emerging stock market winners.
Market Direction

As discussed, three out of four stocks usually follow the overall market
trend, whether it’s up or down. That’s why it’s critical for you to learn to follow, not fight, the market. Within the “Market Direction” tab, you’ll find
links to features that will help you do just that.
Start by taking another look at the “The Big Picture” and “Market Pulse”
to see what stage the market is currently in. You can also click on the
“Indexes” link to view the latest charts for each of the major indexes. The
charts are updated throughout the trading day with a 20-minute delay.
For timely analysis of the market action as it happens, read the “Markets
Update,” featuring nine intraday reports. You’ll find concise insights that
put the day’s events into perspective, plus highlights of leading stocks making a big move.
IBD TV: “Market Wrap” Regularly watching the IBD “Market Wrap” video is
another good way to stay on top of the market and improve your analytical
skills at the same time. Available by 6:30 p.m. (EST) each trading day, this
short video uses charts to visually show you how the market and leading
stocks are acting, and what trends and potential buy points to look out for.

371

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

372

How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

Find Stocks

Once you’ve reviewed the current market conditions, use the “Find Stocks”
tab to look for new investing ideas. Here you’ll find a wide range of ideagenerating screens in addition to those in the IBD print edition.
“Stocks on the Move™”—Learn What the Institutions May Be Buying and Selling as It Happens This is the
online version of the IBD print edition feature. As we’ve mentioned earlier,
just looking at typical most-active lists won’t give you the whole picture. You
need to know about the emerging institutional trades that are beginning to
show promise.
These stocks will appear on this radar screen, which is updated continuously throughout the trading day. You can quickly spot the stocks that institutions may be moving into—or out of—in a major way as it happens.
Remember that institutional buyers who are taking a position in a stock usually buy in huge quantities, which may create major volume in the stock.
Nearly every winning stock will show this type of activity at the onset of
its price advance. You don’t want to miss this screen if you are searching for
emerging leaders. Remember that not all the stocks shown on this list will
be winners. It’s important to check further to make sure the stock’s chart
looks sound and the ratings show leadership potential. This is a good way to
spot the breakout of a stock as it is happening or shortly thereafter.
Intraday Volume Percent Change—Another Way to Spot Possible Winners A key element of the online
version of “Stocks on the Move” is the intraday volume percent change. As
we’ve seen, a stock needs support from institutional buying to propel it
further. Volume percentage changes on an intraday basis will tell you—as it
is happening—if a stock is trading above or below its average daily volume
of the last 50 trading days. That’s a sign of institutional buying (or selling)
and a key component of “Stocks on the Move.” You can also get the intraday
volume percent change for any stock you’re looking at on the “Stock
Quotes” page of Investors.com.
“Screen Center” Click on the “Screen Center ” link to pull up the latest “Screen of
the Day.” Each day, there’s a different list that sorts the entire stock database
looking for potentially superior stocks based on important performance criteria.
This is a quick way to find leaders and the better possible ideas in different categories. The rotating screens include categories such as “Top Relative Price Strength Stocks,” “SmartSelect All Stars,” and “Top Acceleration
in Earnings.”
To access additional stock lists, click on “Screen Center” in the drop-down
menu within the “Stock Research” tab on the Investors.com home page.

373

374 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
You’ll find more possible investing ideas from lists including “CAN SLIM
Select,” “Sector Leaders,” “Tech Leaders,” and “Long-Term Investor.”
Most Active—NYSE and Nasdaq This daily column (also found in the print edition)
highlights breakouts and basing patterns in the best institutional-quality
stocks experiencing unusually heavy trading volume. You’ll also find a
discussion of potential buy points that indicate the best time to make initial
and secondary purchases. This column will also flag potentially negative
action as stocks reach their peaks.
Evaluate Stocks

Next, let’s look at how you can evaluate any stocks you already own or are
thinking of buying. There are many questions that should first be answered:

• Is this the right stock to own? Or are there better ones in its group?
• Is the stock in a leading industry group or a laggard one?
• If you own the stock, have you held it too long?
• If the stock looks fundamentally strong and you want to invest in it, is it
too soon or too late?

• Are we in a bull market or a bear market?
These are just a few questions that need to be answered before you make
your move. Two IBD investing tools—“IBD Stock Checkup®
” and “IBD Charts”—will help you sort through the stock-picking puzzle.
“IBD Stock Checkup®” “IBD Stock Checkup” evaluates and compares more than
6,000 publicly traded companies and assigns a composite rating and a pass,
neutral, or fail grade to put your ideas in the proper perspective. It’s essentially
a statistical summary report made up of several components, including

• Composite Rating
• Performance Within Group
• Group Leaders
• IBD Stock Checklist—with a pass, neutral, or fail grade

•

Red Light, Green Light

For the composite rating and most of the components listed in “IBD Stock
Checkup,” you’ll see a green (pass), yellow (neutral), or red (fail) icon. This is a
quick and easy way to see if your stock passes muster in that particular category based on time-tested CAN SLIM criteria.

375

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

376 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
Composite Rating As we discussed earlier, the composite rating is a quick way to
know whether you should move ahead or not. With the color-coded icons
within the “IBD Stock Checklist” (see point__ in the chart), it’s like a traffic
light that tells you whether to go (green), slow down (yellow), or stop (red)
in your research, and it will guide you toward only the very best companies.
Performance Within Group—Buy the Best Stocks in the Top Groups In the “Performance Within
Group” section, you can see how the stock specifically performs against the
rest of the stocks in its industry group. The rankings are based on IBD
SmartSelect ratings. This will help you determine if you’re making the right
choices. It’s easy to be swayed by news or TV tips, but this should give you a
major edge by forcing you to stick to the facts.
Group Leaders—Pointing You toward Real Potential Leadership No matter what you’ve bought or
are thinking about buying, this screen shows you where the real leadership
is. These are the stocks exhibiting the type of performance that might
propel them further in an uptrending general market You can click on each
of the SmartSelect ratings to see which stocks in the group rank highest for
that individual rating.
“IBD Stock Checklist” Is Your Stock Rated Pass, Neutral, or Fail? The “IBD Stock Checklist”
gives you a thorough review of the fundamental and technical strength of
each stock, along with a pass, neutral, or fail grade for each category. For
example, at the very top of the stock checklist, you’ll see a green, yellow, or
red icon next to the composite rating. This will help steer you toward the
true market leaders—and away from the laggards.
In the “General Market and Industry Group” section, you’ll also get a
pass, neutral, or fail grade for the general market and for the relevant industry group. Do not buy stocks when the general market flashes a red signal.
IBD Charts Show You the Right Time to Buy or Sell You never want to buy any highly rated
stock in IBD’s tables without first checking a chart, and it pays to regularly
review both daily and weekly charts on any stocks you own. This is a vital
step that will help you spot emerging trends and track a stock’s movement
so you know the exact time to buy or sell. IBD charts are designed to make
it easier and faster for both new and experienced chart readers to get the
real picture. These daily and weekly charts are free when you register on
Investors.com.
For those who are intimidated by charts, think of a stock chart as a “picture worth a thousand words.” It will tell you some vital things about the
progress (or lack of progress) of any company. In time, you will find your

377

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

review is quite automatic. Daily charts can also help you spot possible future
winners. IBD daily charts include the following:

• Up days in price in blue; down days in red
• Continually updated price and volume data
• EPS and RS ratings
• Relative Price Strength line
• 50- and 200-day moving averages of price
Refer again to Chapter 2 to learn to recognize chart patterns. You may also
want to consult the “IBD University” section of Investors.com for a course
on chart analysis. Also remember that the majority of stocks tend to follow
the overall trend of the market, so be sure to check current market conditions, as discussed earlier, to confirm that your overall timing is correct.
Weekly Charts—Tip-Off to Institutional Trading IBD weekly charts will help you gauge
institutional buying. Since mutual funds typically take days, if not weeks

378 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
(and sometimes longer), to build (or unload) their positions, any heavy
volume on the chart may tell you if they’re possibly moving into or out of a
stock in a major way.
Weekly charts include the same information that appears on the daily
charts, with the addition of shares outstanding. These charts span nearly two
years of price and volume movements.
To capture the biggest gains, it’s important that you use both daily and
weekly charts, since they offer different views on a stock. You will get more
exact timing indications from the dailies and the big picture from the weeklies.
Track Stocks

Once you’ve evaluated and purchased a stock, it’s crucial that you track its performance. “Buy and hold” is a dangerous strategy, as all stocks—even those of
well-known, established companies—can be volatile and risky. To be a successful investor over the long haul, you need to keep all your losses small and
to know when to sell and take your profits. Chapters 10 and 11 discuss how
you can do that with time-tested sell rules. The “My Stock Lists” feature on
Investors.com will help you stay organized so you can apply them effectively.

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

“My Stock Lists” With “My Stock Lists,” you can create up to five lists with
up to 50 stocks on each list. To stay organized and save time, you can

How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

create different lists for different purposes. For example, you could
create a “My Portfolio” list for the stocks you own, a list of “Stocks in
Bases” for leading stocks that are currently forming a base, and a “Near
a Buy Point” list for stocks that are approaching a proper buy point. It’s
important that you review and manage your lists regularly, adding and
deleting stocks as needed.
To help you track the performance of your stocks, the “My Biggest Price
Movers” feature automatically alerts you to the stocks on your lists that are
making the biggest price moves, up or down.
“My Stock Lists” also gives you one-click access to “IBD Stock
Checkup,” IBD charts, and IBD archives for each stock. Use IBD archives
to read what IBD has written about the companies you’re watching; it can
provide valuable insight into the story behind the stock. Use “IBD Stock
Checkup” and IBD charts to continually evaluate both the stocks you own
and those you’re watching.

•

“My Routine”: Create Your Own Custom Investing Routine

“My Routine” gives you one-click access to your favorite tools and features from
virtually any page on Investors.com. It’s a convenient, time-saving way to go
through your investing “to do” list quickly.
Here’s a sample routine you could set up to follow market direction and find,
evaluate, and track your stocks.
1. “The Big Picture”
2. “Screen Center”
3. “IBD Stock Checkup”
4. IBD charts

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

5. “My Stock Lists”

379

380 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
Continuing Education—The Key to Investing Success

“IBD University” For most investors, not a day goes by without questions. The
“IBD University” section of Investors.com provides a complete stock
investment course to help you improve your knowledge and skill. It outlines
every aspect of buying and selling stocks, along with chart reading and many
other important topics. The lessons are free, and you can take them at your
own pace anywhere you have an Internet connection.
IBD TV: Daily Stock Analysis The “Daily Stock Analysis” video reviews the technical
and fundamental strength of a current leading stock. Watching this every
day will give you new investing ideas—and help you improve your own
chart-reading and analytical skills. You can also read the “Daily Stock
Analysis” column for a summary of key points discussed in the video.
“Investor’s Corner”—Find Answers to Your Questions You can search the archives of the
“Investor’s Corner” column to quickly find detailed answers to beginning,
intermediate, and advanced questions on a wide range of investing topics.
“IBDextra!” Monthly Newsletter The “IBDextra!” newsletter provides exclusive videos,
articles, and stock lists to help you follow current market conditions,
improve your investing skills, and get the most out of IBD’s features and
tools. The newsletter is free when you register on Investors.com.
