annually, it is not surprising that MCX ranks number one and number three
in silver and gold futures trading. Couple that with India's consumption of
2.4 million barrels of oil a day (according to www.cia.gov), and it is no wonder that MCX is number two in the world for natural gas futures contracts
and number three for crude oil futures.
Brazil The Brazilian Mercantile and Futures Exchange (BM&F) is the
fourth largest exchange in the world, according to the Futures Industry
Association. It is also the number one exchange of Latin America. With
an average daily volume of 1 million contracts and its recent partnership
agreement with the CME Group, the exchange is poised to playa significant
role in all of North America. Without a doubt it is a major player in the futures market, providing futures contracts on gold, feeder cattle, live cattle,
arabic a coffee, robusta coffee, cotton, crystal sugar, com, and soybeans.

WHAT DOES TIllS ltlEAN
FOR THE MARIiET?
With the constant merger of exchanges from around the world, new and
more interesting products are constantly being created. There is a greater
effect of settling commodity prices in China or Brazil and how they impact
the opening of commodity prices in India or the United States. The rules
and regulations for stocks, commodities, and indexes quickly become the
concern of an international marketplace.
Various forms of trading and contract types that are considered overthe-counter in one country, that may be illegal in another, and that may be
caught in limbo in yet another country are still owned by the same corporation. This brave new trading environment leads both to a world of
opportunity and to a world of land mines and problems, both legally and
logistically.
As the CME Group aggressively begins to flex its financial muscle
in the acquisition arena, industry operators become increasingly skeptical and worried about the implications of a monolithic, all-encompassing
exchange. The CME Group, NYSE Euronext, the U.S. Futures Exchange

Markets and Margin

35

(formerly Eurex US), and ICE face a multitude of hurdles in offering their
exchange and clearing services. Banks and industry experts are wising up
to the consolidation efforts. They are beginning to see that the concentration of both clearing and exchange services may lead to higher pricing for
them in the long run.
Where once before traders could rely on competition to minimize their
transactional costs, it has become apparent that when one group owns
10 percent in one exchange, owns 35 percent of another exchange, and is
about to acquire another, the competition that allowed them to search for
the best price possible is slowly evaporating. Add to the simmering rebellion from the banking and brokerage community the fact that many ofthese
acquisitions involve exchanges that were once involved exclusively in
either stocks or futures, but rarely both, a recipe for disaster is on the horizon. So while the push to merge and develop one worldwide electronic exchange is an inevitable conclusion to all of this activity, the regulators are
light-years behind in how best to operate in this cross-border community.
New products are constantly being developed all across the globe, and
either various rules and regulations will have to be adjusted to accommodate them or a whole generation of regulators will need to be retrained in
their auditing duties. Cash markets all around the world are being affected
by stock and commodity exchanges in far-fiung regions simultaneously using price discovery to determine the true value of various underlying assets. In this environment, a growing schism of what activity is acceptable
or not acceptable and what regulator or regulators have jurisdiction over
what is happening is on the horizon.
A prime example of this regulatory schism is the contracts for difference (CFDs) and the single-stock futures (SSFs) fiasco that occurred in
the United States. An antiquated law, the Shad-Johnson Accord, separated
the joint efforts of the stock and futures markets for almost two decades.
By the time the Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000 had kicked
in to allow SSF trading, the rest of the world had already passed it by.
Currently South Africa hosts the world's largest SSF exchange at 700,000
contracts daily, which dwarfs the 26,000 contracts traded by the last SSF
exchange in the United States, OneChicago.
In contrast, CFDs are experiencing tremendous growth. They are utilized in at least 12 different countries, with more countries joining daily.
Unfortunately, since the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission maintains strict regulations on OTC trading of financial instruments, the products cannot be offered in the United States, although traders outside the
country can purchase CFDs of U.S. companies and indexes. How U.S. regulators will react to the pan-global commodity exchanges that will want
to increase revenues by offering CFDs to their customer base is unknown,
but the question will arise a lot sooner than later.

36

DESIGNING THE TRADE

Contracts for Difference (CFDs)
Contracts for difference (CFDs) grew out of the unique tax regulatory environment of the United Kingdom. They were developed as a way to avoid
unnecessary taxes for companies or money managers that wanted to hedge
against the risk in their portfolios. Soon after their creation they jumped
over to the retail sector like wildfire. The elegance of the concept has
driven its acceptance across the globe and has paved the way for a simple
solution for traders to participate in shares, currencies, and commodities
anywhere in the world.
Known by its other name, leveraged share trading, CFDs allow the creation of a contract between two private parties. The buyer and seller simply
agree to pay each other the difference between the current value of an asset
and its value at contract time. With this simple contract any investor can
speculate on the price of stock shares, commodity prices, or index values
without being required to actually purchase the underlying item.
There are three core benefits to end users: First, they can go long or
short with few, if any, restrictions; second, they can own a contract that
may never expire, unlike futures and options; and finally, they can choose
the amount of leverage that they want to have, putting up anywhere from
1 percent to 30 percent of the contract value, depending on the agreedupon contract or counterparty. This without question is the fastest-growing
financial sector. It will quickly dwarf the amount of retail activity that the
forex OTC market is currently enjoying.
CFDs are superior to options because there are no "greeks" (beta,
delta, etc.) to contend with. CFDs follow the underlying shares one for one
with few modifications. There are no long, complex formulas that have to
be calculated in order to determine the true value of the CFD or the effects
that volatility is currently having on the CFD.
Not only being superior to options, CFDs also beat out SSFs in both
liquidity and flexibility. SSFs require that you buy a set number of shares,
100, typically at a fixed rate of 20 percent of the contract value and at an
inflated price to the underlying share because of various interest rate costs,
but with no ability to share in the dividend payout of the stock itself.
All is not roses with CFDs, though. Much like any OTC market, forex
trading being a prime example, the broker is the market maker. How he
makes his money is through a commission or a spread between the buy
and sell price and interest rate charges for carrying a position overnight.
This spread can run from a fraction of a percentage point to a flat fee.
Whatever the case, associated costs have the ability to become expensive
if not watched carefully. There is also the danger that, since the CFDs are
traded with little or no regulatory oversight, the assumed liquidity for your
position can evaporate overnight. The problems don't end there. CFDs are

Markets and Margin

37

nonnegotiable contracts. Whichever broker you established the CFD contract with is where your CFD has to stay. Regardless of whether the CFD
price spread is tighter somewhere else, you must maintain your position.
While these potential issues with CFDs are real, there is no precedence
of brokers abusing the system. Yet for those who have been afraid to venture into the world of CFD trading, there has been an even bigger move to
legitimize the product. With the recent merger of the Sydney Futures Exchange and the Australian Stock Exchange, there is a proposed expansion
of their exchange-traded CFDs to include stocks from around the world.
If this occurs, they will be the only exchange-traded CFDs in the world,
eliminating many of the problems that OTC CFDs incur. Currently the
Australian Stock Exchange has an online simulator to help traders learn
about CFDs without having to risk their capital or run afoul of their local
regulations.
The backbone of the futures and options industry revolves around the
ability to offer leverage through margin. In trying to do that effectively,
exchanges have been hamstrung by the requirement that the contracts that
they have to offer must expire at various intervals (monthly, quarterly etc.).
If the CFD makes the leap from stocks to other spot markets, without the
problem of having a forced expiration date, what is the true relevance of
the futures market and how do CFDs affect the relationship that all of these
markets have with options? These are questions that the exchanges, regulators, and shareholders will have to answer.
With that being the case, speculators-longs (buyers) and shorts
(sellers )-must put up the exact same amount of margin. When the market
goes against the speculator, money is transferred directly from the longs
to the shorts during a bear market, and the shorts directly transfer funds
to the longs during a bull market. Therefore a margin call is of great importance and if it is not met within the allotted time your position can be
liquidated without notice. If the forced liquidation results in losses that exceed the margin amount, the speculator is held liable.

DAISY CHAIN El"FECT
It is important to note that every actively traded market discussed in this

book was designed to do one thing and one thing only: operate as insurance for the cash market. The OTC market was developed as a way to
customize the protection of commodities, currencies, and shares. Futures
were developed to protect farmers against wild fluctuations in supply and
demand, along with many other cash markets. Options evolved to protect
shares and futures contracts. No matter what the underlying cash market

38

DESIGNING THE TRADE

is, whether commodities or equities, every derivative that has grown out of
it was originally intended to manage risk or operate as a hedge.
The fact that in order for any of them to work you need liquidity and
speculators is the nature of the beast. Based on the level a speculator can
afford, there are many places where he can interact, head to head, with the
people who ultimately buy and sell the actual cash positions. If a trader has
enough capital, he can operate directly in the cash market. However, the
OTe market is the closest the majority of traders will come to trading the
cash market. The futures market runs third in the daisy chain, and finally
you have the options market.
A multitude of different types of contracts are traded in each of these
arenas, many of them so complex as to need a PhD in mathematics to understand them, let alone trade them. How these markets interact with one
another is based on an amazing dance of credit, faith, history, technology,
and rules-each one depending on the other to manage risk and diminish
loss, while at the same time making the credit easier along the way so they
can expand the number of market participants (speculators).

Cash
Without the cash market, none of the others would exist. Or at least the
cash market would like to believe so. The majority of traders experience
the cash market in only a few arenas-stocks, precious metals, and currencies. At one time or another on a small to moderate scale they may decide to get involved with any of the three markets out of necessity. Either
they are participating in a retirement plan of some sort, or they visit a gold
dealer, or they travel overseas. Whatever the case, they then experience
the rules of the cash market firsthand.
The cash market is straightforward. When you decide to purchase a
share of stock for $1, you receive ownership of a share of stock for $l.
The same can be said for investors who are familiar with spot transactions
in gold and silver, whether they purchase a few precious metal coins or
own several ounces of gold and silver bars. Investment in precious metals is an all-or-nothing deal. Investors who travel may have to exchange
one currency for another. Rarely do individual investors purchase cattle,
soybeans, or all the companies in an index.
Those who have ever had a cash transaction have experienced one of
the most frustrating experiences possible, the spread. Whether it is shares
in a company, gold bars, or a foreign currency, the difference between the
price you pay and the price at which the seller is willing to buy it back
from you are often nowhere near each other. This spread, in addition to
whatever other built-in markups there are, is how the cash market makers
tum a profit.

Markets and Margin

39

This is the danger zone. No one wants to lose their hard-earned capital.
So in order to be able to speculate in the cash market but still have an
out, the over-the-counter market was developed. Whatever position can be
taken in the cash market can be offset or protected in the over-the-counter
market for a fraction of the cost.

Over-the-Counter (OTC)
Currently the most popular OTC market in the world is foreign exchange
(forex) trading. Trading upwards of $2 trillion a day (hard figures are difficult to come by since there is no central exchange), banks and retail investors rub shoulders in attempting to figure out what the true value of a
country is. In the OTC forex market the rules are fairly simple. Two counterparties agree to cross buy and sell particular lots of foreign currencies
that must be bought or sold back within a given time. This typically can occur anytime within a 24-hour period. If a position is carried overnight, then
interest rate charges may accrue. Contracts for difference (CFDs) operate
on the exact same principles as the OTC forex market.
Just like the cash transactions, the difference between the bid and the
ask provides a profit spread that the brokerage or bank uses to make its
money. In return for the opportunity to earn your business, the brokerage or bank will extend you credit (i.e., margin) to buy and sell currencies
throughout the day. While possible, rarely do retail investors choose to put
up the face value of a currency contract. They will typically take advantage
of the leverage provided in order to increase the returns on their dollars.
For those companies or institutional investors actually holding on to
cash positions in stocks or foreign currencies, the leverage of forex and
CFDs gives them an inexpensive way to put on a countertrade just in case
they have misinterpreted the market's direction.

Futures
The futures market is the OTC market without the need for blind trust.
Grown from the world of the OTC forward contract, the futures market
provides several key services. The primary service is the centralizing of information. In the OTC market, every bank or brokerage offering contracts
is able to set its own spreads and slightly different pricing. In order to get
the best bid/ask spread or to discover the best pricing, a consumer (retail
or institutional) had to call around. With the prevalence of the Internet, it
is an easier task, but it still requires research on the part of the consumer
to find the best deals.
The by-product of the centralizing of information is the transparency
in pricing and information. Anyone in the world can receive quotes from

40

DESIGNING THE TRADE

the exchange and receive the exact same price. Anyone can look at the
Commitments of Traders reports and see exactly who is buying and selling
what markets and the ebb and flow from the longs to the shorts and vice
versa. Another key benefit of the exchanges is that there is no overt bid/ask
spread. You have a likely chance to buy or sell at any quote on the screen if
you are willing to put in a special order request, such as limits or stop limits.
Finally, unlike the OTC market, you are able to hold on to your contracts for longer time frames, there are no interest rate charges for using
margin or carrying contracts overnight, and your liquidity is not solely dependent on just the bank or the brokerage- you have the world.
For those who hold significant cash or OTC positions, the ease of getting in and out of futures contracts and the ability to use margined contracts to do so are attractive prospects when you want to manage your risk.

Options
The last instrument on this daisy chain is the option. There is a reason why
the fee you pay for an option is called a premium and fee you pay for an
insurance policy is called a premium. While the financial party line talks
about options in terms of the "right" versus the "obligation" to own the
underlying asset, the reality is quite simple. Options are an inexpensive insurance for the cash, OTC, and futures markets. Whether they are stock
options, futures options, or currency options, they all operate with the exact same principles.
For a small fee (a premium), you can purchase an option (put or call)
at a specific price, typically the same price at which you got into one of
your other positions, and for a set amount of time. The fact that you can
purchase options in-, at-, or out-of-the-money is a testament to their ability
to help you protect against risk.

Credit (Margin)
What makes this entire system of cash-OTC-futures-options work is the
ever-increasing amount of credit that you receive as you work your way
through the chain. Let's look at the stock market as a prime example:
$100 in shares (cash) is the same as
$30 in CFDs (OTC)
$20 in SSFs (futures)
$5 in calls (options)
$5 in puts (options)

Markets and Margin

41

The same $100 in shares is supported by at least four other products.
(There are many more products such as swaps, warrants, and convertibles
that are not appropriate for this book, but also extend the credit.) This has
created an additional $400 in credit for just $60 in up-front cash. That is
almost a sevenfold increase in purchasing power.
On the face of it, economists and major investors like Warren Buffett
are consistently worried that this pyramid of easy credit will cause the collapse of our civilization as we know it. If done properly, the interrelationship between each of these markets was designed to make it less risky, not
more risky. The worry may be unnecessary. It's like saying that if too many
people buy car insurance, whether they drive a car or not, it will destroy
the car industry. One need not be in direct correlation with the other.
Whatever the case may be, the current system has a built-in checks and
balances. There is a requirement that the options be purchased outright,
since they are the least expensive, and that when margin is extended it
comes in two forms. In the first stage you are extended what is known as
an initial margin. This is a percentage of the contract that brokerage or the
exchange has deemed to be appropriate for the market's current volatility
levels.
In the second stage of a margin offering is the maintenance margin.
The maintenance margin is the absolute minimum amount that trader must
keep in his account in order to maintain his position. If the trader cannot keep his account at the maintenance level, then he must put up more
money to get back to the initial margin or close his position out. This is
known as a margin call.
While the system is far from perfect, it works. If not for the fraud component, major disasters at Societe General and Barings Bank could have
been avoided solely based on the various margin calls the traders were receiving on the way down.

Standard Portfolio Analysis of Risk (SPAN)
Whether by design or by chance, in 1988 the Chicago Mercantile Exchange
created one of most sophisticated systems for margin calculation around.
In light of the fact that the CME is expanding at a rapid rate and acquiring
both international and domestic products as part of its stable, the SPAN
system will allow the CME to assess account risk in an ever-expanding way.
As excerpted directly from the CME Group web site:

SPAN uses the risk arrays to scan underlying market price changes
and volatility changes for all contracts in a portjolio, in order to
determine value gains and losses at the portjolio level. This is the
single most important calculation executed by the program.

42

DESIGNING THE TRADE

Through its sophisticated calculations the SPAN program takes into
account the delta of options, intercommodity spread credits, as well as the
amount of volatility affecting the overall account. Based on this calculation, something interesting happens, not just for the exchange, but for the
trader as well. When a trader has properly daisy-chained his cash, OTC, futures, and options holdings, margins have a way of almost magically being
reduced.
The exchange realizes that the OTC, futures, and options markets were
designed as insurance vehicles for the cash market. Through the SPAN system, traders are rewarded for being aware of this. By strategically managing your positions into a way where they are protecting one another and reducing your overall volatility, you can easily find your margin requirements
being cut by half or more. Although the CME invented the SPAN margin
calculation system, various exchanges around the world have adopted it.

GLOBAL MARKETS
There are so many markets, exchanges, and contracts that you can trade.
It becomes an overwhelming task to pick and choose just the right markets

and just the right exchanges to interact with. At the same time, the various
markets fall into several broad categories: stocks, indexes, interest rates,
currencies, agriculture, softs, precious metals, industrial metals, energy,
and meats. There are also several exotic categories such as the climate and
oils. In this book the goal is to narrow down the universe of markets and
to make examples of just a handful. The markets that are represented are
meant both to be broad strokes of a category and to reflect the interrelationship that this market has with various other factors in the economy.
By no means is this done to suggest that you trade these markets exclusively or to teach you to trade these markets to riches. They are meant
as examples to assist you in selecting your markets to trade. My book Winning the Trading Game (John Wiley & Sons, 2008) outlines how to select
markets for your own risk, reward, and volatility levels. Reading that book
will do a better job of helping you determine what is right for you instead
of blindly following the markets that are outlined in this chapter. The goal
here is to see you become a trader who can nimbly look at a market and
construct a trading approach around it, regardless of what it is.
That being said, five markets were chosen for their robustness, current
international importance, and the fact that they are traded across multiple
contract types. While not the only markets to meet these criteria, they are
the easiest to recognize among a slew of other contracts. The examples in
