
Stopping out before things get worse
As part of any trade strategy and to preserve your trading capital for future trading, you always
need to identify where to exit a trade if the market doesn’t move in the direction you expect.
Devote as much time and energy to pinpointing that level as you need, always keeping in mind that
a lot of short-term price action can be stop-loss driven.

Anticipate that key technical and price levels will be tested to see if stop-loss or market
orders are there. Testing levels is what trading markets spend a lot of time doing. For this
reason, I like to factor in a margin of error in placing my stops, based on the individual
currency pair and the current market environment. (I discuss the pros and cons of applying a
margin of error for stop-loss orders in more detail in Chapter 13.)

In my experience, no one is ever happy when a stop-loss order gets triggered. The fact of
the matter is that stop losses are a necessary evil for every trader, big and small. I never
know beforehand where a price movement will stop, but I can control where I exit the market
if prices don’t move as I expect. Most important, stop losses are an important tool for
preventing manageable trading losses from turning into disastrous ones.
No trader is right all the time, so getting stopped out is simply a part of trading reality. Traders
who apply intelligent and disciplined stop-loss orders occasionally may suffer setbacks, but
they’ll avoid getting wiped out, and they’ll still be around to trade the next day. Traders who fail
to use stops, or who move them to avoid having them triggered, run the risk of getting wiped out if
the move is large enough.

Trailing stop losses for larger price movements
The one type of stop loss that traders may actually enjoy seeing triggered is trailing stop-loss
orders, which are often used to protect profits and enable traders to capture larger price
movements. (I explain how trailing stop-loss orders work in Chapter 4.)
Trailing stops are no surefire guarantee that you’ll be able to stay on board for a larger directional
price move, but they do provide an element of flexibility that you should consider in adjusting your
trade plan. For example, if your position is in the money and holding beyond a significant technical
break level, you may want to consider adjusting your stop loss to a trailing stop that has its starting
point on the other side of the technical level. If the break leads to a more sustained move, you’ll be
able to capture more than you otherwise might. If the break is reversed, the trailing stop will limit
the damage.

Setting it and forgetting it: Letting the market trigger

your order
When you’ve identified a trade opportunity and developed a risk-aware trading plan, you’re going
to have active orders out in the market to cover your position one way or the other (stop-loss or
take-profit). Depending on your trading style and the trade setup, you can reasonably follow a setit-and-forget-it trade strategy where your orders will watch the market and your position for you.
Medium- to longer-term traders are more likely to rely on set, or resting, market orders to cover
open positions due to the longer time frame of such trade strategies and the burdens of monitoring
the market overnight or for longer stretches of time.

Remember to use rate alerts to update you on specific price movements (see Chapter 15).
The archetypical picture of the currency trader sleeping with a phone under the pillow is not
really that far off. Depending on how your trade is developing, you can make order
adjustments typically in a matter of seconds or minutes and get back to sleep (or whatever it
was you were doing).
Shorter-term traders are more likely to follow a more dynamic approach, again based on the
shorter time frame of such trades. Short-term traders are more apt to be in front of their trading
monitors while their trade is still open, but they should always still have an ultimate limiting set of
orders to cover the trade strategy.

You may want to be flexible with where you leave your take-profit order, but always have a
stop-loss order in place to protect you in case of unexpected news or price movements. If
you’re trading the market from the long side (meaning, you think prices in a currency pair are
likely to move higher), you need to pinpoint the ultimate price level on the downside, which
negates this short-term view.

Squaring up after events have happened
Depending on the basis of the trade opportunity you’ve identified, there will be very real
hallmarks indicating what, if any, adjustments you should make.
Trades based on fundamental events (like a data report or an expected monetary policy statement)
have a very real basis in both time and content. If you’ve taken a position based on a data release,
for example, when the report is issued, you and the rest of the market now have that information.
If you’ve anticipated various outcomes to the report, you’ll have a leg up on the market in
interpreting the subsequent price action. If the market is not reacting the way you expected, it’s a
strong sign that other forces are at work. The market reaction to the data or news is usually more

important than the event itself.

Most important, though, is that the basis for your trade strategy — the event — has taken
place. If the market doesn’t react as you thought it would, you have very little reason to
continue to hold onto the position. Always relate your original rationale for holding your
position back to the reality on the ground. When events turn out differently from what you
expected, start looking for the exit sooner rather than later.

Exiting at the right time
In trading, it’s frequently said that timing is everything. Truer words were never spoken. But that
line applies to trying to time your entry and exit to capture tops and bottoms in the market —
market timing, in other words.
But I’m talking about the time on the clock on the wall. The time of day and the day of the week
can frequently influence how prices behave and how your ultimate trade strategy plays out. If
you’re trading ahead of major data releases, for example, you need to be aware that price action is
going to be affected in the run-up to the scheduled release, not to mention in its aftermath. There’s
no set way that prices will behave before data releases, but you still need to be alert to upcoming
events that may dictate changes to your trade plan.
Similarly, if you’ve been positioned correctly for a directional price move in the New York
morning, for example, you need to be aware that there may be a price reaction as European traders
begin to wind up their trading day. Some London closes may see the price move continue in the
direction it was going; other times, the price move may reverse. The question for you as a trader,
though, is: Do you really want to find out which way it plays out?

At the minimum, you may want to make adjustments to your trade strategy to limit any
negative impact from session closes, such as reducing your position size, tightening stop
losses, or squaring up altogether.
Depending on the day of the week, you may be looking at different liquidity conditions (such as a
holiday, a month end, or a quarter end, which frequently see lower liquidity and the chance for
outsize volatility). If it’s a Friday, the market will be closing for the weekend in a matter of hours.
If you hold on to your position, you run the risk of being exposed to weekend gap risk. Do you
want to wait ’til the last minute and expose yourself to the uncertain price action?

Staying on top of the time of day is as important a trading consideration as having the right
position. When it comes to adjusting your trading plan or closing out your position, it

frequently pays to be a clock watcher.

Getting out when the price is right
When it comes to market information, the most reliable information is always the prices
themselves. Sharp price reactions are usually strong indicators of significant market interest —
interest that is either pushing prices faster in the same direction or repelling them in the opposite
direction.
As you’re monitoring your position in the market, you need to be closely attuned to significant
price reactions, such as spike reversals or price gaps, with a good benchmark being typically
more than 20 points over a few minutes. The sharp move in prices may be due to news or rumors,
or it may just be a pocket of illiquidity. Either way, the sharp price move carries its own
significance that is information to you. There’s no set way such moves always play out, but if
you’re alert for them, you’ve got one more piece of information to help you decide when and how
to exit your position.

If the rapid price movement was in your favor, you can look at it as a new high-water mark,
or as a new support or resistance level. If the move is reversed, the tide is reversing, and you
should consider exiting sooner rather than later. If the tide doesn’t reverse, you’ve got a solid
short-term price level on which to base your decisions going forward. If the price move was
against you, you may want to consider that the market is not cooperating and adopt a more
defensive strategy, such as tightening stop losses, reducing your position, or exiting
altogether.

Assessing Your Trading Strategy
Active currency trading is as much a learning process as it is a speculative endeavor. Good
traders learn from their mistakes and try to avoid repeating them in the future. Bad traders keep
making the same mistakes over and over again until they give up in frustration or are forced to for
financial reasons.
Successful trades also represent excellent learning opportunities, both about how different trading
strategies work best and about your own personal response to them. Successful traders remember
what they did right and try to emulate it in the future, knowing full well that no two trades are ever
the same. Bad traders only remember that they won, but they fail to take the lessons of why they
won to heart.
The best way to learn from each trading experience — both good and bad — is to make post-trade
analysis part of your regular trading routine.

Identifying what you did right and wrong
Regardless of the outcome of any trade, you want to look back over the whole process to
understand what you did right and wrong. In particular, ask yourself the following questions:
How did you identify the trade opportunity? Was it based on technical analysis, a
fundamental view, or some combination of the two? Looking at your trade this way will
help identify your strengths and weaknesses as either a fundamental or technical trader. If
more of your winning trades are being generated by technical analysis, you’ll probably
want to devote more energy to that approach. If more of your winning trades are coming
from the fundamental approach, you’re probably better off concentrating on a fundamental
style.
How well did your trade plan work out? Was the position size sufficient to match the
risk and reward scenarios, or was it too large or too small? Could you have entered at a
better level? What tools might you have used to improve your entry timing? Were you
patient enough, or did you rush in thinking you’d never have the chance again? Was your
take profit realistic or pie in the sky? Did the market pay any respect to your choice of
take-profit levels, such as stopping short of it, or did prices blow right through it? Ask
yourself the same questions about your stop-loss level. Use the answers to refine your
position size, entry level, and order placement going forward.
How well did you manage the trade after it was open? Were you able to effectively
monitor the market while your trade was active? If so, how? If not, why not? The answers
to those questions will reveal a lot about how much time and dedication you’re able to
devote to your trading. Did you modify your trade plan along the way? Did you adjust
stop-loss orders to protect profits? Did you take partial profit at all? Did you close out the
trade based on your trading plan, or did the market surprise you somehow? Based on your
answers, you’ll learn what role your emotions may have played and how disciplined a
trader you are.

There are no right and wrong answers in this review process; just be as honest with
yourself as you can. No one else will ever know your answers, so you have nothing to lose by
being candid. On the contrary, you have everything to gain by identifying what you’re good at,
what you’re not so good at, and getting to understand how you as a currency trader should
best approach the market.

Updating your trading record
Recollections of individual trades can be hazy sometimes. Some traders may tend to favor
remembering winning trades, whereas others may remember only the losing trades. The only way
to get to the heart of the matter is to look at the numbers — the results of your trades over a

specific time period, such as a month.
A trading record doesn’t lie, but you still have to interpret it properly to glean any useful lessons
from it. I find that depending on your trading style, it’s best to approach analyzing your trading
record from two different angles, each with a common denominator — average wins and average
losses.
Long-term and medium-term traders: Tend to have fewer overall trades because
they’re more likely to be looking at the market from a more strategic perspective, picking
trade opportunities more selectively. If that’s you, you’ll want to tally your results on a
per-trade basis, totaling up separately the number of winning trades and the number of
losing trades, along with the total amount of profits and the total amount of losses. Divide
the number of profits by the number of winning trades to find your average winning trade
amount. Do the same with your losing trades.
Short-term traders: Tend to have a larger number of trades due to their short-term
trading style. If that’s you, you’re going to want to measure your results on a per-day
basis. Tally up your daily profit and loss (P/L) and note the number of winning/losing
days in a month, along with the average win/loss per day.
Your results can be very helpful in allowing you to further identify your strengths and weaknesses
as a trader. The main focus is to evaluate how good you are at spotting trades and how your
financial successes compare to your financial losses.
If you have more winning trades or trading days per month than losing ones, you’re on the right
track and are likely adept at spotting trading opportunities or actively trading in and out in the
market. If your losing days or trades outnumber your winners, you probably need to take a good
hard look at how you’re identifying your trades or making your short-term decisions.
You next want to look at the size of your average win and average loss. Again, if your average win
is larger than your average loss, you’re doing something right, and that bodes well. When you’re
right, you’re right for a larger amount than when you’re wrong — and that’s just the way you want
it to be.

Focus on what you’re doing right, but also figure out what you’re doing wrong. Refine your
analysis of your trading results by breaking them down to smaller categories, such as day of
the week and currency pair or even trade size. Are your losing days or trades concentrated on
certain days of the week, such as Fridays or Mondays? For example, in my own experience,
trading on the last day of a month was a losing proposition. Are your losing trades
concentrated in certain currency pairs? Does the position size of each trade have any
relationship to wins and losses? Are you winning more on large trades, for example, or are
you giving up larger losses on smaller trade sizes?

Look at your results as dispassionately as possible. They’re the real reflection of your
currency trading. Learn from them, and use them to:
Keep yourself honest. You may remember only the winning trades and not realize you’re
developing bad risk-management habits.
Spot dangerous habits or lapses. Over time, you’ll develop and refine your trading style.
If you’re successful, you’ll want to stay that way, and monitoring your trading results on a
regular basis is the way to do that. If you lose more than you normally do on a losing
trade, you may want to consider scaling back. If you’re winning on more days or trades
than normal, you’ll also want to do a reality check and make sure you aren’t overextending
it.
Be your own best teacher. Identify your strengths and weaknesses, as well as trading
styles and market conditions that fit your temperament and discipline best. Focus on those
where you experience the greatest success, and avoid those with bad results.
Identify market sessions and currency pairs that suit you best. Interpret your trading
results to help pinpoint currency pairs where you’ve had the most success and avoid those
where you don’t. You may need to adapt your trading schedule and concentrate on only a
portion of a particular trading session.
Currency trading is all about getting out of it what you put into it. Evaluating your trading results
on a regular basis is an essential step in improving your trading skills, refining your trading styles,
maximizing your trading strengths, and minimizing your trading weaknesses.

Part V

The Part of Tens

In this part . . .
I assembled several great lists to help you identify important habits shared by successful currency
traders as well as common errors that beginners frequently make. I also provide a concrete set of
rules to manage your risks effectively. Finally, I include a list of additional resources for you to
take your currency education and trading to the next level.

Chapter 17

Ten Habits of Successful Currency Traders
In This Chapter
Getting in the groove of positive trading habits
Staying on top of market events and price levels
Narrowing your trading focus
Trading with a plan and sticking to it
Here are ten rules I think define the best currency traders I’ve ever seen. Many of these rules apply
to traders in any market, but some of them are unique to the currency market. The important idea to
keep in mind: No one is born with all these habits. The only way to acquire them is the way other
successful currency traders have — through patience, discipline, and experience.

Trading with a Plan
No successful trader will last very long without a well-conceived game plan for each trade. Sure,
you may have some short-run success winging it, but the day of reckoning will surely come.
Successful currency traders have a specific plan of attack for each position, including position
size, entry point, stop-loss exit, and take-profit exit.
They stay flexible with their take profits, sometimes settling for less if they judge that that’s all
they can take out of the market at the moment, other times extending their profit targets if market
developments are shifting in their favor. But they never move their stop-loss orders from the
original setting unless it’s in favor of the position to lock in profits.

Anticipating Event Outcomes
Trading is very similar to chess, in which the best players are thinking several moves ahead of
their opponents. Successful forex traders look ahead to future events and consider how much the
market has (or has not) priced in an expected outcome. They also consider the likely reactions if
the event matches, or fails to match, those expectations. Then they construct trading strategies
based on those alternative outcomes. While the rest of the market is trying to figure out what to
make of the event, checking charts and redrawing trend lines, the forward-looking trader has a
game plan already in place and is ready to trade.

Staying Flexible
Successful currency traders resist getting emotionally attached to positions. They recognize that
it’s not about being right or wrong — it’s about making money. They adapt to incoming news and
information, and quickly abandon an open position if events run counter to it instead of waiting for
price action to take them out of their trade. At the same time, they’re alert to fresh opportunities
that may develop in the market and are prepared to react. To be prepared, they must keep sufficient
margin available for additional positions. Also, they need an ongoing mental model of other major
pairs so they can factor in fresh news and events. They may not be actively trading AUD/USD, but
they still know the lay of the land for Aussie.

Being Prepared for Trading
Successful currency traders are always prepared, at least as much as possible in a market that’s
open 24 hours a day and subject to random events from half a world away. To stay on top of their
game, successful currency traders are prepared for:
Upcoming economic data releases in the next week to two weeks: Know what the
prior report indicated and what’s expected in the upcoming report.
Scheduled speakers: Find out who’s speaking (central bankers or finance officials), what
they’ve said in the past, and what they’re likely to say this time.
Central bank interest rate setting meetings and announcement times: Know when
they’re scheduled and what decision the market is expecting.
Important gatherings of financial leaders, such as G7/G20 meetings or monthly gettogethers of Eurozone finance ministers: Get a sense of whether currencies are on the
agenda and what actions are expected.
Liquidity conditions: Stay aware of time periods — such as end of month, market
closings or holidays, and time of day (for example, European close, option expirations, or
daily fixings — when market liquidity may be affected.
Unexpected events: Use rate alerts to stay on top of price movements outside expected
ranges. Follow up on alerts to check for significant news and to assess potential trading
opportunities.

Keeping Technically Alert
Even if they’re not pursuing a technical-based trading strategy themselves, successful currency

traders are still aware of important technical levels in the currency pairs they’re trading. For
instance, they know the key Fibonacci retracement levels, where various moving averages are,
important short- and long-term trend lines, and major recent highs and lows (see Chapter 11).

You may be trading based on price behavior or momentum analysis, but be sure to stay
abreast of key technical levels as part of your overall strategy.
