
CHAPTER 1

Prospering in the Postcrash Environment

15

and over again. Your only job is to respond to this harsh reality through a
custom-fit strategy that takes advantage of the moment.

Defining Your Trading Edge
Do you have a trading edge? If not, how do you go about getting one? The
modern market is a tough place to earn a living, with the majority of profits
going to a minority of traders. Not surprisingly, the members of this elite
group utilize definable trading edges at all times. Their advantage over
you, me, and everyone else is characterized by a point of view, scheme, or
plan of attack that separates them from the mindless crowd. It’s often selftaught, because common strategies attract the majority to a few popular
methods of playing the market. The sheer number of people acting in
the same way eliminates the edge that made those strategies work in the
first place.
Popular technical analysis principles offer no edge at all, but that
doesn’t mean you should go ahead and toss them out the window. Buried
between the lines of your favorite patterns and indicators are powerful
trading styles, methods, and strategic advantages. Tap this reservoir by
setting off on a personal journey that truly comprehends its day-to-day
applications. To start, build your own set of observations about market
dynamics. Catalog the price swings that catch your attention, and then
deconstruct them. How and where did they begin, how did they interact
with the chart, and have you seen this type of behavior before? What kept
you out of the trade the last time it happened? Was it a strategic decision,
or did you just freeze when it was time to act? These small discoveries are
the building blocks of a lifetime trading edge.
Many traders look for their edges through mechanical systems.
Of course, large institutions use complex automated systems with great
success. Some individuals can duplicate this workflow and find their edge
through a systems approach, but most of us should just stick with discretionary trading in which we take voluntary positions based on a relatively
fuzzy set of rules. A valid discretionary approach requires a heavy dose
of personal responsibility because there’s no one to blame but yourself if
you’re stuck in a hole at the end of the day.
Unfortunately, many traders who think they have a well-defined
edge may have none at all or one that won’t stand up to the test of time.
The buy-and-hold crowd and long-side momentum players who ruled in

16

PART ONE

Parsing the Modern Markets

the 1990s lost their considerable edges each time a bubble burst, whether
it was tech, real estate, or energy. The horrendous declines that followed
each of those rocket ships highlight the most urgent aspect of a trading
edge—it must hold up through the majority of market conditions.
Simple preparation and a good set of software tools give traders a
minor edge over those less prepared for the market day. A real-time quote
system and fast execution will pick the pockets of those who are stuck on
slower terminals, but state-of-the-art technology can’t turn a bad trader
into a good one or sustain an edge that ensures your survival. Position
management provides a more reliable edge because it takes a predefined
set of rules and turns them into proactive decision making. But this control
mechanism works only when it skews the characteristics of risk and
expectancy in your favor. In other words, it has to increase profits on good
trades and reduce losses on bad ones. In turn, this requires a working
knowledge of leverage and position sizing, which is harder to learn than it
looks.
A near maniacal obsession with entry and exit levels captures a
trading edge better than any other technique or methodology because
the practice aligns perfectly with position outcome. Simply stated, many
traders are fixated on the big picture or underlying trend instead of the
specific levels that will eventually yield profit or loss. Alternatively, those
who focus ruthlessly on entry and exit prices are more interested in making
money than in being right.
All the stuff in Trading 101 gets you to the beginning of your journey,
but it won’t reveal the edge needed to survive in the financial markets. The
bottom line: you need to travel that road alone, and for a long time. Unfortunately, if you don’t know exactly what your edge is, you don’t have
one. In its simplest form, a trading edge is anything that lets you see and
act upon market direction before other traders. Of course, you also need
a well-organized strategy to take advantage of your observations, as well
as skilled risk management after position entry. These twin elements are
equally important in honing a trading edge that will support and underpin
an entire career.
How do technical indicators fit into my personal trading edge? The
bottom line is, this book is about price patterns and tape reading. A few
hundred pages of technical indicators with a ton of arcane math might
impress the Market Technicians Association, but I can’t translate those
derivative numbers into consistent profits. Over the years, patterns and
the ticker tape have told me just about everything I need to know about
market inefficiency. In fact, the more I stare at the hard right edge, the

CHAPTER 1

Prospering in the Postcrash Environment

17

less interest I have in overly complex technical indicators or in system
testing.
Of course, I still use a few indicators, but they haven’t changed
much in the last decade. For example, I believe the Stochastics Oscillator
is an indispensable tool for identifying the current buy-sell cycle, and On
Balance Volume (OBV) tells fascinating tales when markets are near old
highs or lows. And, as my last book pointed out, moving averages are a
necessity in many trading strategies, including the big ones where institutions come into the market and make everyone else feel stupid. On
the other hand, I’ve completely given up on MACD, regression analysis,
average true range, rate of change, and a host of other substitutes for just
looking at the price bars and letting them show me the “real” story of the
trade. And to tell the truth, it’s been wonderfully liberating to free myself
from all the mathematical voodoo and to focus directly on the neverending death match between buyers and sellers.
Three thematic elements, introduced in The Master Swing Trader,
weave through my idea-to-outcome workflow from the moment I pull
up a new chart until the last profit or loss hits my bottom line. These are
the building blocks of my own trading edge, generally unchanged for the
last two decades. Am I worried that revealing these secret ingredients will
undermine my magical trading system? Of course not, because I don’t
execute a system, nor do I exploit any specific inefficiency when it comes
to my trading. In essence, all I have is a set of observations that responds
adaptively to changing market conditions.
These three components provide the majority of my trading edge:
• Pattern cycles reboot the classic principles of stage analysis
outlined in Stan Weinstein’s Secrets for Profiting in Bull and Bear
Markets.
• Convergence-divergence gathers predictive information by comparing two data points in the market and evaluating whether they
support or resist the current trend.
• Relative strength-weakness records and analyzes the oscillation
between buying and selling impulses in multiple time frames.
The nature of pattern cycles, in particular, needs to be understood
instinctively in order to follow the techniques and strategies outlined in
this book. In the simplest terms, this concept just follows around price
action, from the formation of a basing pattern at a new low, the subsequent
breakout and rally, and into the topping pattern that ends the uptrend.

PART ONE

18

F I G U R E

Parsing the Modern Markets

1.3

Use pattern cycles to identify the current market stage. A basing pattern at a significant low generates a bottom
that gives way to a breakout and new uptrend. The uptrend ends at a significant high, where a topping pattern
precedes a breakdown and the start of a new downtrend. Conflicts between pattern cycles in different time
frames generate the inefficiencies that translate into profitable trading opportunities.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

The cycle continues on the downside, with a breakdown from the
topping pattern, the selloff that characterizes a downtrend, and into the
final capitulation and formation of a sustainable bottom.
Pattern cycles are organized through the trend-range axis, which
outlines the tendency of advancing price to alternate between uptrends,
downtrends, and sideways impulses. These cycles occur in all time frames,
from one minute through monthly charts. Trading opportunities emerge
when viewing multiple time frames of the same instrument and correctly interpreting the interplay between their respective cycles. The most

CHAPTER 1

Prospering in the Postcrash Environment

19

profitable trades tend to occur at nexus points, where the low volatility of
a trading range is giving way to the high volatility of a new trend.
It might be a stretch to believe you can build a lifetime trading edge
with just a handful of basic structural concepts. The devil, as always, is in
the details. Learning to read patterns accurately requires flipping through
a million charts to see all the ways that price can move from one market
stage to another. Clearly, this approach is not for everyone because the
interpretive process is highly visual. Admittedly, many smart folks in the
trading game need more indicators, spreadsheets, hand-holding, and generalized therapy before they’re willing to assume risk based on a gap,
triangle, trendline, or Fibonacci retracement.
For the rest of us, however, delving deep into market structure and
how it translates into price movement is a perfectly adequate method to
build a lifelong trading edge. Here’s an example. Edwards and Magee
identify three gaps that are found in the evolution of many uptrends and
downtrends. The breakaway gap erupts from a base or topping pattern,
initiating the new trend. The continuation gap marks the halfway point as
trend momentum builds and price surges. The exhaustion gap prints near
the end of a trend, with the weakest hands capitulating just as a reversal is
about to strike.
The continuation gap doesn’t create a trading edge in a vacuum,
because anyone can pull up a chart and find this common pattern.
However, careful observation indicates that countertrend price action
will act according to specific rules when retracing into this level. It’s
this tiny sliver of the pattern cycle puzzle that generates the dynamics of
a profitable trade entry. Specifically, a retracement approaching or entering the gap should reverse sharply, before it gets filled. The subsequent bounce should then pull into the 38% retracement of the countertrend wave, at a minimum. I’ve taken this narrow observation and
put together an entry strategy that works reliably because the majority
of market players don’t take the time to look ahead “three chess
moves.” And so it goes with most trading edges. To be truthful, most
traders are reactionary (chasing the market around), rather than anticipatory (acting ahead of movement), because they’re just plain lazy.
Anticipation requires more effort than reaction because it utilizes a
predefined set of risk-taking activities when patterns approach points
of opportunity.
A single pattern or related observation can create multiple trading
edges. For example, the continuation gap is easy to find after three gaps
carve out an entire five-wave trend, but it can also be identified a few bars
after it prints, just as the fourth wave gets under way. Elliott Wave structure

PART ONE

20

F I G U R E

Parsing the Modern Markets

1.4

A lifetime trading edge can start with a few simple observations, like the strong tendency of price to reverse
at a continuation gap. Massey Energy sells off into the continuation gap after completing a nine-point rally.
Buyers step in within a few cents of the gap fill and trigger a high-profit bounce followed by a broader recovery
up to 29.50.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

points to three primary and two countertrend waves in an uptrend
or downtrend. The continuation gap marks the middle of the second
primary wave. So, whenever you see a gap in which price keeps moving
and doubles the extension prior to the gap, you’ve identified a potential
continuation gap. This is vital information because wave structure also
predicts there will be a final rally or selloff, i.e., the third primary wave,
before the trend finally ends.
This expectation creates an opportunity to enter a position within the
sideways pattern that follows the gap, in anticipation of the third and final

CHAPTER 1

Prospering in the Postcrash Environment

F I G U R E

21

1.5

Repeating price patterns uncover profitable market inefficiencies. The observant trader can use the continuation gap to locate an evolving Elliott five-wave rally set as soon as the third wave uptrend (second primary
wave) gives way to the fourth wave consolidation pattern. Once identified, it’s a relatively easy task to get
positioned within the trading range and ride the fifth wave rally (third primary wave) to higher prices.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

primary wave. Frankly, I’m amazed at how few traders understand this
relatively simple play, because I’ve watched it work over and over again in
the last two decades. The trick, of course, is to understand price structure
within the sideways pattern so your cash isn’t tied up forever, waiting for
the last big trend to get under way.
Many trading edges are made possible by the reactivity of our poorly
prepared competition. For example, the narrow range tactics outlined in
The Master Swing Trader take positions within small price bars near breakout
levels, using the excitement created by reactionary traders to generate our

22

PART ONE

Parsing the Modern Markets

profits. We can also capitalize on their poor planning when breakouts (or
breakdowns) lose momentum and they have no exit plan. In fact, there are
several good opportunities when these weak-handed traders are caught
like deer in the headlights. First, we can fade their positions, selling short
when relative strength rolls over; second, we can wait at lower levels to
buy in a classic pullback play as soon as they give up and capitulate.
It’s vital that you stand aside when you have no trading edge, or
you’ll open yourself up to failure. The markets operate through an inefficiency engine that sets up good positions at key intersections of price and
time. In between these points of light, trading can be choppy, volatile, and
downright treacherous. You need to adapt to this feast and famine cycle,
or you’ll perish trying to fight it. Admittedly, trading when you have no
edge won’t incur massive losses most of the time. But it will hurt your discipline, dull your senses, and set you up for the big fall. At a minimum, it’ll
undermine your ability to act spontaneously when the real low-hanging
fruit comes along.

2

C

H

A

P

TE

R

THE CROOKED
PLAYING FIELD

I

t started with the collapse of the bid-ask spread in the late 1990s. The
Nasdaq market makers were sued in the middle of that decade for
colluding on wide spreads that averaged between 25 and 50 cents for a
standard mid cap stock that traded 2 million to 4 million shares per day.
The repentant market makers finally agreed to major reforms that led to
new SEC order handling rules in 1997. In turn, these regulations opened
the doors for ECNs (electronic communication networks), like Archipelago and Island, which competed directly with the major exchanges for
trade execution.
Then came decimalization in early 2001. In prior decades, market
orders had posted simple fractions between the bid-ask spread. Decimalization proponents argued this type of pricing was unfair, because it let
exchange middlemen pocket outsized profits. The new rule changed all
that, allowing spreads on highly liquid stocks to fall to one cent and even
lower at times. Trading volume exploded after the rule change, nearly
tripling by 2003, because entry and exit decisions could now be subdivided
23

24

PART ONE

Parsing the Modern Markets

into seconds and minutes rather than hours and days. Of course, most of
us humans weren’t up to the task of trading for pennies, but this was no
problem at all for a new generation of lightning-fast computers.
The dramatic success of the ECNs in stealing market share from the
exchanges brought a revolution in transaction costs and bid-ask spreads.
It also heightened efforts by Nasdaq to become a fully electronic market.
As we know, the NYSE had to be dragged to this marriage altar, at least
until Chairman Dick Grasso was forcibly retired in 2003. The pace of the
electronic revolution heightened considerably after John Thain took the
helm at the NYSE following Grasso’s departure. The exchanges, instead
of competing with the ECNs, decided to buy them outright in an attempt
to retake market share. On April 20, 2005, NYSE bought ARCA, and,
just two days later, Nasdaq responded by picking up the newly merged
Island-Instinet.
The two acquisitions marked the death of the middleman, a.k.a.
market makers and specialists, who had dampened market volatility
for many decades. Consider how these universally maligned folks were
tasked with “orderliness” because they were obligated to take positions
against the general flow of supply and demand. However, the brand-new
electronic markets had no middlemen or obligation to maintain stability,
which would have been OK if the SEC promulgated appropriate rules that
guided order flow within logical boundaries. But guess what happened
when this regulatory body did the exact opposite, i.e., abolished existing
rules that maintained order and then added new ones favoring chaos?
The SEC took another giant leap backwards on July 6, 2007, when
it eliminated the uptick rule. The CBOE Market Volatility Index (VIX)
jumped out of a three-year base in the midteens just two weeks later
and never looked back. What triggered this surge in volatility? Simply
stated, with no middleman in place to dampen order flow, program algorithms could hit sell bids repeatedly for hours and easily overcome human
demand. The second shoe fell between August and October 2007 when the
exchanges and other market centers phased in Regulation NMS, a.k.a. the
“trade-through rule.” This Orwellian nightmare required that entry and
exit orders be routed to the venue that offered the best price. This sounded
good in theory, but the rule turned out to be a total disaster in implementation. Regulation NMS infected the financial markets with a major destabilizing force because it fractured order flow into microscopic pieces,
with institutions placing minimum size at the top of the bid-ask heap and
refreshing in tiny segments, forcing market players to jockey around in a
never-ending shell game.

CHAPTER 2

The Crooked Playing Field

25

Modern computer systems, acting in milliseconds, also had the
power to back away from these elusive orders, making them disappear
instantly. This vanishing act shifted monopolistic power into the index
futures, which were also dominated by program algorithms and easily
manipulated by relatively few transactions. That’s why you’ll now see bids
on a thousand NYSE and Nasdaq stocks evaporate during a minor S&P
500 index futures downswing. Mere mortals, like old-fashioned money
managers and public investors, just can’t compete in this hyped-up electronic environment because their orders have little or no impact on shortterm pricing. In a nutshell, there’s no real supply to be taken out or real
demand to be filled. The order fragmentation also set the stage for even
more frightening consequences. First, the mythical market order book,
open or closed, has effectively been destroyed. Second, the environment
has spawned a new generation of program algorithms tasked with executing cross-market environments at faster and faster speeds, automatically and without human intervention.
The trade-through rule is also responsible for the rapid growth of
dark pools and other stealthy, off-exchange systems that keep institutional
strategies out of the public eye. However, the massive transactions on
these complex systems still reverberate into equity and index prices
through late reporting, options offsets, and exchange-traded funds. We
also know that ETFs and leveraged ETFs have become the preferred
execution routes for program algorithms due to liquidity, leverage, and
dampened exposure to stock-specific risk. This places absolute power into
the hands of a few wealthy institutions with enough cash to manipulate
the index futures and a relatively small basket of equity funds.
Although originally designed to reduce the risk of equity exposure,
modern stock derivatives now fully control the value of security prices.
This is absolute madness but a perfectly logical outcome of an electronic
market environment gone wild. It’s also a highly dangerous situation
because it’s replaced supply and demand as the final arbiter of price discovery in the financial markets.

Index Futures
Back in the olden days (circa 1995), few at-home stock traders had access
to the futures markets. In those ancient times, futures transactions were
executed by hand, and there were no electronic “e-mini” contracts for the

26

PART ONE

Parsing the Modern Markets

S&P 500 or Nasdaq-100 indices. That all changed with the introduction
of these enormously popular instruments and the implementation of
the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) Globex open access policy in
2000. At the same time, the bursting of the tech bubble triggered an exodus
from equities into the futures markets. The reasons were twofold. First, big
fish wanted the power to sell short during that bear market, without an
uptick, and were attracted by the index futures’ massive liquidity. Second,
legions of small fry migrated to the index futures because the SEC’s
ridiculous pattern day trading rule, which requires that equity accounts
hold more than $25,000 to avoid draconian clearing issues, triggered a
massive wave of frozen retail accounts. Together this odd couple started a
market revolution.
Simply stated, index futures lead price direction in the equity
markets. This correlation is more intense now than at any time in the past
because the growth of index futures has paralleled an explosion in algorithmic programs, many of which are constructed with the sole purpose of
exploiting inefficiencies between equities and futures prices. As a result,
every futures swing now generates a proportional swing in the equity
markets. In fact, many traders use index futures breakouts, breakdowns,
and reversals to time the majority of their stock entries and exits. This
makes perfect sense, given the tight correlation between cross-market
instruments. It also overcomes the issue of conflicting technical readings,
i.e., divergence, between the index futures and individual stocks. Take this
analytical workflow one step further, and you can also assume that an outperforming stock will continue to outperform when the futures price rate
of change increases in a sympathetic direction.
Index futures trade all night on the CME Globex exchange and have
a profound impact on the opening of the U.S. markets. American traders
tend to focus exclusively on the local session that starts at 9:30 a.m. New
York time and ends at 4:15 p.m., but a better plan is to track convergencedivergence relationships between the 24-hour and day-only intraday
charts. The 24-hour session carves out high-low swings that may come into
play early in the U.S. session. It also generates a unique relative strength
cycle visible on a 5-3-3 Stochastics. We can use this conflicting information
by marking out notable highs and lows on the day-only pattern and then
looking for Stochastics crossovers on the 24-hour pattern. Tight correlation (convergence) between day-only and 24-hour index futures relative
strength is a precursor to a strongly trending equity market, while conflict
(divergence) between the two patterns points to a trading range and
intraday chop. Just keep in mind that these short-term signals provide just
