
Getting the Low-Down on Volume
You are more confident that a price move has staying power if you know that
many traders are involved in a price move and not just one or two.
Volume is the term for the number of shares or contracts of a security traded
in a period. Volume is the most powerful confirming indicator of a price
move, and confirmation is a key concept in technical analysis. (See Chapter 16
for more on the confirmation concept.) When you look at price changes,
you imagine buyers demanding more of the security at ever-higher prices
or sellers offering a greater supply at ever-lower prices, which you can read
about in Chapters 6, 7, and 8. But a price can move on a single large purchase
or sale, especially if the market happens not to have many participants at
that exact moment, a condition named illiquidity. (See Chapter 6 for a moredetailed description of liquidity.)
In technical trading, you use volume to measure the extent of trader participation. When a price rise is accompanied by rising volume, you have
confirmation that the direction is associated with participation. You’re no
longer imagining demand as being behind the price rise, as when you perform
bar analysis (see Chapter 6). Instead, you have outright, direct evidence of

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 3: Going with the Flow: Market Sentiment
demand. Similarly, if you see a price fall by a large amount, but the change
isn’t accompanied by a change in volume, you can deduce that the price
change was an aberration. Some trader made a mistake.
Volume tells us only the number of shares or contracts traded, not the
number of participants. Obviously you can get a jump in volume that is due
to only a handful of participants, and then you will be drawing the wrong
inference from high volume.
In this section, you can turn up your use of volume in technical analysis by
considering a few top-drawer indicators. These indicators tend to be among
the most reliable in technical analysis.

Leading the way with spikes
Volume sometimes leads price. The most obvious situations are when
volume spikes. A spike is a volume number that is double or more the size
of volume on the preceding days. Say volume has been running at 100,000
shares per day for several days or weeks and suddenly it explodes to 500,000
shares. If the price had been in a downtrend, this wild increase in volume
means that the crowd is throwing in the towel and exiting en masse.
When everyone has jumped off the bandwagon, get ready to jump back on.
Nobody’s left to propel the price lower. Conversely, the same advice is usually correct when you see a volume spike as the price is making new highs.
The underlying principle is the same — the crowd has exhausted its supply of
cash. Think about taking profit if you own the security. If you’re considering
a new position in a rising security that just had a volume spike, think again.
Look at other indicators. Try to understand why so many people suddenly
jumped on the bandwagon — does fresh news justify the increase in demand
for the security, or is it just animal spirits?
A volume spike is one of the occasions when fundamental information is
complementary to a technical observation. Beware a price making new highs
coupled with a volume spike when there is no fresh news or fundamental
information that attracted new buyers. Chances are that the top is in. If the
security has new, legitimately exciting news and you can reasonably deduce
that it attracted new buyers, you have a nontechnical reason to ignore the
usual spike interpretation.

Tracking on-balance volume
On-balance volume (OBV) is a single number representing cumulative volume.
A market technician named Joe Granville devised the OBV indicator to display
volume adjusted as follows: To calculate OBV, you add volume on days that

www.pdfdummies.com

43

44

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis
the close is higher than the day before and subtract the volume on days
that the price is lower than the day before. You are assuming that when the
price closes higher than the day before, demand was greater than supply at
each price level. Buyers had to offer higher prices to get holders to part with
their shares.
In OBV, you are attributing all the volume on a higher-close day to net buying
and all the volume on a lower-close day to net selling. This assumption isn’t
realistic, but hang in there for another minute. See Figure 3-1, which shows
IBM stock. Daily prices are in the top part, volume (in hundreds of thousands
of shares) is the center of the chart, and the OBV indicator is in the bottom
window of the chart.
OBV doesn’t work all the time, but a change in the indicator often precedes
a change in the price. You can see how to use the OBV indicator in two
instances on the chart in Figure 3-1. Follow along:
✓ The down move: In the section of Figure 3-1 marked by the ellipse,
notice how the price down move, already in progress, is suddenly
accompanied by a big rise in volume. The increase in volume starts the
day before the downward gap. I describe gaps in Chapter 7, but take my
word for it: A falling price punctuated by a downward gap is a message
that the price is going to fall farther. The OBV indicator forecasts the
impending bottom, falling ahead of the volume spike and the gap.
If you own the stock and see the OBV indicator start to decline and
then you see spiky volume (like the area in the ellipse), you should sell.
Holding on after the downward gap is to court a fat loss. In fact, the loss
from the open on the gap-down day in Figure 3-1 to the close on the day
of the lowest low is $7.22. If you had sold the stock on the very day that
volume spiked, the day before the gap, you would have saved another
$4.75, for a total of $11.97.
Figure 3-1 shows that the stock did come back this time and put in
higher highs a few months later. But you don’t know that in advance. To
hold on through the falling-price period would be to give up the chance
to save as much as $11.97 in cash.
✓ The up move: OBV reaches its lowest levels about two weeks before
Pivot Day 1, which features the lowest low in the series of lower lows,
but a higher closing price and a gap upward the following day. (To
refresh your understanding of the price bar components, see Chapter 6.)
Notice on Figure 3-1 that OBV is already rising while the price is still
falling, a divergence that is a critical clue to an impending change in the
direction of the price.
The divergence of price and an indicator that normally move in tandem is a
wake-up call. A change in volume often predicts a change in price. The indicator is telling you something you can’t see with the naked eye — prices were
putting in new lows but not consistently closing lower than the day before.
Buying and selling pressure, or supply and demand, was reaching a balance.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 3: Going with the Flow: Market Sentiment
85

PIVOT DAY 2

80
75
70

GAP

65

GAP

PIVOT DAY 1

60
55

20000
15000
10000
x10

0

Figure 3-1:
On-balance
volume. 29

-500
-1000
x1000

5
August

12

19

26

3
9
September

16

23

30
7
October

14

21

28

4
11
November

Your eye can see the price down move, but the indicator can detect the
exhaustion of the sellers (supply).
The term smart money refers to traders who see the exhaustion of a price
move ahead of the other traders. They are alert to the moment when the
crowd suddenly realizes that it has taken a price too far — and reacts violently in the other direction. For example, down around the price lows in IBM
stock in Figure 3-1, somebody had to be buying in order for the stock to close
at higher levels than the day before (which is what changed the OBV indicator). These traders were the smart money.
Notice that after Pivot Day 1 in Figure 3-1 the price puts in several gap days
upward. This message to the crowd is to buy, and they do, leading to Pivot
Day 2 on Figure 3-1. If you had bought IBM at the close on Pivot Day 1 and
sold it one day after Pivot Day 2 (when the OBV indicator turned downward),
your profit and loss statement would look like Table 3-1.

Table 3-1

Profit and Loss Statement

Trades

Amount

Buy

$57.58

Sell

$81.68

Gain/Loss

$24.10

The raw percentage return is 42 percent for a holding period of a little over a
month, or about 500 percent annualized. This ideal example in Table 3-1 illustrates exactly how using an indicator for buy/sell timing is supposed to work.

www.pdfdummies.com

45

46

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis
Truth to tell, though, no indicator works all the time, and this one doesn’t,
either. The OBV indicator didn’t forecast Pivot Day 2 on Figure 3-1, although
it did fall right afterward. Therefore, you’d have to say it was not leading this
time, but rather coincidental. Even OBV inventor Granville famously missed
a major bull market that started in 1982, and then persisted in saying it was
a false bull for the next 14 years. However, OBV correctly predicted the
crash of October, 1987 — in August, two months early. So you can see that
Granville’s personal woes with forecasting do not detract from the usefulness
of his indicator, even if it can be tricky to apply.

Refining volume indicators
As noted in the section “Tracking on-balance volume” earlier in the chapter,
the OBV indicator attributes all the day’s volume to buying. This is not realistic. It makes more sense to attribute only a portion of the volume to the price
rise, rather than the whole kit and caboodle.
A technical analyst named Marc Chaikin figured that a more representative
amount would be the percentage equivalent of the price that is above the
midpoint of the day. You calculate a midpoint as the high of the day plus the
low of the day divided by two. Chaikin’s version of accumulation and distribution is more refined than OBV.
If a security closes above its daily midpoint, bullish sentiment ruled. The
close over the midpoint defines accumulation, referring to buyers being willing to pay higher prices to get sellers to part with the security. The closer the
closing price is to the high, the more bullish it was. If the price closed right
at the high, then you say that 100 percent of the volume can be attributed to
bullish sentiment.
Conversely, distribution is the term for sellers willing to accept lower prices
in order to induce buyers to buy. Lower prices imply bearish sentiment.
Distribution is calculated the same way as accumulation — a close below the
price midpoint means distribution. The closer the closing price is to the low,
the more distribution existed. If the close is exactly at the midpoint, then the
indicator has the same value as yesterday — and you have no reason to add
or subtract volume from the running total.

Thinking Outside the Chart
You may have the inside scoop on the best stock ever, but if the entire
market has a case of the collywobbles, your best-ever stock is likely to fall,
too. Conversely, when the market is in a manic phase, even the worst of
stocks gets a boost (hence the old saying, “A rising tide lifts all boats”). This

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 3: Going with the Flow: Market Sentiment
ebb and flow isn’t only because of individuals, but also because money flows
into and out of mutual funds and other institutional players, like insurance
companies and pension funds. All these institutions have latitude about how
much money to keep in cash. In a mania, they get more fully invested, and in
a panic, they pull funds out of the market and into cash.
Nobody knows for sure, but some percentage of any security’s price move is
attributable to changes in the market environment. Factors include not only
the index to which it belongs, but also its size (large-cap or small-cap, for
example) and sector (biotech, high-tech, no-tech). A guess is that about 25
percent of a price move in any single issue should be considered a function of
what is going on in its index (or other benchmark to which the issue belongs).
To get a handle on possible market effects on your specific security, you want
to measure overall market sentiment. You do this by looking at market statistics. Strictly speaking, market statistics are not technical analysis, which is the
study of how specific prices behave. Nevertheless, sentiment measures can be
helpful as a supplement and complement to your decision making.
In this section, you can combat the ups and downs of the market by gaining
additional market tools to add to your chart tool belt. You are still looking for
the supply-and-demand dynamics, just not for your own specific security.

Sampling information about sentiment
Most sentiment indicators look outside the price dynamics of a particular
security or index of securities for information about whether the trading
crowd is humming along with expectations of normalcy or is willing to jump
ship. In technical trading, the key principle is to study what people do (price
and volume), not what they say. You can do just that by following the suggestions in this section.

Monitoring investors: The Bull/Bear Ratio
Key reversals come when the majority of advisors (60 percent or more)
are bullish or bearish. In other words, when everyone recognizes the trend
bandwagon and has hopped on board, it’s over. Investors Intelligence Service
(started over 60 years ago) measures the balance of bullish sentiment against
bearish sentiment (called the Bull/Bear Ratio) and claims an excellent track
record in predicting turning points.
Note that other services have sprung up to measure bull and bear sentiment
in general, in specialized sectors, and in mutual funds. You can find the Bull/
Bear Ratio and other indicators on hundreds of Web sites and in business
newspapers. To get a specific Bull/Bear Ratio from a specific vendor the
minute it’s published, you have to pay a subscription fee.

www.pdfdummies.com

47

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

48

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis
Following the money: Breadth indicators
Breadth indicators measure the degree of participation by traders in the overall market represented by an index, such as the Dow or S&P 500. You can
track the breadth indicators to get a feel for market sentiment.
Breadth indicators include
✓ Ratio of advancing to declining issues: This indicator measures the
mood of the market. Stocks that are reaching a higher price today than
yesterday are called advancing issues. Stocks that are reaching lower
prices are called declining issues. When advancers outnumber decliners,
money is flowing into the market. Bulls are beating bears. Sentiment is
favorable. When the rally starts getting tired, the number of advancing
issues declines while the number of falling issues rises.
If you subtract declining issues from advancing ones, you get the
advance/decline line. In the same vein, if you divide advancing issues by
declining issues, you get the advance/decline ratio, abbreviated A/D.
✓ Difference between issues making new highs and new lows: The logic
is the same as in the advance/decline indicator. If more stocks in an
index are closing at higher prices than the period before, bullishness
is on the rise. When a higher number are putting in new lows, supply is
overwhelming demand and the mood must be bearish.

Following the betting: Options
The Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) is the venue for options trading in equity indices like the S&P and NASDAQ indices. The CBOE publishes
the ratio of puts to calls. Here’s what you need to know about puts and calls
when gathering info about sentiment:
✓ Put: This term refers to the right to sell at a set price in the future.
Traders who buy puts are bears (pessimists) who think the index won’t
reach their set price.
✓ Call: A call is the right to buy at a set price in the future. Traders who
buy calls are bulls (optimists) who think they’ll profit when the market
rises to and beyond their set price.
Accordingly, the put/call ratio is an indicator of whether sentiment is bearish or bullish. A high put/call ratio means bears are winning. Recognize that
an extreme of emotion like this is usually wrong, and marks a turning point.
You should start planning to do the opposite. The same line of thinking holds
true for a low put/call ratio: When emotions are running strongly optimistic,
watch out for an opportunity to take advantage of a change.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 3: Going with the Flow: Market Sentiment
Viewing volatility: The V IX
The volatility index (VIX) is among the most popular breadth indicators
today. Theoretically, you can create a volatility index for any security in
which options are traded, although it takes computational expertise. Its calculation is too complicated to get into here, but for information about volatility, see Chapter 14. For your purposes, know that when the crowd is jumpy
and nervous, it projects that anxiety into the future and assumes that prices
will be abnormal.
In other words, the crowd believes volatility will be high. When the price of
VIX is high, options traders have been buying puts and selling calls on the
index — they’re bearish and think the market may fall. (For more on puts and
calls, check out the section “Following the betting: Options,” earlier in this
chapter.) In actuality, what they really think is that the risk of a fall is high
and worth spending some insurance money on. When VIX is low, the market
is relaxed and confident — overly confident.
You can use VIX as a contrary indicator. When VIX is either abnormally high
or abnormally low, you know it’s getting to the right time to trade against the
crowd. Start watching for reversal points in your own stable of securities. A
high VIX value means exactly the opposite of what it seems to mean — the
bottom isn’t coming, it’s already in! If VIX is low, the crowd is girding its loins
for a big move. When VIX is low, traders are complacent. They’re projecting
the same price levels, or nearly the same levels, into the immediate future
with little variation and therefore little risk.

Contrarians and cranks
A contrarian is someone who has a fundamental reason for thinking that a security is mispriced. In equities, one such reason could be
insider info that an out-of-favor pharmaceutical company has secretly discovered the cure
for some important disease and its price will
shoot the moon on the announcement. In financial futures (stock indices, bonds, and currencies), a fundamental reason to judge a security
mispriced may be a forecast of a central bank
interest rate change that nobody else can see
coming. A true contrarian is quite rare, although
lots of people fancy themselves contrarians
when they’re just cranks. When a contrarian
is right, he becomes a zillionaire and is called
eccentric. When he is wrong, he stays poor and
is called a crackpot.

In contrast, technical trading is by its very
nature noncontrarian. You want to go with the
crowd, not against it (most of the time). To identify when the crowd has gone too far isn’t contrarian in the proper sense of the term. When
you figure out that a pivot point is impending,
you’re a crowd leader. Confusion about the
meaning of the word contrarian arises because
some followers of sentiment indicators use it
when talking about turning points predicted
by indicator extremes. To recognize that at the
top of a rally everyone is fully invested and no
buyers are left is called contrarian logic. But to
say that the crowd is wrong isn’t contrarian —
it’s simply understanding crowd dynamics. A
true contrarian has a fundamental reason to say
that the crowd is wrong.

www.pdfdummies.com

49

50

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis

Following the earth’s axis: Seasonality
and calendar effects
You shouldn’t be surprised to hear that heating oil futures go up as winter
heads for Chicago. The prices of agricultural commodities rise and fall with
the seasons. Seasonality is the term used for the natural rise and fall of prices
according to the time of year.
Oddly — very oddly — equities and financial futures exhibit a similar effect:
They change according to the time of year. The changes are regular and consistent enough to warrant your attention.

Defining seasonality and calendar effects
Seasonality used to be a word applied to agricultural prices, and calendar
effects was a word applied to equities. Today they’re used interchangeably.
You can discover the seasonality characteristics of any given stock by using
seasonality trackers on various Web sites, including the best-known seasonality tracker, Thomson Financial. Their Web site allows you to see a chart of
any stock with its associated average returns by month, starting in 1986. You
can also see a table of the months in which the stock rose or fell over the
years.
You have probably heard the adage, “Sell in May and go away.” This advice
comes from work on calendar effects by Yale and Jeffrey Hirsch, who tested
the correlation of stock indices with the time of year in their annual Stock
Trader’s Almanac. The sell in May rule is called the best six months rule.
Hirsch discovered that nearly all the gains in the S&P 500 are made between
November 1 and April 30. This rule isn’t true without exception, but it’s true for
most years since 1950. When April 30 rolls around, you sell all your stocks and
put the money in U.S. government Treasuries. Come November 1, you reenter
the stock market. If you’d followed this rule every year since 1950 and also
modified the exact timing a little by applying the moving average convergencedivergence indicator (check out MACD in Chapter 12), a starting capital stake
of $10,000 in 1952 would have ballooned to $1,472,790 by 2009. On average, you
would’ve been invested only six and a half months each year — and remember,
when you’re not in the market, you’re not taking market risk.
Other calendar effects include
✓ January Barometer: When the S&P 500 is up in January, it’ll close the
year higher than it opened. Since 1950, this rule has an accuracy reading
of 90 percent.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 3: Going with the Flow: Market Sentiment
✓ President’s Third Year: Since 1939, the third year of a presidential term
is always an up year for the Dow. In fact, the only big down year in the
third year of a presidential term was 1931.
✓ Presidential Election Cycle: Wars, recessions, and bear markets tend
to start in the first two years, while prosperity and bull markets tend to
happen in the second two years. Since 1833, the last two years of a president’s term produced a cumulative net gain in the Dow of 718.5 percent,
while the first two years produced 262.1 percent.
Hirsch and others have discovered many other calendar effects. Hirsch’s
annual Stock Traders Almanac publishes the probability of any of the three
major indices (Dow, S&P 500, and NASDAQ) rising or falling on any day of
the year. The almanac bases this information on what has happened in those
indexes on those dates since January 1953.
