
The Paradox
The next two declarations are true on multiple levels, but they’re also
totally contradictory. The markets (a) are the same now as they were one
hundred years ago, with timeless principles moving the tape, and (b) have
changed radically in the last decade and no longer operate according to
timeless principles. Therein lies the challenge for traders at all levels as
we head into the second decade of the new millennium. In a nutshell,

CHAPTER 1

Prospering in the Postcrash Environment

5

we’ve read all the technical analysis books, attended all the seminars, and
listened to all the market gurus and talking heads. But nothing, absolutely
nothing, has prepared us for the surreal science fiction landscape we’re
now forced to navigate each day.
Of course, it starts with the trading bots. We knew the influence of
program trading would grow when we saw its handiwork between 3 and
4 p.m. New York time back in the 1990s. But who could have predicted
that coldhearted algorithms would become the overriding force in price
development, on a daily basis, just 10 years later. On the surface, computerized trading is a great addition to the marketplace because it adds significant liquidity to the ticker tape. But these algorithms lack the singular
force of nature we could always count on throughout our years of flipping
stocks, futures, and currencies: they operate without the twin emotions of
greed or fear.
That’s right, trading bots won’t panic when they find themselves
on the wrong side of the market and won’t get euphoric after good
news delivers a windfall profit. In other words, they don’t act or react
to the financial markets like you or I, our neighbors, or those suits on
Wall Street. They’re cold, calculating, and totally focused on their oneminded goal to move the markets in their favor. Sadly, today’s stateof-the-art algorithms wouldn’t work with such diabolical precision
if the market’s historic center of gravity still existed. For all our complaints in the 1990s about the NYSE specialists and Nasdaq market
makers, those savvy middlemen kept the trading bots in a controlled
space, from which we flesh-and-blood players could coexist in an
uneasy peace.
That delicate balance was lost, perhaps forever, when electronic execution systems killed the middlemen around 2005 and replaced their overriding role in maintaining orderly markets with the ephemeral barrage
of bid-ask prices that now flash across our screens at the speed of light.
Retail traders like you and me have been forced to operate since that time
in a desolate Mad Max landscape that has become the centerpiece of our
twenty-first-century auction place.
Wait a second. If things are really that out of control, why don’t we
all just give up and find another moneymaking hobby, like poker or
macramé? Well, as it turns out, you can only screw around so much
with the modern market environment before it bites back. Whenever the
tape gets a little too crazy, manipulated, or downright synthetic, we can
depend on the natural forces of supply and demand to suddenly kick
back into gear and take control, just like the old-fashioned NYSE circuit

6

PART ONE

Parsing the Modern Markets

breakers. Therein lies the incredible power of technical analysis. In truth,
this venerable practice still works, although it’s been battered, beaten, and
deconstructed into a zillion microscopic particles. Indeed, the power of
price charts to expose zones of conflict and levels of opportunity is undiminished in our new millennium, despite trading bots, inadequate regulation, and a marketplace with no center of gravity.
The balancing act for modern traders like you and me is to coexist
peacefully with the market whales that control price movement while
applying technical analysis and razor sharp observation to identify inefficiencies that translate into consistent profits. Of course, this is easier said
than done because long-term profitability requires a near fanatical commitment to our unique craft. Gone are the salad days when we could just
throw money at a rising tape and expect to get paid off on a regular basis.
Simply stated, there’s no seat at the table for lazy or dumb money in our
tough-crowd, postcrash market environment.
If you’re still up for the considerable task, despite the sea of obstacles,
you’ll need to master the three overriding aspects of market knowledge
and day-to-day strategy. These essential items represent the core themes
of my peculiar market view:
• Recognize what the market is saying whether or not it supports
your bias or positions.
• Find the right time and right price to take on exposure, or step
back to the sidelines.
• Manage risk with razorlike efficiency while adjusting the odds in
real time at the hard right edge.
Finally, let me offer a word or two about trading discipline. As I
noted ad nauseam in The Master Swing Trader, most market players will
fail due to a lack of discipline rather than a lack of knowledge. Despite
that great truth, most of us are uncomfortable with the subject matter
because we’ve deluded ourselves into thinking we’re disciplined individuals when we’re not. Simply stated, the strategies and observations in
this book are totally worthless if you fail to exercise steady discipline in
your market approach. And there isn’t much I can say or do to turn you
into a more disciplined trader. So, beyond a pleasant set of truisms,
bulleted lists, and horrifying examples scattered throughout this text,
you’re on your own when it comes to this life-or-death aspect of market
performance.

CHAPTER 1

Prospering in the Postcrash Environment

7

The Diabolical Market
Listen up, because the next sentence is extremely important to your longterm survival. Traps and trapping behavior are the primary forces moving our
modern electronic markets. This contrary dynamic assumes the tape will act
in a way that hurts the most traders and trading strategies. While still dangerous, these bull and bear traps occur less frequently when the public
floods into or out of the market, especially during strong bull advances
and cascading selloffs.
Price seeks volume at all times and will go to great lengths to find it.
This is why the markets tend to move toward points of maximum pain,
taking out carefully placed stop losses and rational risk-based positions. In
other words, the majority needs to be punished, with this prime directive
seeking out fulfillment through diabolical price mechanics. This force of
nature becomes especially powerful after events (economic news, Fed
meetings, earnings reports) that defy current expectations. Sadly, most
traders react to shock data by overthinking the news instead of just leaning
against whichever side of the market is getting trapped as event-driven
price swings oscillate through the ticker tape.
How does price know where the greatest pain lies? It’s relatively easy,
because most traders do things in exactly the same way. For example, the
majority of the retail crowd chases into overmargined positions using
momentum strategies already deconstructed by the smart money and their
emotionless machines. As a result, price action undermines those classic
methodologies far more efficiently now than in the past. Fortunately,
traders have the power to co-opt this contrary force and use diabolical
thinking to get on the right side of the market. Simply stated, diabolical
thinking is your razor sharp focus on all the traps that can be set against
the majority. To this end, ask yourself the following question whenever a
shock event hits the market: “Which side has the biggest targets on their
backs, right at this minute?” If you can answer that query accurately, you’re
in a great position to make money. Figure 1.1 provides an example of how
this diabolical thinking works in real-time.
FedEx gaps down on June 22 in response to a premarket shock
event. Downside momentum fizzles out within the first 45 minutes (1)
of the session, with the stock settling into a narrow trading range (2)
through the rest of the day. Clearly, longs holding positions overnight are
the first group to be trapped by the big gap. But the bull-bear dynamic

PART ONE

8

F I G U R E

Parsing the Modern Markets

1.1

FedEx Gap

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

evolves over time because weak-handed short sellers pour in at the open
“just because” the stock is down over a point. In the real world, these
folks need to get punished because the lazy trade rarely gets rewarded.
With this in mind, the observant trader recognizes that two conflicting groups have targets on their backs that morning. First, the downside has to go far enough to shake out trapped longs. Second, the
downside also needs to deny short sellers who jump in mindlessly after
the open.
This bilateral scenario responds well to a first hour breakoutbreakdown strategy in which the trader marks out the high and low for

CHAPTER 1

Prospering in the Postcrash Environment

9

the first 60 minutes of the session and then does nothing until one side
gives way. Now, add in diabolical thinking and realize how the odds shift
over time against the short sellers because the trading range refuses to
break to the downside. This simple tape reading observation, taken in conjunction with a basic execution strategy, contains all the elements needed
to (a) get a reliable signal, long or short, and (b) locate and execute a trade
with favorable reward:risk.
FedEx’s first hour range holds through the rest of that session, with
price dropping to the morning low in the final minutes and inviting short
sellers to enter at the close in anticipation of a breakdown at the next day’s
opening bell. The diabolical tape then kicks into gear, right on schedule,
with a gap (3) well above the closing price and prior day’s range. This
buying thrust serves two vital functions. First, it traps short sellers, and
second, it denies risk-conscious longs an easy entry into the new uptrend.
The gap also serves a third and more diabolical purpose. It generates
enough disgust on both sides of the aisle to force most traders to give up
and move on, just as best entry (4) is finally setting up. This triggers when
price pulls back to range support, tags it perfectly, and then resumes the
uptrend with a three-point buying spike.
This perfect moment illustrates a key inefficiency within the diabolical crazy quilt. Simply stated, the market will often give you exactly
what you want if you read the contrary forces accurately and are willing to
wait long enough for your ideal trade. That’s easier said than done when
you’re suffering from the data overload of a typical trading day, so how do
you actually profit with diabolical thinking? For starters, realize that many
traps occur in volatile markets that are in the process of shifting balance
between bulls and bears. Green bar–red bar alternation and contrary dayto-day gaps are the most reliable “tells” for these all-too-frequent transitional periods. Two defensive entry strategies work well in these actively
diabolical conditions:
• Stand aside and watch the edges of support-resistance until the
shakeout games are over. Then step into the trade.
• Keep stop losses tight and position size small, taking multiple
entries until price action finally yields a favorable trend.
Diabolical forces are at work in quiet markets as well. Financial
instruments can move through narrow ranges for weeks, shaking out
traders through false breakouts and breakdowns. As with more volatile
markets, the real trend usually arrives when the crowd is put to sleep

10

PART ONE

Parsing the Modern Markets

through narrow range bars or is stuck permanently on the sidelines, licking
their wounds after too many losing positions. Notably, the contrary
dynamics in these large-scale events are identical to the FedEx gap
example but can take months to unfold, instead of hours.
Mr. Market draws pretty pictures all the time through sentiment and
price action. It’s our job to wait patiently for the inevitable ambush as
soon as the majority believes the illusion and takes the bait. This diabolical
thinking process might sound like a lot of work just to make a few bucks
in the financial markets. Well, that’s true up to a point. Fading strategies—
i.e., execution that takes advantage of traps—requires a unique skill set
but, realistically, it’s often the only way to play if you want to trade in the
big leagues.
There’s an old expression that bulls and bears make money while
pigs get slaughtered. If you take a passive approach to the modern electronic markets, you set yourself up to get pickpocketed on a daily basis.
For this reason alone, it makes perfect sense to identify the weakest hands
as quickly as possible and then get positioned with the smart money and
their coldhearted machines.

Twenty-First-Century Inefficiencies
The ferocity of the 2008 market crash caught most traders and investors off
guard. Not surprisingly, none of the classic technical analysis books told
us what to do when the CBOE Market Volatility Index (VIX) spiked above
50 and then whipped violently for over two months. The damage incurred
during that historic period was as much psychological as financial, because
it became virtually impossible to trade overnight. The postcrash aftermath
triggered a secondary shock because most traders had spent their entire
careers playing in a fertile environment that generated new and exciting
bubbles on a nearly annual basis. In turn, that beneficial cycle fostered
a grand illusion that all price movement takes place within relatively
narrow buying and selling boundaries. Of course, we now know that this
isn’t quite true.
Price action generates constant inefficiencies that traders capitalize
upon to earn their daily profits. These aberrations occur in all time frames,
from five-minute charts to monthly trends. All inefficiencies, regardless
of their source, have one thing in common: they generate a counterforce
that will, sooner or later, cause the profitable opportunity to implode and

CHAPTER 1

Prospering in the Postcrash Environment

11

disappear. Here’s a classic example. The tech bubble in 1999 and 2000
generated so much excitement that folks with no market knowledge—
i.e., “waitresses,” “shoeshine boys,” and ”Joe six-pack”—felt compelled
to buy stocks at higher and higher prices. This chasing behavior eventually drained the last supply of available buyers, triggering a massively
overbought technical condition that closed the inefficiency. Smart money
then recognized the new inefficiency and sold the highs aggressively, triggering a massive decline that forced first-in first-out weaker hands to exit
the market for substantial losses.
At its core, the 2008 crash simply targeted the buy-and-hold mentality, which, although Wall Street might disagree, was the most abused
market inefficiency of the last two decades. We got hurt during that period
to the degree we were mindless investors rather than trader-opportunists,
and since most traders are closet investors, many of us got hurt badly.
While the investing crowd can be forgiven for failing to comprehend the
market dynamics that create profits, traders should be flogged for making
the same error during those turbulent times.
The bottom line is, we have no choice but to play our game in the
school of what works now. At a minimum, this overriding truth requires
a diverse toolkit of strategies for trending, sideways, safe, and dangerous
markets. In turn, this requires intimate familiarity with a wide range of
tactics, holding periods, and risk management practices. Frankly, most
traders, professional and amateur, are too lazy to do what’s required to
earn profits in a variety of markets, so the future belongs to those of us
who carry the biggest and boldest bag of trading tricks.
There’s a tendency in choppy markets to see meaningless swings
as awakening trends and throw money at them. For obvious reasons,
this impatience eats up capital and undermines our confidence. The only
solution for this myopia is to step back and look at the big picture, identifying the exact placement of current price within the trend-range
axis. This technical concept, a key element in The Master Swing Trader,
refers to the oscillation of price between directional trends and sideways
markets. These alternating states occur in all time frames, from one
minute to monthly charts. There’s also a proportional characteristic to
this axis in which rangebound conditions persist about 80% of the time
while trends occur about 20% of the time. Market efficiency aligns naturally with the trend-range axis. In other words, it isn’t a good idea to
chase a momentum trade in a sideways market or to fade a breakout in a
fast-moving rally. Which brings us right back to the big picture. Simply
stated, if you know exactly where you are on the trend-range axis, you can

PART ONE

12

F I G U R E

Parsing the Modern Markets

1.2

The trend-range axis lies at the core of a successful swing trading strategy. All financial markets, including equities, futures, currencies, and fixed income, alternate between directional trends and nondirectional ranges in
all time frames. Trading ranges persist for longer periods than uptrends or downtrends. Trading a trend strategy
in a rangebound market, or a range strategy in a trending market, is a great way to lose money.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

usually find a strategy that takes advantage of that market stage and
makes money.
Managing the elusive shape-shifter that we call “market inefficiency”
requires mastering each of the variables in a well-developed trading plan.
These include holding period, overnight exposure, fading protocols, time
triggers and filters, stock segmentation, and position collaring. In sum,
these are the main topics of discussion in the next eleven chapters of
this book.

CHAPTER 1

Prospering in the Postcrash Environment

13

The Survivalist Trader
You’ll notice survival as a recurring theme as you go through this text.
Dealing with the risk side of the equation in our modern market environment is far more urgent than chasing profits or unrealistically high
returns. That’s not to say the ticker tape won’t offer low-hanging fruit from
time to time. It’s the tweener periods we need to address more carefully so
that adverse price action doesn’t pickpocket the capital we so carefully
accumulate in more favorable times.
Here are five survivalist techniques you can employ whenever the
market hits a rough patch or heads into a black hole:
1.	Wait until the magic moment slaps you across the face. Everyone
is looking for the same thing in choppy or dangerous markets, i.e.,
a change in character that opens the door to a great buying opportunity or the most profitable short sale in decades. However,
traders forget that cash is a position too. Here’s a little exercise.
Go back and count the money you would have saved in the last
few years by sitting on your hands. I rest my case.
2.	Remember that the charts still work. Take a giant step back and
examine the weekly or monthly charts when high volatility dulls
your concentration and makes you question your strategies. You’ll
find that larger-scale patterns fit perfectly into support or resistance
levels. In fact, if you look hard enough, they’ll also tell you how
long you need to wait before getting aggressive once again.
3.	Become a big game hunter. Clear your head and stalk your
patterns for days or weeks, if required, rather than chasing the
market around like a crazed monkey. Learn to keep your cool
after missing a big turn. Just get up, pet the dog, and wait for the
next trading opportunity to come along. It always does.
4. Embrace uncertainty and volatility. Trading isn’t about knowing
what’s going to happen next. It’s about taking risk when the odds
are in your favor. Just be happy when the market starts to move,
even if it’s against your position, because volatility shakes things
up and creates opportunities. In other words, it’s a whole new
game of pick-up-sticks whenever prices jump from one level to
another.
5.	Survive first and the rest will follow. Your first job in a tough
market is to avoid losing money. Period. Listen to the calm inner
voice that tells you what to do and what to avoid when a major

14

PART ONE

Parsing the Modern Markets

crisis hits the ticker tape. That’s the voice of the survivor that
wants to come out and play when the dark clouds finally pass.
The average retirement fund lost over 35% in 2008. One dark secret
of the boom years, preceding the crash, was the outsized risk we took
by clandestinely trading our IRAs, SEPs, and Keoghs. It’s certain we’ll be
taking fewer leaps of faith with these cash accounts in future years because
we’re now far wiser and a lot closer to old age. In turn, this seismic shift
puts more pressure on the performance in our margin accounts. It’s hard
to generalize about these speculative cash pools because a minority of
traders reaped windfall profits playing the short side during the historic
downturn. These folks have put themselves into a better position to act
aggressively in future years because they have the firepower to assume
greater risk.
Margin utilization and management takes on far greater significance
in the postcrash environment. This is a two-edged sword because the
assumption of inappropriate risk in unfavorable periods is a great way to
wash out, while the underutilization of margin in favorable periods fails
to maximize profits. As a general rule, traders need to cut down on margining until their equity curve confirms that they’ve successfully adapted
to the intense demands of the modern markets. This is especially true for
yo-yo traders, defined and discussed in Chapter 5, who alternate between
big profits and big losses. For now, let’s just say that margining is a big
no-no for a yo-yo.
The survivalist trader needs to build a diverse toolbox that takes
advantage of different market conditions and then become an astute
observer and die-hard contrarian. Our primary task is to remain skeptical
of every price swing, taking the time to read between the lines and figuring
out what the market is really doing a few clicks before everyone else. Once
that’s accomplished, we back up our conclusions with a targeted strategy
that fits the current ticker tape.
Reading the landscape better than our competition isn’t an optional
skill for the survivalist trader. At a minimum, it requires abandoning the
illusion that all we need to win in the financial markets is a good technical
analysis book and a few well-placed trendlines. In truth, every pattern has
multiple outcomes, and we’ll make little progress until we adapt the technicals to deal with the curveballs the market throws at us. Want to stay in
the game for the next 5, 10, or 15 years? Start by leaving your opinion at
the door and throwing your directional bias into the trash. In truth, the
market doesn’t care what you think and will do what it wants to do, over
