
FXCM
In 2010, Forex Capital Markets (FXCM) became the first forex broker to
become a publicly listed company, bringing prestige and respectability to the
industry. Unfortunately, it was also around this time that its regulatory
troubles began. It was fined $2 million by the NFA in August 2011 due to
price slippage. Basically, when prices moved against traders with open
orders, their orders were executed at the lower price. When prices moved in
traders’ favor, however, FXCM also filled the orders at the lower price. This
practice cost traders millions of dollars and generated significant profits for
FXCM. In October 2011, FXCM was fined an additional $6 million and

Forex for Beginners
ordered to pay out $8 million in restitution to affected customers. Monitoring
of its execution system was ordered for 3 years. Since its IPO, it has also
been the subject of numerous class action lawsuits, alleging unfair trade
practices. All of this is extremely unfortunate, as FXCM goes to great lengths
to emphasize the advantages of its non-dealing desk execution system and
has made this system a cornerstone of its marketing efforts.
To be fair, FXCM has received numerous awards for service and technology.
Its TradeStation platform is cutting-edge and industry-leading, and features
advanced charting, automated execution of trading strategies, and complete
customization. Its affiliated DailyFX site is bookmarked and pored over by
serious traders. It offers fractional PIP pricing (1/100,000th of one unit!) and
transparent rollover rates. In short, while its regulatory history should not be
overlooked, it deserves credit for its serious efforts toward reform.

GFT Forex
GFT, in contrast, has never been the subject of regulatory action, a point that
is highlighted on the company’s homepage. GFT also boasts about automated
order execution and minimal negative price slippage, and its client
profitability numbers are impressive. It offers more than 120 currency pairs
and attractive spreads for all of the majors (and even a handful of exotics). In
addition to its proprietary DealBook 360 software—which includes more
than 85 technical indicators—it offers the gold standard MetaTrader 4
program, and both are free of charge. GFT has also made a commendable
effort to attach itself to some of the most famous names in forex analysis,
including Boris Schlossberg and Kathy Lien. Their daily commentary
(available on FX360.com) and free research reports are a must-read for those
looking for inspiration.
GFT offers four different types of accounts, and it awards certain perks to
those that maintain higher balances. Platinum accountholders with more than
$250,000 in equity capital receive four streaming news feeds, waived fees,
more favorable rollover rates, and free use (for six months) of GFT’s
proprietary technical analysis software. Its powerful Foresight-A.I. is an
algorithmic trading tool designed to time entry and exit points, while its
prized DiNapoli D-Levels are customized technical indicators used by
professionals. In short, GFT is a solid choice, especially for those that are
well-capitalized.

209

210

Chapter 8 | Opening an Account

Forex.com (Gain Capital)
Forex.com is another publicly listed forex company that has been targeted by
regulators. In 2010, it was fined $459,000 by the NFA for abusive margin,
liquidation, and price slippage practices, and was ordered to pay restitution to
traders that were adversely affected.
On the other hand, it has a strong global presence, deep pockets, and
impressive liquidity. The average trade is executed in 0.06 seconds and
99.4% of trades are executed in less than one second. All quotes are live and
ready for automatic execution, rather than requiring confirmation from a
third-party liquidity provider. Its instant execution mode ensures that market
orders are executed favorably. Given that Forex.com’s internal quote system
is almost perfectly symmetrical with the interbank market, it should come as
no surprise that 100% of limit orders are filled at or better than the prices
requested by its customers.
Forex.com offers attractive spreads for 50 currency pairs through both web
and mobile trading. Its proprietary platform, FOREX Trader Pro, supports
automated strategies and customization of its features. For traditionalists,
MetaTrader 4 and eSignal are both offered free of charge. Forex.com
improves on the customer service of its competitors by offering free online
consultations with market strategists who gauge your experience and critique
your approach to fundamental and technical analysis/strategy. Thanks to this
emphasis on service, Forex.com remains a popular choice for new traders.

Saxo Bank
Saxo Bank is not unlike Interactive Brokers. Both offer a broad suite of
investment products that go well beyond forex, including stocks, bonds,
futures, and contracts for difference (which are similar to futures, but
prohibited in the United States). It offers an incredible 160 currency pairs and
even 40 currency options of both the plain vanilla and binary versions. It is
also the only major broker that I know of that offers trading in outright forex
forwards. Its software is award-winning, its service is top-notch, and its
reputation is stellar. It supports leverage of up to 200:1 and is especially good
at accommodating high-volume traders with large account balances.
While Platinum accountholders will rejoice in tighter spreads and lower
commissions, the average trader will probably find fault with Saxo Bank’s
standard spreads, which are well above average. Saxo Bank also charges

s

Forex for Beginners
commissions on all orders below $100,000. As if this weren’t enough, its
platform suffers from serious price slippage, which affects about 10% of all
stop orders. Finally, the fact that Saxo Bank is not registered in the United
States may be a deal-killer for American traders. Thus, while its one-click,
integrated trading platform is a great sell, traders with multi-asset strategies
might be better off opening an account with Interactive Brokers.

CitiFX Pro
After the sudden exit of Deutsche Bank FX from the forex brokerage
business, Citigroup became the last major bank with a retail forex trading
arm. CitiFX is unique among forex brokers in that it is regulated by the SEC,
not the NFA. While it generally adheres to NFA forex regulations on
leverage and other aspects, it unfortunately does not have to release
information on the number of trading accounts it holds and client
profitability. At the same time, there are tangible advantages to dealing with
a bank. You can expect spreads to be quite narrow, since Citigroup
participates directly in the interbank market. It offers strong liquidity in more
than 130 currency pairs. The financial crisis notwithstanding, Citigroup has a
massive balance sheet, which affords peace of mind to those concerned about
credit risk. It also maintains a large research department.
All accountholders receive free access to four trading platforms and to
autochartist software, which can be used for trend confirmation. (More on
this in Chapter 9.) Elite traders may qualify for a free Reuters workstation, as
well as discounts on commissions. In short, for traders that are still
concerned about broker ethics, CitiFX Pro is a good choice.

Interbank FX
What Interbank FX lacks for in brand recognition, it makes up for in value.
Its spreads are average, but it has consistently scored well in the client
profitability rankings, due perhaps to its multi-bank liquidity system for trade
executions. It also scores well in transparency and publishes live data on
spreads, execution time, and execution rates, even when this data is
unfavorable. It was the first broker to unveil MetaTrader 5, and its innovative
IBFXConnect system facilitates social trading. In this way, participants can
share trading ideas and mimic the strategies of others. There is also a ranking
system so that you can see how your performance this week or this month
stacks up against other traders. Overall, Interbank FX is a good option for

211

212

Chapter 8 | Opening an Account
those that enjoy the social aspect of trading and are generally looking for
something different in their broker.

ATC Brokers
ATC Brokers is registered with the NFA as an introducing broker, and all of
its orders are executed through FXCM. Fortunately, ATC Brokers has been
spared the enforcement issues that have dogged FXCM. Instead, its model is
commission-based, and it assesses a standard $4 commission on every lot for
every currency pair. ATC Brokers also supports forex futures trading
(through separate accounts for regulatory purposes). Ultimately, ATC
Brokers’ most notable feature is its miniscule spreads, which are among the
lowest in the industry and often fall below 1 PIP. Unfortunately, its NFAregistration status as an introducing broker does not require it to publish
client profitability data, so we have no way of knowing whether ATC
Brokers accountholders benefit from this.

Opening an Account
In addition to choosing a broker, you will also need to select an account type.
First of all, do you want to open an individual account, a corporate account,
or an IRA, which may be subject to different tax treatment from the IRS?
Some brokers offer both standard accounts and mini/micro accounts. The
advantages of using a micro account are that there is neither a minimum
balance requirement nor a minimum allowable trade size. The downside of
opening a micro account is that the temptation to use enormous leverage to
enhance profits will be difficult to suppress. You must either get very
comfortable with leverage or expect to make only a few hundred dollars per
year in profit.
You will find that other brokers also classify account types based on account
balance, trading frequency, and types of securities that can be traded. Some
brokers will allow you to trade several different assets using one account and
one platform, while others require segregated accounts. All brokers will try
to entice you to commit to a more ambitious account type, using lower
spreads and other perks to draw you in. My advice is to not let these
marketing tools sway your decision. Trust your intuition, and don’t be forced
into the position of overextending yourself.

Forex for Beginners
The next step is to electronically fill out the documentation that is required to
open the account. Most brokers will ask you for a combination of personal,
financial, and employment information. You may also need to prepare
documentation that can confirm your address, such as a recent utility bill, as
well as to upload scans of government-issued identification. Finally, you will
be expected to agree to a litany of terms and conditions. If you haven’t
already perused your broker’s margin policy and other terms of business, this
would be a good time to do so.
The final act is to fund your account, which can be done using a debit card,
credit card, or wire transfer. On the one hand, I would recommend only
funding your account with money that you could afford to lose. At the same
time, initially depositing more funds will save you the trouble and personal
anguish of having to top up your balance (which may be required by your
broker) in the event that you sustain heavy losses. In addition, the more that
you invest, the less you will have to rely on leverage. Trading data
corroborates the idea that accounts with higher balances are more likely to be
profitable than those with low balances. Whether this is due to skill, leverage,
or other factors is unclear, but the fact remains.

Conclusion
If you followed all of the steps outlined in this chapter, you will have a
funded account and already be in the position to make trades. This is it, the
moment that you have been waiting for—the chance to test out everything
that you have learned. The only problem is that you still don’t know how to
read a quote, or even place an order!
That’s why I recommend that before you open an actual account, you first
open a demo/practice account (and finish reading this book, to boot). Every
reputable broker will offer you this service completely free of charge. You
can initially use these demo accounts as a tool for evaluating different
brokers, kind of like test-driving a car. How are the spreads? Execution? Is
the software powerful and easy to use? Many brokers offer multiple
platforms (usually the most up-to-date version of MetaTrader, as well as a
proprietary program). At the very least, you will need to try out these
different platforms in order to determine the one that suits you best and
through which you will ultimately place orders and interface with the forex
market.

213

214

Chapter 8 | Opening an Account
Even after you have selected a broker and a platform, you should continue to
trade with the demo account, not only to develop a familiarity with the
mechanics of placing trades, but also in order to hone your strategies,
backtest them, and determine whether they are profitable in real-time. Let’s
now take a closer look at this process.

CHAPTER

9
Account
Management
Learn the Mechanics of Trading
and
the Art of Backtesting
When you open your trading platform for the first time, you will immediately
be confronted with a dazzling array of windows, indicators, and data—as in
Figure 9-1—and you will instantly realize that despite your vast, newfound
knowledge of technical analysis and trading strategy, you haven’t the faintest
idea of how to actually place an order.
In Chapter 9, you can expect to achieve proficiency in managing both your
overall account and your active positions. You will learn how to read forex
quotes, place various kinds of orders, execute complex strategies, and
minimize risk. You will develop a firm grasp of margin (also known as
leverage), including how it is calculated, how interest is credited and debited,
and how margin can lead to the liquidation of your account if used
improperly. You will acquire more forex lingo than you ever wanted or even
need. Finally, you will learn how to perform instant backtests on strategies
that you have developed. In short, you will be able to put your forex skills
into practice.

214

Chapter 9 | Account Management

Figure 9-1. Screenshot of sample trading platform (Source: OANDA fxTrade)

Reading a Quote
One of the most basic skills in forex is the ability to read a quote correctly.
Unfortunately, it will take some practice before you can expect to
instantaneously absorb the information contained in forex quotes, for the
very reason that they contain two assets (currencies), while quotes for stocks
and bonds involve only one asset. Every exchange rate quote contains the
same basic elements. The base currency is printed first, and the quote
currency is shown second. In a nutshell, a forex quote tells you how many
units of the quote currency are required to purchase one unit of the base
currency.
Quotes for all financial instruments are organized in the form of a bid/ask
spread. Buyers of the currency pair must pay the ask price, while sellers will
pay the bid price. In practice, the bid/ask represents the rate that your order
would be filled at if you entered it right now. In the quoting convention used
in forex, the first two decimal points are shown in small font, while the
number of PIPs appears in large font. In the EUR/USD quote depicted in
Figure 9-2, a trader would expect to pay 1.33365/unit to open a long position
and receive 1.33353/unit to close the position. Opening a short position
would net the seller 1.33353/unit and closing that position would cost
1.33365/unit. Another way to think about this is that it currently costs

Forex for Beginners
1.33365 dollars to purchase one euro, while a sale of one euro would net
1.33353 dollars.
The difference between the two quoted prices is known as the spread, which
represents the profit earned by the market maker and/or your broker. In the
case of forex, the bid/ask spread is equivalent to the unit transaction cost for
a round-trip trade, as long as there are no commissions that need to be taken
into account. If not for the spread, you would be able to buy and sell for the
same price, and the broker would have to find a different way to profit from
the service of matching up buyers and sellers. In this case, the spread is only
1.2 PIPs (or 0.00012 units). Thus, opening and closing (whether long or
short) a EUR/USD position would entail a round-trip cost of 1.2 PIPs per
unit. If the position size were 100,000 units, this would equate to a total
transaction cost of $12.

Figure 9-2. Anatomy of a forex quote

Leverage & Margin
If leverage refers to your broker’s willingness to lend you money to fund
trades that exceed the balance of your account, then margin refers to the
collateral that your broker requires you to post in return. Failure to maintain
adequate collateral has serious consequences, as we shall see.
Due to recently revised National Futures Association (NFA) rules, leverage
is now capped at 50:1 for major currencies and 20:1 for so-called exotic
currencies. In exchange for this leverage, you must maintain at least 2%
(100/50) of your account balance as collateral for major trades and 5%
(100/20) equity collateral for exotic trades. Of course, these leverage ratios
are only the sanctioned maximums, and actual ratios may very well be lower.

215

216

Chapter 9 | Account Management
Table 9-1 shows Forex Capital Markets’ (FXCM) required margin ratios for
a handful of selected currency pairs and their implied leverage ratios.
Table 9-1. Selected margin rates and implied leverage ratios (Source: FXCM)
USD/JPY

AUD/USD

CHF/JPY

EUR/USD

GBP/USD

USD/MXN

EUR/CZK

Margin
Rate

2.0%

2.4%

2.6%

3.0%

3.6%

5.0%

7.5%

Implied
Leverage
Ratio

50x

42x

38x

33x

28x

20x

13x

With forex, it is always assumed that you are trading on margin; you don’t
need to request a loan or even indicate your interest in margin. Based on the
stated margin rates, your trading platform will automatically compute both
your margin used and available margin in real-time. As a result, you will
always know exactly how much of your equity capital is locked up as
collateral, as well as the amount you have available to trade.
I’ll offer a concrete example later, but first I want to introduce you to a few
more terms. Basically, you can think of your account vis-à-vis a few vital
statistics, all of which are accessible in real-time through your trading
platform. Your account balance represents all of the money that you ever put
into your account plus realized gains and losses from trading (from positions
that have already been closed out) plus credits and debits from interest. The
net asset value of your account, meanwhile, is equal to your account balance
plus unrealized gains and losses (from positions that remain open). Finally,
your position value represents the real-time value of all of your open
positions. From these numbers, your platform can automatically determine
how much available margin you can afford to take on, as well as the change
in position value that would cause your equity to fall below margin
requirements.
Figure 9-3 contains a position summary and an account summary from my
OANDA demo account. I have two open positions and both of them are long.
Based on the number of units and the current price of my open positions, it’s
possible to calculate my separate and total exposure, which is dropped
directly into the position value cell in the Account Summary box as
$1,708,105. Based on the average execution prices, it is also possible to
calculate my separate and total profit, which shows up in the Unrealized
P&L (profit and loss) cell as $3,749.17. If I were to close both positions, my

Forex for Beginners
unrealized profit would become a realized profit of $3,749.16 and would
further be reflected in a higher Realized P&L value in my Account Summary.

Figure 9-3. Sample position summary and account summary (Source: OANDA)

My net asset value ($103,646.03) is equal to my unrealized P&L ($3,749.16)
plus the account balance ($99,896.86), the latter of which is itself equal to
my initial fund deposit ($100,000) plus my realized P&L (-$99.83) plus
interest. (Total current interest is about -$5, which I deduced by subtracting
the other known components from my net asset value.) If I closed all of my
open positions and closed my account tomorrow, I would receive a check
from OANDA in the amount of $103,646.03; this is how much my account is
currently worth.
Here’s where it starts to get tricky. Based on OANDA’s required margin
rates, the platform has automatically calculated my margin used ($85,405),
which in this case equals 5% of my total position value. If you subtract the
margin used from my net asset value, you get my available margin, which is
$18,240.78. In other words, I have $85,000 locked up as collateral for my
open positions and only $18,000 left in collateral to open new positions. Of

217

218

Chapter 9 | Account Management
course, this collateral can also be leveraged, such that my platform will
automatically limit any new orders to about $250,000.
You may have noticed one more important number: $42,702, which is
labeled margin closeout. This is equal to margin used divided by 2 and
represents the net asset value that would trigger a margin closeout. In other
words, if my position value drops by about $60,000, then my collateral
would no longer be acceptable to cover my open positions. While all brokers’
margin policies differ from one another, the result in this case would
typically be a liquidation of all of my positions, an extraordinarily serious
action. Because I am so heavily leveraged, a mere drop of 3.5% in the value
of my positions would trigger such a margin closeout and leave me with an
account balance that was depleted by 60%!
Even before the margin closeout, the decline in my net asset value would
have triggered a so-called margin call, which is a warning that I no longer
meet even basic margin requirements. It conveys that unless I deposit more
funds or sell some of my open positions, a margin closeout will be
unavoidable. Even if my net asset value remains above the margin closeout
level, most brokers will still order liquidation after 5 to 7 consecutive margin
calls, which are typically issued daily. In Chapter 10, I will come back to this
topic, but for now, let this serve as a reminder of the pitfalls of leverage!

Rollover
Recall from our earlier discussions about the carry trade that every currency
has an associated interest rate. When the base currency in a pair has a higher
interest rate than the quote currency, then the interest rate differential is said
to be positive, and a long position should accrue interest to the investor. With
a short position, in this case, the trader would pay interest.
In practice, forex brokers manage this interest in the form of rollover.
Basically, anyone that has a currency pair with a positive interest rate
differential will receive a rollover credit, while a short interest rate
differential would imply a rollover debit. Wider interest rate differentials
imply proportionally greater rollover. These credits and debits take place
automatically and will be immediately reflected in your account balance.
Some brokers (such as OANDA) calculate rollover every second, while
others assess it only once per day at a fixed time.
