
264

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

What size does the 2% Rule allow me to trade and how much will
I trade?
One could draw an extensive flowchart for every trade, but the key
point is to observe several inviolate rules, mostly having to do with
money management and multiple timeframes. As long as you observe
those rules, you have a wide choice of analytic and trading techniques.
Just be sure to keep good records and continue to learn from your
experience if you want to trade like a pro.

BEGINNER, SEMIPRO, PRO
Traders’ questions reveal their stages of development. Beginners always
ask about trading methods—what indicators to use, what systems to
choose. They want to know the right Stochastic parameters and the
best length of a moving average. Most newbies are so excited about
profits and so clueless about risk that no fancy tools can save them
from disasters.
Those who survive the stage of original innocence move on, thanks
to a combination of luck, work, or an inborn sense of caution. They
learn to select trades and find where to buy and sell. They start asking
why their profits are so inconsistent, if they know so much. How come
their account is up 20% one month and down 25% the next? How come
they can make money but not grow equity?
Traders at the second stage often grab a profit and spend it before
that money evaporates. They feel insecure about their ability to
make money. I remember ages ago taking a penny profit from Swiss
franc futures and rushing to a jewelry store to buy my then-wife a
necklace. Another time, I used a little less than a cent profit to buy
my daughter an expensive Abyssinian cat. Those cats have long
lives and hers, named Swissie, used to remind me of my old impulsive trading days.
Traders who get stuck at that level keep bouncing up and down like
a flower in an ice hole. To move to the next stage, a trader must overcome the biggest obstacle to winning—the person he sees in the mirror.
He must recognize his role in putting on impulsive trades, undisciplined trades, trades without stops. No matter how clever his methods,
he is not a winner until his mind is in the right place. His personality,
with all its quirks, influences results more than any computer. Traders
at that stage ask: “Do I have to put in stops or can I use mental stops?”

TRADING FOR A LIVING

265

“Why am I afraid to pull the trigger?” “How come the trades I don’t take
work out better than those I take?”
A trader who survives, succeeds, and moves up to the third stage
feels relaxed and calm. When he asks questions, he is interested in
money management. His trading system is in place, his discipline is
good, and he puts a lot of time into thinking how to allocate his trading capital and reduce risk.
These three stages form a pyramid, a structure with a broad base
and a narrow top. The journey has a high attrition rate. I wrote this
book to help make your passage a little smoother, faster, less painful,
and more profitable.
What are the reasonable profit targets for different stages? The
numbers I’ll give you may surprise you as low. You want to make
more money, and you should feel free to reach higher and do better
if you can. These guideposts should help you see whether you’re
meeting the minimum requirements. They help you recognize when
you are in trouble so that you can stop, think, and adjust your
methods. If you trade for a bank and keep missing profit targets,
your manager will pull your trading privileges. A private trader has
no manager and is in charge of his own discipline. If this book
helps you stop, think, regroup, and move higher, I have not wasted
my time writing.
1. BEGINNER
A. The minimal acceptable performance level for a beginner is a
loss of 10% of trading capital in a year. Traders are shocked
when I give them this number. They forget that most beginners blow themselves out fast. Many lose 10% in a month if
not in a week. If you can survive for a year, learn about trading, and lose less than 10%, your education is cheap and you
are way ahead of the crowd.
B. The goal of a beginner is to cover trading expenses and generate annual return on his account equal to one and a half
times the current rate on T-Bills or a comparable riskless
instrument. You have to charge the cost of software, data,
classes, and books, including the one you’re reading, against
your trading account. Beginners often throw money at gurus
who promise the keys to the kingdom. Charging your tradingrelated expenses against your account introduces a useful

266

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

reality check. If you can cover them and then beat the Treasury
bills, you’ re no longer a beginner!
2. INTERMEDIATE (SERIOUS AMATEUR OR SEMIPROFESSIONAL)
A. The minimum acceptable performance level for a serious
amateur is return on equity twice the current rate on T-Bills.
Your improvement is evolutionary, not revolutionary. Cut some
of your losses a little faster, grab some of your profits a little
sooner, learn a few more tricks of the trade. Once you’re covering your trading expenses and making double what you
could get from riskless paper, you’re miles ahead of the efficient market theorists.
B. The goal of a serious amateur or a semiprofessional is to generate a 20% annual return on equity. At this stage, the size of
your trading capital becomes an important factor. If you are
trading a million dollars, you may be able to start living off
your profits. But what if you trade a relatively small account,
say $50,000? You know you can trade, but 20% of $50,000 is
not enough for a living. Most undercapitalized traders destroy
themselves by overtrading, trying to squeeze unrealistic returns
from their tiny accounts. Take crazy risks, and you’ll have crazy
results—both on the way up and on the way down. Better stick
to your trading system and leverage your skills by trading other
people’s money (see “Going Pro” on the next page).
3. EXPERT
A. The minimal performance targets are more flexible for experts. Their returns are steadier, but not necessarily higher than
those of serious amateurs. You have to continue outperforming T-Bills—to fall behind them would be ridiculous. An expert
may grab a 100% return in a good year, but trading a serious
amount of money year after year, just staying north of 20% is
a very good performance. Certified geniuses such as George
Soros maintain a lifetime average of nearly 30% per year.
B. The goal of an expert trader is to put enough money into riskless
investments to be able to maintain his current standard of living
forever, even if he stops trading. Trading at this stage becomes a
game that you continue to play for your own enjoyment. Soros
certainly doesn’t need any more money for personal expenses

TRADING FOR A LIVING

267

but trades because he enjoys spending fortunes on political and
charitable causes. Curiously enough, when you no longer have
to stretch for the money, it starts flowing in faster than ever.

GOING PRO
A beginner is better off starting with a relatively small account. Someone who has moved up to a solid semiprofessional level needs to start
pushing up his account size to increase profits. An expert with a large
account has to be cautious not to impact thin markets with his trades.
He has to watch out for a fall in performance, a frequent side effect of
greater size.
The minimum size for a trading account is about $20,000 at this
time. Once you’ve moved up to the level of a serious amateur or a
semiprofessional trader, $80,000 will give you more freedom to
diversify. Once you get your account up to $250,000, you may start
thinking of moving up to professional trading. These are absolute
minimums, and if you can increase them, your life will be easier.
Starting with $50,000, having $120,000 at a semiprofessional level, and
moving up to professional trading at $500,000 will improve your
chances of success.
What if you do not have that much? Trading on a shoestring raises the
pressure to a deadly level. A person with a tiny account cannot apply
the essential 2% Rule. If he has only $5,000, his permitted risk is only
$100 per trade, which guarantees that he will be stopped out by market
noise. A desperate beginner swallows hard and puts on a trade without
a stop. Most likely, he’ll lose, but what if he wins, ends up with $7,000,
then puts on another trade and goes up to $10,000? If he is smart, he will
sharply reduce his trading size and start using the 2% Rule now. He was
very lucky and should put his winnings into a sensible trading program.
Most people become intoxicated by success and cannot stop. A beginner who has doubled his $5,000 stake usually feels that the game is easy
and he’s a genius. He feels he can walk on water, but soon drowns.
You might be able to start by getting a trading job, but corporate
Wall Street will not hire someone over 25 for a paying job as a trader
trainee. A more realistic option is to sharply cut expenses, get a moonlighting job, and save money as fast as you can, while paper trading
the markets. This calls for discipline, and some of the best traders have
started this way. The third option is to trade other people’s money.

268

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

Trading your own capital reduces the level of stress. Having to
raise money increases tension and interferes with trading. Taking a
loan is not a sensible way to raise funds because the interest raises an
insurmountable barrier to success. Borrowing money from family and
friends has the added kicker of having to justify their trust and trying to
show off.
Scared money is losing money. If you have to worry about paying it
back, you cannot concentrate on trading. Companies that hire executives usually run credit checks on their candidates. A high level of debt
kills a candidacy because a person who is worried about money cannot properly concentrate on his job. I know a chronic loser who
received a quarter million from his mom as a wedding gift. She told
him to buy an exchange seat as an investment, but he resented his
financial dependency on the strong-willed lady and decided to show
how good he really was. He took a loan against the seat and went to
trade on the floor. His scheme had a predictable ending, and to this
day his family talks of “the missing seat.”
You are better off learning to trade with your own money. The time
to use other people’s money comes when you know what you are
doing and want to leverage your skills. There are huge pools of capital sloshing through the financial system, looking for competent money
managers. Show a good track record going back several years, and you
will have all the money you care to manage.
I have a friend who earned an engineering degree but went to work
as a floor clerk on a futures exchange. He spent several years learning
to trade, saved $50,000, and then quit his job to trade full-time. He
moonlighted by writing a book and teaching a few classes but continued to struggle despite his steady 50% annual returns. His profit was
about $25,000 a year, but he had to pay rent, eat, and occasionally buy
a new tennis racket and a pair of shoes. After a few years of this he
had a bad year and broke even. That’s when he had to eat his seed
grain—dip into his trading capital for living expenses. Then he connected with a big money management firm.
The firm checked his track record and staked him out with an additional $50,000. He was to trade through that firm, at low commissions,
and keep 20% of any profits on managed money. He kept delivering,
and they kept giving him more money to manage. In a few years he
was up to $11 million but then had another bad year, returning only
18% profit. In the old days he would be dipping into his capital, but

TRADING FOR A LIVING

269

now the math was different. Eighteen percent profit on $11 million
came to almost $2 million, and his 20% share was $400,000. That’s how
much he earned in a bad year. He now has over $100 million under
management. His performance as a trader has not changed much, but
the size of his rewards went through the roof.
You can start trading other people’s money informally, without a
license, although you will have to register once the funds under management exceed a certain limit. The rules are different for stocks and
futures because they have different regulators.
You can begin by asking people to give you the power of attorney
over their accounts, allowing you to trade but not to withdraw the
money. Once you become registered, it is not a good idea to have
individual managed accounts because their owners receive confirmation slips for each trade and pepper you with questions. It is better to
have all your accounts in a pool whose members receive a single statement at the end of the month telling them how much that pool is worth
and what their share is.
Futures money managers are regulated by the National Futures
Association (NFA). To become a Commodity Trading Advisor (CTA),
you must pass an exam known as Series 3, unless you are a floor
trader. Stock market money managers are regulated by the Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC). Their exam, called Series 7, is much
harder and many people take months to prepare for it.
The more free-market NFA allows its members to charge performance fees, taking a share of profits, much as US lawyers work on contingency fees. It is not uncommon for a manager to take 20% of profits,
but that is not how most of them make their money. Many charge 1%
or 2% of assets as a management fee. If you collect 1% on $50 million,
you are taking in half a million dollars a year just for being a nice guy.
Any performance fees come on top of that as pure gravy.
The more blue-blood SEC does not allow performance fees, forcing
its registrants to be satisfied with a small percentage of assets. Since the
assets in the stock market are much greater than in the futures market,
those fees are nothing to sneeze at. For all the mutual fund advertising
hoopla, those fees are a key deciding factor in funds’ long-term performance. The Vanguard Fund, which has always made low fees its key selling point, keeps outperforming most hot-shot managers in the long run.
Stock market money managers have found a way to run around the
SEC regulation against performance fees. They set up vehicles known

270

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

as hedge funds. Only so-called qualified investors who pass income
and assets tests are allowed to invest in them. Hedge fund managers
typically put their own money into the funds and receive performance
fees comparable to those in futures markets. A hedge fund manager is
trading his own money along with that of his clients, which is probably why hedge funds as a group outperform mutual funds. Tracking
hedge fund managers and shifting funds between them offers an alternative to tracking the markets for wealthy investors. If you go this
route, make sure you find out what percentage of their own assets they
have in their funds.
Successful money managers go through three stages of development. Many begin by informally managing a few modest accounts.
Then they become registered and the funds under management rise to
millions of dollars. Those who accumulate a five-year track record of
steady gains and low drawdowns can go after the key prize—pension
funds and endowment money. Those who get to manage these assets
are the true elite of professional money managers.

CHAPTER TEN

COME INTO
MY TRADING ROOM

G

ood trades begin and end with money management. The 6% Rule
tells you whether you may put on a trade in the first place. Then,
before you place an order, the 2% Rule tells you the maximum size
allowed for that trade, based on the distance from your entry to the stop.
Sandwiched between those rules is market analysis. Here, in this chapter,
I want to illustrate the analytic process for you.
Shocking but true, most people who write books on trading do not
trade. In putting together their books, they rely on the power of wellchosen hypothetical examples. The only people obligated to disclose their
track records are money managers. I trade my own money and feel no
need to lay my full accounting open to curiosity seekers. Still, you trusted
me enough to buy this book. Since all trust is mutual, I want to reciprocate by showing you some of my trades.
Here are a few trades I executed in recent months. It is important that
all of them have already been closed out. One of the worst things a trader
can do is reveal his open trades, putting his ego on the line and gumming
up the decision-making process. Completed trades are history, from which
we may learn.
These charts show how one trader makes his buy and sell decisions. Mine
are based primarily on Triple Screen trading system—making strategic decisions in the longer timeframe and tactical decisions in the shorter timeframe.
Whenever I put on a trade, I print out its charts and mark key signals
that prompted me to act. Whenever I close a trade, I print out its charts
again and mark up those signals that prompted me to exit. I may write a
few lines on how I first became aware of a potential trade, how I felt
entering and exiting, and so on. I try not to write a dissertation on every
trade, and record only the key factors, aiming for speed and brevity.
271

272

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

My journal, a hard-cover spiral-bound album, sits on a bookshelf in my
trading room. I sometimes come into that room in the evening, sprawl in
an armchair, and review my trades, one after another. Some pages are
pleasant, others painful, but all are educational.
As you go looking for trades, please do not feel as if you have to find
the same patterns as shown here. This is just a brief excerpt from one
man’s diary—a few of the trades made in recent months. Also, trading is
intensely personal, with different people reacting to different aspects of
the game. There are many ways to make money in the markets and even
more ways to lose it. My main purpose in showing you a few pages from
my diary is to prompt you to begin documenting your trades in order to
learn from your own experience.

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

273

EXCERPTS FROM THE DIARY
Charts in my trading diary are printed in color and marked up by hand.
Comments, written on margins, are telegraphic and abbreviated. In preparing
this manuscript for publication, I had to print those charts in black and white
rather than color, while slightly expanding my comments to make them easier to understand.
Showing strangers your trading diary feels almost like inviting them
into the bedroom during an intimate moment. As we grow older, we care
less and less about what others think of us; I do not believe I could have
shown you my diary just a few years ago.
The key question is, What are you going to do with it? Will you casually flip through the pages? Will you go through them slowly, evaluating
each trading signal? Will you feel overwhelmed? Will you feel critical,
especially of trades with less than perfect scores? Before I turn my records
of six recent trades over to you, I have just one question. Will you be
keeping your own diary? If my example has inspired you, I will have
achieved my goal.

274

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

Trade 1—Long CSCO
The stock market has been falling for a year, accelerating in recent
months. In a Traders’ Camp a month prior to this trade I asked a guest
instructor, a famous expert, what companies will be left standing at the
bottom of a severe economic, as well as financial, decline, that is, what
stocks to buy amid the ruins. His answer—BGEN, CSCO, and IBM. I
included all three in my weekly scan of the market.

Figure 10.1 Weekly Entry

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

275

C
A

B

Figure 10.2 Daily Entry 1

A

Figure 10.3 Daily Entry 2

BC

276

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

ENTRY
Weekly: CSCO has lost over 85% of its value, but this company is not
going to disappear like some silly dot-com. Weekly trading ranges have
become narrow; the bars near the right edge are only a couple of dollars wide, compared with $10 bars a year ago. This is a sign that speculative excesses have been squeezed out. Weekly MACD-Histogram
has been rising for the past six weeks at the right edge—bullish. Weekly
price is as far below its EMA as it was above it at the top in 2000; the
“rubber band” that connects price to the EMA is overextended, ready to
snap back.
Daily: Massive bullish divergence between price and MACD-Histogram.
See how strong bears were at bottom A, weaker at bottom B, and now,
at C, with prices much lower, bears hardly have any power. Moreover,
there is a rarely seen bullish divergence B-C between price and MACDLines. Triple bullish divergence A-B-C between two-day Force Index
and price shows that each recent attempt to drive prices lower was
weaker than before. This divergence is shouting to buy now because it
reveals that bears are out of steam and bulls are about to seize control.
Action: Long on 4/9/2001 at 13.91, with a stop at 13.18, below the latest
low.

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

277

A

B

Figure 10.4 Exit

EXIT
Daily: Prices snapped back slightly above their EMA, working off the oversold condition, and appear to have stalled. The two-day Force Index is
tracing a bearish divergence A-B, showing that the rally of the past three
days is weaker than during the previous week.
Action: Sold longs on 4/20/2001 at 18.85. Trade rating 55% (took 4.94 out
of a 9-point channel).

278

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

Trade 2—Long GX
Different stocks often trace similar patterns within a few days of each
other. If you figure out what the leaders are doing, you can start looking
for similar patterns in the laggards. A friend drew my attention to GX
when she called to ask my opinion on a handful of stocks that she liked.
Its patterns looked remarkably similar to CSCO, which was already running in my favor.

C
A

Figure 10.5 Weekly Entry

B

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

279

A

B

Figure 10.6 Daily Entry 1

A

Figure 10.7 Daily Entry 2

B

C

280

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

ENTRY
Weekly: GX has lost over 80% of its value. Prices are as deep below their
weekly EMA as they have ever been, just above the $10 psychological
support level. Both MACD-Histogram and MACD-Lines are tracing massive bullish divergences (A-B-C and B-C, respectively).
Daily: Bullish divergence between MACD-Histogram and price A-B shows
that bears are becoming weaker, prices are falling out of inertia, and no
great selling pressure exists. Seven trading days ago there was a false
breakout below 10, and the rightmost bar is declining to retest that
level. The bottom of the previous week’s break provides a logical stoploss point. The two-day Force Index is tracing a triple bullish divergence A-B-C, showing that bears have no force—it is a screaming buy.
Expect prices to snap above their EMA.
Action: Long on 4/16/2001 at 10.05, with a stop at 8.76, below the latest
low.
