 Stan Lipsey, the publisher, observed Buffett and Graham together on a trip to Niagara Falls. “I don’t know the answer,” Lipsey said, “but I didn’t get the vibes you get from people who are sleeping together. Kay is very powerful, and also very shy. Nine hundred and ninety-nine out of one thousand people would think twice about what they are saying to her. Warren didn’t. And they became confidants.” 
 It is doubtful that either “answer” would explain why Buffett thrived in the relationship. The annual reports that he brought her probably had more to do with it. Buffett delighted in playing the teacher, as he had in his letters to his partners, and Graham was a very intriguing, very receptive student. A Post director said, “It was kind of goofy. She would have these pre-meeting dinners. And we’d all leave. And Warren wouldn’t go. I never saw anything sexual about it.” 
 What executives did see was that the Buffett-Graham alliance had a far-reaching impact on the business, and ultimately on Buffett’s investment. It was impossible to get Graham to open her checkbook, a fact that they blamed, quite rightly, on Buffett. Joel Chaseman, the head of broadcasting, had a chance to buy a television station in Orlando, before the city’s full explosion as a mecca for tourists, for $120 million. “It was a hell of a buy,” he noted. “You could already tell it would be a great market. But somewhere in the murk and mist of the upper levels of the corporation it got turned down.” 
 Murk and mist? Graham had called Buffett, who said it was overpriced. 29 
 The litany of such forgone chances drove Post executives to despair. Buffett was cool to cellular and to cable TV because they required a lot of capital. 30 (The reason he had invested in the Post was that its publishing and television properties—as distinct from, say, an airline—produced free cash flow. The profits were not sucked back into the business.) He was skeptical of start-ups and of new technology because they were, well, new . They’d be like switching from hamburgers to foreign foods. 
 If Buffett couldn’t see a business, he wasn’t comfortable with it. It wasn’t enough for him to get an expert’s assurance on a new project, which is what the typical executive relies on. If he didn’t understand a venture—he, personally—he felt that he’d be speculating. And Buffett wouldn’t do that. 
 Graham’s dependence on Buffett caused the Post to miss some opportunities. Tom Murphy, the self-assured CEO of Cap Cities, also conferred with Buffett, but adopted his suggestions selectively. But Graham, who presided over a revolving door in the executive suite, went to Buffett even on matters that were outside his expertise. And Buffett’s conservatism came to permeate the board. 
 Chaseman, who before joining the Post had launched the all-news format at WINS radio in New York, proposed in the late seventies that the Post start an all-news cable program. Ted Turner was developing the same idea. At the Post it never got past the first board meeting. “I don’t think they were prepared to buy anything . It was the antithesis of an entrepreneurial company,” Chaseman said. He was so frustrated that he tried to spin off the Post’s broadcasting unit into a separate company. Mark Meagher, the Post’s president, wrote a long letter when he resigned, urging that the Post go private—since, as he saw it, there was no point in such a stodgy company holding public capital. Richard Simmons, who replaced Meagher, dryly remarked after yet another proposal had been killed, “The sage of Omaha has spoken again.” 31 
 The funny thing was, the Post executives didn’t really dispute Buffett’s reasoning. Meagher, in a comment that is typical of the bunch, says, “I didn’t disagree. Prices were high.” Also, on a personal level, the executives found Buffett impossible to dislike. Simmons, like some of the others, made a pilgrimage to Omaha, a trip that invariably included a steak dinner, a leisurely tour of Buffett’s childhood haunts, and an earful of his wisdom. 
 Buffett didn’t say much during the Post’s board meetings. But occasionally a comment would spark him. At one meeting, Jeffrey Epstein, a young M.B.A. who was scouting for new fields of investment, gave an overview of what consumers were spending in each part of the media and entertainment industry. His figure for home entertainment was $5 billion. 
 Buffett’s bushy eyebrows went up about three feet. “That $5 billion is a pretty interesting number,” he noted. “That means if there are twenty million teenagers in the United States they are all spending $20 every month on video.” That was how his mind worked: numbers, numbers. It was suddenly clear that Epstein’s figure, if true, was unsustainable. Needless to say, the Post did not go into video. ‡ 
 It is striking how little the Post did do during Buffett’s tenure on the board. Over eleven years, it started and folded a sports magazine; it bought a newspaper in Washington state and sold one in Trenton; and it acquired small interests in cellular phones and other areas, some of which were subsequently sold. But 98 percent of the profits derived, as before, from the Washington Post , Newsweek , and four television stations. 
 Meanwhile, its revenue grew at a solid but unspectacular rate of 12 percent a year. The only dramatic change was in the level of profitability. In 1974, the company earned an operating profit of ten cents for each dollar of sales; in 1985, the figure was nineteen cents. Similarly, the return on equity doubled. 
 Of course, the Post would have won the newspaper war in Washington without Buffett. And he had little to do with the doubling of profit margins at its television stations. 
 His main contribution came after the profits had been earned. Buffett gave the Grahams a way of thinking about the business that was oriented to the shareholders, and at a time when media companies were devoted to acquiring empires. He insistently reminded them—as he had Ken Chace, so many years earlier, outside the textile mill—that size was not the goal; the return to shareholders was. Opportunities were missed, but he saved the Post from the business error that is truly a tragic error—throwing the profits from a good business into a bad one. 
 Instead, at Buffett’s urging, the Post used its excess cash to retire 7.5 million of its own shares, or about 40 percent of the total. Net profits grew seven times over, but the earnings per share —the cheese on each slice—grew by a factor of ten. 
 Of course, media companies in general were prospering in those years. But by the single yardstick that mattered to Buffett—translating the profits into rewards for the investors—the Post outclassed the field. 
 Consider that over those eleven years, 1974 to 1985, the Post earned an extraordinary average of twenty-three cents for each dollar of the shareholders’ capital. Cap Cities and Times Mirror each earned a none too shabby, but inferior, nineteen cents. 
 The Post’s stock rose at the astounding compound rate of 35 percent a year. With dividends, the total return was 37 percent a year. Cap Cities did a heroic 32 percent, and Times Mirror a still-impressive 24 percent. But the Post was better. And by the end of 1985, when Buffett would leave the board, Berkshire’s $10 million investment would be worth $205 million. 
 Shortly after Buffett joined the Post’s board, he began to renew his interest in another old corporate flame, also in Washington and also from his youth. GEICO had been a tiny company when Buffett, while at Columbia, had taken the train to Washington and knocked on its door. In the ensuing years, it grew dramatically. Lorimer Davidson, who had patiently taken Buffett’s questions that long-past Saturday, rose to chief executive, and GEICO became one of the biggest auto insurers in the country. 
 However, by the early seventies, Davidson had retired and GEICO had new management, led by Ralph C. Peck. The climate had also changed; insurers were being battered by new no-fault laws and rising inflation. Peck, trying to grow his way out of such problems, relaxed the company’s historic policy of accepting only the lowest-risk drivers—even while maintaining its generally low prices. 32 Inevitably, premium volume soared and the cash poured in. 
 For a while, all seemed rosy. Alas, GEICO’s higher-risk drivers, not surprisingly, were filing more claims. Moreover, inflation was raising the cost of fixing the bodies and cars that GEICO was insuring. 
 To compound the problem, GEICO’s management didn’t adequately reserve for losses. For a critical fifteen months in 1974 and 1975, the company denied, belittled, or lied about the problem—both to Wall Street and to itself. 33 Lorimer Davidson, still on the board, bitterly complained as the company was wrecked. But even he did not suspect how bad it was. 

 We found out when the board retained an independent actuarial firm. We got the report the day before Christmas, 1975. It was some Christmas present. We had $50 million to make up—to our horror—and we didn’t have the money. 

 Early in 1976, GEICO announced a staggering $126 million loss for the previous year. As recently as 1974, the stock had hit a high of 42. Now it was quoted at 4⅞. 
 Buffett had long since sold his small holding in GEICO, but he had harbored a secret desire to revisit the company in a big way, just as he had the Washington Post . 34 For someone so rational, Buffett was sentimental about his past (though not so misty-eyed as to invest in GEICO when the stock was dear). But now, GEICO was cheap. What’s more, it was in deep trouble. And Ben Graham, who had been chairman of GEICO when Buffett had been at Columbia, still had his savings in it. Helping to salvage the company would be a sort of double fantasy: following in Graham’s footsteps and rescuing his company. 
 Graham was then living quietly and modestly with his mistress, Malou, part of the year in La Jolla and part in Aix-en-Provence. At his eightieth-birthday party, when his family gathered in La Jolla, he movingly looked back on his life, without mentioning his career on Wall Street. He spoke of the pleasure he had gotten from beauty, literature, and art, and also from varied female companions, and recalled, as a boy, seeing Mark Twain in his later years, “resplendent in his white suit and curly white hair.” 35 However, Graham had not lost interest in stocks. He had an account in La Jolla, and though he rarely traded, the father of security analysis would go to his broker’s and sit unobtrusively at a corner desk, reading his beloved Standard & Poor’s. A broker who visited Graham found a book of Greek on his desk and a Rodin sculpture in the living room. 36 
 At about the time of GEICO’s troubles, Graham asked Buffett to coauthor a revised edition of The Intelligent Investor . They corresponded, but Buffett found that he and his teacher had some basic disagreements. Buffett wanted a section on how to identify “great businesses” (such as See’s Candy); Graham didn’t think the average reader could do it. Also, Graham recommended a ceiling of 75 percent of one’s assets in stocks; the gamer Buffett was willing to invest his whole kitty if prices were right. 37 Buffett felt so strongly that he gave up being Graham’s coauthor and instead was simply acknowledged inside the book as a “collaborator.” 
 Ironically, no stock was as suggestive of their philosophical rift as GEICO. Graham would have said that it lacked a margin for safety—which, given that the company was on the verge of failure, it certainly did. Buffett sensed an opportunity if the management could be righted, and he was following its drama closely. 
 In April 1976, when GEICO held its annual meeting, four hundred shareholders jammed into the Washington Statler Hilton, where they all but hooted the officers off the premises. 38 Within a month, Peck was booted out, and John J. Byrne, Jr., a forty-three-year-old veteran of Travelers, was tapped to succeed him. Byrne moved with exceptional force. In New Jersey, he visited James J. Sheeran, the state insurance commissioner, to demand a rate increase. When it was clear that Byrne was getting nowhere, he pulled a paper from his pocket, slammed it on Sheeran’s desk, and said, “Here’s your fucking license. We are no longer a citizen of the state of New Jersey.” Then he summarily fired seven hundred employees and notified 300,000 policyholders in the state to find another insurer. 
 Nationwide, Byrne closed one hundred offices and cut the workforce nearly in half. 39 But it wasn’t enough. The insurance superintendent in Washington, D.C., was threatening to shut him down unless GEICO could get other insurers to pick up a portion of its policies (providing what is known as reinsurance). Byrne appeared to have gotten their okay, but early in July, State Farm, the industry leader, backed out on him, as did Travelers. 40 
 GEICO’s fortunes were now at a low. Buffett was acutely interested in getting involved—though, as usual, he had someone else smooth his entree. Kay Graham, doing his bidding, called Byrne and said, “I have a houseguest I’d like you to meet.” Byrne said some other time. Then Byrne got a call from Lorimer Davidson, GEICO’s elder statesman, who asked if it was true that Byrne had snubbed Warren Buffett. Hearing that he had, Davidson snapped, “How can you be so dumb? Get your ass down there.” 
 Byrne showed up at the Graham mansion in July, the night before a Post board meeting. GEICO’s stock was at 2. § This once seemingly invincible company was on the brink of becoming the biggest failed insurer ever—in Buffett’s words, “the Titanic of the insurance world.” 41 
 As Buffett led Byrne to the stately, high-ceilinged library, he had an eerie recollection of when he had banged on GEICO’s door twenty-five years earlier and been led by a janitor to Lorimer Davidson. Though his circumstances were vastly changed, his modus operandi was not. Once more, he was eager to learn all he could about GEICO. As the ruddy-faced Byrne recalled, Buffett pumped him for hours. 

 We talked to maybe 2:00, 3:00 A.M. He wanted to know the things I would do. What did I think of our ability to survive? I remember we talked late at night about families, other stuff. But mostly the conversation was GEICO. I’m sure I did 80 percent of the talking. 

 There was little Byrne could tell Buffett that he didn’t already know. GEICO had the same low-cost method of operation (based on not having sales agents) that had always given it an edge. In rough terms, GEICO spent fifteen cents of each premium dollar on expenses, whereas other insurers spent an average of twenty-four cents. 42 This enabled GEICO to charge less, and thus be more selective about choosing customers. In recent years, of course, GEICO had abandoned this surefire formula. But its underlying cost advantage was intact. Buffett figured that if it survived the present crisis, its profitability would return. 
 Buffett’s genius was to see this even when GEICO was in total chaos and on the verge of bankruptcy. Like American Express in the sixties, it was “a magnificent business going through a time of trouble.” 43 And even in that troubled time, he could envision the storm’s passing. 
 On this evening, Buffett wanted to take the measure of Byrne personally. And Byrne impressed him. He spoke like an owner as distinct from a manager or bureaucrat. He was decisive and energetic, as the crisis required. Perhaps he was too volatile to lead the troops in peace. But as a wartime general, Buffett thought him a brilliant choice. 
 I didn’t ask, “How long is it going to take, Jack?” In the end, you can’t predict. [But] Jack clearly understood the dimensions of the problem. 44 
 Somehow, Byrne would get it done. And if he did, the stock could prove to be a tremendous bargain—maybe even better than that. 
 Buffett got up a few hours after Byrne left and called Ronald Gutman, his broker at Goldman Sachs. He bought 500,000 shares at 2⅛ and left a standing order for shares “in the multimillions.” 45 At the Post board meeting, a light-headed Buffett confessed, “I’ve just invested in something that might go under. I could lose the entire investment next week.” But once he had started it was not in his nature to stop. Berkshire quickly invested more than $4 million in GEICO stock. 
 Byrne said later, “That night at Kay’s was the turning point.” But GEICO was far from out of the woods. It needed, first, to convince the regulators to give it time, and second, to persuade competitors to provide it with reinsurance and thus limit GEICO’s exposure to losses. 
 Buffett took a piece of the reinsurance for Berkshire, and also paid a call on Maximilian Wallach, the D.C. insurance superintendent. 46 In essence, Buffett argued that if Berkshire thought enough of GEICO’s future to stake a few million bucks on it, maybe Wallach shouldn’t be so quick to close it down. 
 Byrne, meanwhile, got other insurers to agree to take the reinsurance—but only with a big “if.” As part of the deal, GEICO had to raise new capital. Byrne went to eight firms on Wall Street and was bounced out of every one. In desperation, he turned to Salomon Brothers, a still-smallish trading firm. 
 John Gutfreund, Salomon’s blunt-spoken second-in-command, had already rejected GEICO. However, a junior research analyst named Michael Frinquelli had invited Byrne to give a presentation to Salomon over lunch. Since Byrne was going to be in the building anyway, Gutfreund agreed to let him come by his office when he was done. 
 When Byrne sat down, Gutfreund removed his cigar and gave him a pouting sneer. “I don’t know who’d ever buy that fucking reinsurance treaty you’re trying to sell,” Gutfreund said. 
 Byrne, answering in kind, replied, “You don’t know any fucking thing you’re talking about.” 47 
 Impressed with this display of virility, Gutfreund showed Byrne the door and told Frinquelli, the Salomon analyst, to research GEICO and write up a recommendation. Frinquelli concluded that GEICO could be saved, and ought to be saved. If restored to health, he said, it would be valuable to policyholders and profitable for investors. Gutfreund also was reassured by the news of Buffett’s investment. 48 
 In August, Gutfreund agreed to underwrite a $76 million offering of GEICO preferred. This was a gutsy move. GEICO was thought to be so risky that no other firm would join in a syndicate, as usually occurs, meaning that if the offering failed, Salomon would be on the hook for the entire $76 million. 
 When a lawyer on the deal pestered the bankers over some detail, Gutfreund snapped, “What are you worried about? It’s only your job. It’s our money .” 49 In November, days before the offering, it appeared that Salomon would take a major loss. 50 
 Shortly before the underwriting, Buffett told Gutfreund that he’d be willing to take the entire allotment—and named his price. 51 Byrne wanted to sell it at $10.50 a share, but Gutfreund, knowing Buffett’s ceiling, insisted on $9.20. He wouldn’t budge—not by a penny. Buffett was his backup. 
 The offering turned out to be a hit. Buffett took 25 percent of it, giving Berkshire a total investment of $23 million. Thanks to a curious Catch-22, the investment, once made, was no longer risky—because the fact of the added capital took GEICO out of peril. In Byrne’s view, the hero of the rescue was Gutfreund, who had stepped up with capital when no one else would. 52 Buffett also was impressed with him. Gutfreund evidently was his kind of investment banker. 
 Within six months, GEICO rose to 8⅛—a quadrupling. That was only a faint indication of its potential. Over the next few years, Berkshire doubled its stake, making Buffett the controlling investor. GEICO seemed to go through a Buffett mold—Buffett had that effect on companies. GEICO, like the Washington Post, repurchased its own shares; GEICO’s boss, too, made a habit of calling on Buffett. It was Buffett-ized. Byrne was an experienced pro, but his business relationship with Buffett was not so very different from Kay Graham’s. Quoting Byrne: 

 I’d ask him all kinds of things. He showed me sensible ways to finance. He was generous with his time. But he never—ever—made suggestions. Warren figured out a long time ago that he could make a lot more money for Berkshire by being a benevolent shareholder. This guy made a lot of money by backing up the truck. 

 Once a year, Buffett would do a Q&A with GEICO’s executives. Onstage, he was a natural. He had the Casey Stengel technique of avoiding overliteralness by treating questions as general prompts. He would segue into a little story, which usually had an investment moral, but which he told in an utterly simple style. He was informal, yet picked his words with exquisite precision. You couldn’t not be drawn in. 
 Byrne swears that people at GEICO canceled vacations so as not to miss the show. One time, Buffett said an investor should approach the stock market as if he had a lifetime punch card. Every time he bought a stock he punched a hole. When the card had twenty holes he was done—no more investing for life. Obviously, the investor would filter out every idea but the best. Lou Simpson, who was managing GEICO’s portfolio, said this parable had a profound impact on him. 
 Buffett, in fact, had this punch-for-life conviction in GEICO, and went out of his way to let Byrne know it, both privately and in Berkshire’s published reports. In an era when managers were increasingly under the gun to raise their stock or face a takeover, Buffett wanted Byrne to manage for the long term, and emphasized that he wouldn’t sell him out. 
 This was put to a test when a Fortune 500 company made a serious bid to acquire GEICO. Byrne called Buffett and asked what he thought. Buffett said, “It’s up to you.” Byrne said, “Oh, come on—you gotta give me more than that.” Buffett said nothing, but agreed to accompany Byrne to a late-night bargaining session at the Waldorf-Astoria, in New York. 
 The suitor and his bankers naturally addressed themselves to Buffett, the controlling stockholder. Buffett said, “You’re talking to the wrong guy. He [Byrne] is the one you have to convince.” Byrne took Buffett aside and pleaded, “At least whisper a price in my ear.” Buffett stayed mum. 
 “It was amazing,” Byrne said. “We were talking a billion dollars or so. He left it in my hands.” 
 Finally, Byrne named a price that was out of the buyer’s range, and the talks ended. That was surely the outcome that Buffett, who figured that GEICO’s best days were still ahead, had wanted. So why had he played around? “It’s hard to know what’s going on in Warren’s mind,” Byrne admitted. 
 No doubt, Buffett wanted Byrne to know that he trusted him. And he must have guessed that if he showed his faith, Byrne would not want to let him down. One could say that Buffett was lucky, except that he got lucky too often. 
 Reminiscing on the GEICO roller coaster, Walter Schloss, Buffett’s buddy from Graham-Newman, said the entire saga “was pathetic in a way. Some people became millionaires, some didn’t benefit at all, and others went broke.” 53 Leo Goodwin, Jr., the son of GEICO’s founder, bailed out at the low, a bankrupt. And Ben Graham kept his GEICO to the bottom. In September 1976, just before the bailout was completed, Graham died at his home in France. He was eighty-two. 
 After Graham’s death, commentators often remarked on Buffett’s departure from Graham’s methodology. Quite obviously, Buffett evolved. He was influenced by Charlie Munger and by the writer-investor Philip Fisher, each of whom stressed good, well-managed companies as distinct from statistically cheap ones. 54 And he was influenced by his own experience. 
 Buffett analyzed companies more subjectively than Graham, and he found “intrinsic value” in companies, such as See’s Candy, that Graham would not have touched. But these deviations tend to obscure a larger fidelity. The very idea that a stock had an “intrinsic” worth, independent of the tape, Buffett got from Ben Graham. Indeed, it is nearly impossible to imagine Buffett’s quitting the partnership at the height of the Go-Go years, or jumping back in during the 1974 market depression, had he not read Graham’s liberating parable of Mr. Market. Buffett’s eulogy for Graham, written for the Financial Analysts Journal , stressed, precisely, the endurance of Graham’s approach: 
