The |
Candlestick
Course


John Wiley & Sons

Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons ts the oldest independent publishing
company in the United States. With offices in North America, Europe,
Australia and Asia, Wiley 1s globally committed to developing and
marketing print and electronic products and services for our customers’
professional and personal knowledge and understanding.

The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived
the market's ever-changing temperament and have prospered—some by
reinventing systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether a novice
trader, professional or somewhere in between, these books will provide the
advice and strategies needed to prosper today and well into the future.

Por a list of available titles, please visit our Web site at
www. WileyFinance.com.


The
Candlestick
Course

STEVE NISON

WILEY
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.



Copyright © 2003 by Steve Nison. All rights reserved.

Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published sunultaneously in Canada

MetaStock Charts courtesy of Equis International

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the
1976 United States Copyright Act, without elther the prior written permussion of the
Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750
8400, fax 878-750-1470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher
for pennission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07080, 201-748-6011, fax 201-743-6008, e-mail:
permeoordinator@wiley.com.

Lurut of Liability Dsclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with
Tespect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically
disclaim any unphed warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No
warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materlals.
The aclvice and strategies contained herein may not be sultable for your situation. You
should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author
shall be hable for any logs of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not
lurdted to spectal, incidental, consequential, or other damages.

For general information on our other products and services, or technical support, please
contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at 910-762-2074,
outside the United States at 317-572-3088 or fax 317-572-4002.

Wiley also publishes its books in a varlety of electronic formats. Some content that
appears In print may not be available in electronic books.

For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:

Nison, Steve.
The candlestick course / Steve Nison.
p. em. —(A marketplace book)
ISBN 0-471-22728-5 (CLOTH)
1. Stocks—Prices—Charts diagrams, ete. 2. Investment analysis. 3. Stock price
foreasting. 4. Stocks—Prices—Japan—Charts, diagrams, ete. I. Title. IL. Sertes.
HG4638.N560 2008
332.692042—de21 2003000872

Printed in the United States of America

wW9S8T6S4321


Contents

Foreword by Toni Turner

vii

About the Author xi
Introduction alii
CHAPTER OVE The Essentials i
SECTION ONE CANDLESTICK OVERVIEW 1
SECTION TWO CANDLESTICK CONSTRUCTION 9
SECTION THREE BASIC MARKET STRATEGIES 19
CHAPTER TWO Single Candle Lines 27
SECTION ONE SPINNING TOPS AND HIGH WAVE CANDLES 27
SECTION TWO THE DANGEROUS DOJI 43
SECTION THREE LONG REAL BODIES, THE CONSUMMATE ss
STORYTELLERS
CHAPTER THREE The Power of Candle Patterns 63
SECTION ONE CLOSE COUSINS: PIERCING, DARK CLOUD 63
COVER, ENGULFING, AND COUNTERATTACKS
SECTION TWO THE HARAMI AND HARAMI CROSS, MORNING 81
AND EVENING STARS
SECTION THREE PICTURESQUE STORYTELLERS: TWEEZERS, 91
CROWS, AND SOLDIERS
SECTION FOUR DISJOINTED CANDLES: RISING AND 101

FALLING WINDOWS


vi THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

CHAPTER FOUR Taking Advantage of Market Opportunities iit
SECTION ONE CANDLE CHART APPLICATIONS 113
SECTION TWO TRADING GUIDELINES 121

CHAPTER FIVE = Progressive Charting {23

CHAPTER SIX. Bringing It Al Together: Real-World Charts 177
Conclusion 205
Visual Clessary of Candlestick Terms Used in This Book 207


Foreword

Japanese Candlestick Charting Teckniques. As I began to turn the
pages, I mused, “Ah, here is a book that talks about charts in a way
I can understand and enjoy!"

Td become overwhelmed by other books on technical analysis—books
that threw me into mazes of indicators and oscillators and parabolic trailing
stops. Immersing myself in these tomes inevitably brought on one result. . .
anap.

Steve's book was different. In its pages, I discovered the world of can-
dlestick charting, a technique created centuries ago by a Japanese rice trader.
The history of candlesticks fascinated me, as did the picturesque names of
many of the formations, names such as morning star, hanging man, and dark
cloud cover. I soon learned that these patterns revealed much more than
their symbolic names. They displayed the trader's most important signal—
that of a price trend reversal, or change.

After having stared at cold and stoic bar charts for months, I weleomed
the chance to replace them with candlesticks. I quickly adopted the popular
method of assigning green and red colors to the positive and negative can-
dies, respectively.

I soon found that these storytellers helped me assess a stock's price pat-
tern rapidly. With the help of other indicators, candlesticks aided me in gaug-
ing a stock's possible future movernent with a high degree of accuracy. I felt
a debt of gratitude to Steve Nison for bringing this powerful information to
the Western world.

Please realize that before Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques
(often referred to as the “bible of candle charting") was published in 1991,
eandlestick charting techniques remained deeply hidden in the East. We are
fortunate that Steve Nison researched this unique charting system and

W hen I was a brand-new trader, I purchased Steve Nison’s first book,

vii


THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

brought it to Europe and the United States. His efforts literally revolutionized
technical analysis of the financial markets.

As a trader or investor, your interest In candle charts will present you
with many benefits. First, even if you are relatively new to technical analysts,
candlestick patterns are easy and enjoyable to learn. Second, as mentioned
earlier, they give you an edge on spotting possible price reversals. Next, com-
bined with other Western indicators, they become a potent decision-support
tool that can confirm or enhance buy/sell signals. Finally, the ability to read
eandle formations adds to your efficiency and effectiveness in reading over-
all markets and trends. These benefits should have a positive affect on your
trading or investing account's bottom line.

Some years after I became a student of candlesticks, I attended a large
trading conference held in Ontario, California. By this time, I had written my
own book, A Beginner’s Guide to Day Trading Online, and had another in
process, A Beginner's Guide to Short-Term Tradang. A glance at the confer-
ence program told me Steve Nison was speaking that afternoon. I immedi-
ately decided to attend his workshop and introduce myself to him.

I enjoyed Steve's lecture, and afterward, elbowed my way through the
erowd to the podium. When I introduced myself, he shook my hand, and
smiled. “Ton! Turner?" he said. “Oh, yes, I know who you are. I bought your
book on day trading. It’s great." I returned his smile and I glowed for the re-
mainder of the conference.

lam now honored and gratified to say that Steve Nison and I have be-
eome good friends. Among the leaders in the financial field, this wise and
savvy gentleman 1s held in the highest regard. Whether he is presenting a
seminar, writing a book, or teaching an online course, he 1s the consummate
professional. I especially enjoy his Jabs of dry humor, which make learning
the intricactes of technical analysis pleasurable and downright fun.

This course book has been designed as an interactive study guide. A sup-
plement to Steve Nison’s books, video, and online courses, it gives you the
framework in which to study and apply candlestick charting techniques.
Each chapter includes learning objectives, key terms, content to study, and
thought-provoking questions. You'll find the answers to the questions located
at the end of each section. Please read those answers in their entirety. They
eontain additional information you will find useful.

I'm confident you'll find Tke Candlestick Course an enjoyable, hands-on
tool you will refer to often, even after you've finished working through its
contents.


Foreword ix

As a trader or investor, acquiring knowledge and applying it properly is
one of the most important steps you can take. The time you Invest learning
about candle charts will serve you well, and should add to your success in the
financial markets.

Good luck and good trading!

Toni Turmer, author of A Beginner's Guide to Day Trading On Line
and A Beginner's Guide to Short-Term Trading
www.toniturner.com


About the Author

teve Nison, Chartered Market Technician (CMT), is President of Can-

dlecharts.com. Mr. Nison, the very first to reveal the startling strength

of candle charts to the Western world, is the leading authority on the
subject. His books, Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques and Beyond
Candlesticks are known as the bibles of candlestick charts.

Mr. Nison has presented his trading strategies in 18 countries to traders
from almost every financtal firm, including the World Bank and the Federal
Reserve. His work has been highlighted in financial media around the world,
ineluding the Wall Street Journal, Worth magazine, and Barron's. He was
previously a senior technical analyst at Merrill Lyneh and senior vice presi-
dent at Datwa securities. He holds an MBA in Finance and Investments.

Candlecharts.com offers a wide array of services and products that com-
plement this workbook, including on-site and Web-based seminars, candle-
stick software, advisory services, and video workshops.

You are invited to sign up for Mr. Nison’s free biweekly educational e-
newsletter. Each newsletter details a specific trading tool or technique using
real-world examples. To subscribe, please go to www.candlecharts.com.

Contact Information

Web site: www.candlecharts.com
E-mail: info@eandlecharts.com
Telephone: (732) 254-8660

Fax: (732) 390-6625

xi


Introduction

8 the first to reveal Japanese candlesticks to the West, I am pleased

and proud that they have now become an important analytical tool for

many traders and investors. Candlestick charts, also called candle
charts, are especially potent for helping to spot early reversal signals and,
when utilized correctly, can help preserve capital while increasing the per-
centage of successful trades. Candle charts display a more detailed and ac-
curate map of the market than bar charts do. This is because candle charts
open new avenues of analysis and offer many advantages over bar charts:

1. Candle charts pictortally display the supply-demand situation by showing
who ts winning the battle between the bulls and the bears.

2. Like the bar chart, the candle chart shows the trend of the market, but
eandles add another dimension of analysis by also revealing the foree (or
lack of foree) behind the move.

3. Bar chart techniques often take weeks to transmit a reversal signal. How-
ever, candle charts often send out clues of imminent reversals In one to
three sessions. The result is that candle charts often provide the oppor-
tunity for more timely trades.

4. Because candle charts use the same data a bar chart does (that 1s, the
open, high, low, and close), all Western technical signals used on a bar
chart can easily be applied to a candle chart. Since candles offer many
advantages over bar charts, using candle charts instead of bar charts 1s a
win-win situation because you get all the trading signals used in bar
charts with the earlier reversal signals generated by the candles.

For example, say you have a long stock position. A candle pattern known
as dark cloud cover takes shape. In the course of only two sessions, It com-
pletes its reversal signal. At that point you'd be wise to take your gains off the
table, especially if there are other confirmatory bearish signals. Others, who

Mii


xiv THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

don't recognize the pattern, are not so fortunate. They may hold their pos)-
tion and eventually lose some—or all—of their profits.

Another advantage of candles relates to their effectiveness on charts on
a wide spectrum of markets. Futures, bonds, currencies and equities, and any
chart in which sessions include a high, low, open, and close can display can-
dlesticks.

Candle lines and patterns also apply to any time frame. Individual and in-
stitutional investors utilize them on weekly charts, swing and intermediiate-
term traders study them on daily charts, and short-term and day traders
examine them on intraday charts.

In addition, candles give instant pictures of market psychology. Early
Japanese traders placed great faith in interpreting the emotions of market
participants. In today's volatile markets, driven to extremes by the impact of
sudden news and events, it's easy to see why awareness of market sentiment
and collective opinion 1s so important.

Unhke bar charts, in which opinion ts not so easily spotted, one glance at
a candle chart tells you instantly how people feel about a stock or market. A
eandle's extended real body demonstrates definite bullish or bearish control.
Conversely, a small real body indicates indecision or a tug-of-war between
the bulls and bears with no apparent winner. (We discuss these aspects In
Chapter Two). Both strong opinion and indecision are extremely important
signals to market players, and candlesticks broadcast them quickly and
efficiently.

ABOLT THE BOOK

A Japanese proverb says, “Like both wheels of a cart." This 1s an apt way to
describe this book. The first wheel of this book provides a basic foundation
for those new to candle charts or for those who want to reinforce their un-
derstanding. The second wheel consists of the many questions interspersed
throughout the book. These provide a quick way to gauge the depth of your
understanding and will help solidify the concepts addressed. It 1s the ques-
tions and interactive sections that separate this book from my others.

The Candlestick Course has two main audiences: those who are novices
to candle charts and those who are knowledgeable and want to gauge their
depth of understanding. It focuses on the critical aspects of candle charts
that are so important for successfully harnessing their power. The goal is not


Introduction XY

to edueate you on all the candle patterns and techniques but to show you
how to recognize and use the more important and widely used candle signals.
Most important, the book offers a way to quantify your understanding of the
basic concepts and principles.

Keep in mind that the tools addressed in the course should be only a part
of your analysis. If you have favorite Western tools, such as volume or mov-
ing averages, stay with them, and add the candle charting techniques to your
analysis.

Each chapter contains sections that include learning goals, key terms,
discussions for hands-on application, and questions. Please use the questions
at the end of each section to check your understanding of the material pre-
sented. To maximize the effectiveness of this workbook, I've used a spectrum
of questions, from multiple-choice to exhibits and real-world chart exam-
ples. While the questions may be short, many of the answers are lengthy so as
to aid understanding. Don't skim through the answers, they are designed to
be another avenue of education. The more time you spend absorbing the dis-
cussions and applying what you've learned by answering the questions, the
more effective (think profitable) your decisions will be in the real financial
world.

Chapters One, Two, and Three describe how to recognize the candle sig-
nals, how to use them to gauge tf the trend is changing, and questions and an-
swers are given at the end of each section.

Chapter Four has practical applications of the principles discussed in
the earlier chapters, as well as trading guidelines.

Chapter Five 1s unique: We take a five-month daily chart and dissect that
chart a day, or a few days, at a time.

In Chapter Six we bring it all together, with charts and related questions
to provide real-world, hands-on practice.

A visual glossary of candlestick terms appears at the end of the book.

Chapters One to Three include Side Lights and Key Points. The Side
Lights detail Interesting facts or added information. The Key Points are an-
swers to the questions I am most frequently asked at my seminars.

A Japanese proverb states, “The depth of the foundation determines the
height of the wall.” The Candlestick Cowrse provides a foundation of knowl-
edge for immediately harnessing the power of candle charts and will serve as
a solid foundation for all your future work with candle charts.


CHAPTER ONE

The Essentials

SECTION ONE

Candlestick Overview: Origins
and Basic Applications

lenging arenas on earth. Those who participate in these markets con-

duct research by utilizing two basic types of analysis fundamental and
technical. Fundamental analysts pore over fiscal statements and company re-
ports, and technical analysts scan charts to assess a market, stock, or any
other financial instrument.

Though the fundamentals are important, the shorter the time frame, the
more important the psychological component of the market becomes. And
the only way to measure the emotional aspect of the markets is through tech-
nical analysis. Indeed, there are many times when the emotional conditions
of the market overwhelm the fundamentals. For example, how many times
have we seen the appearance of a positive fundamental only to have that mar-
ket descend? Even if we have a strong stock based on the fundamentals,
what is likely to happen to that stock if the overall market is down sharply?
Of course, the negative psychology of the overall market will influence that
stock even if its fundamentals didn’t change. As Bernard Baruch cogently put
it, “What is important In market fluctuations are not the events themselves,

T he finanelal markets represent some of the mast exciting and chal-


THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

but the human reactions to these events." The most potent way you can
gauge the emotional state of the market is through candlestick charts.

In the pages that follow, you'll learn how Japanese candlestick tech-
niques promote efficient and effective analysis. As your proficiency in inter-
preting candle charts evolves, the knowledge absorbed and its application
should add to your success in the financial markets. Since the terms candle-
stick charts and candle ckarts are used interchangeably in the trading com-
munity, that is how they are used throughout the book.

In this section you will learn... .

Background of candlestick charting techniques

Markets and time frames in which candles are utilized
Limitations of candle charts

Importance of nisk/reward

Significance of using other technical tools with candle charts

hev terms to watch for:

Reversal signals
Candle lines
Price targets
Risk/reward

The use of candlestick charts originated in Japan. Since little or no cur-
rency standard existed during those times, rice represented a medium of ex-
change. Feudal lords would deposit it in warehouses in Osaka and sell or
trade the coupon receipts whenever they chose. Therefore, rice became the
first futures market.

In the 1700s, Munehisa Homma, a rice trader from a wealthy farnily, stud-
ied all aspects of rice trading from fundamentals, such as weather, to market

a 4 | SIDE LIGHT

Centuries ago, Japanese merchants were at the bottom of that country’s social sys-
tem, below soldiers, farmers, and artisans. By the 1700s, though, merchants moved
up in prominence. Even today, the traditional greeting in Osaka is “Mokarimakka?"
which translates to, “Are you making a profit?”



The Essentials 3

psychology. He subsequently dominated the rice markets and amassed a
huge fortune. Homma’s trading techniques and prineples eventually evolved
into the candlestick methodology used by Japanese technical analysts with
the start of the Japanese stock market in the 1870s.

The greatest advantage to using candles on your charts, instead of bars,
is that single candle lines and multiple candle patterns offer more reliable,
earlier, and more effective reversal signals.

Reversal signals are the meat and potatoes of traders and investors.
Major trend reversals represent the territory where the most gains are pock-
eted (and lost). In addition, the ability to identify possible reversal signals on
the markets is invaluable for applying money-management strategies to im-
prove profits and, equally important, preserve profits.

No single technical indicator, however, represents the holy grail. Like
other indicators, candlesticks have limitations.

As will be detailed later, the candle line is constructed from the open,
high, low, and close, which is the same data used in bar charts. Therefore, for
a candle line or pattern to offer a proper signal, you must wait for the ses-
sion's close to confirm it. To hasten the reading, however, rather than wait-
ing for the end of a daily session (for a daily chart), you can look at a shorter
time frame (Le., an intraday chart) and obtain an earlier signal.

Let's say it’s midday and you are focusing on a daily chart. Your view of
the market 1s that it may be ready to rally. Rather than waiting for the end of
the daily session to see if a bullish candle signal is confirming your outlook,
you can switch to an hourly chart and see if any bullish candle patterns
formed in the morning on the hourly chart.

Be aware that although candle signals can demarcate areas of support
and resistance, they do not offer price targets. This is why It 1s so important
to use classic Western techniques, such as pivot highs and lows, or trend
lines, since these can be used to obtain a potential target. Before initiating a
trade with a candle signal, always consider the risk versus the reward
(nisk/reward) of that trade. I repeat: NEVER PLACE A TRADE WITH A
CANDLE SIGNAL UNTIL YOU HAVE CONSIDERED THE RISK/REWARD
OF THE POTENTIAL TRADE. For example, if there is a bullish candle signal,
such as a hammer, the risk (stop-out level) should be under the low of that
hammer. Now that we have defined the risk, the next step ts defining the po-
tential target. Defining a target can be done in many ways, including a prior
high or a falling resistance line. Now we have the risk‘reward parameters de-
fined, only then should you decide whether or not to place a trade. Bullish
harmmer or not, if the risk 1s $2 and the target is also $2 from the hammer’s

