
tease a trader with the very real possibility of fulfilling his grandest dreams
of financial independence and at the same time stand ready and willing to
take away everything he owns—and more.
Furthermore, the principles of time, effort, and reward associated with
most job situations simply do not apply with the markets. For example,
many jobs offer an unchanging reward, regardless of effort, because of
hourly wages or yearly salaries. For a trader, effort can be irrelevant, and
there is virtually no relationship between time and reward. A trader can be
stunned with a windfall profit in a matter of seconds for making one simple
decision and the only energy expended was mental.
Initially, you may think what could be wrong with making a lot of money
in minutes or seconds. A lot! Whether you're aware of it or not, most if not
all of us grow up with highly structured belief systems about the
conditions under which we deserve to receive money. In fact, many people
because of their childhood conditioning and religious training believe they
don't deserve any money they didn't work for.
Certainly, making a lot of money in a very short period of time with no
effort expended does not fall within the definition most people have about
working for their money. So how does someone reconcile windfall profits
against these structured work beliefs, especially when they're probably not
even aware of them or would not take them into consideration if they were?
This kind of mental conflict usually gets reconciled by the trader finding
some clever, ingenious, or mundane way of giving his money back to the
markets.
Not adjusting to the differences between the cultural and trading
environments or just being unaware that differences exist can certainly
account for many of the trading errors committed by the majority of
traders. Yet, a thinking methodology can not only redefine the market's
behavior in understandable terms to avert such mistakes, it can also
manage most, if not all, typical undisciplined, emotional reactions to that
behavior.

CULTURALLY LEARNED BEHAVIOR
THAT RESULTS IN AN UNSUCCESSFUL
TRADING EXPERIENCE
In an emotionally charged situation that requires split-second decision
making (which could lead to failure of some kind), there's little time to
compare the present event with previous market experiences. You
probably wouldn't even notice if you had behaved similarly in the past and
suffered the same disastrous consequences. Because the present situation
is so immediate, you may have no concept of how typical and even
thoughtless your behavior may be.
In fact, it may be news to you that there are only a limited number of
such typical reactions leading to failure. Being able to recognize them can
26

prevent you from repeating past mistakes without losing any of that time
so necessary for split-second decisions.
The following typical trading errors have a specific cause rooted in a
thinking methodology that can be changed.
1. Refusing to define a loss.
2. Not liquidating a losing trade, even after you have acknowledged the
trade's potential is greatly diminished.
3. Getting locked into a specific opinion or belief about market
direction. From a psychological perspective this is equivalent to
trying to control the market with your expectation of what it will
do: "I'm right, the market is wrong."
4. Focusing on price and the monetary value of a trade, instead of the
potential for the market to move based on its behavior and structure.
5. Revenge-trading as if you were trying get back at the market for what
it took away from you.
6. Not reversing your position even when you clearly sense a change
in market direction.
7. Not following the rules of the trading system.
8. Planning for a move or feeling one building, but then finding
yourself immobilized to hit the bid or offer, and therefore denying
yourself the opportunity to profit.
9. Not acting on your instincts or intuition.
10. Establishing a consistent pattern of trading success over a period of
time, and then giving your winnings back to the market in one or
two trades and starting the cycle over again.

SKILLS TO BE ACQUIRED
To excel in any activity—whether it is mental, such as trading, or physical,
such as swimming—we need to learn specialized skills. These skills give us
the necessary requirements to look at, think about, and behave toward
events in a manner different from what we may be used to or what we may
have been taught.
However, beyond the sheer mechanics of the activity—which just about
anyone can master—lies a particular thinking methodology or strategy that
leads to excellence. Although few people have it, such a thinking
methodology can nevertheless be learned.
Any thinking methodology requires a series of approaches to goals and
problems. These approaches might be better described as mental techniques,
even skills of thought application. For example, one such skill might be the
ability to identify those conditions that are conducive to making a common
27

trading error before it actually happens. Other techniques or skills include:
1. Learning the dynamics of goal achievement so you can stay positively
focused on what you want-not what you fear.
2. Learning how to recognize the skills you need to progress as a trader
and then stay focused on the development of those skills, instead of
the money, which is merely a by-product of your skills.
3. Learning how to adapt yourself to respond to fundamental changes in
market conditions more readily.
4. Identifying the amount of risk you are comfortable with - your "risk
comfort level"-and then learn how to expand it in a way that is
consistent with your ability to maintain an objective perspective of
market activity.
5. Learning how to execute your trades immediately upon your
perception of an opportunity.
6. Learning how to let the market tell you how much is enough, instead
of assessing the potential from your personal value system of how
much is enough.
7. Learning how to structure your beliefs to control your perception of
market movement.
8. Learning how to achieve and maintain a state of objectivity.
9. Learning how to recognize "true" intuitive information and then
learning how to act on it consistently.

HOW IS THIS DIFFERENT FROM
A TRADING SYSTEM?
Trading systems give us a way to define, quantify, and categorize market
behavior. Since the markets offer traders a seemingly infinite combination of
behaviors, all with their corresponding opportunities and risks, it is easy
to understand how our minds can become overwhelmed. Trading systems
limit the scope of market behavior, and therefore make this activity a little
easier for our minds to manage. They also give us direction and
suggestions about what to do in a given market situation. Without them
traders could easily feel as if they are floating aimlessly in an endless sea of
possibilities and opportunities with no land in sight.
Since trading systems define opportunity and offer suggestions,
following these suggestions can lead to the development of skills, even
though as suggestions they merely point the way for your awareness to be
directed. A true skill not only points the way, but almost automatically
begins to direct awareness as well. And a thinking methodology controls the
28

selection of which skills should be used and when.
I do not offer a trading system in this book. It's more a means of
interfacing a trading system with the mind's psychological structure. If a
trading system provides awareness of market signals, and suggests behaviors
appropriate for any given market situation, then the thinking methodology I
will share with you teaches skills and processes of skill application.
Having the skills necessary to consciously manipulate one's
psychological environment is essential for the trader who recognizes how
ineffectual a trading system can suddenly become whenever a tense
situation demands a split-second decision.
Most everyone reading a book of this nature would consider himself as
successful to one degree or another, either through trial and error, or the
rigorous application of some proven formula, through which each has
learned—intentionally or not—skills or methodologies of thought to
achieve this success.
In any case, we all have a natural tendency not only to want to achieve
success in something, but also to apply the principles of success that work
very well in one situation to practically everything else. It often doesn't
occur to us that some environments may require very different
psychological resources to achieve success.
Suppose, for example, that you arbitrarily tried to apply a certain thought
system of success to trading futures or stocks without first investigating the
usefulness or validity of that system in relationship to the actual conditions
as they exist in the markets. More than likely, you would be doomed to
failure before you even started.
Obviously people don't consciously start trading with the belief that they
don't have the right resources or that they're going to fail. In fact, it is just
the opposite. Because most traders come from or still enjoy very successful
careers outside of trading, they have a great deal of confidence in their
ability to extend this success in the trading environment. This unfounded
confidence, coupled with the way the markets distort a person's concept of
reward in relationship to time and effort expended, will cause the trader to
form some very unrealistic expectations about the kind of results he should
achieve.
Believing that trading is easy is the reason for the unrealistic expectations.
And they are probably the single biggest reason why most traders never
make it beyond the initial levels of development before they lose all their
money.
Starting out believing that trading is easy is a psychological trap that
entices almost all traders. But it isn't too difficult to understand why, when
you examine the dynamics of the process of how we set up a standard of
performance for ourselves by which to gauge our progress. There are four
basic components that make up a person's standard of performance or
expectations for results.
First is our basic concept of time; most people believe that it is limited,
29

passing nonstop and will eventually run out. Second is our concept of
effort—our supply of personal energy is not inexhaustible; it runs out, we
tire, and we may even become ill if we don't rest properly. The third is our
concept of expertise—the number of skills we have learned and our degree of
proficiency in using these skills; it usually takes a great deal of time and
energy to acquire expertise.
Now one of the primary ways we learn to value ourselves is based on our
belief about how much work we do and the amount of time it takes to do
it. Which brings us to the fourth component in the equation; reward. To
determine the amount of reward we should receive, we will make an
assessment about how hard or easy a job is by determining how much effort
(personal energy) we will need to expend and to assess how long the job will
take (using up our limited time), so we can then determine how much we
should be compensated. It is like our own personal supply and demand
formula for our time and energy.
Now I am going to put all this together to demonstrate how trading
distorts all these components in a way that allows someone to believe that
trading is easy. First, to function in the market environment requires very
little if any physical effort, especially for the off — the — floor trader.
Second, time is not a relevant factor because a trader can be stunned with
thousands of dollars in profits in a matter of moments. Conceivably, you
could put on a trade, never have the market go against your position, and be
rewarded at levels far beyond your expectations of what is possible. A
person can't help but make the association between the speed at which
something like this could happen and how easy it must be because there
was no physical effort required.
Most people don't have to experience this personally to make the
erroneous assumption that trading is easy. They will just naturally do it the
first time they experience market action. They will assume that they would
have been a buyer at some low point and held on to liquidate the trade for a
profit. Even if it's just for a couple of ticks, invariably they will multiply
those ticks by several contracts to come up with these mental windfall
profits for themselves. These profits could represent an exotic trip, a dream
car, or thoughts of financial independence. Then they will compare how
long and how hard they normally have to work to get the same amount of
money, and what will result is a completely erroneous conclusion that
trading is easy.
The problem is that it is almost impossible for the beginning trader to
make a reasonable assessment of the level of expertise that is required to
function in the trading environment, like learning to limit oneself in an
unlimited environment, when possibly for the first time in the trader's life
he has the freedom to express himself creatively without any social
constraints, or the amount of the time it takes to acquire this expertise,
especially when it looks as if the profits should just roll in so easily and so
fast. These kinds of assumptions will blind the trader to the true nature of
30

the endeavor. Time is certainly a factor in learning to perceive opportunity
or learning how to execute one's trades flawlessly. Both these skills could
take a great deal of time to learn. However, neither time nor effort is a
factor in relationship to the potential for reward.
So what happens when we don't live up to our own expectations?—
especially, when most everyone starts their trading career thinking it's a
piece of cake and that they're only moments away from fulfilling their
financial dreams? Regardless of how long it may take any individual to
admit that he's not making it, the experience is painful and invariably
generates feelings of inadequacy, guilt, and even shame. When one fails,
especially when the expectations for success are so high, it will create three
major psychological obstacles that have to be overcome before any measure
of success will be realized.
First, you will need to learn how to release yourself from any feelings of
inadequacy, guilt, or shame. Second, you will need to learn how to identify
and repair the residual psychological damage caused by the emotionally
painful experiences because painful experiences have the potential to
generate fear. Finally, you will need to undo any inappropriate trading
habits and learn the appropriate skills that will help you eventually to
accumulate the wealth you desire from trading.
For many, what I have outlined may seem like an overwhelming task,
and I'm not going to downplay it in the slightest. Even if you haven't as yet
subjected yourself to any emotional trauma, just learning the appropriate
skills will be no easy task. However, you should keep in mind that the
rewards can be astronomical. Would any other endeavor having the
unlimited potential of trading in futures or stocks be easy?
As you proceed through this book, it is very important to keep in mind
that neither I nor anyone else can deny what you consider to be the
structure of reality—even though what I hold to be true and what you hold
to be true may differ by a wide margin. Force, violence, or even torture will
not cause you or anyone else to give up your beliefs if you don't want to.
However, if what I offer will produce a result you desire, then you may be
quite willing to suspend, at least temporarily, what you hold to be true and
see if what works for me will also work for you.
The fire-walkers I mentioned earlier demonstrated how a thinking
methodology could suspend their belief that walking on abed of hot coals
would severely damage their feet—even though they had learned early in
their lives the dangers and pain of intense heat Perhaps you too can
suspend some of your beliefs about what makes trading successful. You
could find out how your own early training—before you ever considered
becoming a trader—may have produced contradictory attitudes and beliefs
that cancel all good intentions and optimistic trading, and thus lead to
failure.
Understandably, before you even consider the possibility of changing
some of your innermost beliefs, you will certainly want to know not only
31

how the process of altering beliefs works but also what benefits it will have
for you as a trader.
Like all traders, you have probably read repeatedly what it takes to be
successful at trading: "Trade with the trend," "Cut your losses and let your
profits run," "Money management is the key," and so on. As true as these
adages are, they are too vague to give you a clear understandable connection
between the application of these principles and their benefits: a positive and
successful trading experience. If you will recall, I listed resistance to
accepting a loss among the most common trading errors. If you have ever
experienced such resistance, you have probably also encountered the
following thought: "How do I accept small losses when what I want to do is
make money, and I feel like a failure every time I lose."
Your helplessness in such a situation and the disastrous consequences for
your finances are at the essence of this discussion. If, for example, you can
change what losses mean to you and how you represent them mentally, then
to whatever degree you can accomplish this, you will be releasing yourself
from the stress and anxiety experienced when you have to acknowledge
any given trade is a loser and take the appropriate action.
The few individuals who have achieved astronomical success in trading
at some point learned to stop trying to conquer the markets or make them
conform to their expectations or mental limitations. At some point in their
trading careers, they understood the psychological implications of an event
that is never ending, that begins only when one decides to participate, that
ends only when one has had enough, and behaves without the slightest
regard for individual survival. Eventually they adapted to these unusual and
demanding psychological conditions by changing their perspective,
although, as I have already pointed out from my experiences, the process of
change usually isn't the result of making a conscious choice to take a stepby-step approach, as this book is designed to give you.
In our everyday lives it is much easier to control the external
environment to satisfy our desires. What I mean is, if something has to
change to get what we want, we will find it much easier to change the
external conditions to suit our needs before we attempt to change our
mental perspective. Changing ourselves would seem like the absolute last
resort as a solution to any problem. So, why would you consciously go
about the task of learning how to change yourself from the inside? I have
three reasons for you.
First, because you decide to learn new skills or ways of expressing
yourself. Second, because you may have any number of beliefs acting as
resistance in the acquisition of the new skills you are attempting to learn.
The third I will get to in a moment.
Right now I want to give you an example to illustrate these first two
points. A client of mine lost an uncle that he was very close to while he was
still a child. His uncle was very much of a father figure to him, where his
own father was not. The uncle died of a heart attack at a young age while
32

doing some very strenuous exercise. Because of this experience my client
grew up believing he would also die of a heart attack, if he exercised too
strenuously.
What would have been just normal heart pounding, to anyone else, after
working up a sweat, he would perceive as the beginning of a heart attack. He
would start to hyperventilate and stop doing whatever he was doing.
Obviously, his belief about dying was very limiting. As a result, he never
participated in any sports as a child or well into his adult life.
Well, by the time he was in his late thirties, he decided that he was not
going to die prematurely of a heart attack like his uncle. Actually he didn't
make this decision until after he passed the age in which his uncle had
died. (His uncle's age at the time of his death was the age at which my
client thought that he would also die.) When it didn't happen, he gave up
the whole notion. Deciding to build up his stamina, he asked me for some
tips on how to become a runner, since he knew I had been running for
years. In a sense running was a new skill for him and definitely a new way
of expressing himself. So we went running together. Of course, what he
found out was that he couldn't run. Not that he couldn't take the steps in
the fashion of a runner; it is just that every time his heart rate started to
climb, he would stop dead in his tracks, even though his intent was to keep
on going. His beliefs about dying from exercise still had a great deal of
power in his mental environment. This belief acted as resistance, working
against his conscious intent to run. Consciously, he was giving his body
instructions to keep on going; his conflicting belief, however, was saying.
"No way, pal; you're staying right here until your heart rate goes down." In
this situation it was very easy to determine what component of his mental
system had more power over his behavior.
The third reason why you would want to learn to change from the inside
instead of forcing the environment to conform to your psychological
makeup relates strictly to trading. The markets are just too big for one
person or even a group of individuals to prevail for long. That is, if you
don't have the financial power to move prices in your direction, then you are
going to have to learn how to flow with and constantly adapt to the outer
conditions.
The choice is you can either adapt or continue to experience some very
painful lessons. A quick hint: the intensity of your emotional discomfort
and pain you experience as a trader is an excellent indication of how much
you will have to change to trade without fear and be consistently
successful.
You might ask, "Why consider the market from a psychological
perspective at all? Doesn't the market behave as it does regardless of what a
single individual thinks or feels about it?"
My answer is this: "The market behaves as it does because of the
interactions of hundreds of thousands of people. And since all these
individuals are members of the human race, regardless of national origin,
33

religious conviction, or what have you, they will all have one thing in
common—the psychological structure of the human mind." This
psychological structure behaves in certain highly predictable ways
whenever it encounters stress or split-second decisions. In the market, the
fear of losing one's fortune is every bit as intense as the fear of losing one's
life from an attack by a wild animal.
However, even though we all participate collectively, the market is not the
same for all of us. Every move the market makes has a different meaning
and impact on each of us as individuals. And every trader's experience of
this movement is the result of his individual mental process of inputting
environmental information (perception) and all the unique internal
psychological factors that affect his behavior. So, even though two or more
traders can agree on what the current price is, they will not be sharing the
same experience of how that price is impacting them personally.
The meaning you place on any particular price change is the result of
your beliefs. As a trader you constantly have to define what is high and what
is low relative to your beliefs about the future. That is the only way you can
make money: buy low and sell it back at a higher price (in the future) or
sell high and buy it back at a lower price (in the future). As long as prices
continue to move, that movement will create opportunities to buy low and
sell high or sell high and buy low, and these opportunities are available for
all traders. You create the game in your own mind based on your beliefs,
intents, perceptions, and rules. It is your own unique perspective and no one
else's and the secret is, you can and do choose how you perceive events.
Even if you are not aware of exactly how to control and change your
perception to make other choices available to yourself, you are still
choosing, even if it is out of ignorance.
Until you learn the appropriate skills, your success as a trader will he
determined by a number of psychological factors that often have little or
nothing to do with the markets.
