
And walking? When Father was on a walk, his body was purging
that excess undulating energy, and he was the most relaxed I ever saw
him. He could take a long walk, in either the city or the woods, and
calm down. He could talk while he was walking and be calm about it.
He started every workday walking to and from the train station and
ended his day that way, too, And if he wasn’t walking fast, it didn’t count.
When Arthur and I used to take the train and walk into town with him
and back, we would be sweaty and uncomfortable and resentful. He
never sweated. He was one who liked it hot. But that was when he
could say what was on his mind in ways he never could without walking.
After I moved his office to San Mateo late in his career, he walked from
home and back, and he said it was the most peaceful time he had ever
known as an adult, walking through San Mateo’s residential gardens,
gazing at the bright flowers. He was a great walker, simply great. The
man’s body was staggering. Tough. He could walk forever on legs that
wouldn’t quit no matter what, no matter how far or how steep the hill.
He loved it.

1 live and work on top of a two-thousand-foot-tall redwood-
covered mountain overlooking the Pacific Ocean. I have lived there
thirty years, and I have two hundred of my five hundred people up there
at headquarters, And I own a stunning mountain-top ranch property
nearby that is the only in-holding inside a five-thousand-acre open-
space preserve. Once when father was eighty, my brother Donald was
down ftom Oregon. Father, Donald, my then twelve-year-old middle


22 Introduction

son, Nathan, and I left the rest of the extended family at the ranch and
started downhill, toward the Pacific, through the trees on the trails into
the heart of Purisima Canyon. Father whistled and talked as if he were
a boy. No worries. Walking. Walking purged worry. I’ve been a moun-
tain man in this area most of mty life and know it exceptionally well, and
my legs are used to hills from living here. At every trail junction, I would
say, “Now Father, this way is the shorter, less steep, quicker way to get
back, and that way is the longer, further-down-in-the-canyon, steeper
way. Which way do you want to take?” At every junction, he chose the
harder, longer way. We dropped thirteen hundred feet in elevation and
walked five miles, at which point we had to get back up. I was a bit
worried. I had an eighty-ycar-old father and a brother who was over-
weight and under-exercised and who didn’t have the world’s strongest
cardiovascular system. Don was also studying to be a nurse-practitioner
at the time. Huffing and puffing up the hill, Don was taking his own pulse
regularly. Father periodically looked back downhill at Don and asked if
he wanted us to wait for him or slow down. And Don periodically had
to stop to rest. When we stopped, Father wasn’t walking, so he would
start to worry. And he could worry about nothing at all and turn it into
a big worry. And right then he worried that my mother would be wor-
tied that we were stranded and hurt in the woods because it was taking
us so long to get back. So he harped at Don repeatedly that we had to
get going because mother would be worried. Poor Don; onward and
upward he plodded, huffing and puffing and taking his pulse. Nathan,
raised on the mountain, scampered ahead like a darting deer. As the sun
started setting, Father fretted more and wanted us to pick up the pace.
Of course, my mother wasn’t worried. She wasn’t the worrying kind.
That night, Don was staying at their home and told me later the next
day that his legs were so sore he could hardly get out of bed or a chair,
and Father waited on him, worrying the whole time. That’s what he
liked—walking, worrying, and work.

One of the best times I ever had with my father came about by
serendipity. I was fourteen. ‘I'he family—Mother, Father, Donald, and
l—were having a Wyoming-dude-ranch summer vacation. Arthur was
gone from home by then. Father and I had been hiking daily. Donald
didn’t much like going along. I was a nut about wildlife at that time—
loved critters of all forms. One day we were out hiking and looking for
antelope. Father was walking and talking. I was looking for antelope. We
were way the heck away from the car, maybe four miles, in the high



Introduction 23

plateau, sparse chaparral. Summer clouds started to fill the sky, and we
started drifting back toward the car. Quickly the clouds turned deadly
dark. Out of nowhere, it cooled, and lightening and hail pounded all
around us-~huge golf-ball-sized hail stones hitting us. We ran for the
car. Lightening was striking everywhere. We should have flattened our-
selves to the ground; but I was young and stupid and he didn’t know
any better, and we kept running. Lightening strikes hit the ground ten
and twenty-five feet from us over and over, and we were terrified. The
hail was hitting my father on the top of his head, and he was holding
his head and running. I was fifteen and reasonably athletic. He was fifty-
nine and could keep up with me running without much problem
because he had those legs that wouldn’t quit. We finally made it to the
car and piled into it.The lightening continued all around, but we were
finally safe-—-and I never saw my father laugh so hard. He had run so
hard that he didn’t worry for an hour.

In the early 1980's, Father had some bad experiences walking from
the San Francisco depot to his office and back, including not watching
where he was going and bonking his head on a metal post once, pass-
ing out once, and getting accosted by a wanna-be mugger once. And,
so, mother and I convinced him to follow my lead by letting me move
his office down the peninsula, something I had done in 1977. I moved
him and set up his office in San Mateo in a little office building on Fifth
and El] Camino Real. He continued to walk from home to work every
day and loved it. Gardens. No muggers. Few stop lights or crazy taxi
drivers to dodge. Beautiful flowers. No worries.

As mentioned earlier, late in his life, my father started falling down
in his garden on Sundays. It was an early warning of dementia’s onset,
but no one saw it as such at the time. In retrospect, I can see that there
were other signs of it back then. But I knew nothing about demen-
tia and couldn’t recognize them. His father probably had Alzheimer’s,
too, but there was no such name for it back then. The early progression
of the disease is often very hard to detect and impossible if you don’t
know what to look for, which none of us around Father did. And if we
had, the tough old coot wouldn’t have listened to us anyway because he
was always ruggedly independent and self-willed.

One of his former Stanford students, Tony Spare, who went on to
run the Bank of California’s money management operations and then
started his own successful money management firm (since sold and a
shadow of its former self), long revered Father. On November 5, 1998,


24 Introduction

‘Tony was having a client seminar in San Francisco and asked Father to
come deliver a dinner speech. Father left his San Mateo office in the late
afternoon to walk to the train station to ride to the city, where he could
catch a taxi downtown to Tony’s event. Tony would drive him home that
night. The walk was wet from the afternoon’s light drizzle. As Father
passed through downtown San Mateo, he saw the next stop light start-
ing to shift from green to yellow and he ran to beat it, something he had
done all his life. As he ran off the near curb, he slipped and fell, break-
ing his right hip cleanly. The recovery went reasonably well, but from
moment one of that trauma, dementia flooded through the oppor-
tunity like a dam breaking.

As Father’s body recovered, his memory and logic did less so. 1 was
running his health care program and feeling pretty darned good about
how well he was improving. But as so often happens with a hip break in
the elderly, on January 15, 1999, he contracted pneumonia, which hit
him hard and almost killed him. By January 19, he was in intensive care,
and we were told to expect his death by morning. Mother was very
upset. Arthur flew down from Seattle and sat the night with him. By 3
A.M., the tough old coot was pulling through, coming out of the coma
and reacting initially to pin pricks to his toes. By 5 a.M., Arthur had me
back down there. By 8,1 was calling mother, who was already grieving
his death, telling her to get back down to meet me because she could
once again talk with her husband, who was conscious and clear-eyed,
even if he was still on a respirator. I assembled an around-the-clock ded-
icated team of nurses and injected them into the hospital with my own
doctor’s oversight to supervise Father as he came out of intensive care.
Hospitals do the best they can with elderly patients, but their care for
people in that condition is really totally inadequate; and there isn’t much
they can do about it because of how they function. And the family was
clear that we were going to do better. This particular hospital had never
before actually had anyone bring in a dedicated outside crew, but they
were very good to me as I put it in place, allowing us much more free-
dom than I expected or deserved. It turned out that father needed it.
He was nip and tuck with death twice more before finally pulling
through, including requiring on very short notice an emergency proce-
dure that drained a quart and a half of fluid from his lung by needle
injunction and vacuum removal. The fluid had filled his lungs almost
instantly. Without our dedicated crew to catch it fast, he would not have
survived. But all this trauma beat up his body and mind.



Introduction 25

The entire crisis, which included several small strokes, was still
another floodgate for the dementia to pour through en masse. Still, this
old man’s tough body recovered enough to where he could walk several
miles a day and talk clearly at length, even if he couldn’t remember
many things. By then, however, he had forgotten pretty much every-
thing after about 1968. Slowly, as dementia does, his long-term memo-
ries became only about older and older events. He is at the stage now
where he recalls very little and recognizes very few people, typical of
late dementia. The slide was a slow, irregular decline that felt amazingly
swift to all of us as it occurred every few months. The only people he
always knows now are my mother and me. It shocked me when he first
failed to recognize Arthur, his favorite son, whom he now sometimes
knows and sometimes doesn’t. He remembers me because he sees me
more often and long has. At home, with around-the-clock in-home
help, he is bedridden, unable to walk, lacking his favorite activities of
most of his live—the walking, the worrying, and the third “W,’ work-
ing. I take care of pretty much everything in terms of health care,
finances, and so on for both him and my mother. While my mother is
stil] pretty vital, my father isn’t the man I knew. Not at all. The man
I knew is long gone.

Today my mother puts in endless time on him but struggles under
the burden. Despite his health care providers doing an overall great job
for him, she never feels it is good enough and regularly injects herself
into the middle, which ultimately drains her to exhaustion. Then, with
her away, he starts calling out for her, and it is very tough on her and on
everyone. I can’t tell how much of a curse and how much of a blessing
it will be for her when he finally passes on. It is impossible to tell. The
only thing | know for sure is that old age isn’t for sissies.

They had eleven grandchildren and four great-grandchildren. The
first grandchild, Donald’s oldest daughter, was named after my aunt
who was named after Aunt Cary. The second was Arthur’s oldest son,
named after my father, Philip A. Fisher. They are the only real name-
sakes. My father always regretted that none of his grandchildren were
named after Mother, but she didn’t care. It wouldn’t be like her to fret
over something like that. Because Father had his own children fairly
late in life, he was really closest to his oldest grandchildren. Mother,
being the baby of her family, was more naturally drawn to her younger
grandchildren. Two of the great-grandchildren my parents barely know.
The other two they have never met, ail residing far, far away. Only a


26 Introduction

few of the grandchildren have any real sense of the man I knew. They
never saw the mirror.

SIGNIFICANCE—THE MIRROR IMAGE

My father is a great man who influenced many people, great and small,
from national business leaders to students to students of his students
who went into other fields. He had a knack for getting people to see
things they wouldn’t see otherwise, not by telling them but by some-
how getting them to think thoughts they don’t believe they ever would
have thought without interaction with him. At times, it was like he was
a mirror held up to your brain.

I can’t tell you how many people over the decades said something
to me like, “I met him once. It was only briefly, but he said x, y, and z,
and that made me think, and that gave me the idea I used in starting
my company.” It was, of course, their idea, but they somehow credited
him with some of its creation. He brought that quality out in people.
Somehow he made people think things that they might have thought
anyway, but for sure they believed they thought them because of inter-
actions with Father. I remember some of these people clearly, and to
my certain knowledge Father didn’t say the things that some people
thought he said. But somehow they heard the right words anyway, and
that is all that counts for them. His writings are like that, too, and always
have been for many pcople. Many investors have told me over the
decades how they did this or that because of something they read in
Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits or in Conservative Investors Sleep
Well. Of course, they didn’t. They did whatever they did because of
something in them, in their mind. But they believe it was inspired by
something they read in those books. The books are good. The inspira-
tions are even better.

And that is a very good thing. If you read my father’s writings and
ideas come to you, ones he never really said, and if you are motivated
by them, so much the better. It is another reason that re-reading his
books is useful. Somehow, my father was a mirror for many people:
He let them see themselves in ways they believe they wouldn’t have
otherwise. Now, forty-five years after Common Stocks and Uncommon
Profits first appeared, my father will never directly have that impact on



Introduction 27

anyone again. But his writings carry on. If you’ve never read him,
I hope you enjoy this man. If you’ve read him before, I welcome you
back. With the response his writings have received over these forty-
five years, it is quite clear they will be here for you for the remain-
der of your life and probably far, far after, just as his memory will be
for me.




Part One

COMMON STOCKS
AND UNCOMMON
PROFITS




Preface

he publication of a new book in the field of investment may well
i some explanatory statement from its author. The following

remarks will therefore have to be somewhat personal in order to
supply an adequate explanation for my venturing to offer another book
on this subject to the investing public.

After one year in Stanford University’s then brand-new Graduate
School of Business Administration, I entered the business world in May
1928. I went to work for, and twenty months later was made the head
of, the statistical department of one of the main constituent units of the
present Crocker-Anglo National Bank of San Francisco. Under today’s
nomenclature I would have been called a security analyst.

Here I had a ringside seat at the incredible financial orgy that cul-
minated in the autumn of 1929 as well as the period of adversity that
followed. My observations led me to believe that there was a magnifi-
cent opportunity on the West Coast for a specialized investment coun-
seling firm that would make itself the direct antithesis of that ancicnt
but uncomplimentary description of certain stockbrokers—men who
know the price of everything and the value of nothing.

On March first 1931, 1 started Fisher & Co. which, at that time, was
an investment counseling business serving the general public but with
its interests centered largely around a few growth companies. This activ-
ity prospered. Then came World War II. For three and a half years, while
I was engaged in various desk jobs for the Army Air Force, I spent part
of such spare time as I had in reviewing both the successful and, more
particularly, the unsuccessful investment actions that I had taken and


32 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

that I had seen others take during the preceding ten years. I began
seeing certain investment principles emerge from this review which
were different from some of those commonly accepted as gospel in
the financial community.

When I returned to civiliah life I decided to put these principles
into practice in a business atmosphere as little disturbed by side issues as
possible. Instead of serving the general public, Fisher & Co. for over
eleven years has never served more than a dozen clients at one time.
Most of these clients have remained the same during this period. Instead
of being mainly interested in major capital appreciation, all Fisher & Co.
activity has been focused upon this one objective. I am aware that these
past eleven years have been a period of generally rising stock prices dur-
ing which anyone engaged in such activities should have made good
profits. Nevertheless by the degree to which these funds have consis-
tently forged ahead of the generally recognized indices of the market as
a whole, I find that following these principles has justified itself even
more thoroughly in the postwar period than was the case in the ten
prewar years when I was only partially applying them. Perhaps even
more significant, they have been no less rewarding during those of these
years when the general market was static or declining than when it was
sharply advancing.

In studying the investment record both of myself and others, two
matters were significant influences in causing this book to be written.
One, which I mention several times elsewhere, is the need for patience
if big profits arc to be made from investment. Put another way, it is often
easier to tell what will happen to the price of a stock than how much
time will elapse before it happens. The other is the inherently deceptive
nature of the stock market. Doing what everybody else is doing at the
moment, and therefore what you have an almost irresistible urge to do,
is often the wrong thing to do at all.

For these reasons over the years | have found myself explaining in
great detail to the owners of the funds I manage the principles behind
one or another action I have taken. Only in this way would they have
enough understanding of why I was acquiring some, to them, totally
unknown security so that there would be no impulse to dispose of it
before enough time had elapsed for the purchase to begin justifying
itself in market quotations.

Gradually the desire arose to compile these investment principles
and have a printed record to which I could point. This resulted in the



Preface 33

first groping toward organizing this book. Then I began thinking of the
many people, most of them owners of far smaller funds than those
belonging to the handful of individuals it is my business to serve, who
have come to me over the years and asked how they as small investors
could get started off on the right path.

I thought of the difficulties of the army of small investors who have
unintentionally picked up all sorts of ideas and investment notions that
can prove expensive over a period of years, possibly because they had
never been exposed to the challenge of more fundamental concepts.
Finally I thought of the many discussions I have had with another group
also vitally interested in these matters, although from a different stand-
point. These are the corporate presidents, financial vicc presidents and
treasurers of publicly owned companies, many of whom show a deep
interest in learning as much as possible about these matters.

I concluded there was need for a book of this sort. | decided such
a book would have an informal presentation in which I would try to
address you, the reader, in the first person. | would use much the same
language and many of the same examples and analogies that I have
employed in presenting the same concepts to those whose funds I
manage. I hope my frankness, at times my bluntness, will not cause
offense. I particularly hope that you will conclude the merit of the
ideas | present may outweigh my defects as a writer.

Puiuip A. FISHER
San Mateo, California
September 1957


Clues from the Past

buy some common stock. You may have reached this decision

because you desire to have more income than you would if you
used these funds in other ways. You may have reached it because you
want to grow with America. Possibly you think of earlier years when
Henry Ford was starting the Ford Motor Company or Andrew Mellon
was building up the Aluminum Company of America, and you wonder
if you could not discover some young enterprise which might today lay
the groundwork for a great fortune for you, too. Just as likely you are
more afraid than hopeful and want to have a nest egg against a rainy day.
Consequently, after hearing more and more about inflation, you desire
something which will be safe and yet protected from further shrinkage
in the buying power of the dollar.

Probably your real motives are a mixture of a number of these
things, influenced somewhat by knowing a neighbor who has made
some money in the market and, possibly, by receiving a pamphlet in the
mail explaining just why Midwestern Pumpernickel is now a bargain. A
single basic motive lies behind all this, however. For one reason or
another, through one method or another, you buy comunon stocks in
order to make money.

Therefore, it seems logical that before even thinking of buying any
common stock the first step is to see how money has been most suc-
cessfully made in the past. Even a casual glance at American stock mar-
ket history will show that two very different methods have been used to
amass spectacular fortunes. In the nineteenth century and in the early
