
supply. When Susie reached her limit, she sometimes locked Howie in his room.9
Peter, who was naturally quiet, felt rewarded for staying in the background as his siblings ruled through
squabbles, with bossy Little Susie striving to contain Howie’s whirlwind.10 Placid by nature, Peter retreated
inside his head when the energy around him grew too intense. He played “Yankee Doodle” on the piano in a
minor key whenever he was unhappy, rather than express his feelings in words.11
***
Warren approved of his wife’s sprawling interests, was proud of her generosity and her leadership role in
Omaha, and appreciated her attentiveness to the children, which freed him to focus on his work. He, too, was
always adding one more thing to his list, but unlike her he never overextended himself. When something new
came into his life, something else went out. The two exceptions were money and friends.
Thanks to both, by 1963 a number of professional investors had figured out that this Buffett fellow out in
Omaha knew what he was doing. Even some who normally would never have heard of Warren Buffett were
starting to seek him out. He no longer had to charm, much less prospect; he simply laid down the terms on
which he would take people’s money.
Those outside Omaha often knew more about him than his own neighbors. A friend of Little Susie’s was in
the family car on the way to the 1964 New York World’s Fair when her parents stopped for gas. They struck
up a conversation with the woman at the next pump, who turned out to be the mother’s former high school
teacher. The woman was traveling from Elmira, New York, to Omaha, carrying with her $10,000 to invest
with Warren Buffett. Do you know him? she asked. Should I invest with him? He’s our neighbor, the family
said. Yes, you should. They got back in the car and headed onward to the World’s Fair, thinking no more of
it. With five kids and a new house, it didn’t occur to them to invest for themselves.12
Another would-be partner, Laurence Tisch, one of two brothers who were building a New York hotel empire,
sent in a check for $30,000 made out to Charlie Munger. Buffett called him and said he was glad to have
Tisch join the partnership, but next time, “make the check out to me.”
Munger could have used the money. Whatever Laurence Tisch may have thought, in 1963 he and Buffett
were not partners. Munger had just opened a partnership of his own after waiting until he had accumulated a
fair amount of money—around $300,000—by investing in real estate. But this was peanuts by Buffett’s
standards, a fraction of Warren and Susie’s wealth.
“Charlie had a lot of children early on. That hindered him a lot in getting independent. Starting early with
no encumbrances is a big advantage. Even when I came back from Graham-Newman, I mean, I had my
174,000 bucks, I felt like I could do what I wanted to do. I could take courses with my father-in-law the
psychologist. I could go out there to the university and sit in the library and read all day.”
In fact, Buffett had been encouraging Munger to think seriously about investing as a career ever since they
first met. He would say to him, It’s nice to be a lawyer and to do real estate on the side, but if you want to
make some real money, you ought to start something like my partnerships.13 In 1962, Munger had gone into
partnership with his poker buddy Jack Wheeler. Wheeler was a trader on the Pacific Coast Stock Exchange,
the Wild West version in miniature of what was going on back east: a floor full of screaming traders,
aggressive men looking to make a killing the fastest way they could. He owned an investing partnership,
Wheeler, Cruttenden & Company, which included two “specialist posts” on the exchange, where traders
took orders from brokers to trade stocks on the floor. They renamed the business Wheeler, Munger & Co.,
and sold the trading operation.
Munger continued his law practice but bolted from his old firm together with several other lawyers, among
them Roy Tolles and Rod Hills. They founded a new firm, Munger, Tolles, Hills & Wood, that suited their

ideals of how a law firm should be managed.14 All along, Munger had naturally resisted following the rules of
a law firm run by anyone but himself.
“It’s no coincidence that the year he started his partnership was the same year he started his new law firm.
The partners at the old firm found it abhorrent that a young lawyer in their firm would want to be a
member of that gambling den, the Pacific Coast Stock Exchange. When Charlie and Roy left the firm, they
sat down with the senior partners and said that they wanted these senior partners to understand that the day
would come when every first-rate law firm had a member of the Pacific Coast Stock Exchange. This is
probably apocryphal, but you can easily picture Charlie delivering that message to them as a parting
shot.”
At their new firm, Munger and Hills imposed an elitist, Darwinian ethos designed to attract the brightest and
most ambitious. The partners all voted on one another’s pay, which was circulated for everyone to know.
Even as the firm launched, however, Munger was already spending a significant amount of time at the Pacific
Coast Stock Exchange. Within three years, when he was forty-one, he abandoned the law altogether to work
full-time at investing. But he still consulted to the firm and kept an office there, where he remained an
important, almost spiritual presence. Tolles, too, shifted most of his attention to investing. Hills, by far the
most ambitious and dedicated to law of the three, ran the firm and kept it going.
In his new role as a money manager, Munger had to raise money to manage. Buffett had always hustled for
investors in an understated way, often using others as his promoters—people like Bill Angle and Henry
Brandt, who found and prepared prospects—so that he could show off his impressive track record with a
pleasing modesty. But however gracefully he’d hustled, he’d still done it. Munger felt this was demeaning. “I
didn’t really like raising money,” he says. “I always felt that a gentleman should have his money.” Now,
however, he managed to parlay his law practice into an investing partnership by raising funds from his
powerful Los Angeles business connections. While his partnership was of course much smaller than
Buffett’s, the money would be enough.
Jack Wheeler had explained to him that, as a member of the exchange, under its rules he could borrow an
additional ninety-five cents for every dollar invested.15 Thus, if he put up $500, he could borrow another
$475 and invest a total of $975. If the investment earned a profit of twenty-five percent, the profit on
Munger’s $500 of capital would be nearly double that.16 While having the potential to nearly double his
returns, this borrowing likewise nearly doubled his risk. If he lost twenty-five percent, he would lose nearly
half his capital. But Munger, more than Buffett—far more than Buffett—was willing to take on some debt if
he was positive the odds were right.
He and Wheeler set themselves up at the exchange in a “crude, cheap” office festooned with radiator pipes
and stuck their secretary, Vivian, in the tiny private back office overlooking an alley.17 Wheeler, a big
spender who liked to live large, had just had a hip replacement and soon started showing up for work on the
golf course most mornings.18 Munger fell into a routine, arriving at five a.m., before the market opened on
the East Coast, and checking the quotation board.19 Buffett had connected him with Ed Anderson, the
Graham-Newman investor who had worked for the Atomic Energy Commission and seemed so smart;
Munger hired him as his assistant.
Most of the traders at the stock exchange had ignored Munger’s arrival on the scene, but one of them, J.
Patrick Guerin, took note. Guerin had bought the trading part of Wheeler’s partnership when Wheeler had
spun it off and gone into business with Munger. A rough-and-tumble guy who was scrambling like mad to
better himself, Guerin had grown up with a “divorced father,” says Munger, “and his mother was a drunk, so
he raised himself on the streets. He was high IQ, rebellious, and maladjusted.”20 After a stint in the Air Force,
Guerin had worked as a salesman for IBM, then became a stockbroker at a couple of small firms that peddled
third-class stocks because they carried the highest profit, or “spread,” for the firm. This was a part of
stockbroking Buffett had detested; Guerin, too, found it a relief to escape life as a “prescriptionist.”
By the time Munger met him, the lean, handsome Guerin had learned to roll his crisp shirt cuff down over his

tanned forearm to cover his tattoo. He seemed to have a great number of friends as well as a tinge of
Hollywood in his blood; one day he brought his friend, the actor Charlton Heston, down to the exchange for a
tour.21 He did the trading for Wheeler, Munger, and says he immediately recognized that Munger had a
money mind and began to cultivate him. He came to the conclusion that he’d been on the wrong side of the
Wheeler deal right away, and began to emulate Munger and Buffett, with the goal of forming his own
investing partnership.
“With some, the idea of buying dollar bills for forty cents takes, and with some it doesn’t take. It’s like an
inoculation. It’s extraordinary to me. If it doesn’t grab them right away, I find that you can talk to them for
years and show them records—you can do everything—and it just doesn’t make any difference. I’ve never
seen anyone who became a convert over a ten-year period with this approach. It’s always instant
recognition or nothing. Whatever it is, I’ve never understood it. But with a fellow like Rick Guerin—no
business background in terms of studying it, but he saw it like that, he understood what it’s about, and he
was applying it five minutes later. And Rick was smart enough to know that you should get a great teacher,
which is what I was lucky enough to do with Ben Graham.”
As the day progressed at the Pacific Coast Stock Exchange, Munger would sit, lost in thought, usually
reading. “Charlie! Charlie!” Ed Anderson would shout from the next desk. Munger would say nothing, or
grunt something in response.22 Eventually, Anderson learned to make Munger respond clearly to questions,
erasing ambiguity; a simple grunt was not sufficient. But it took time and experience for most people to figure
out that Munger’s mind and mouth often went their separate ways.
Guerin did not know this yet. One day he came into the office from his booth on the floor. “Charlie,” he said.
“I’ve just been offered fifty thousand shares of XYZ at fifteen dollars. This looks like a good deal.”
“Hmmm, uhm,” said Munger.
“Look, Charlie,” Guerin carried on, “if this interests you, I’m going to buy it.”
“Yeah, yeah,” said Munger.
A little later, Guerin walked back into the office and said, “Charlie, we got them.”
“Got what?” said Munger.
“We bought the fifty thousand shares at fifteen dollars.” Big money.
“What!?” screamed Munger. “What are you talking about! I don’t want ’em! Sell ’em! Get rid of ’em right
now!”
Guerin tried to explain. He called on Anderson for backup: “Ed, did you hear this when I said it earlier?”
“Charlie, I was sitting here listening to it, just as Rick said,” Anderson interjected.
“I don’t care! I don’t care! Sell ’em! Sell ’em! Sell ’em!” yelled Munger.
Guerin ran out the door and got rid of the shares. “That was an object lesson,” says Anderson.23
Munger bought cigar butts, did arbitrage, even acquired small businesses—much of this in Buffett’s
style—but he seemed to be heading in a slightly different direction than Buffett. Periodically, he said to Ed
Anderson, “I just like the great businesses.” He told Anderson to write up companies like Allergan, the
contact-lens-solution maker. Anderson misunderstood and wrote a Grahamian report emphasizing the
company’s balance sheet. Munger dressed him down for it; he wanted to hear about the intangible qualities
of Allergan: the strength of its management, the durability of its brand, what it would take for someone else
to compete with it.

Munger had invested in a Caterpillar tractor dealership and saw how it gobbled up money, which sat in the
yard in the form of slow-selling tractors. To grow, the business had to buy more tractors, gobbling up more
money. Munger wanted to own a business that did not require continual investment, and spat out more cash
than it consumed. But what were the qualities of such a business? And what gave such a business an enduring
competitive advantage? Munger was always asking people, “What’s the best business you’ve ever heard of?”
But he was a man of no great patience, and inclined to think that people could read his mind.24
His impatience stood out more than any theory that was emerging inside his head. He wanted to get really
rich, really fast. He and Roy Tolles made bets on whose portfolio would be up more than one hundred
percent in a year. And he was willing to borrow money to make money, whereas Buffett had never borrowed
a significant sum in his life. “I need three million dollars,” Munger would say, on one of his frequent visits to
the Union Bank of California. “Sign here,” the bank would reply.25 With these huge sums, Munger did
enormous trades like British Columbia Power, which was selling at around $19 and being taken over by the
Canadian government at a little more than $22. Munger put not just his whole partnership, but all the money
he had, and all that he could borrow into an arbitrage on this single stock26—but only because there was
almost no chance that this deal would fall apart. When the transaction went through, the deal paid off
handsomely.
Yet despite their different approaches, Munger regarded Buffett as the king of investing, and saw himself as
merely a friendly pretender to the throne.27 “Vivian, get me Warren!” he shouted several times a day to
whichever secretary had come to occupy Vivian’s desk.28 He cultivated Buffett like a garden he was tending.
Buffett explained his philosophy: “You’ve got to coattail,” he said.29 But he did not want his friends to
coattail him and considered it unethical when they did. Hence, while Munger, cultivating Buffett, was open
about his trades—he got Buffett into his British Columbia Power deal, for example—Buffett always kept his
trades to himself unless he was working an idea with a partner.
By the early 1960s, the Buffetts had begun to vacation in California, so that Warren could spend more time
with Graham and Munger. Once Warren and Susie took the kids on a long trip up and down the coast, but
usually when they came to visit, they’d settle into a motel on Santa Monica Boulevard, and he and Munger
would talk stocks for hours. The differences in their philosophies made for long conversations. While Buffett
made many of the same investments, he would forgo the chance of profits any day to avoid too much risk,
and viewed preserving his capital as an almost holy imperative. Munger had the attitude that unless you were
already wealthy, you could afford to take some risk—if the odds were right—to get rich. His audacity put
him in a different category from all the others who cultivated Buffett, for his deference to Buffett was limited
by his high opinion of himself. “Charlie would get so excited by his own words that he’d hyperventilate,”
says Dick Holland, Buffett’s friend and partner, who was present at some of these California get-togethers.30
In his quest for the great businesses, Munger did not understand Buffett’s fascination with Ben Graham.
“Because he is good at explaining Ben Graham,” Munger later wrote, Buffett was “behaving like the old
Civil War veteran who after a few minutes of ordinary conversation always interjected: ‘Boom Boom, that
reminds me of the battle of Gettysburg.’”31
Graham’s flaw, Munger felt, was that he considered the future “more fraught with hazard than ripe with
opportunity.” Graham was a man, he said, “whose favorite story is that of Croesus, surveying the ruin of his
life and empire after the too-hopeful misadventure with Persia, and recalling the words of Solon that ‘no
man’s life should be accounted a happy one until it is over.’”32 Munger began trying to wean Buffett away
from Graham’s dreary pessimism, which underlay the drudgery of stooping for cigar butts and sucking out
their last puff.
Buffett had a buoyant optimism about the long-term economic future of American business, which had
enabled him to invest in the market against his father’s and Graham’s advice. Yet his investing style still
reflected Graham’s doom-laden habits of looking at businesses based on what they were worth dead, not
alive. Munger wanted Buffett to define the margin of safety in other than purely statistical terms. In doing so,

Munger was working against a subtle tendency toward catastrophism in Buffett’s outlook that sometimes
cropped up when solving theoretical problems. His father, Howard, had always prepared for the day the
currency became worthless, as if that day were imminent. Warren was far more realistic. Nonetheless, he
tended to extrapolate mathematical probabilities over time to the inevitable (and often correct) conclusion
that if something can go wrong, it eventually will. This style of thinking was the proverbial double-edged
sword: It made Buffett a gifted visionary whose thoughts oriented toward doomsday. He would come to use
this sword often to slice through knotty problems, sometimes in a very public way.
A few years earlier, another friend of Buffett’s, Herb Wolf of New York Hanseatic, an over-the-counter
trading house, had helped Buffett tame another personality trait that was hindering his financial quest. Wolf,
an investor in the water utility American Water Works, had sought Buffett out in the early 1950s after
reading an article that Warren had written on IDS Corporation in the Commercial & Financial Chronicle.33
“Herb Wolf was one of the smartest guys I ever met. He could tell the effect on American Water Works’
earnings if somebody took a bath in Hackensack, New Jersey. He was unbelievable. One day Herb said to
me, ‘Warren, if you’re looking for a gold needle in a haystack of gold, it’s not better to find the gold
needle.’ I had this thing that the more obscure something was, the better I liked it. I thought it was a
treasure hunt. Herb got me out of that way of thinking. I loved that guy.”
By 1962, Buffett had shaken off the treasure-hunt way of thinking. But he still had Wolf’s passion for detail,
and even with the addition of Bill Scott, his operations had expanded so much that he now needed another
employee to assist him. He managed to keep this one off his own payroll; Buffett would forever go to
extremes to control his overhead by paying for expenses in ways that could be shut off as needed, or, better
yet—as in this case—could be covered in ways that made them effectively free.
Henry Brandt, Buffett’s stockbroker friend who worked at Wood, Struthers & Winthrop, was a born sleuth
who had been doing part-time research for the BPL partnership. Buffett had been paying Wood, Struthers for
Brandt’s time through the brokerage commissions he paid for trading stocks through it. Since he would be
paying commissions to somebody anyway, Brandt effectively worked for him for free.34 If Buffett decided
he did not need Brandt’s research anymore, he could use another brokerage firm to execute his trades.
Now, Brandt worked for Buffett almost one hundred percent of the time. Buffett paid Brandt by waiving his
partnership fee and beginning to cut him in on outside deals without an override. The two men shared an
interest in knowing the minutest details about a company. Brandt was fearless about asking questions. Unlike
Buffett, he never thought twice about making himself obnoxious if this was what it took. He gladly did
enormous amounts of meticulous research by gumshoeing and pestering people. Brandt, however, was
incapable of stopping before he found the gold needle. Therefore, Buffett set the agenda and steered the
process to keep it from turning into a treasure hunt. Brandt produced foot-high stacks of notes and reports.35
Part of Brandt’s job for Buffett was finding scuttlebutt, a term used by investment writer Phil Fisher, the
apostle of growth, who said that many qualitative factors like the ability to maintain sales growth, good
management, and research and development characterized a good investment.36 These were the qualities that
Munger was searching for when he spoke of the great businesses. Fisher’s proof that these factors could be
used to assess a stock’s long-term potential was beginning to creep into Buffett’s thinking, and would
eventually influence his way of doing business.
Buffett now had Brandt digging into an idea that would have pleased Munger, had he known about it. The
episode that resulted would become one of the high points of Buffett’s career. This opportunity had its roots
in the machinations of a big-time commodities trader, Anthony “Tino” De Angelis, who had become
convinced in the late 1950s that he’d found a shortcut to making money in soybean oil. De Angelis—who
had a shady past, having once sold tainted meat to the government school-lunch program—had by then
become arguably the world’s most important and legitimate dealer in soybean oil.
It apparently struck De Angelis one day that no one actually knew how much oil was in his warehouse. He
was using the oil as collateral to borrow from banks.37 As long as nobody knew how much soybean oil was in

the tanks, why not goose up the numbers a little bit so he could borrow more money?
The tanks sat in a warehouse in Bayonne, New Jersey, which was managed by a tiny subsidiary that was an
almost invisible part of the gigantic empire of American Express. This arm of the business issued warehouse
receipts: documents that certified how much oil was in a tank and could be bought and sold, just like the
warehouse receipts for cocoa beans that Graham-Newman had bought from Jay Pritzker in exchange for
Rockwood shares.
After American Express had verified the oil in the tanks, De Angelis and his Allied Crude Vegetable Oil
Refining Corporation sold these receipts or used them as collateral to borrow from banks—fifty-one banks.
Furthermore, American Express stood as guarantor of the quantity of oil behind those receipts.
As for the tanks, they were connected by a system of pipes and valves, and De Angelis found that the
soybean oil could be sloshed and shunted around from one tank to another. Thus, a gallon of oil could pull
double or triple or quadruple duty as collateral for a loan. Pretty soon, the loans guaranteed by warehouse
receipts were secured by a smaller and smaller amount of soybean oil.
Eventually, it occurred to De Angelis that, in fact, very little oil was needed. Indeed, just enough to fool the
inspectors would do the trick. So the tanks were filled with seawater, and oil was placed inside a little tube
that the inspectors used to guide their measuring sticks. They did not notice the difference or think to test a
sample from outside the tube.38
At about that point, dealing in the oil itself was no longer generating enough money to satisfy De Angelis, so
he began to trade in the futures market. Futures contracts give someone the right to buy soybean oil at a later
date, betting on the price of oil in the future versus the price today. They are like the futures contracts
Graham-Newman had sold to lock in the price of cocoa beans. For a buck or two per ton, De Angelis could
buy tons of soybean oil to be delivered in nine months at a certain price to be paid on that date. The contracts
could be sold before the payment came due, which made speculating in oil much cheaper than paying twenty
dollars to buy the oil outright in order to sell it later. Thus stretched, the borrowed money went much further;
De Angelis could, through the futures market, control a great deal of soybean oil.
The people at American Express had not been entirely asleep; after an anonymous tip in 1960 that something
was amiss down in New Jersey, they made inquiries of De Angelis and his employees. But De Angelis, who
was as tubby as the tanks full of seawater sitting there right in front of the investigators’ eyes, managed to
give them answers that apparently satisfied them.
In September 1963, De Angelis saw a chance to make a further killing. The Soviet sunflower crop had failed,
and rumors spread that the Russians would have to turn to soybeans for oil. De Angelis decided to corner the
soybean market, forcing the Communists to buy from him at an inflated price. There was no particular limit
to how many soybean futures he could buy. In fact, he could and did control more soybean oil than actually
existed on the planet39 by borrowing heavily from Ira Haupt & Co., his broker, and taking on obligations in
the futures market to buy 1.2 billion pounds of soybean oil. But this large a bet meant that he could afford to
have the price of soybean oil go in only one direction—up.
Then, suddenly, it appeared that the U.S. government might not let the Soviet deal go through. The price of
soybean oil collapsed, driving the market down by $120 million. Haupt began calling on De Angelis to meet
his obligations, but De Angelis sent excuses instead. When Haupt came up short of money, the New York
Stock Exchange shut the firm down and Haupt was forced into bankruptcy.40 De Angelis’s lenders, holding
the now-worthless warehouse receipts, hired investigators and turned to American Express, issuer of the
receipts, to recoup their $150 to $175 million in losses. And American Express—caught holding tanks full of
nothing but worthless seawater—saw its stock plummet. The story began to hit the newspapers.
Two days later, on Friday, November 22, 1963, President John F. Kennedy was assassinated while riding in a
Dallas motorcade.
