
c01.indd 20

11/2/07 12:13:57 PM

Blueprint for Success

21

trades as your sole income source often causes you to make bad
emotional decisions. It’s similar to the underfunded trader. Neither
of you believe that you can afford a loss so you do everything you
can to avoid it. The part-time trader can afford to go for long periods without placing a trade; preferring to wait for a low-risk, highreward setup. However, the full-time trader knows that he won’t
make any money if he’s not trading, so he finds trades whether they
exist or not.
Many traders simply use trading as a way to outperform the broad
market. Their goal is not to be financially independent through
trading or to build profits for a specific reward like a new boat or
home. They want the ability to use their own research and judgment
and direct a portion of their portfolio into opportunities that they’ve
identified. This is one of the most conservative trading strategies
and, as such, one of the most attainable goals. The decision rule
for when it’s time to stop trading becomes easy. You allow yourself a
certain amount of time to learn the skills and reach your objective. If
after one year, for example, you’re still underperforming the broad
market, then stop trading. Decide whether you need to learn more
or end your trading altogether. If you can’t beat the broad market,
why not just invest your money in a low-cost index fund? It requires
none of your time and attention and you’ll pay lower fees.
4. Markets and Products

As part of your trading plan, you need to decide what and where you
will be trading. Stocks are the easiest products for most people to
understand and begin trading. Included in the stock category are
exchange-traded funds (ETFs). These are essentially mutual funds that
trade just like stocks. Traditional mutual funds are priced and traded
once a day at net asset value (NAV). The NAV is calculated after the
markets close by benchmarking the closing price of all the constituent
stocks within the fund. Any buy or sell orders entered during the day
are then executed after the NAV is calculated. ETFs, however, trade
throughout the day and may be bought and sold just like stocks. You
may be familiar with some ETFs without realizing what they are. For
example, the Dow Jones Industrial Average can’t be traded directly.
However, you can trade the DIA ETF (referred to as the Diamonds),
which follows the value of the index (see Figure 1.4). The Nasdaq 100
may be traded through the QQQQ ETF (the Q’s) and the S&P 500

c01.indd 21

11/2/07 12:13:57 PM

22

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 1.4 Dow Jones Industrial 30 versus DIA ETF

Index has the SPY ETF (the Spyders). Besides indices, ETFs are often
used to trade specific sectors or industries. You can trade the biotech
sector, for example, with the ETF ticker symbol BBH.
Traders will often graduate into options after learning the basics
of stocks. It’s important to understand stock trading before trading
options because part of the options pricing model is the price of the
underlying stock. If you don’t understand the nature of price movement with stocks, you’ll only magnify your confusion when you trade
options. Having a plan to transition into options will help you avoid
making the move too early. As we discussed earlier in this chapter,
there are many so-called experts who will try to convince you that
options (or gold or currencies or futures—you get the idea) are the
path to riches. You’ll be sorely tempted to drop your current trading strategy and style and follow their 12-step plan. If you decide
to trade various products, then develop a plan for each. Each plan
should include the salient points we’re covering in this discussion
and should stand alone. Your funding requirements for your futures
trading will likely be different than the funding requirements for
your stock trading. Likewise, if you’re highly leveraged through
futures trading, you should expect better returns than simply outperforming the broad market. The risk you assume should have a
corresponding level of return.
Your trading plan should identify which market you plan to trade.
Of course, this is often determined by the product. Some stocks only

c01.indd 22

11/2/07 12:13:58 PM

Blueprint for Success

23

trade on the Nasdaq exchange while others trade on the New York
Stock Exchange (NYSE). Many traders around the world will trade
their local exchanges for such products as contracts for difference
(CFDs) while also trading the U.S. markets for the liquidity offered.
The consideration of which market to trade is not as significant as it
once was. There was a time when the execution difference between
virtual markets and physical markets was drastic. Technology has
created a forced leveling and the historic differences are becoming
less of an issue.
5. Trade Setup and Execution

It may seem intuitive to define the process by which trades are identified and executed while ignoring the other trading plan components
discussed in this chapter. Lest we gloss over this important concept, the
following is an outline of the salient points to consider in this section:
Time horizon. You must decide in advance how long the trade will
be held. Do not change time horizons in the middle of a
trade to accommodate a bad trade. This is quite different
from riding a profitable trade. Don’t exit a winning position
just to satisfy your defined holding period, but don’t become
an investor because you’re a bad trader.
Stock screening. How are you going to pare down the population
of thousands of stocks into a pool that you can reasonably
analyze for trading? Are you a trend trader, or will you be
trading channels, or both? Are you going to attempt to pick
reversals? Will you screen stocks for large-capitalization companies, or will you be speculating with penny stocks?
Pretrade analysis. Charts are the primary tool of technical analysis,
but there are many variations to charts and techniques for
using them. Candlestick charts are the personal favorite of
many traders, but some people will swear by point-and-figure
charts because they remove the time scale from the analysis.
Once you choose a charting style, what indicators and entry/
exit rules will you apply?
Risk analysis. Knowing when to exit a losing trade is one of the
most important skills that a trader develops from experience.
However, the beginning trader must define risk management
rules from the first trade. Are you going to use The Market

c01.indd 23

11/2/07 12:13:58 PM

24

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Guys’ 1% Rule or do you have another risk tolerance level
that you’ll apply? You need to decide how you’ll protect an
open position. For example, a long stock position could be
protected with a long put option or a sell stop order.
Position sizing. Some traders answer this question by looking at
how much they can afford. We recommend tying your position size into your risk tolerance and have provided guidance to accomplish that later in the book. Your trading plan
should include rules for your position size, including adding
to the position as well as exiting the position. Remember, if
you buy 1,000 shares, there’s no requirement that you sell all
1,000 shares at the same time.
Trade execution. Finally, consider how your trade will be executed.
You may have different rules for different market conditions.
For example, some traders will use limit orders only in the first
and last half hour of trading to help protect against the higher
volatility found during these periods. Some traders enter a
position with a market order and exit with limit orders.

6. Trade Diary

Knowing exactly how profitable you are through trading is critical
for improving. The best way to keep tabs on your profits and growth
is through a detailed trading diary. The trading diary will help you
identify what works and what doesn’t. Along with that, it will quickly
show you when your trading strategy is starting to break down. Some
traders employ a strategy that performs remarkably well in a bull
market but underperforms in a sideways or bear market. Your trading diary will be the first to flag you when conditions are changing
and you need to adjust your strategy.
There is no limit to the information that you choose to log into
your trading diary, although it is possible to overanalyze your performance and spend more time with your spreadsheets and less time
with the markets. Whatever your predisposition may be toward selfanalysis, the following is a suggested minimum list of information
that your diary should contain:
• Product traded
• Entry price, date, and time

c01.indd 24

11/2/07 12:13:58 PM

Blueprint for Success

25

• Reason for entry
• Position size
• Stop price
• Exit price, date, and time
• Reason for exit
• Net profit or loss
• Market conditions
• Miscellaneous notes

Grow with Your Plan
As we wrap up this discussion of the trading plan, there is one more
important point that needs to be made. The trading plan should serve
to make you a better trader and guide you through your growth. It is
by no means a malevolent dictator that, once created, must be served
without question. You’ll find that your trading plan will evolve over
time, reflecting your increase of both knowledge and experience. It
represents your best effort at a set of rules that you believe will help
you reach maximum profitability. However, it is a snapshot frozen in
time. As you continue trading, you may find products that are more
profitable for you. Some traders are most profitable in sideways markets when they learn to trade options. They don’t enjoy the same
success with stocks, which may be what they started trading. There’s
no problem with making the change as long as you develop a new
plan. We’ve known many traders who were lured into the markets by
the promise of quick riches that were supposedly available to anyone
willing to commit to day trading full time. Reality set in very quickly,
and these same traders discovered that trading was more profitable
for them if they lengthened their time horizon from minutes to
weeks. Once again, it is perfectly acceptable to switch from being a
day trader to a swing trader if you’ve developed a plan to do so.
Your trading diary will be your feedback loop for changes that
you’ll make to your trading approach. Look for the patterns that tell
you what time of day is best to enter an opening trade, which products produce the best returns, or when it’s just time to take a break
and regroup. The markets will always be changing; be sure you
change with them.

c01.indd 25

11/2/07 12:13:58 PM

c01.indd 26

11/2/07 12:13:59 PM

2

C H A P T E R

Are You Out of Your Mind?
HOW T O WORK WIT H YOUR EMOTIONS

W

ithout question, the biggest challenge for any new trader is
learning how to remove emotions from the decision-making process
when it comes time to make a trade. It really doesn’t matter how
much experience you have; you will find that this will be your biggest
battle when trading the markets. If you were to ask a seasoned trader
if they are able to completely remove the emotions associated with
risk positions they’ve taken in the market, and they answered “yes,”
then they would be lying to you. We have seen it time after time, over
many years in the market, people coming to us with the same story
. . . “I don’t believe it. I was up 50 percent on this stock last week
and now I’m down. I can’t take a loss now. I’ll just hold on a little bit
more and see what happens.” Throughout this chapter, we’ll discuss
ways to keep our emotions in check and follow our trading plan. As
you’ll see, in the trading business you may actually profit from being
out of your mind!

Avoiding Pain, Seeking Pleasure
It is well documented among many scientific studies that our brains
are designed to direct us away from pain and toward pleasure. So
one of the reasons people hold on to a losing trade is that it’s the
brain’s way of avoiding pain. Hoping for a breakeven point is an
idea people have that gives them pleasure when they think that “one
day” they will not have to take the loss. If this is the way you have
27

c02.indd 27

11/2/07 12:14:53 PM

28

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

been thinking, then rest assured you are in good company. It doesn’t
mean you are doing the right thing, but you are in good company.
Since your brain is wired to avoid the pain, it will look for ways
to get around having to take the loss. I’m sure you have heard of
how, when we feel threatened, our survival instincts tell us to fight
when we’re in danger in order to defend ourselves, or run from a
situation that could result in our being harmed. Blood moves from
the extremities of our bodies to the critical organs and muscles that
bring us to “fight-or-flight” mode. The fight-or-flight response, also
known as the acute stress response, was first discovered by Walter
Cannon back in 1929. His theory talked about how animals react to
threats with a general discharge of the sympathetic nervous system,
priming the animal for fighting or fleeing. In extremely dangerous situations, our bodies go into shock and adrenaline is released
into our bloodstream, giving us extraordinary strength that helps
us in our defense. You don’t even have to think about it. When we
are threatened, our bodies naturally adjust and our minds quickly
throw us into autopilot. Over time, we have learned that our quick
reactions help guide us to safety. However, while in fight mode, we
will naturally take a stance to defend ourselves when our backs are
against the wall.
But what happens when our financial lives are in danger? If you
have ever found yourself in a losing position in the market, and in
financial danger, you may have noticed the physical changes that
take place in your body. Your heartbeat increases, your blood pressure goes up, you perspire uncontrollably, and your stomach muscles
tighten up, not to mention the loss of sleep from the added stress.
Sound familiar? These symptoms are very close to what you would
experience in a fight-or-flight response.
When faced with having to take a loss, you would rather flee
from the threat of having to take a financial loss and go with something that sounds better like “dollar cost averaging.” Yeah, that’s a
great idea. Let’s buy more of the stock that’s been beating the pants
off of us. Then you think, “If I cost average down, then I’ll only have
to climb up half the distance to get back to my breakeven point.”
What happens next? The market takes another turn for the worse,
and you realize that you can’t run from this situation, so you go into
fight mode. This is when you decide once again to buy more, at
new lows, because you absolutely refuse to take a loss at this point.
You begin to think that what started out as a short-term trade is now

c02.indd 28

11/2/07 12:14:54 PM

Are You Out of Your Mind?

29

better suited for a long-term investment, and you start looking for
good things about this company to justify reasons why you should
hold on to it for a couple of years. You have just committed one of
the great mortal sins of trading, which is changing your strategy to
justify a loss.
As you can see, our survival instincts don’t really help us in the
financial markets. First, we are not able to flee from big losses when
we are under attack. Secondly, the market is just too big for us to
fight. So the next best thing we can do is learn as much as we can
about this beast we call The Market. Once we understand what the
market is capable of and how it can hurt us, then we can approach
it with caution in order to better defend ourselves against an attack
before it happens.

Piloting Your Trades
The first step toward avoiding a catastrophic loss is learning how
to deal with the emotions associated with trading. One of the best
ways to understand how important it is to remove our emotions from
the decision-making process is to compare trading with flying an airplane. We’ve found that there are a large number of pilots who show
up in The Market Guys’ audience, and both of the authors are pilots,
so it’s easy for us to use this analogy.
When flying a plane, safety is the pilot’s paramount consideration. Let’s face it, if you take off from the ground only to find
later that you didn’t have enough fuel in your plane, you’re going
to be in trouble. So every pilot is required to go through a preflight
checklist: fuel, brakes, seat belts, and so on. Making sure that your
engines are running properly and that you have a backup plan in
case you have engine failure is part of every pilot’s checklist. One
of the reasons checklists are so important is that our minds will play
tricks on us from time to time. If we rely solely on our memories,
then it will only be a matter of time before one of life’s distractions
gets in the way and causes us to forget a minor little detail like making sure the landing gear is down before touchdown.
Now let’s compare this to trading. How often do you use a
checklist before putting your money at risk? Do you check to see
if the stock is going up before you buy it or are you busy trying to
pick a bottom in order to get a bargain price? If you regularly try
to pick bottoms as a strategy, then you are letting your emotions

c02.indd 29

11/2/07 12:14:54 PM

30

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

get in the way of the decision-making process, because what you are
really saying is, “I think this stock has hit its low and I believe it will
go higher from here.” In this case, it’s your opinion that you are
trusting and not the actual facts of what’s happening with the stock.
That’s like a pilot saying, “I am going to head north even though I
should be heading west because I think the wind is going to change
direction after I get in the air. Let’s take off and see what happens.”
Who is going to get in a plane with this kind of pilot? We’re not, and
neither should you.
Another dangerous condition that pilots are challenged with
from time to time is when the body plays tricks on the mind. Naturally, our body senses when gravity is pulling us to the ground. If you
were in an elevator, you could generally discern, even with your eyes
closed, whether you were going up or down. Going up, you would
feel your body getting heavier; going down you would feel lighter.
Your ears would pop and your senses would tell you that there is a
change in your altitude. The same thing happens in a plane. If you
were to close your eyes in a plane and then initiate a slight turn
to the left or right, your body would tell your mind that you were
gaining altitude. The forces acting on your body from being in a
turn push you down in the seat and trick your mind into thinking
that this added weight, like in an elevator, is the result of gaining
altitude. This, of course, would be a lie. Night flying or flying in
overcast conditions can be a very dangerous place for a pilot who is
not aware that her body is lying to her. Experienced pilots are fully
aware of this, and when they sense that their bodies are tricking
their minds, they immediately force themselves to refer to their
instrument panel to get the truth. The instruments will tell pilots
if they are in a turn or in a climb. Instruments also tell them what
direction they are heading.
We can apply this analogy to the trader who is taking risk in
the market because of the similarities in how our minds interpret the data. If you, a trader, decided to go with a feeling instead
of looking at the truth seen in price trends, you may be fooled
into thinking that your money is in a safe place when, in fact, you
are heading in the wrong direction. We have seen many people
crash and burn in the market because they bought a stock on a
broker recommendation or because an analyst upgraded a particular company. Then, when the stock drops 30, 40, 50 percent
or more, they hold on because they believe in the story of the

c02.indd 30

11/2/07 12:14:54 PM

Are You Out of Your Mind?

31

company. How many times have you seen a person buy a stock
just before an earnings announcement because they heard an
analyst say that they expected the company to report strongerthan-expected earnings? After the stock beats the earnings estimate
like the analyst expected, the stock plunges to a new 52-week low.
This happens more often than you would imagine, and the reason
people lose money in situations like this is that they are trading on a
feeling. Like the pilot, we need to focus on the instrument panel to
get the truth and not rely on what our minds are telling us. For the
trader, our instrument panel is the price chart.

Technical Analysis or Tea Leaves?
For many years technical analysts were met with resistance from the
diehard fundamental analysts who labeled them as fortune-tellers
who might as well use tea leaves to predict the market. Price charts
were looked upon as crystal balls that added little value to the world
of money managers. However, in July 2000 a financial earthquake
shook up the financial world. Fundamental analysts ran for the hills
as Lucent Technology news hit the market, causing this former Bell
Labs gem of a stock to drop its share price by more than 91 percent
in less than a year. Not too long after that, in October 2001, a company called Enron announced more than $600 million in quarterly
losses, sparking a national investigation of its leadership team. That
triggered the beginning of the end for employees and shareholders alike. Then, when you thought it couldn’t get any worse, it did.
WorldCom, the world’s second largest long distance carrier, filed the
largest bankruptcy in U.S. history in July 2002.
For the first time in history, fundamental analysis came under
attack as senators and government officials questioned the validity
of company reports and analyst forecasts. Investigators started holding up price charts during investigative hearings, asking analysts and
company executives why they did not see this coming. They held these
price charts up to the cameras, showing significant downward trends.
“Would you buy a stock like this?” was the oft-repeated question.
From that point on, technical analysis became less of a forecasting tool and more of a risk management tool. We will be covering the
basic ideas behind technical analysis in Chapter 4. For now, understand that it helps us remove our emotions from the decision-making
process. This is especially crucial when we have money on the line.
