
Trendlines and Reversals

181

FIGURE 8.19 Multiple trendlines can also help trace movements of diﬀerent
strength and length.

through 2006, the lower trendline shows a decisive uptrend that spans virtually the entire graph, and the higher trendline shows how, starting late in
2003, the market accelerated even faster, resulting in a steeper trendline.
Both trendlines are valid, and both are useful. If the prices violated the
medium-term trendline, that would negate the faster uptrend, but it would
not negate the broader, larger uptrend until such time as that trendline was
itself crossed.
A similar graph is shown in Figure 8.20, which is the Dow Jones Industrial Average over a four-year period. The uptrend is firmly intact, even with
smaller ups and downs, and beginning in the autumn of 2005, the market
picks up even more steam.
As you learn about other drawn objects, you will learn to apply different objects to the same chart to deepen your analysis, since chart action is certainly more complex than “it’s going up” or “it’s going down.”
Figure 8.21 shows that after an ascending trendline was violated, the prices
actually moved higher quite substantially. In the course of doing so, they
hammered out a small head and shoulders pattern, thus providing two reasons to sell the stock: (1) that it had broken beneath its ascending trend;

182

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.20 This chart of the Dow 30 shows the long-term trendline and the
medium term trendline, the latter showing an increase in upward momentum.

(2) it had formed a bearish pattern. Following this confirmation, the stock
lost about 25 percent of its value in just a few weeks.
A more sophisticated example of the same concept is shown in
Figure 8.22, which is a chart of the Dow Jones Utilities ETF (symbol UTH).
The uptrend lasted many years, but when prices broke the trendline, a new
pattern began to form.
A close-up of this graph (Figure 8.23) gives you more detail as to how
the prices shaped their new post-uptrend pattern. The first thing you notice
is how the trendline did the classic “support to resistance” metamorphosis.
Even though the fall through the trendline swiftly sent the stock to $107,
it recovered and climbed to about $120, nearly a new record high. But by
then it had already formed the left shoulder and the head of a classic head

Trendlines and Reversals

183

FIGURE 8.21 A variety of drawn objects can be used to identify the complex
mechanics of a stock’s price action.

FIGURE 8.22 This illustrates how the price clung to the trendline even after support had been violated.

184

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.23 This close-up view shows how the trendline changed its nature
from support to resistance.

and shoulders pattern. It went on to form the right shoulder (two, actually)
and broke down. Simply stated, the price action was very messy after the
trendline was broken, and a holder of UTH would have been wise to have
quickly closed the position and taken profits on the day the trendline was
violated.
Some more recent examples—Figures 8.24 through 8.29—further illustrate what an important role support and resistance play in price
movement.
As you know, trendlines come in only two forms: resistance and support. We will now focus on resistance trendlines and their application.

RESISTANCE
For a trendline to represent resistance, it simply has to be above the prices.
It doesn’t matter if the stock is going up or down (although resistance during a downtrend is more useful from a chartist’s perspective). So long as
the prices are trapped underneath the trendline, that trendline represents

Trendlines and Reversals

185

FIGURE 8.24 The Utilities index, XLU, fell hard after violating support (the upper
line) and, once it started to establish a base and tried to recover, had trouble pushing
above resistance (the lower line).

resistance, meaning that buyers do not have the strength to push it above
the line.
Figure 8.30 offers a superb example of resistance with a downtrending market. This is the USD/CAD (that is, the foreign exchange market of the U.S. dollar and Canadian dollar pair). At the beginning of
the graph, a Canadian dollar was worth about $1.58 in U.S. dollars. The
downtrend shown here was in place for years, erasing over a third of
Canadian purchasing power versus the U.S. Again and again, the prices
made a move toward the resistance level, sometimes getting close to crossing it, but they failed each time. This graph represents a staggering loss
in currency value, and a person short this position would have enjoyed
steadily mounting profits, knowing to get out only when the trend was
broken.
A trader positioned in a security can use trendlines for just such a
purpose—that is, “as long as the price is on the correct side of the line,
I’m fine.” Imagine having a short position in Express Scripts (ESRX) during
the time shown in Figure 8.31. Suppose you shorted the stock on March 27
at about $88 per share. Using the descending trendline shown in the upperright of the chart, you would be assured that your position was safely intact
as long as the prices remained below the line. You might have had a close
scare in mid-April when prices got close to the line, but they did not violate

186

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.25 Symbol APL succumbed to price failure at the high horizontal support line and later stabilized at a lower level which became a new support level.

it. Afterwards, they eased back a few dollars, finally tumbling significantly
and providing an excellent profit on the trade. One simple trendline was all
it took to know that the position was still prudent.
When prices do violate the resistance line—and they almost certainly
will, sooner or later—it informs you based on your position with the stock.
If you have a position, it tells you to get out. And if you do not have a
position, it tells you that you might want to take advantage of what might
be a trend change.

Trendlines and Reversals

187

FIGURE 8.26 Honeywell, symbol HON, had its prices bounded by both support
and resistance levels. The lower horizontal line illustrates how resistance eventually
changed its role into support, once the price ﬁnally pushed higher.

A typical example of an upside break through resistance is shown in
Figure 8.32, where the prices bumped up repeatedly against the trendline.
Finally, in one decisive trading session, prices blasted through the trendline
and stayed consistently higher.
The real power of this is shown in Figure 8.33, which is a much longerrange view of the same security. What was shown in Figure 8.32 was only
the rightmost portion of this graph. The push above the resistance line
was very significant, because resistance went back for years. This signal
would have provided an excellent indication that the trend had reversed
and would have provided a great opportunity to take advantage of the big
upsurge in the NASDAQ market in 2003 and 2004. As usual, the trend reversal didn’t pinpoint the exact bottom, but it certainly allowed for tremendous profit opportunity in spite of the market’s modest rise that had already
taken place.

188

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.27 A stock’s “memory” about support and resistance levels can be
long-lived. Note how the important support level, the upper horizontal line, represented resistance over a year later as prices tried to recover their old levels.

A similar graph, with extremely dramatic positive results, is Primus
Telecommunications Group (Figure 8.34). The stock had suffered a terrible downtrend, dropping from $52 to the realm of penny stocks. You can
see here that prices finally pushed above resistance. But note this well:
prices continued to drop. If you had bought this stock, you may have been
disappointed that trendlines don’t work so well after all.
The seasoned chartist, however, would be watching the trendline
closely, even after it had been crossed, because the trendline now represented support, since the prices were higher than the line, not lower. What
is painful about this, of course, is that it sets no lower limit on how long

Trendlines and Reversals

189

FIGURE 8.28 Akamai’s relationship with trendlines is complex. Here we see a
descending trendline creating a formidable resistance zone, whereas the two horizontal lines are demarcation levels for descending price ranges.

FIGURE 8.29 The ratio of the U.S. dollar to the Canadian dollar—a longer-term
version of which is shown in Figure 8.30—had an explosive move higher, but when
it fell, the price stopped short at the former resistance trendline.

190

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.30 The Canadian dollar’s long slide versus the U.S. dollar is shown
here, with the resisting trendline never being overcome.

FIGURE 8.31 Resistance trendlines can be invaluable in minimizing risk and
maximizing reward with your trading.

Trendlines and Reversals

191

FIGURE 8.32 When a price breaks through a descending trendline, the change
in direction can be fast and powerful.

to hold on to the stock. Prices can remain above the trendline all the way
to $0, so you might want to apply other criteria to how long you would
hang on to the trade (in this instance, you may have put in a stop-loss order
just below the lifetime low of the stock, at least assuring you would get
something back and not ride the stock all the way to bankruptcy).
In fact, such a strategy would have worked well. As you can see, even
though the stock continued to fall for a few months after crossing above
the trendline, it began to compose itself and started a rise well over 1,000
percent. The patient chartist would have been handsomely rewarded with
this position.
The importance of how trendlines act as a “turncoat” (reversing roles)
cannot be over-emphasized. A fine example is Figure 8.35, which is the
Ultra Short OTC Fund from ProFunds. This is a really interesting mutual

192

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.33 This shows the NASDAQ bottoming in late 2002, at which time the
index pushed its way above its very long descending trendline.

FIGURE 8.34 This stock went up well over 1,000 percent after it pushed its way
through resistance.

Trendlines and Reversals

193

FIGURE 8.35 A security can continue to decline, even when its trendline changes
from resistance to support.

fund, because it is a double-inverse index fund. What that means is that if a
particular market (in this case, the NASDAQ 100) goes down 1 percent, the
value of the fund goes twice as far the opposite direction (up 2 percent).
So in a bear market, a fund like this provides an opportunity for people to
still increase their portfolio’s value.
This graph shows the fund during a relatively bullish phase of the stock
market, when the fund’s value declined from $97.50 to below $15. Notice
how on three separate occasions the prices just barely “kissed” the trendline, only to be repelled each time. After the third kiss, prices got enough
strength to push through to the other side, allowing the fund to form a basing pattern and stabilize at about $15.
Now let’s examine the opposite effect—a stock in an uptrend that
breaks beneath it.

BREAKS TO THE DOWNSIDE
Stocks in an uptrend that violate that trend provide a signal for bulls to get
out of the stock and for bears to consider selling the stock short. All the
rules cited for breaking through upside resistance apply, only in reverse.

194

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.36 The shorter trendline on the right helps gauge a resistance level
after the larger trendline has been violated.

The Dow Jones Utilities enjoyed a multi-year bull market in the early
part of the twenty-first century, mainly due to declining interest rates
(Figure 8.36). As interest rates started increasing, this uptrend was quickly
stopped, and in a matter of a couple of weeks, the $UTIL went from a lifetime high to a clear break in its uptrend.
When a stock breaks its support line, it is prone to weakness, because
the faith in the stock’s bulls is going to be badly shaken. Figure 8.37
illustrates this with Autodesk (symbol ADSK), which had climbed from
$7 to $47, often priced far above its support line. Late in 2005, the stock
gapped down, and the prices never crossed above the trendline again.
Although the price recovered over the next few weeks, nearly marking
a new lifetime high, the trend change was already in place: The stock
succumbed to the loss of momentum and lost about a quarter of its value.
The multiple trendlines in the chart illustrate how shorter-term trendlines
can be helpful in seeing the new direction a stock is taking, since that is
prone to change in the early stages of a trend reversal.
A closer view of ADSK’s change from bullish to bearish (Figure 8.38)
highlights the fascinating ability of stock prices to have a sixth sense about
their former trendline, sometimes touching it to the penny, but not going

Trendlines and Reversals

195

FIGURE 8.37 A stock’s failure to hold above its trendline usually precedes major
changes in direction.

FIGURE 8.38 This is a close-up view of AutoDesk as it changed from bullish to
bearish.

196

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.39 Cleveland Cliﬀs lost momentum just before falling through its
trendline.

above it again. The middle of the graph shows the price’s failed attempt
to get above the long-term trendline, and from February through May, the
prices had an even lower level of resistance they were not able to mount.
The psychology behind these trend shifts is important to understand. If
a stock has been in an uptrend for years, once it loses momentum, the holders of that stock are going to be frustrated and disappointed (Figure 8.39).
But after the initial shock, they will try to reestablish the stock to
its old bullish ways. Figure 8.40 shows that after Cleveland Cliffs fell to
$81, the bulls wrested control from the bears and were able to add about
25 percent to the stock in a matter of days. But the uptrend was over, in
spite of the bulls’ efforts. After this final run-up into the triple digits, the
stock fell yet again below the $81 low it had so recently established.
Lastly, Figures 8.41–8.47 offer excellent examples of price failure from
the financial crisis of 2008 and 2009.

SUPPORT BECOMES RESISTANCE
Knowing that support become resistance (and vice versa), and understanding how prices can cling to trendlines is powerful knowledge that you can

Trendlines and Reversals

197

FIGURE 8.40 A close-up of Cleveland Cliﬀs shows the stock attempting to regain
its former bullish self, which ultimately failed.

turn into profitable opportunities. Knowing how to use trendlines well can
help you minimize your risk at the same time.
When prices fall beneath support and try to get back to the trendline,
it’s as if the prices are kissing the underbelly of the line. Keep in mind very
few people know how to use trendlines (and even fewer know how to use
them well), so it’s not as if the markets are zealously following one agreedupon line and marking prices along it. But the mass psychology driving
millions of individuals to do what they do in the markets helps create these
phenomenon and those practiced in charting can exploit them.
Imagine you had watched Allegheny Technology climb from $2 to thousands of percent above that level, and you wanted to short the stock.
But because the stock was so strong, you didn’t know where to enter
the trade. The trendline for the stock (Figure 8.48) was broken when the
stock was about $22, and the stock kept climbing. Shorting the stock
in the subsequent months would have been a very unprofitable decision, since the stock climbed hundreds of percent more. Waiting until
the price finally mustered enough strength to touch the underside of the
trendline at $77.50 would have created a much safer opportunity for the
short sale.

198

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.41 Sterling Financial lost virtually its entire value after breaking important support at the $17.50 level.

The typical action after a price break usually does not take as long
as that, however. Figure 8.49 shows a more common pattern of the price
quickly moving down after the price break, regaining its strength, and then
pushing back up to touch the underside of its former support line.
The danger of shorting a stock merely because it has broken support
is highlighted in Figure 8.50. After the initial break, the stock (Hilton) did
indeed fall badly. But it didn’t take long for it to recover and make a series

Trendlines and Reversals

199

FIGURE 8.42 Allied Capital perfectly retracted its price drop in September 2008,
only to rapidly resume its fall.

of new lifetime highs. A person bearish on this stock would have been wise
to wait until the price was just barely underneath the former support level
before placing the short. That way, if the price does manage to cross above
the line, you can close the position quickly with a relatively small loss.
This kind of thinking applies not just to individual securities but
to entire markets as well. The NASDAQ Composite (Figure 8.51) broke
its support line and, similar to Hilton, initially fell swiftly, gathered its
strength, and began moving substantially higher. The market eventually
got extraordinarily close to the trendline, which would have represented
a very low-risk price level to short the market. Of course, there’s no

200

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.43 Former giant AIG stayed above the horizontal line shown here for
an entire decade. Once that level was breached, it only took a few months for the
stock’s price to approach zero.

guarantee a stock or index will have enough strength to get close to its
former support level—it may simply fall away. But it is definitely safer to
wait for the possibility that it does so.
It takes a lot of buying power to overcome the disappointment of a
trendline break. Figure 8.52 shows a closer view of the NASDAQ’s attempt
to get back above its trendline. It took about four months to do so, and in
the end, it failed, because the uptrend was simply no longer valid.
Continued strong volume can push a stock in an uptrend, even if a
former trend has been damaged. One of the most amazing stocks of 2005

Trendlines and Reversals

201

FIGURE 8.44 Not all price falls are rapid. Dynegy broke its support in November 2001 and lingered just beneath it for ﬁve months. But in the next few months
following that, the price went from $27 to about ﬁfty cents.

and 2006 was NutriSystem (symbol NTRI), shown in Figure 8.53. Bears
would have had a number of opportunities to short the stock at relatively
safe levels, but in this graph, they would have lost money each time. The
techniques being illustrated here are certainly no guarantee of profit. But
they do provide a measuring tool to know when you are wrong with your
speculation.

202

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.45 Trendlines are often retraced after they are broken. Acuity Brands
broke its trendline in October 2007 and tried to recapture the same line through
June 2008, at which time it started to fall hard.

FIGURE 8.46 Insurance ﬁrm Aﬂac had a burst in September 2008, but the next
month, it broke its long-term trendline and lost about 80 percent of its value.

Trendlines and Reversals

203

FIGURE 8.47 Clothes retailer Abercrombie & Fitch held above its long-term
trendline until the summer of 2008. Once the trendline was broken, ANF lost over
80 percent of its value as measured from its lifetime high.

One success story with this technique was Safeway Stores (symbol
SWY), shown in Figure 8.54. After a staggering rise in value, the stock
started softening, and it fell beneath support in the first half of 1999. In
a few months, it had recovered some and was pushed up against the underside of its trendline. A short sale at that point would have yielded marvelous
profits, since the stock was exhausted and didn’t attempt such an assault
on its trendline again.
A close-up view of this event is shown in Figure 8.55, which also
highlights how one must be somewhat discerning when watching price
action around trendlines. On the very first day of August, prices just
barely peeked above the trendline. This did not mean that suddenly a new
bull market was in place for the stock. Once the ascending trendline is

204

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.48 This gigantic push upward was in the context of a major trendline
changing from support to resistance.

broken, it cannot regain its stature as a reliable measure of upward price
movement simply because prices manage to sneak to the other side.
In this case, the trendline provided a valuable “line in the sand” that
prices were prohibited from crossing. The prices did get across this line
by a few pennies, but certainly not enough to stop looking at the short
opportunity. This day in August established the high-water mark for the

FIGURE 8.49 This is typical price action following a trendline break, as prices
push up against the former supporting trendline.

Trendlines and Reversals

205

FIGURE 8.50 In a strong market, it is typical for a stock to continue to push
higher, even though it is underneath resistance.

FIGURE 8.51 The safest place to short a market after a trendline break is when
it is up against the resistance line.

206

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.52 This illustrates how much strength is required for a stock to make
an assault on its former trendline.

stock after its trendline break, and it went on to a substantial loss in value
afterward.
Figures 8.56–8.61 provide a few more examples, all from recent history,
of resistance and support changing their roles.
As stated earlier in this chapter, the more experience you gain with
drawing, interpreting, and trading based on trendlines, the better you will
become. The markets are always changing, and you will learn many of the
subtleties in applying drawn objects well and profitably.

PARALLEL TRENDLINES
There are some instances—relatively rare—when price action is bound
by two parallel trendlines: one below as support, and the other above as
resistance. We will explore these “channels” in Chapter 9, but for now, let
us see how to use the Trendline tool to track these channels.

Trendlines and Reversals

207

FIGURE 8.53 NutriSystem provided many shorting opportunities during its rise,
but its strength kept the bears at bay.
