
28 506455-ch20.indd 325

9/24/09 10:43:05 PM

326 Part V: The Part of Tens

28 506455-ch20.indd 326

9/24/09 10:43:05 PM

Chapter 21

Ten Things to Look at When
Analyzing a Company
In This Chapter
▶ Running through ten of the most basic things fundamental analysts should check for
▶ Reinforcing some of the fundamental analysis techniques that matter most
▶ Showing how several of the types of fundamental analysis may complement each other
▶ Considering some signs that a company is beginning to lose its competitive edge

W

hen you see that pile of dirty dishes in the sink, you probably feel a
tinge of guilt telling you that you really should wash them. But you
just might not be in the mood.
And that same sense of reluctant obligation might also apply to your portfolio. You might own some individual stocks and realize you really should be
analyzing their fundamentals, but other things just seem more interesting. So
the annual reports and proxy statements just pile up.
Certainly, performing a complete financial analysis of a company takes time
as you run through all the financial statements, calculate dozens of financial
ratios and study the industry, just to name a few things. Fundamental analysis can take a bit of effort, seeing that Wall Street analysts and credit rating
experts get paid to do this kind of thing all day long.
Just because you might not have time to do a complete financial analysis
doesn’t mean you should let your financial dishes sit in the sink. This chapter
will tell you what ten types of fundamental analysis you should always make
time for. You’ll find out which types of fundamental analysis you should prioritize for when looking to dig into a company’s financials but have limited
time. If you conduct these ten aspects of fundamental analysis, you will be
well ahead of many investors who just blindly buy stocks on a whim.

29 506455-ch21.indd 327

9/24/09 10:43:42 PM

328 Part V: The Part of Tens
Measuring How Much of a Company’s
Earnings Are “Real”
If you’re not a full-time fundamental analyst, and you own more than a handful of stocks, it would be a full-time job to constantly monitor in real-time
every bit of financial data you’ll want to be aware of.
So here it is. My suggestion on the one form of fundamental analysis you
should never skip is the measurement of a company’s quality of earnings. As
soon as you can get your hands on a company’s income statement and statement of cash flows, you want to make sure a company’s cash from operations
is greater than or equal to its net income. When a company is generating
cash flow, you have some proof the earnings are real, not just smoke and mirrors allowed by accounting. You can review how to conduct this analysis in
Chapter 11.
Comparing a company’s cash from operations to its net income only takes a
few moments. The payback for this small investment of time is huge. If you
avoid investing in companies with weak cash flow relative to their net income,
you may sidestep many bum investments or even outright frauds.

Considering How Much Cash
the Company Has
It would be pretty rude to ask strangers you meet at a cocktail party how
much money they have in their savings accounts. But you don’t have to
worry about such etiquette when it comes to companies. Before you invest
a dime in a company, you want to make sure you not only know how much
companies have, but also what they owe. You should know:
✓ How much cash a company has on the balance sheet.
✓ How much the company owes to lenders in the short term and long
term.
✓ How much cash a company generates.
Paying close attention to these four variables will help you avoid plunking
your money down in a company that may not survive.

29 506455-ch21.indd 328

9/24/09 10:43:43 PM

Chapter 21: When Analyzing a Company

329

Looking for a quick way to see if a company’s survival is in question? Don’t
forget to calculate the company’s Altman’s Z-score, described in Chapter 20.

Making Sure You Don’t Overpay
Investors are constantly surprised when they spend hours and hours analyzing a company’s fundamentals, only to buy a stock and still lose money.
There are countless forces at work to determine a stock’s price. Remember,
stock prices are set by the constant tug of war between buyers and sellers
trading shares back and forth until settling on a price everyone can agree
upon. And that’s why it’s critical for you to not only evaluate how solid a
company is, but also how profitable it is and whether it has staying power.
It’s imperative not to pay too much.
Studies have shown that growth stocks, or shares of companies with the highest valuations measured by price-to-book ratios, are often the biggest disappointments for investors. This means that the more you pay for a stock, the
lower your future return is likely to be.

Evaluating the Management Team
and Board Members
As an investor in a company’s common stock, or the shares issued to the public
representing standard ownership in the company, you’re at the mercy of
the management team to make the correct decisions with your money. And
you’re counting on the board of directors to keep a watchful eye on the management team. If you can’t trust the management team and board of directors,
you shouldn’t trust them with your investment.
If you don’t look at anything else in the proxy statement, always be sure to
look for related party transactions between executives or board members
and the company. These are side business dealings with the potential to corrupt the ability of executives or board members to represent the interests of
investors like you. And even if a CEO is doing an excellent job, be watchful of
excessive pay packages. CEOs that aren’t ashamed to lavish themselves with
excessive pay probably aren’t afraid to take other liberties with your money.
Review Chapter 9 for tips on how to dig into the proxy statement.

29 506455-ch21.indd 329

9/24/09 10:43:43 PM

330 Part V: The Part of Tens
Examining the Company’s Track
Record of Paying Dividends
Day traders used to scoff at investors who paid attention to dividends. During
stock market booms, these small cash payments some companies pay to
their shareholders seem almost insignificant.
But fundamental analysts know better. For one thing, dividend payments
account for a big portion, roughly 4 percent, of the returns generated by
stocks over time. Miss out on those payments, and you’re leaving quite a bit
of cash on the table. Also, steady dividends can make sure you’re earning
something on your money even if a stock is flat. Dividend payments can also
be helpful in helping you decide how much a stock is worth, as described in
Chapter 10.
Lastly, while companies can fudge or pad their earnings, dividends can’t be
faked. Dividends are usually actual cash payments you can deposit in a bank
account or spend. Companies paying dividends are at least showing you a
tangible sign of their profitability.

Comparing the Company’s Promises
with What It Delivers
It’s easy to simply take a company management’s word as gospel. Financial
television is especially infamous for practically turning corporate CEOs into
royalty and taking everything they say at face value.
That’s not to say you, as a fundamental analyst, need to treat CEOs as crooks
or liars. But it is up to you to verify claims made by a CEO. If a company’s
CEO says a new product is selling like crazy, take the time to look at its revenue growth and also the accounts receivable turnover in days to ensure customers are buying and actually paying for the goods. If a company claims to
have posted record profits, it’s up to you to not only verify the claim, but also
make sure it wasn’t the result of accounting puffery.
Always compare the promises made by a CEO in one year’s annual report to
shareholders with the reality delivered in the following year’s financial statements. Professional fundamental analysts often read a company’s latest 10-K
with the previous one, side-by-side.

29 506455-ch21.indd 330

9/24/09 10:43:43 PM

Chapter 21: When Analyzing a Company

331

Keeping a Close Eye on Industry Changes
Fundamental analysis is powerful, but there is a great deal of emphasis
placed on financial statements. And the big weakness of financial statements is that they’re historical documents telling you how a company did, as
opposed to how it will do.
Trend analysis, described in Chapter 17, is one way fundamental analysts look
beyond historical numbers to assess the future. But you need to be especially
mindful of game-changing technologies or new ways of doing things in business that can render a company’s way of making money, or business model,
obsolete.
The constant danger that a new technology may wipe out a company is one
reason why some fundamental analysts stick with easy-to-understand and
basic businesses, where consumers keep coming back. Consumer products
companies, for instance, don’t have to worry that people will stop buying
deodorant (at least your nose hopes so).

Understanding Saturation: Knowing
When a Company Gets Too Big
Eventually, for most companies, the early days of easy growth evaporate as
the product and business matures. A product, which might have been so new
that everyone had to buy one, eventually becomes so prevalent that growth
slows. And when a company expands so much, it becomes more difficult to
grow further. These growing pains and maturity present great challenges to
both management teams and fundamental analysts. Companies often struggle
with the transition from a fast-growth company to a slower growth one, and
sometimes need to change their entire strategies. Fundamental analysts, too,
much change the way they evaluate a company and measure its valuation.
Keep a close eye on a company’s operating profit margin, or how much of revenue the company keeps in profit after paying direct and indirect costs. When
you see the operating profit margin deteriorate, that can be a heads-up that
the business’ glory days are fading. That doesn’t mean you shouldn’t invest in
a mature business. In fact, the contrary is often true. But you need to be aware
that the business’ fundamentals have changed. Review Chapter 5 for methods
on how to monitor profit margins.

29 506455-ch21.indd 331

9/24/09 10:43:43 PM

332 Part V: The Part of Tens
Avoiding Blinders: Watching
the Competition
It’s often tempting to buy stock in a company you think is the best in a business, and assume that your work is done. But companies are constantly
changing and evolving. Sometimes a company’s rival might rise up from near
death with a killer product and pose a huge threat. Meanwhile, the valuations
of so-called leading stocks are often driven up so high that its future returns
are often disappointing.
When looking to invest in a company, take the time to read statements and
documents released by a rival company you might consider to be weaker.
Paying attention to statements made by the CEO of a rival company in a letter
to shareholders, for instance, might tip you off to industry trends the CEO of
the leading company may not have noticed yet.

Watching Out When a Company
Gets Overly Confident
Some athletes get themselves into trouble when they decide to showboat.
The temptation to do that one extra and unnecessary back flip or victory
dance sometimes lets a quiet competitor sneak up and steal the win.
Companies, too, can sometimes get full of themselves. Figuring that their fat days
will never end, some companies build opulent headquarters, send employees on
overly lavish business trips or even spend cash on vanity promotions.
Perhaps one of the ultimate forms of business vanity is when a company pays
millions of dollars for the right to slap its name on a professional sports team’s
stadium. During the 1990s, it became fashionable for companies to pony up
millions of dollars to sponsor venues hosting a professional team in sports
including football, baseball and basketball. Several academic studies, though,
have shown there to be very little to no benefit to companies, on average, for
making these large investments. One of these studies lists a number of the
classic examples of companies that ran into extreme financial difficulty after
paying to put their names on sport facilities, including Adelphia, Enron and
PSINet, which all filed for bankruptcy protection. You can read the full study
here: http://jse.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/8/6/581.

29 506455-ch21.indd 332

9/24/09 10:43:43 PM

Chapter 22

Ten Things Fundamental
Analysis Can’t Do
In This Chapter
▶ Setting realistic expectations of what you can expect when using fundamental analysis
▶ Describing some of the hidden costs of fundamental analysis
▶ Highlighting how the successes of famous fundamental analysts are extraordinary
▶ Stressing fundamental analysis’ heavy reliance on guesses and estimates

I

’d love to tell you fundamental analysis will make you instantly rich
beyond your wildest dreams. Heck, I’d love to tell you that fundamental
analysis will make you look 15 years younger, too.
And certainly, fundamental analysis is a very valuable tool. It can be used by
all sorts of investors, or even by employees, members of the public, or just
about anyone interested in knowing how to gauge the health of companies.
But, fundamental analysis also has its limitations. And rather than trying to
ignore the shortcomings of fundamental analysis, it’s important to recognize upfront what they are and adjust your strategy accordingly. If you don’t
approach fundamental analysis with reasonable expectations and knowing
what the risks are, you may certainly be disappointed with the results.
In this chapter I outline some of the primary drawbacks to fundamental analysis. I hope you don’t let these shortcomings turn you off completely from
fundamental analysis. After all, understanding how companies work, how
stocks are valued and how to measure how profitable a business is are skills
that can only benefit you. But again, you need to know what fundamental
analysis can do, and what it cannot, before making ill-informed decisions.

30 506455-ch22.indd 333

9/24/09 10:44:20 PM

334 Part V: The Part of Tens
Ensure You Buy Stocks
at the Right Time
The biggest knock against fundamental analysis is that it doesn’t necessarily
help you time your investment decisions just right. You might do a beautiful
job analyzing a company’s financials, identify an undervalued stock, buy it and
wait to make money. And then, 10 years later, you’re still waiting and waiting.
Just because a stock is fundamentally cheap doesn’t mean it must soar in value
anytime soon; in fact, it can become even cheaper. Sometimes a stock is cheap
for a reason that will reveal itself in its financial statements in the future.

Guarantee You’ll Make Money
I wish I could tell you that if you use fundamental analysis, you’ll make money
on every stock you buy. But the fact is, during a bear market, even the most
skilled fundamental analyst will likely suffer losses, at least on paper. During
times of extreme stock market stress, some investors might wonder why they
even bothered with fundamental analysis.
One investor, who submitted a question for my daily Ask Matt investment
column at USATODAY.com, stated this frustration very well. “I’ve learned how
to read the fundamentals, including earnings per share, price-to-earnings,
return on equity and the stock price chart. But I’m still losing money. How are
you supposed to research stocks anyway?”
Hopefully this book shows you that fundamental analysis requires taking a
close look at many aspects of a company. And even after this, fundamental
analysts can make mistakes.
Being wrong from time to time is just one of the aspects of fundamental analysis you need to be aware of and live with. Don’t beat yourself up too badly
when you make a mistake. Consider some of the admissions made by Warren
Buffett in his 2008 letter to Berkshire Hathaway investors. Buffett bought a
large position in oil company ConocoPhillips during the year, when oil and
gas prices were near peak levels. Buffett was thinking energy prices would go
higher. But in the letter, he wrote “I have been dead wrong.” He added: “Even
if (energy) prices should rise, moreover, the terrible timing of my purchase
has cost Berkshire several billion dollars.”

30 506455-ch22.indd 334

9/24/09 10:44:20 PM

Chapter 22: Ten Things Fundamental Analysis Can’t Do

335

Save You Time When Picking Stocks
Some investors like to refer to fundamental analysis as an art. There’s at least
one key difference, though, between art and fundamental analysis. After an
artist is done chiseling a statue or creating a painting, he or she is done. The
work stands as a completed masterpiece of enduring value.
Fundamental analysis, though, doesn’t age well. Even after you spend hours
completely studying all public information about a company, its stock and
industry, you’re not done. New information continuously flies at you and may
have an influence on your analysis. If fundamental analysis is art, it’s definitely a work in progress.
Performing fundamental analysis takes time, patience and determination.
You’ll need to take the time to gather, analyze and process new financial
information as it comes in. Fundamental analysis can be somewhat timeconsuming, as you’ll need to make sure you are studying every aspect of a
company that you possibly can.

Reduce Your Investing Costs
There’s no question the cost of buying and selling individual stocks has fallen
dramatically. If you open an account with an online discount brokerage firm,
you might expect to pay $10 a trade or less as a trading commission. And certainly, at $10 a trade, the trading commissions you pay won’t make a big dent
in your portfolio’s return.
But many investors make the mistake of assuming the trading commissions
are the only tolls you pay when you buy and sell individual stocks. Other
costs include:
✓ Your time: Imagine if you decided to invest $100,000 in 10 different
stocks using fundamental analysis. And presume that you need to spend
at least an hour a week researching each stock. If you’re very good, you
might happen to pick ten great stocks that wind up beating the market
by two percentage points a year. Sounds great. But that additional return
works out to $2,000 a year, which means you’ve only made about $4
an hour for all the work you put in, according to an analysis by Mark
Hebner of Index Funds Advisors.
✓ Research: It’s true you can obtain a vast majority of the data you
need for fundamental analysis for free. The Securities and Exchange
Commission, for instance, provides free access to companies’ regulatory
filings. And there’s no shortage of helpful, free sites that provide fundamental data on companies.

30 506455-ch22.indd 335

9/24/09 10:44:20 PM

336 Part V: The Part of Tens
But if you really get into fundamental analysis, you might be tempted to subscribe to fundamental data and research services that will cost you money.
✓ Being wrong: By taking on fundamental analysis, you’re saying you think
you can outsmart the market. By using your ability to read financial
statements and make intelligent forecasts, you may load up on shares of
individual companies. And if you choose correctly, then you may benefit.
However, being wrong can be costly. Remember that large U.S. stocks,
on average, gained 9.2% a year between January 1928 and December
31, 2008, says IFA.com. If you pick the wrong stocks or buy or sell at the
wrong time, you might sabotage the nearly 10% return you could have
had for just buying a diversified basket of stocks and holding on.
✓ Tax hits: Buying and selling individual stocks may generate tax events,
which could eat into your return. You can read more about the role taxes
play below.
While fundamental analysis has its costs, picking your own stocks could
actually save you money versus investing in actively managed mutual funds.
Actively managed mutual funds employ professional money managers who
select stocks and decide when to get in and out. Some of these mutual funds
charge large fees. These fees, disclosed as part of a mutual fund’s expense
ratio, can cost you 1% of your investment a year or even more. If you’re convinced you don’t want to put your money in a low-cost index fund, and instead
are invested in a fund that charges a large expense ratio, it’s possible you
might save money by picking stocks yourself.

Getting started with investing
In this book, I assume you’re already familiar
with setting up a brokerage account or may
already have a relationship with a brokerage. But if you don’t already have a brokerage
account, don’t underestimate the importance of
this decision. In fact, choosing the right type of
account to use for investing can be as important
or even more important than choosing stocks
using fundamental analysis.
The first thing you need to decide is whether
you plan to do your investing from a taxable
account or a retirement account. When you buy
and sell stocks in a taxable account, you will
need to pay attention to rules on capital gains
and losses. For instance, if you sell a stock for
a profit inside a taxable account, you may need
to pay tax on that gain. However, if you trade

30 506455-ch22.indd 336

from inside a retirement account, such as an
individual retirement account or IRA, you may
defer your gains when you sell winning stocks.
You’ll also want to make sure you take the
time to fully investigate what kind of brokerage firm is right for you. Some brokerage firms
charge rock-bottom commissions, but you’re
completely on your own when it comes to handling your accounts. Other firms charge more
for commissions, but provide you access to
branch offices and financial advisers, if that’s
something you’re interested in.
You can read more about how to choose the
type of account and brokerage firm that’s right
for you in my other book, Investing Online For
Dummies.

9/24/09 10:44:20 PM

Chapter 22: Ten Things Fundamental Analysis Can’t Do

337

Protect You from Every Fraud
There’s no question fundamental analysis is one of your biggest shields from
getting sucked into the next Enron or Sunbeam accounting scandal. As you
discovered throughout this book, there are tricks and techniques to fundamental analysis that help you spot suspicious activity going on at a company.
And while you may not be able to pinpoint the specifics of a fraud using a
company’s financial statement, you’ll probably see enough red flags to make
you suspicious of the company and the way it operates.
With that said, fundamental analysts must accept, to a certain degree, the
fact they must take financial statements somewhat at their face value. If a
company completely fabricates the numbers on the financial statements
while the board of directors and auditing firm aren’t paying attention, there’s
only so much a fundamental analyst can do.
