
174

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

Retail Sales: This index measures the total sales of goods by all retail
establishments in the United States (sales of services are not included).
These figures are in current dollars, which means they are not adjusted for
inflation; however, the data is adjusted for seasonal, holiday, and
trading-day differences between months of the year. The retail sales index
is considered the timeliest indicator of broad consumer spending patterns,
providing a sense of the trends among different types of retailers. These
trends can help you spot specific investment opportunities. The data is
released around the 12th of every month at 8:30 a.m. EST.
International Trade: This report measures the difference between
exports and imports of U.S. goods and services. Imports and exports are
important components of aggregate economic activity—representing
approximately 14 percent and 12 percent of the GDP, respectively. Typically, stronger exports are bullish for the dollar. The data is announced on
the 19th of every month at 8:30 a.m. EST.
The above economic indicators are the most relevant for the six major
world currencies on the Forex market, but that does not mean they are the
only ones. Once again, you can keep up with all major government reports
that affect the Forex at www.markettraders.com or www.forextips.com,
under the heading “Economic Reports”. I strongly suggest you review the
economic calendar daily before you trade in order to be prepared for any
surprise movements in the market.

CONCLUSION
Tracking down the fundamental announcements before you trade is critical.
Make it a habit to see if there are any major fundamental announcements
about to take place, which may create volatility.
Trading during fundamental announcements can be like riding the rapids
in a river, whereas trading during non–fundamental days can be like riding in
the calm part of the river. I recommend that the novice trader shy away from
trading during potentially volatile times, staying focused on only trading what
you understand. Do not ever trade with a sense of false security, thinking that
the environment is going to be calm because you checked with the economic
calendar and there were no announcements. All it takes is an attempted
assassination of a president, an unscheduled announcement of an interest rate
change, or a September 11 type event, and that calm trading environment will
suddenly turn hostile and volatile. Whenever an unexpected announcement or
event takes place, it can have a major impact on prices in the market.

C

11

H

A

P

T

E

R

CONSOLIDATING,
BRACKETING,
ACCUMULATION,
OR SIDEWAYS
MOVEMENT
IFE IN GENERAL needs to be kept simple—people have a tendency

L

to complicate it—and trading consolidation needs to be kept simple as well. The market can only move up, down, or sideways. If
the market is not trending up or down, it is moving in sideways,
which is commonly referred to as consolidation (see Figure 11-1).
In Chapter 10, I pointed out the relevance of fundamental announcements, and we looked at their importance, as well as the effect they have on
the market and the price of the different currencies. Although the market
consolidates in a tight trading range right before a fundamental announcement, this is not the only consolidation that exists.
Believe it or not, the market consolidates 50 to 60 percent of the
time and trends the remainder of the time. That is why traders who create
175

Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

176

FIGURE 11-1

GBP/USD (One-Hour Chart)

trading systems for trending markets lose all their money when the market
starts to go sideways. If you are going to use a trading system, you really
need to trade two different trading systems: one that spots trends and allows
you to take advantage of them, and one that spots consolidations and allows
you to take advantage of them.
Learning how to spot and trade in sideways markets is every bit as profitable to a trader as is trading a trend. When the market consolidates, it
creates equal levels of support and resistance within a trading range.
Trading ranges vary in size per chart and from one time frame to the next.
They can range as little as 30 pips on an hour chart to as much as 400 pips
on a daily chart, and even larger (see Figure 11-2).

CONSOLIDATION FACTORS
There are two primary reasons why a market starts to consolidate, accumulate, bracket, or go sideways.

CHAPTER 11

SIDEWAYS MOVEMENT

FIGURE 11-2

177

GBP/USD (One-Hour Chart)

The first reason for a consolidation is when the world is waiting for
a fundamental announcement and traders stop trading in anticipation of
a major market move or breakout after the announcement. When traders stop
trading, the market begins to consolidate in what is called a tight trading
range, or a small trading range. Small trading ranges are found on smaller
time frames and are between 20 to 60 pips. They can be seen on smaller time
frames such as the 60-minute and 30-minute charts (see Figure 11-3).
The second reason the market may consolidate could be due to a country intervening and wanting its currency to trade within a certain trading
range for economic reasons. Many times countries will want their currency
to stay within a trading range of, say four cents. For example, if Japan
wanted their currency to stabilize between 108 and 112 yen to the U.S.
dollar, that is a 400-pip range. The reason they may want the market to stay
there could be for importing and exporting reasons, or perhaps they found
this to be a good price that spurs imports or exports. If that is the case, the
markets may go sideways for extended periods of time.
Large trading ranges are between 150 and 400 pips or even larger. They
can extend over a longer period of time, such as a few weeks or even a few

178

FIGURE 11-3

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

EUR/USD (One-Hour Chart)

months. They are easily seen on larger time frames, such as four- to eighthour charts, or daily charts. In Figure 11-4, the euro consolidated inside a
three-cent trading range for well over a month.
With the market only able to go up, down, or sideways, and having the
market locked in a sideways range 50 to 60 percent of the time, learning
how to trade the two types of consolidations in the market can be financially advantageous.
There are three trading strategies to use when the markets are consolidating, accumulating, or bracketing.

STRATEGY 1
This strategy is suitable for large trading ranges between 150 and 300 pips.
As the market rallies toward resistance, the bulls will incur a tremendous
amount of resistance at or near the highs. What is actually taking place in
the market is that major banks and financial institutions are entering
the market and beginning to sell aggressively, creating more sellers than
buyers. Consequently, prices fall.

CHAPTER 11

SIDEWAYS MOVEMENT

FIGURE 11-4

179

EUR/USD (Four-Hour Chart)

During periods of consolidation, traders will look to sell at resistance
or near the highs. What successful traders do is look into their trader’s
toolbox to see what else they can use to confirm their decision to sell.
When prices get close to resistance, most traders turn to smaller time
frames and look for confirming bearish Japanese candlestick formations
near the highs, and then short the market after the bearish formation
appears, according to the rules of that specific candlestick formation.
The bearish candlestick formation gives confirmation that the market is
about to U-turn. They then turn back to a larger time frame and look to find
support on the other side of the consolidation trading range, taking the ride
back down to support.
As prices begin to fall and get closer to the level of support, once again
major banks and financial institutions will enter the market, and there will
be a change of the tide from bearish to bullish, due to more buyers than sellers. If the consolidation is going to hold, prices will then U-turn and begin
to rally. When prices get close to another level of support, once again,
traders will look to confirm their decision to buy and look for bullish

180

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

Japanese candlestick formations near a level of support or a prominent low.
They will enter going long after the bullish formation appears, and they will
trade the bullish candlestick formation according to the rules of that formation and within the guidelines of equity management (which will be discussed in Chapter 12). The bullish candlestick formation gives confirmation
that the market is about to U-turn. A trader then needs to turn back to a larger
time frame and look at where resistance is currently and take the ride back
up to the level of resistance. Traders can repeat this process over and over
again for weeks or months, until the market breaks out of the range.
If you think about it, once you find consolidation, it is hard to get hurt.
As long as you have the patience to wait for the bearish candlestick formation to appear near the level of resistance and a bullish candlestick formation to appear near a level of support. The beauty of waiting for candlestick
formations to appear in the consolidation is that when the market is ready
to break out of consolidation, a candlestick formation will usually not
appear (see Figure 11-5). This would make trading too simple. You need to
sell at the level of resistance and buy at a level of support when you find a
consolidation in the market.
FIGURE 11-5

EUR/USD (Four-Hour Chart)

CHAPTER 11

SIDEWAYS MOVEMENT

181

STRATEGY 2
This strategy will work provided your broker will allow you to trade this
way (currently at www. I-TradeFX. com, a Forex Broker, you can straddle
the market in this fashion). Please check with your broker first before
attempting to trade using this strategy. Because of the increased volume of
people wanting to trade the fundamentals, not all brokers can handle the
increased trading volume during announcements.
This strategy is called a straddle and was designed for trading in tight
trading ranges in anticipation of a fundamental announcement. It is very
important that there is a fundamental announcement to be released and that
the market range is between 20 and 60 pips. In order to trade a straddle
effectively, the market needs to create a tight level of consolidation before
the announcement, which, in turn, will provide a straddle opportunity. As a
rule, the longer the market has been in the range, the more aggressive the
outbreak will be (see Figure 11-6).
When you see consolidation forming before a fundamental announcement, turn to a smaller time frame, such as a 30-minute chart. Place your
straddle orders five minutes before the announcement is made. Place a buy
FIGURE 11-6

EUR/USD (One-Hour Chart)

182

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

order 15 pips above or north of the resistance level and 10 pips below or
south of the level of support, or the trading range. Why 15 pips above
and 10 pips below? All currencies have a bid-ask spread that is between
3 and 5 pips. Place your stop-loss orders 15 pips above the last high for the
sell order and 10 pips below the last low for the buy order. The reason your
buy entry order is 15 pips above the last high is because traders look at
bid charts, which reflect the selling price at a particular moment. Because
there is a spread between the bid and the ask price, we need to add the extra
5 pips to compensate for the difference. This precaution will keep you from
being taken into the market too early.
You should also consider not trading if the trading range of the consolidation is greater than the amount of money you are willing to lose should
the trade not work out. Always remember that the market can break out in
either direction.
It is important that you create two trading plans with entry points, stoploss orders, and limit orders for profit in both directions. It is also important to mentally work through a “what if ” scenario. You need to remember
the market can go north or south. If the market goes south, look for past
levels of support to exit with a profit before the bears score any points and
begin pulling back. The opposite will take place if the buy order is triggered
first—look for past levels of resistance to exit with a profit before the bulls
score any points by taking out those highs or past levels of resistance. Bulls
also pull back after making a new high and scoring a point.

NOT ALL FUNDAMENTAL ANNOUNCEMENTS MOVE THE MARKET
In theory, the market should not move if the numbers from the economic or
fundamental report do not differ from the previous announcement. But
trading is not an exact science. The market can move whichever way it
wants, whenever it wants. If the market breaks out of consolidation and
triggers one of your entry orders and then returns into consolidation,
perhaps there was mixed sentiment in the market and everyone is changing
direction. If the market breaks out of consolidation and returns back to
consolidation, technically the market will then go the other way, which is
why you may want to keep the second order in place, allowing you to take
advantage of the market reversal.
During any fundamental announcement, the market is very volatile—
anything is possible. If the market reverses, the only way to recoup your
losses after you have been stopped out by the first order is to have the courage
to leave the other order in and change direction. You must be agile as you

CHAPTER 11

SIDEWAYS MOVEMENT

183

trade and you must be quick to change from being a bull to becoming a bear.
Charts talk, and you need to listen to what the market is telling you.
To be a good trader, you must trade by the chart and not by your heart.
You must listen to the market with your eyes and respond accordingly with
no feeling or emotion attached to any given trade.

STRATEGY 3
Should you spot consolidation, rule number one is to check to see if there
is a fundamental announcement in the near future. Many times a consolidation will appear because the market is open 24 hours a day, and during
later afternoon trading is light. In this case, the simplest strategy is it to
continue to trade in the direction of the previous trend.
Should you spot consolidation without a fundamental announcement in sight, do not be like Roger, one of our students who shared this
experience.
Roger returned to class and started off telling us about some of the
great results he experienced trading straddles and consolidations in the
market. He told us about how he got all excited and told his wife to get
ready for dinner because they were going out on the town to celebrate.
He entered a trade during a straddle in the market and, just like clockwork,
the market took him in. He yelled at his wife, “Come on honey, pour me
some champagne, I see nothing but good times filled with wealth and prosperity taking place tonight.”
All of a sudden the market U-turned, went back into consolidation, and
started to go the other way. “I was so excited when I saw that consolidation,
all I could think about was the money I had made trading a straddle breakout, and I forgot to do the two most important things—see if there were any
fundamental announcements and, two, put in a protective stop-loss order on
my trade,” he said.
“After about an hour, the market had moved about 60 pips against me
and I was trading two lots at the time. I realized I was $1,200 down. At that
moment, my wife came downstairs all dressed up, ready to go to dinner,
champagne bottle in hand.” He said he looked at his wife, grabbed the
bottle of champagne out of her hand, took a big swig and said, “Where do
you think you are going?” Everyone in the class burst out laughing. I guess
we have to experience pain every now and then as a reminder to pay attention to the details.
I have learned it is better to be out of a trade wishing you were in than
to be in a trade wishing you were out!

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

184

If you see a consolidation forming, always check for fundamental
announcements first to determine if you should trade in that market. If there
are no fundamental announcements, then go ahead and trade in the direction
of the current trend. If you forget to check the above two important rules,
you will probably be introduced to what is called a bull trap or a bear trap.

BULL AND BEAR TRAPS
If you spot consolidation and you straddle the market without checking the
economic calendar for fundamental announcements, you will likely get
caught in a trap.

BULL TRAPS
After consolidation has formed and there are no fundamental announcements, bull traps are false breakouts to the south out of that consolidation,
doing nothing more than fulfilling the natural numerical sequence of the
market, then U-turning back in the direction of the previous trend, moving

FIGURE 11-7

EUR/USD (30-Minute Chart)

CHAPTER 11

SIDEWAYS MOVEMENT

FIGURE 11-8

185

USD/CAD (One-Hour Chart)

towards the Fibonacci D extension level. In other words, the market begins
to consolidate inside the natural A, B, C, D formation of a price swing.
There are no scheduled fundamental announcements, and the market is
simply following the Fibonacci numerical sequence as it slowly moves in
the direction of the previous trend (see Figure 11-7).

BEAR TRAPS
Bear traps are the opposite of bull traps. After consolidation has formed and
there are no fundamental announcements, bear traps are false breakouts to
the north that do nothing more than hit a Fibonacci retracement level and
then U-turn back in the direction of the previous trend, moving towards the
Fibonacci D extension (see Figure 11-8).

CONCLUSION
Most fundamental announcements create a dramatic change in the market.
Remember, the only thing in life that remains consistent is change. Currencies may aggressively react to fundamental announcements or they may

186

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

not. Successful and educated traders respond, rather than react, to those
announcements. They are well prepared and ready to switch from being a
bull to becoming a bear at the drop of a hat. Trading on the Forex with or
without fundamental announcements can create an environment where
there are unexpected surprises, creating trading ranges of perhaps 150 to
300 pips in a single four- to five-hour trading session.
Your future depends on many things when you trade. In this market, it
depends mostly on you—your education, your emotions, and what you do
with them. Trading consolidations can be very exciting and profitable if
you know how to trade them correctly.
Hopefully, this chapter will place you in position to take advantage of the
markets during consolidation so the market does not take advantage of you.

C

H

12
A

P

T

E

R

LEARNING THE
RULES OF EQUITY
MANAGEMENT
WHAT IS EQUITY MANAGEMENT?
I wanted to place this chapter at the beginning of the book, but the more I
thought about it, the more I felt it really needed to be at the end. It’s about
financial losses. No matter where I go, I seem to hear story after story
about traders who lost money in the market.
As I have listened to each trader’s personal experience, I have always been
tempted to ask two simple questions:
1.
2.

Was the loss of money worth all the emotional pain and financial
heartache?
If you had the opportunity to do that trade or investment again, what
would you do differently?
So tell me your tale of loss:

1.
2.

What is the biggest loss you have personally taken in the market?
If you have never traded in the market, what is the biggest loss you
have taken as an investor or in business?
187

Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

188

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

What was your emotional experience during this event?
What went through your head and your heart during that event?
Were you in emotional control or was your destructive ego in control?
Was it worth it?
What did you learn from this experience? If nothing, then I am sad
to inform you that you will probably repeat it in the future.
What new disciplines have you now implemented when you invest
or trade to protect yourself against losses?

8.

Trading in the markets is a fantasy or dream to most people. For some
reason, they think something magical is going to take place and poof, they
will become rich. They don’t try to understand it because they believe there
is nothing to be understood. They believe it is mysterious and accept that it
just works that way. Well, it can be understood.
The market is not a mysterious or magical place. It can be figured out,
and people can make money over and over as they come to this trading
wishing well.
If you have experienced trading on the Forex, and you tried to outsmart
the market by not protecting yourself by trading with a stop-loss order, let
me ask you this; how many pips did the market move against you? 100?
200? 300 pips? Did it come back to your entry or were you liquidated? If it
did come back in your financial favor, did you continue to stay in to capture
100, 200, or 300 pips in profit, keeping your risk-reward ratios intact? Or
were you so traumatized and emotionally beat up that when it came back,
you were just too grateful and happy to get out at breakeven or with only 3
to 5 pips of profit, in fear that the market would take it all away again? I
know the feeling, I have been there, too.
I remember sitting on our back porch one evening with my wife, after
one of my many emotional rollercoaster rides in the market; I looked at my
wife and said, “You know, if the government called me up for active duty
and asked me to go to war, I wouldn’t have one scared bone in my body. I
think learning to trade on the Forex is much worse than fighting any war.”
Traders who have attempted to day trade with limited knowledge can certainly appreciate what I am saying.
After I finally learned how to trade, I realized how important it was to
protect myself at all times. As you learn to trade (or do anything new in
your life) never forget rule no. 1: Protect yourself at all times.
When you drive, when you are at work, when you are on vacation,
when you are swimming in oceans, rivers, and lakes, always remember to

CHAPTER 12

EQUITY MANAGEMENT

189

protect yourself. Always protect yourself when you enter into a loving relationship, when you lend money to your friends and family, when you make
a new investment. Always protect yourself—this is vital to your financial
survival!
Protecting yourself as you trade is called placing a protective stop-loss
order in the market at the same time as you execute the trade. Protecting
yourself as you trade is quantifying how much you are willing to lose ahead
of time before you enter the trade. It is being very clear about one thing: if
the trade does not work out according to my plan, I will be able to emotionally and financially survive without that loss affecting my life and my
financial security.
Market Traders Institute’s broker of choice is I-TradeFX (www.itradefx.
com). They have an extremely user-friendly trading platform and will
instruct you in how to place your protective stop-loss order every time
you trade.
Protecting yourself at all times, and in every trade, needs to become a
subconscious habit. Never trade without looking at the downside first.
Never trade without saying, “If this trade does not work out, can I afford to
lose x amount of money?” Protect yourself at all times, and if you take a
financial loss, do not take it personally. Trading without protective stoploss orders is outright exposure to financial self-destruction.
As you learn to trade and gain some experience and taste some success,
you step into an arena of false security. That is why people drown in
the ocean. They swim with insufficient respect for and knowledge about
the ocean—a false sense of security, a feeling that they are greater than the
force of the ocean—and they drown. What is amazing is that when someone drowns in the ocean, the ocean meant no harm. It was just doing what
it does . . . it just exists.
Like the ocean, the market exists with no feeling, and without the
proper knowledge and respect for the market, you, too, can drown financially, and if you do, the market will feel nothing. “Fear always springs
from ignorance.”
Trading without a protective stop-loss order ignores the potential damage the market can do to you psychologically, emotionally, and financially.
If you enter the market without protection and trade without a protective
stop-loss order, you are the perfect candidate for a major catastrophic, lifealtering event in your trading career. Events that move the market 500 pips
in a direction don’t happen every day, but surprise fundamental announcements happen all the time.
