
The EROC Can Act as a Bias Indicator

Source: Bloomberg LP.

136
FIGURE 3.36

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
The EROC on a Five-Minute Basis

Source: Bloomberg LP.

weekly EROC is in a negative pattern, only short-sale triggers are taken on
a daily basis (buy signals are ignored). In Figure 3.34, those times when the
EROC fell below its signal line were not good times to sell short because
the bias of the weekly EROC was positive. When the weekly EROC is in a
positive pattern, only buy triggers are taken on a daily basis (sell-short signals
are ignored).
A similar scenario can be seen in Figure 3.36, an intraday chart of the
S&P 500 index. There were both buy and sell EROC trigger signals. Some
worked out well, others not so much. Because the bias (as measured by the
daily EROC) happened to be positive, only buy triggers are contemplated.

Erlanger Nantucket Sleighride
The Nantucket Sleighride (NS) is a set of three subindicators: the ENS, the
ENS Fast, and the ENS OB/OS. The ENS can act as a bias, setup, and
trigger indicator. It is a composite of very sensitive direction measures, and
its name is derived from its aggressive nature in following a trend. Wherever
the “harpooned whale” goes, the user will be dragged, like the whalers on a
Nantucket sleighride, in that direction.
The idea behind the ENS is to highlight the meaty part of a trend as
soon as it unfolds (see Figure 3.37). For the ENS and ENS Fast, the meaty
part of the trend is highlighted by the time spent in the extreme zones, which
are delineated by the indicator’s time spent above 50 (uptrend) or below –50
(downtrend). These are colored green and red, respectively. Once the ENS
rises above 50, an uptrend is considered to be underway. The meaty part of

Applying Seasonality and Erlanger Studies
FIGURE 3.37

137

The ENS Highlights the Meaty Parts of a Trend

Source: Bloomberg LP.

the uptrend is complete when the ENS falls back below 50. Once the ENS
falls below –50, a downtrend is considered to be underway. The meaty part
of the downtrend is complete when the ENS moves back above –50.
The ENS Fast indicator is designed to give the user an early indication
of entry into the meaty portion of a trend. Long-entry (short-exit) signals are
considered with the ﬁrst move above 50, with a long-exit (short-entry) at the
ﬁrst move below –50.
There is a third version of ENS, the ENS OB/OS indicator, which is
designed to reﬂect overbought and oversold levels in a trend.
The oversold moments of the ENS OB/OS indicator, like the one on
February 15 in Figure 3.38, is an important setup for an upside reversal of
trend. In Figure 3.38 the trigger for that upside reversal occurred late in
the day of February 15 when the ENS Fast indicator moved above 50 (the
green level in the ENS Fast). The new uptrend was conﬁrmed when the ENS
Standard moved above 50 (the green level in the ENS).
The overbought moments of the ENS OB/OS indicator were also an
important setup for a downside reversal of trend. The trigger for a downside
reversal occurred on February 18 when the ENS Fast indicator moved below
–50 (the red level in the ENS Fast). The new downtrend was conﬁrmed when
the standard ENS moved below –50 (the red level in the ENS). Generally the
ENS conﬁrms the ENS Fast in the next bar.

138
FIGURE 3.38

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
The ENS Setups and Triggers on an Intraday Basis

Source: Bloomberg LP.

The ENS can be used as a bias indicator. As is often the case for bias
indicators, select an interval larger than the one used for triggers. If triggers
are taken using daily data, select the ENS or ENS Fast on a weekly basis as a
bias for which side of the market to trade. For example, as long as the ENS
Fast on a weekly basis is above 50 (green zone), the bias is for long trades only
on trades triggered on a daily basis. As long as the ENS Fast on a weekly basis
is below –50 (red zone), the bias is for short trades only on trades triggered on
a daily basis. It is also appropriate to use the weekly ENS as a bias indicator
and another type of indicator as a trigger, like the daily EROC.

Erlanger Crossover and Crossover Spread
The Erlanger Crossover (EC) indicator is primarily a trigger indicator. Trigger
strategies are patterns in an indicator that typically point to a time to execute
a trade. The EC uses “true range” technology to eliminate whipsaws while
maintaining timely trigger signals.
The trigger mechanism in the Erlanger Crossover is a simple process of
buying when the “fast” line (plotted as a solid line) rises above the “slow” line
(plotted as a dashed line), and selling (or short selling) when the “fast” line
moves below the “slow” line. As is the case with all triggers, it is helpful to
have appropriate setup indications in place before acting upon such trigger

139

Applying Seasonality and Erlanger Studies
FIGURE 3.39

The Erlanger Crossover with Its Signal Line

ES MO
1185

1180.75
1180

1175

100

EC Spread

50
12.5566
-31.6607
-30

Erlanger Volume Swing
B

C

20
0.00

A
07:00

-13.3098
-20
08:00

09:00

10:00

11:00

12:00

13:00

14:00

Nov 30 2010

Source: Bloomberg LP.

indicators. In Figure 3.39, the S&P 500 e-mini contract (ES MO) is plotted
on a ﬁve-minute basis, the Erlanger Crossover turns negative at points A and
C, and positive at point B.
Notice that the Erlanger Crossover “fast” line turns direction substantially
ahead of the actual crossover. This momentum of the Erlanger Crossover is
at the heart of the EC Spread, which is simply the difference between the
Erlanger Crossover “fast” and “slow” lines of the Erlanger Crossover.
The EC Spread is a multiuse tool. It has the trigger information contained
in the Erlanger Crossover, setup patterns that often precede price direction
changes, and is a trader’s tool for money management.
The EC Spread also has its own signal line that acts to identify clear
changes in the direction of the EC Spread (i.e., the momentum of the Erlanger Crossover). The key indications of the EC Spread occur when the EC
Spread moves through its signal line, and also when the EC Spread moves
above or below its zero level. The latter is, of course, another way of depicting

140

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

FIGURE 3.40

The EC Spread Measures the Momentum of the Erlanger Crossover

ES MO
1185

1179.50

1175

200

Erlanger Crossover

100
-3.8072
-100
-121.7655

X3

X2

EC Spread

100

0.00

A

C

B

-68.8464
-100
-117.9583

X1
07:00

08:00

09:00

10:00

11:00

12:00

13:00

14:00

15:00

Nov 30 2010

Source: Bloomberg LP.

crossovers of the Erlanger Crossover, and as such is a trigger mechanism. The
movement of the EC Spread through its signal line is an early warning that
suggests a trend change in price. This use of the signal line is a setup situation,
but it also serves as a useful money management tool. In Figure 3.40, point
X1 shows an upturn of the EC Spread through its signal line—a good time to
exit, or pare down a short position. As a typical money management process,
traders look for an early signal to take 50 percent of a position off of the table,
and another signal to close out the entire position. In this case, point B could
be the latter and it also serves as an entry trigger for a long trade. Point X2
serves as a money management signal to sell 50 percent of a long position place
at point B, and either point X3 or C could close out the entire long position.

Erlanger Volume Swing
The Erlanger Volume Swing (EVS) index is a ratio between up and down volume. In the EVS, the total volume for a given day is divided into two portions

Applying Seasonality and Erlanger Studies

141

according to the position of the close between the day’s true high—the higher
of today’s high and yesterday’s low—and the true low—the lower of today’s
low and yesterday’s high. True high and true low eliminate the problems of
limit days and more suitably distribute volume on gap days. The separate
up-volume and down-volume are then smoothed exponentially.
Setup strategies are patterns in an indicator that typically precede a change
in price. The Erlanger Volume Swing index is an oscillator. As such, the user
looks for higher highs and lower lows in price to be conﬁrmed by the EVS.
When nonconﬁrmations occur, trend changes are more likely forthcoming.
For instance, a failure of the EVS to conﬁrm a higher high in price is a setup
for a downside reversal. When the EVS fails to conﬁrm a lower low in price,
a setup for a rally reversal is in order. Once a setup is observed, the EVS can
also be used as a trigger into a trade.
Trigger strategies are patterns in an indicator that typically point to a
time to execute a trade. Triggers are best executed following appropriate setup
patterns. An EVS trigger for a long trade is made when the EVS moves above
the zero level. A trigger for a short trade is made when the EVS moves below
the zero level.
In Figure 3.41, we have added the EVS to the chart of the S&P 500
e-mini futures contract. At point “A,” the EVS triggers into a sell position by
dipping below the zero line—well ahead of the EC Spread. It’s a good idea
to use a combination of trigger indicators, as is depicted here. One is not
necessarily better than the other. The value is that these are representations of
different criteria, so when they agree, a case for the signal is therefore more
valid. Point “B” is a buy signal in the EVS that slightly lags the buy signal in
the EC Spread. Note the positive divergence of the EVS with price (dashed
lines) leading up to point “B.” At point “C,” the EVS broke out to a higher
reaction high before the market, indicating expanding positive volume ahead
of the price action.

Erlanger Put/Call Ratio
Tracking Options Ratios is designed to highlight the prevailing sentiment of
options traders, and as such falls under the category of a setup indicator. Setup
strategies are patterns in an indicator that typically precede a change in price.
Bullish or bearish sentiment tends to become extreme after extended price
action. For example, a lengthy uptrend will engender widespread enthusiasm.
The rub is that when most have entered the market, there are fewer on the
sidelines to keep the trend going by joining the crowd. This overcommitted

142

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

FIGURE 3.41

The Erlanger Volume Swing Helps to Conﬁrm Other Signals
1188.00

ES MO

1185.00
1184.00
1182.00

1179.50
1178.00
1176.00
1174.00

Erlanger Crossover

200

C

100

A

-3.8072

-121.7655

B
07:00

08:00

09:00

10:00

11:00

12:00

13:00

14:00

15:00

Nov 30 2010

Source: Bloomberg LP.

state of bullish participation in the marketplace often sets up the price action
for a reversal; in the case in Figure 3.42, it is a downturn.
The key features of the Erlanger Options Ratios are the measurement of
volume-weighted values of all options contracts, and that they are computed
on a median basis. We also plot these ratios on a put/call and a call/put
ratio basis. This better shows the peaks and valleys of put and call activity at
extremes. In Figure 3.42, the Diamonds Trust ETF (DIA) is plotted with the
Call/Put Median and the Put/Call Median. In February, an advance in price
was set up by a high Put/Call Median. The advance was triggered when the
price action rose above its DMA channel. The big story in Figure 3.42 was
what happened later in April and May. The Call/Put Median rose to very high
levels in April, setting up the DIA for a decline that was triggered in early May
with the DIA’s drop below its DMA channel. Like all sentiment indicators,
we always use a price study to activate the sentiment setup. For the options
ratios, we typically use the daily DMA channel as a trigger.
The Erlanger Options studies can be applied to individual stocks. The
following example looks at Best Buy Co., Inc.

143

Applying Seasonality and Erlanger Studies
FIGURE 3.42

The Erlanger Options Ratios Measure Options Trading on a 10-Day

Median Basis

DIA-SPDR DJIA TRUST
110

Trigger
105

Trigger

103.4767
101.1717
100.32

Call/Put Median
1.500

1.000

Setup

0.786
0.500

Put/Call Median
1.500
1.272
1.000

Setup
0.500
Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

2010

Source: Bloomberg LP.

Figure 3.43 shows how high the Erlanger Put/Call Median rose in
mid-March, 2010. The prior decline in price encouraged excessive negative
betting on the part of the options traders. This was a setup for a rally that was
triggered by the price of Best Buy (BBY) rising above its DMA channel. It
wasn’t until the options traders changed allegiance and became super-bullish
in late April that the price action wavered. This interplay between sentiment
and price action is at the heart of our squeeze-play philosophy. Trading setups
and triggers such as these that are in line with the big-picture bias is a strategy
that, by design, is a logical one that adds value to the decision-making process.

Erlanger Trend Direction
Erlanger Trend Direction (a proprietary indicator of Phil Erlanger Research)
is used to measure the coincident trend underway. There are four “states” (see
Figure 3.44) to this indicator: uptrend (green above the zero line), correction
or pullback within an uptrend (red above the zero line), downtrend (red below

144

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

FIGURE 3.43

Erlanger Options Patterns Are Setups for Contrary Moves
50

Best Buy
45

Trigger
40

Trigger

Trigger

37.6333
38.7787
35

30

Call/Put Median

Setup
2.000

1.000

Setup

0.617

Put/Call Median
1.621
1.300

1.000

Setup
0.500
Dec
2009

Mar

Jun

Sep
2010

Dec
2011

Source: Bloomberg LP.

the zero line), and correction or rally within a downtrend (green below the
zero line).
It might help to think of the trend direction mechanism as a coincident
(to slightly lagging) indicator. Traders/investors have many reasons to get long
or short a position, but if the trend direction moves contrary to expectations,
it is time to reevaluate. It is not uncommon to see changes from advance to
decline phase on shorter timeframes while the larger trend direction remains
unchanged. So, the hourly can go through a number of cycles while the
daily remains unchanged. The daily can go through a number of cycles
while the weekly remains unchanged. Each smaller cycle is a test of the next
larger cycle.
The trend direction indicator is best used in conjunction with (and to
conﬁrm) other indicators. Waiting for the trend indicator to agree with the
DMA channel can help to minimize whipsaws.

145

Applying Seasonality and Erlanger Studies
FIGURE 3.44

Erlanger Trend Directions’ Four Signals
50

45
41.403
40.016

35

ETD––Erlanger Trend Direction
Uptrend

Downtrend
Jan

Pullback

Rally
Feb

Downtrend
Mar

2010

Apr

May

Source: Bloomberg LP.

Monitoring
In the Erlanger Chart Room program powered by Bloomberg
(www.erlangerchartroom.com), users can track their positions using key metrics from the available Erlanger Studies. Monitoring is a valuable process that
enables the portfolio manager to follow key technical metrics as they unfold
in real time. It is not possible to effectively perceive all the pertinent charts for
a universe or portfolio of securities on a real-time basis. By monitoring the
progress of key technical patterns security by security in a quote sheet format,
it becomes easy to identify their progress and change in status.
In Figure 2.45, the columns in the quote sheet are designed to highlight
short and long squeeze plays by tracking key sentiment setup situations such
as shorts as a percentage of ﬂoat, short selling intensity, Erlanger Short Ratio
(current short interest divided by the 12-month average of average daily
volume), and the Erlanger Option Rank (the higher the Option Rank, the
more dominant put activity is to call activity). The key to these setup indicators
is to identify excess in bullish or bearish sentiment. The last column is the
Erlanger Trend Direction (ETD), which identiﬁes the trend underway—in
this case on a daily basis. For a short squeeze situation, we are looking for those
stocks that have an excess of negative sentiment but are in an uptrend—these
are situations where the market is telling us that the negative bettors are

146
FIGURE 3.45

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
Monitoring Squeeze Play Factors

Source: Erlanger Chart Room.

wrong. The columns in Figure 3.45 are sorted ﬁrst by ETD and second by
Short Intensity. Stocks UTX and IBM are in a short squeeze situation. HPQ
is in a long squeeze situation because its short intensity is at a low 23 percent
(indicating little negative betting, hence too much bullishness) and its trend
(ETD) is down—thus the HPQ bulls are feeling the squeeze pressure of lower
price action.
Earlier in this chapter we discussed the merits of using the monthly DMA
channel as a bias for trades triggered using daily DMA channels. This was

Applying Seasonality and Erlanger Studies
FIGURE 3.46

147

Dow 30 Industrial Stocks—DMA Channel Factors

Source: Erlanger Chart Room.

especially valid for high beta stocks. In Figure 3.46, a quote sheet is set up for
the Dow 30 issues with the ﬁrst sort on the monthly DMA channel column
and a secondary sort on the daily column. There is also a column for beta so
the portfolio manager can focus on higher beta issues. With one simple quote
sheet, the portfolio manager can identify those issues that are in a positive
or negative bias situation, ﬁltering for beta—a process that we identiﬁed as a

148
FIGURE 3.47

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
Dow 30 Industrial Stocks—Erlanger Value Line Factors

Source: Erlanger Chart Room.

superior strategy. Taking long positions in positive bias situations with those
issues marked as “above” the daily DMA channel is now a snap. Similarly,
ﬁnding short positions in negative bias situations with those issues marked as
“below” the daily DMA channel is just as easy.
It is almost an impossibility to track the value lines of 30 securities by
perusing charts, even with a real-time system. However, quote sheets that not
only identify the value line levels, but also highlight when the price action
moves through the key levels, can make this effort a reality. At the beginning
of the trading day, the table in Figure 3.47 shows the support, resistance,
and pivot Erlanger Value Lines, along with the prior day’s last two-hour
high and low.
As Figure 3.48 shows, as the trading day unfolds, the cells for the key
Erlanger Value Lines “support” and “resistance” change color if price has
moved through their values for the day. Knowing which stocks have moved

Applying Seasonality and Erlanger Studies
FIGURE 3.48

149

Dow 30 Industrial Stocks—Erlanger Value Line Factors Change during the

Trading Session

Source: Erlanger Chart Room.

below their support level (colored in red, symbols GE, WMT) and those that
have moved above their resistance level (colored in green, symbols CAT, KO,
MMM, and MSFT) allow the trader to focus in on securities on the move. This
is especially pertinent when the market itself is having a quiet day—something
extraordinarily positive is boosting a stock when it rises above its resistance
level when the market is ﬂat. Conversely, something extraordinarily negative is
weighing on a stock when it falls below its support level when the market is ﬂat.
Opening ranges are an effective bias tool for short-term traders. By tracking the opening ranges of a universe of stocks that traders favor for short-term
trading, the trader can instantly identify those stocks that are positively and
negatively biased in the ﬁrst few minutes of trading. Figure 3.49 shows that
as the minutes unfold from the opening bell, the trader can see those stocks

150
FIGURE 3.49

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
Dow 30 Industrial Stocks—Tracking the Opening Ranges

Source: Erlanger Chart Room.

strong enough to rise above their 5-minute and 60-minute opening highs (in
this case, CAT, KO, MSFT, and UTX). The trader can also see those stocks
weak enough to fall below their 5-minute and 60-minute opening lows (in
this case, DIS, GE, INTC, JNJ, and WMT). Additionally, tracking universes
like the Dow 30 Industrials can give the portfolio manager a unique insight as
to how a particular day’s trading is unfolding. Where is the strength? Where is
the weakness? How broad is the strength or weakness? These questions can be
answered by a quick glance at a quote sheet similar to the one in Figure 3.50.
Monitoring quote sheets with Erlanger studies can also highlight setups
and triggers. In Figure 3.50, all the ENS cells are colored when they reach
values above 50 or below –50. When the ENS is above 50, a triggered uptrend

Applying Seasonality and Erlanger Studies
FIGURE 3.50

151

Dow 30 Industrial Stocks—Tracking the Erlanger Nantucket Sleighride

Signals

Source: Erlanger Chart Room.

is underway. Interestingly, none of those uptrending issues are above 50 on
the weekly ENS OB/OS, which suggests that no uptrending issue has yet to
reach overbought on an intermediate (weekly) basis.
Earlier in this chapter, we showed how the weekly EROC can be used
as a bias indicator for those who trade on daily price data. In Figure 3.51,
this EROC trading process is displayed by sorting the weekly EROC column

152
FIGURE 3.51

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
Dow 30 Industrial Stocks—Tracking the EROC Trigger and Setup Signals

Source: Erlanger Chart Room.

ﬁrst to show bias, followed by the secondary sort of the daily EROC as the
trigger. There are a host of buy triggers in Figure 3.51, with only two short-sell
triggers (BA and HPQ). A buy trigger is initiated when the daily EROC rises
above both the EROC zero level and its signal line (signiﬁed by “up”) while
the weekly EROC is in the same condition. A sell short trigger is initiated
when the daily EROC falls below both the EROC zero level and its signal
line (signiﬁed by “down”) while the weekly EROC is in the same condition.

Applying Seasonality and Erlanger Studies
FIGURE 3.52

153

Dow 30 Industrial Stocks—Tracking a Combination of Erlanger Studies

Source: Erlanger Chart Room.

In Figure 3.52, a combination of trigger factors is listed. The primary sort
is the daily EROC column, with the secondary sort the daily DMA channel
and the tertiary sort the daily ENS. Also included in this quote sheet is the
Erlanger Volume Swing (EVS). By monitoring quote sheets such as the one in
Figure 3.52, the trader can instantly determine which securities have triggered
on all four indicators.
The use of quote sheets deployed to intelligently contain the various
Erlanger Studies provides the medium for monitoring portfolios and makes
effective use of the real-time changes in technical status, which is so important
to bottom-line performance.
