
30

31
never worked. I sometimes can't believe I'm making all this money to essentially play an elaborate game.
On the other hand, when you look at all the money I've produced over the years, I've been vastly underpaid.
The more supertraders I interview, the more convinced I become that, at least to some degree, their
success can be attributed to an innate talent. Bill Lipschutz provides an excellent example. His first encounter
with trading actually involved paper trading in a college investment course. Lipschutz ended up running a
hypothetical $100,000 into an incredible $29 million by the end of the course. Although this accomplishment
has to be taken with a grain of salt because it didn't involve real money and the rules of the experiment were
flawed by the lack of realistic limitations on leverage, the results were striking nonetheless.
Lipschutz's first experience in actual trading was prompted by a $12,000 inheritance that he steadily built
up to $250,000 over a four-year period. Although he ended up blowing the entire account because of one
drastic mistake of wildly overleveraging his position, that does not take away from the skill that was needed
to produce the steady equity growth in the first place.
Finally, and most important, despite having had no previous experience whatsoever in the currency
markets, Lipschutz was significantly profitable in his very first year of trading these markets and extraordinarily profitable over the next seven years. Although he declines to quote any specific figures, it has been
estimated that his trading alone accounted for an excess of one-half billion dollars in profits for Salomon
Brothers over his eight-year stay with the firm.
Lipschutz himself cites hard work and an all-consuming commitment to the markets as the principal
ingredients for his success, Although hard work by itself is not sufficient to make one a great trader, it does
appear to be an important ingredient in the success of many of the world's best traders. Lipschutz also
believes that superior intelligence is an important ingredient to trading success. However, it should be noted
that others whom I have interviewed (e.g., Victor Sperandeo) do not share this view.
One theme that seems to recur in many of my conversations with the world's top traders is their view of
the markets as a wonderful game rather than as work. Lipschutz emphatically claims that, for him, trading is
such an engaging game that he would do it for free if he had to.
One lesson that could be drawn from Lipschutz's trading style is that you don't have to get in or out of a
position all at once. Lipschutz scales in and out of virtually all his trades. One sensible piece of advice for
most traders is this: Avoid the temptation of wanting to be completely right. For example, let's say you
become convinced that a market should be bought, but prices have already had a sizable run-up. In many
instances, if the trade is really good, by waiting for a significant reaction before putting on the entire position
you are apt to miss the move completely. However, by adopting a scale-in plan-putting on part of the
intended total position at the market and the remainder on a scale-down basis-you assure that you will at
least have a partial position if the market keeps on going, without the excessive risk that would be implied by
putting on the entire position after a large, uninterrupted advance.
As another example, assume that you are long with a large profit and are concerned about a market top.
If you get out of the entire position and the market advance continues, you can miss a large part of the total
move. On the other hand, if you keep the entire position and the market does indeed top, you can end up
giving back a very large portion of the gain. By using a scale-out approach, you may never get the best
outcome, but at the same time you will never get the worst outcome either. Also, by using a scale-in and
scale-out approach, you can restrict full positions to those instances in which your confidence in a trade is
greatest.
Another lesson to be learned from this interview is that if you have a strong conviction about a trade and
the market has a large move because of a news event, the best decision may well be to bite the bullet and
buy on extreme strength (or sell on extreme weakness). A perfect example of this concept was provided by
the way the trader in Lipschutz's group handled trading the market following the G-7 meeting.
In Market Wizards, Marty Schwartz made the observation that if a trade that you are very worried about
does not turn out as badly as feared, don't get out. The rationale is that if there is no follow-through in a
direction adverse to your position, then there must be some very strong underlying forces in favor of the
direction of the original position (since the reasoos-fundamental or technical-for your own fears are probably
shared by many others in the marketplace). A prime example of this rule in action was provided by the one
trade that Bill Lipschutz admitted scared him. In that instance, he was short a very lage dollar position
against the D-mark in the midst of a shan, dote rally and had to wait for the Tokyo opening to find sufficient
liquid, y to ex, the position. However, by the time Tokyo opened, the dollar wa weaker, letting him off the
hook easily and therefore implying that he shouldn't get out. Lipschutz, being a highly skilled trader,
responded exactly right and delayed liquidating his position, thereby recoupingmost of his loss.
One item I found particularly curious was that. atter more than four years of steady trading gains in his
stock option account. Lipschutz lost virtually the entire amount in a few days- nme. Ironically, this loss
coincided with his start of fall employment at Salomon Brothers. Interestingly. as expressed in the interview,
he had strong feelings agiuns simultaneously trading personal and company accounts. The demise of his own
account, therefore, played neatly into avoiding .my potent source of conflict. In our conversation, Lipschutz
insisted that the loss was probably coincidental since he was only in the training class and not yet aware of
any potential conflict.
Despite Lipschutz-s denial. I couldn't help but be reminded of the provocative aphorism: "Everybody gets
what they want out of the market •." I wondered whether Lipschutz-s subconscious was perhaps a bit more
foresightful than he realized. In any case, the timing of this large loss and its relative uniqueness in
Lipschutz-s trading career does seem somewhat ironic. Whether this interpretation is strained comec ure or

31

32
fact. one thing is certain: Lipschutz did indeed get what he wanted-a Perfect job, huge trading profits,
and an absence of conflict between ms personal and company trading.
•Ai proposed by Ed Seykola ill Market Wizards.
**Note:** For a few sections of this interview, a basic understanding of option terminology would be
very helpful. Readers totally unfamiliar with options may wish first to read the primer provided in the
Appendix.

32

33
PART III Futures-The Variety-Pack Market

33

34
Futures-Understanding the Basics
Today s futures markets encompass all the worlds major market groups: interest rates (e.g., T-bonds),
stock indexes (e.g., the S&P 500), currencies (e.g., Japanese yen), precious metals (e.g., gold), energy (e.g.,
cmde oil), and agricultural commodities (e.g., corn). Although the futures markets had their origins in
agricultural commodities, this sector now accounts for only about one-fifth of total futures trading. During the
past two decades, the introduction and spectacular growth of many new contracts have resulted in the
financial markets (currencies, interest rate instruments, and stock indexes) accounting for approximately 60
percent of all futures trading. (Energy and metal markets account for nearly half of
Today's futures markets encompass all the world's major market groups: interest rates (e.g., T-bonds),
stock indexes (e.g., the S&P the remaining 40 percent.) Thus, while the term commodities is often used to
refer to the futures markets, it has increasingly become a misnomer. Many of the most actively traded
futures markets, such as those in the financial instruments, are not true commodities, and many commodity
markets have no corresponding futures markets..
Trading volume in futures has expanded tremendously during the past generation. In 1991 total volume of
all futures traded in the United States alone exceeded 263,000,000. Conservatively assuming an average
contact value of at least $40,000, the total dollar value of these contracts exceeded $10 trillion! (Yes, trillion,
not billion.)
The essence of a futures market is in its name. Trading involves a standardized contract for a commodity,
such as gold, or a financial instrument, such as T-bonds, for a future delivery date, as opposed to the present
time. For example, if an automobile manufacturer needs copper for current operations, it will buy its
materials directly from a producer. If, however, the same manufacturer were concerned that copper prices
would be much higher in six months, it could approximately lock in its costs at that time by buying copper
futures now. (This offset of future price risk is called a hedge.) If copper prices climbed during the interim,
the profit on the futures hedge would approximately offset the higher cost of copper at the time of actual
purchase. Of course, if copper prices declined instead, the futures hedge would result in a loss, but the
manufacturer would end up buying its copper at lower levels than it was willing to lock in.
While hedgers, such as the above automobile manufacturer, participate in futures markets to reduce the
risk of an adverse price move, traders participate in an effort to profit from anticipated price changes. In fact,
many traders will prefer the futures markets over their cash counterparts as trading vehicles for a variety of
reasons:
1. Standardized contracts-Futures contracts are standardized (in terms of quantity and quality); thus, the
trader does not have to find a specific buyer or seller in order to initiate or liquidate a position.
2. Liquidity-All of the major markets provide excellent liquidity.
3. Ease of going short-The futures markets allow equal ease of going short as well as long. For example,
the short seller in the stock market (who is actually borrowing stock to sell) must wait for an uptick before
initiating a position; no such restriction exits in the futures markets.
4. Leverage-The futures markets offer tremendous leverage. Roughly speaking, initial margin
requirements are usually equal to 5 to 10 percent of the contract value. (The use of the term margin in the
futures market is unfortunate because it leads to tremendous confusion with the concept of margins in
stocks. In the futures markets, margins do not imply partial payments, since no actual physical transaction
occurs until the expiration date; rather, margins are basically good-faith deposits.) Although high leverage is
one of the attributes of futures markets for traders, it should be emphasized that leverage is a two-edged
sword. The undisciplined use of leverage is the single most important reason why most traders lose money in
the futures markets. In general, futures prices are no more volatile than the underlying cash prices or, for
that matter, many stocks. The high-risk reputation of futures is largely a consequence of the leverage factor.
5. Low transaction costs-Futures markets provide very low transaction costs. For example, it is far less
expensive for a stocJc portfolio manager to reduce market exposure by selling the equivalent dollar amount
of stock index futures contracts than by selling individual stocks.
6. Ease of offset-A futures position can be offset at any time during market hours, providing prices are not
locked at limit-up or limit-down. (Some futures markets specify daily maximum price changes. In cases in
which free market forces would normally seek an equilibrium price outside the range of boundaries implied by
price limits, the market will simply move to the limit and virtually cease to trade.)
7. Guaranteed by exchange-The futures trader does not have to be concerned about the financial stability
of the person on the other side of the trade. All futures transactions are guaranteed by the clearinghouse of
the exchange.
Since, by their very structure, futures are closely tied to their underlying markets (the activity of
arbitrageurs assures that deviations are relatively minor and short-lived), price moves in futures will very
closely parallel those in the corresponding cash markets. Keeping in mind that the majority of futures trading
activity is concentrated in financial instruments, many futures traders are, in reality, traders in stocks, bonds,
and currencies. In this context, the comments o-f futures traders interviewed in the following chapters have
direct relevance even to investors who have never ventured beyond stocks and bonds.
Note: This chapter was adapted from Jack Schwager, Market Wizards (New York: New York I? Institute of
Finance, 1989).

34

35
Randy McKay: Veteran Trader
There are few futures traders who have gone from a starting account of several thousand dollars to
double-digit million-dollar gains. Those who have kept their winnings are even fewer. If we now add die
stipulation of holding a twenty-year record of highly consistent profitability, we are down to about the same
number as there are Republican supporters of Teddy Kennedy. Randy McKay is one of those individuals (a
consistent trader, that is- I don't know what his political leanings are). The start of McKay's trading career
coincided with the birth of currency futures trading. Although currencies have become among the most
actively traded futures markets, at their inception they were moribund. In those days, the currency trading
ring was so quiet that in the list of daily activities conducted in the pit, trading was probably a distant third to
newspaper reading and board games. Yet, although the currency futures market's survival was initially in
question, McKay's success as a trader was never in doubt. Despite the lack of activity, McKay was able to
parlay an initial $2,000 stake into $70,000 in his first calendar year in the business (actually, a seven-month
time span). McKay continued his success, making more money each year than in the previous year. This
pattern of steadily increasing annual gains was broken when McKay decided to switch from trading on the
floor to trading at home. He quickly made the necessary adjustments, however, and by his second year of
trading from home, he registered his first million-dollar gain. McKay continued to increase his winnings each
successive year until 1986, when he suffered his first trading loss. Prior to that point, he had strung together
seven consecutive million-dollar-plus years in his own account.
Over his entire trading career, McKay has been profitable for his own account in eighteen out of twenty
years. A conservative estimate would place his cumulative earnings in the tens of millions. McKay has also
managed a handful of accounts for family and friends. The two oldest accounts, which were initiated in 1982
with a starting equity of $10,000, have each generated cumulative earnings in excess of $1 million.
Despite his great success in the markets, McKay has maintained a very low profile. Until recently, even
within the industry, few people had heard of him, myself included. McKay, however, has decided to enter the
world of money management, a transition that requires at least a modestly higher public profile.
The interview was conducted in McKay's office during trading hours. Although McKay traded intermittently
throughout the interview, he seemed totally focused on our conversation, with the exception of when he
made actual trading decisions. I found McKay refreshingly open about his personal experiences and his
thinking process in regards to the markets.
==== How did you first get involved in this business? ====
In 1970, I returned from a tour of duty in Vietnam ...
==== Before you continue, I'm curious, were you drafted or did you volunteer? ====
I was drafted. In my second year of college, I learned to play bridge and became addicted to the game. I
played day and night and skipped all my classes. My lack of attendance led to six Ps. I flunked out and was
immediately drafted by the marines.
==== I didn't know that the marines drafted recruits. ====
They normally don't. However, there were two months in 1968-April and May-in which they were allowed
to take eight thousand draftees.
==== Did you try to avoid getting drafted? ====
I didn't have to be drafted. My father was a colonel in the reserves and he could easily have gotten me a
cushy job in the reserves.
==== How come you didn't take that option? ====
At the time, I felt it was my obligation to serve. I guess I was a conservative kid. I felt that if I accepted
the privileges of being a U.S. citizen, I also had to accept the responsibilities.
==== Did you have any personal opinions about the war at the time? ====
I thought it was a stupid war, but I felt that we elected leaders and they made the decisions.
==== You make it sound like it was a matter of civic responsibility. ====
That's exactly the way I felt about it before Vietnam. During and after the war, my feelings changed
drastically.
==== In what way? ====
One of the experiences that will always be with me is standing guard duty, which is something everyone
did regardless of his job. I would hear a noise in the bushes and think, "What is that?" Of course, the worst
possibility was that it was one of the enemy sneaking up to try to shoot me. I would think; to myself, "This is
the enemy; I really want to kill him." Then I thought about who was really out there. It was probably a young
kid just like me. He didn't hate me; he was just doing what his superiors told him to do-just like me. I
remember thinking, "What's going on here? Here's a kid who's as scared as I am, trying to kill me, and I'm
trying to kill him."
I started to realize that war is insanity. It doesn't make the slightest bit of sense for countries to try to
settle their political differences by sending their children out to kill each other and whoever kills the most
people gets the piece of land. The longer I was in Vietnam, and the more personal my experiences became,
the more intently I felt that war was insanity.
==== It almost sounds as if the war made you a pacifist. ====
Very much so.

35

36
==== What about the rest of the unit? Was there
any prevailing sentiment about the war? ====
There was a pretty wide range of feelings, but most of the unit leaned to the hawkish side. Most of them
thought that we were doing the right thing; that we were there to help free these people from communism. I
don't know if they were, as we say in the markets, "talking their position," or whether they really believed it.
==== Did you get into arguments because your beliefs were different? ====
I tried to avoid it. You have to remember that the marines were almost all volunteer. Therefore, the
people who were there believed in what they were doing. Their backgrounds were very different from mine.
Few of them were college educated. A number of them came from street gangs. Some were even there
because the judge had given them a choice between jail and probation on condition of joining the service.
==== Did you feel out of place? ====
I felt very much out of place. I was in an artillery unit. Each hour we received weather reports, which we
were supposed to use to derive a composite adjustment factor. We filled out a form specifying the wind .
direction and velocity, air density, temperature, rotation of the earth, ; and other factors and performed a
mathematical process to derive a net t factor. Every time the weather report came in, it became a game to
see Is who could derive this factor most quickly. Before I was there, the speed & record was nineteen
seconds. On my second day there, I broke the record, and I eventually got the time down to nine seconds. I
thought this was great fun. Little did I realize that I was making enemies by the truckload.
The people who were there preferred the new guys being ignorant so that they could have the feeling of
helping to bring them along. Here I was, a new guy, a college kid, doing things better and faster than they
were. I also got three promotions in my first four months, which was unheard of in the marines. All of this
didn't go over too well. It took me a while, but I finally realized that being a college hotshot was doing me a
lot more harm than good. I made an effort to blend in better, with modest success.
==== Were you in situations in which your unit was in direct line of fire? ====
Oh sure. We were bombarded by mortars and rockets nearly every other day, and there were about a
dozen times when we were in face-to-face combat with troops trying to overrun our position. However, for
the most part, the greatest danger was that artillery pieces were primary targets for the North Vietnamese
troops and Vietcong.
==== What was the emotional response to going from civilization into a situation where your life was being
threatened almost daily? ====
There are two responses one has. The first is fear. I remember getting off the plane in Da Nang, with
gunfire all around, and being rushed into the back of a jeep. There were repeated bursts of gunfire
throughout our ride to the base camp. We had our weapons with us, but we had no experience in shooting at
people. I was absolutely terrified.
After a few months, the primary feeling changed from fear to boredom. Once you get used to the idea that
you might die, you're faced with a sixteen-hour workday in absolutely horrible conditions. Either it was 110
degrees with dust blowing in your face, or during the monsoon season you were knee-deep in mud and
freezing, even though the temperature was about 50 or 60 degrees.
==== Did the fear dissipate after a while? ====
There is always fear, but you get used to it. There were even times when an attack was almost welcome
because it helped break up the boredom. I don't mean that to sound flip-some of my friends were killed or
lost their arms and legs in these attacks-but after a few months, the boredom became a bigger problem than
the fear.
==== Did you have any experiences in hand-to-hand combat in which you know that you killed somebody?
====
Yes and no. I know that I personally killed people, but there were no specific instances in which I fired and
saw someone drop. Firefights are different in reality than they are on TV. You don't fire single shots at
specific targets. Instead, you put your rifle on automatic and put out as much lead as you can. I know that I
killed people with my rifle and certainly with the artillery shells that I was directing, but fortunately I never
had the experience of seeing a person bleed to death by my bullet. I'm very thankful for that. I have
nightmares to this day, but I'm sure my nightmares would be much worse if I had that experience.
==== Nightmares because you were the instrument of death? Or because you were exposed to death?
====
Nightmares from being exposed to death. The one nightmare I still have to this day is being chased by
people with rifles. My feet get bogged down; I can't mn fast enough; and they're gaining on me.
==== While you were in Vietnam, did you feel that you were going to come out of it alive? ====
I guess you're always an optimist in that type of situation. I thought I would, but I certainly had plenty of
friends who didn't. I knew that was a possibility. But you can't have an anxiety attack every thirty seconds
for a year. Eventually, your mind forces you to get used to the idea that you might die or lose a leg, and you
go on.
==== How did the Vietnam experience change you? ====
The major change was that I went from being a rule follower to thinking for myself. When I realized that
the leaders in the country didn't necessarily know what they were doing, I became much more independent.
==== Given that you came out of Vietnam in one piece, in retrospect do you consider it a beneficial
experience? ====
