
P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

The Six Attributes of a Successful Currency Trader

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

65

FIGURE 2.2 Greed Can Be Good

In the same way, currency traders need to let their account values get
big and fat, and the way they do that is to attack the trends and stay firmly
on the trend as long as they can; as long as the account equity cannot get
any larger. When is the moment to exit? The moment comes when the market price decides it is going to change the bias from one direction to the
other. At that point is when the successful traders “slaughter” their position and take their profit.
To illustrate, Figure 2.2 is the same EURUSD used earlier to demonstrate what goes through the mind of a trader who has the fear of success.
In this case, I will explain the thought processes for a smart trend trader
who has greed. Like the other trader, this trader gets short at 1.3485 too.
He realizes, however, that the market is poised for a trend-type move. I
will refrain from telling why at this point in the book, but I will explain
why later.
The market does what it is supposed to do and moves lower. The trend
trader enjoys the first leg down to the first targets at 1.3450 and 1.3437.
The trader, because he is anticipating a trend, does not close his position.
Instead he moves his stop down to 1.3475. This is just above the prior lows
and just before the first sharp move lower. The market pauses at 1.3450,
moves below 1.3437 and consolidates, allowing the moving average line
(solid line) to catch up.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

66

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

As the time goes by, the trend trader—still looking for trend move—
can move the stop down to 1.3453, which is above the first support level,
or alternatively use a move back above the moving average line to stop
the position out. The stop levels do not get triggered as the price continues its moves lower. Instead, the trader is rewarded with another leg to
the downside that takes the price down to the 1.3355 low, an impressive
129 pips from the entry level. The trend trader is playing with the house’s
money now as a gain is virtually locked in, and exits the trade either when
the market moves back above the channel trend line or above the 100 bar
moving average. He gets out at 1.3382 and books a profit of +103 pips.
The gain is made because he anticipated a trend move, because he
managed his position and stops logically. He controlled his fear of success
and had just enough greed to fatten his account. When the market could
not go any farther and the bias turned bullish by going above the 100 bar
moving average, he “slaughtered” the position and booked the profit.
Bulls and bears make money, but pigs can and do get fat before getting
slaughtered.
Greed can indeed be good as long as the prior five attributes of successful traders are firmly in place. Traders need to develop their skills and
aptitude in order to create the desire to do better. They need the desire
so they practice and begin to firmly understand markets and have a feel
for risk. They need to evaluate and know their risk so they avoid the accidents of trading. They need a plan that will define their risk/reward, and
they must accept failure as part of the plan. They need ways to control both
the fear of failure and the fear of success, because fear is a trader’s worst
enemy. Finally, with all that in place, successful traders need the greed to
attack the currency trends that allow the account to get big and fat.

A FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS
Admittedly, I have begun to build the foundation by telling what needs to
be done. However, I have not explained how it can be done. We do not have
a plan. We do not know how to set our stops so we can control our fear. We
do not know the tools we will use in our plan. We do not know specifically
the profit targets we are aiming for or how to anticipate a trend. All these
have yet to be developed.
Before we can do that, however, we must first continue to strengthen
the foundation by introducing the mission statement for our trading and
the game plan for attacking the currency trends. Let’s move on with our
journey and keep our step-by-step progression in motion.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c03

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

18:51

Printer: Yet to come

CHAPTER 3

The Mission
Statement

efore Mission Impossible was a series of movies starring Tom
Cruise, it was a television show. The program started with a tape
recording that detailed a mission for Mr. Phelps, played by actor
Peter Graves. The distinctive recorded voice would say “Your mission,
should you decide to accept it . . .” with a brief explanation of the goal
of the mission. The final words would warn “this tape will self-destruct in
five seconds,” at which time the tape recorder would smoke and the tape
was destroyed.
Mr. Phelps was always focused on the mission. He knew what he had
to do. However, to do it, he needed to develop a game plan. Of course, by
the end of the program (consistent with the Hollywood tradition) he was
able to perform the impossible by following the game plan.
In life we all have missions that seem impossible, but we are somehow
able to solve a lot of them. Many of you may be parents. I know when I
think back to the day my first son was born, my wife and I had no clue
what to do or how to do it. We felt anxiety not just for the near term, but
the long term as well. We were only 25 years old, and it just seemed like a
lot for a young couple. It was a mission impossible for us.
Apart from the little hurdles like changing diapers, feeding, getting by
on little sleep (now it seems I get even less sleep), my wife Debbie and I
knew that our mission as parents was to mold Matt into a responsible adult.
Our game plan was to protect him and keep him safe from harm. We
wanted him to understand right from wrong. We wanted to give him the
opportunity to succeed as best we could. We did not want to be his best

B

67

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c03

JWBT439-Michalowski

68

January 18, 2011

18:51

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

friends, but we wanted to be his best parents, whom he could depend on
as a baby, toddler, child, teen, and young adult. That became what I now
call the game plan that would satisfy our mission—to have Matt become a
responsible adult.
How about something less pressure packed then parenting? I have always loved the game of golf. In my youth, when I had more free time, my
mission on the golf course was to lower my handicap. If I did not lower it
over the course of a season, the season was a failure. My game plan for accomplishing the mission was to hit more fairways with my drives, reduce
my putts, and improve my bunker play. I had it all mapped out. Maybe you
have something similar in your life.
Over the next two chapters, I will outline a mission statement and game
plan for retail currency traders. These two pieces help to lay and strengthen
the foundation for success as a currency trader and, like the six attributes
of successful traders outlined in the previous chapter, can often determine
success or failure.
Whether it is something serious like raising a child or something not so
serious like golf, success is built from having and committing to a mission
and a game plan. Your mission, should you decide to accept it, will take
you closer to profitability in your currency trading.

A TEAM OF ONE
When I have a speaking engagement, I often ask the traders to honestly answer a question. Do they have a mission statement for their trading? What
I find is that very few hands go up.
Now I know that the mission statement is part of many a corporate
motivational exercise, and it sounds great during an off-site team-building
weekend. However, it is often forgotten on Monday morning when the
“rah-rah” of the weekend is over.
I have been there and felt rejuvenated by off-sites, but I think it is
hard to get everyone to drink the corporate Kool-Aid and make permanent
changes for the good of the firm. Management knows it works, but unless
the team members rally together, it is difficult to keep the momentum going forward. As a result, success of mission statements may not be as great
as most would think. In the corporate world, it takes persistence, a strong
leader, and, most importantly perhaps, the team behind the idea.
What I do know, however, is each year there is a champion crowned
in baseball, in football, in soccer, in rugby, in basketball, in many sports,
and the common thread in most championship teams is the individuals’
willingness to put team ahead of self.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c03

JWBT439-Michalowski

The Mission Statement

January 18, 2011

18:51

Printer: Yet to come

69

True teams become families. Family members will often do anything
for other family members. In fact, the 1979 Pittsburgh Pirates used the Sister Sledge disco hit “We Are Family” as their theme song for their baseball
championship run. Post-game interviews of champions tend to always reference how “we couldn’t have done it without the dedication of everyone
on the team.” That is often the mission statement for groups of people and
especially in sports.
In currency trading there is usually no team. By and large, trading is
a lonely business. Most retail traders don’t have physical face-to-face human contact with other traders. In recent years there has been more contact through message boards, but most participants are anonymous, just
another pictured face behind a pseudonym.
I am not all that surprised by the loneliness of trading. Let’s face it,
trading can be humbling. Losing is unavoidable, and most people shy away
from being put in a situation whereby their faults are so exposed—even if
they are overall profitable.
The fact is that successful traders can be wrong more than half the
time and still be profitable. That can be tough for some people who grew
up getting all A’s on their report cards, went to a top university, went to
business, medical, or law school, and are now retired and looking to trade
currencies. It is tough being wrong 50 percent of the time when in your
prior profession you had to be right 99.9 percent of the time or you were
out of a job (or sued because of your “incompetence”). I certainly am glad
I have a cushion as a foreign currency trading analyst when compared to
my CPA wife, who had better get the tax return right, or the IRS will be on
her client’s tail.
Once, early in my career, I traded with someone as a team member
and, quite frankly, it did not work out. We both ended up abandoning the
idea. Upon reflection afterwards, we both came to the realization that we
compromised to the detriment of our trading beliefs. It wasn’t so much on
our decisions about getting into a trade but more on how and when to get
out of a trade.
For example, when we had a losing trade, we both felt like we had to
keep it open longer than normal, for fear of being considered a chicken, or
not committed to the trade in each other’s eyes. When we had a winning
trade, we were often more quick to take profit because of the fear that if
the position turned around, we would be questioned by the other as to why
profit was not realized. In both our eyes, it was safer to take the small profit
even if it was premature and well before its time to do so.
Could we have fixed the team and traded more profitably? In theory,
we could have, but we thought we would do better on our own, using our
own styles, making our own decisions. We thought being a team put more
stress on our trading and created more fear. We both knew that was not

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c03

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

70

18:51

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

what either of us wanted. We realized that trading was not really a team
sport for us.
So if currency trading is not all that suited to being a team sport, do
we still need a mission statement? Of course we do. In fact, because most
retail traders trade as a team of one, it makes the dynamics of following
through on the mission statement easier. The only person who needs to
buy into the idea—into the mission statement—is you. You and you alone
are the family.

A TWO-PART MISSION STATEMENT
When I went about creating my mission statement for trading, I looked
at it as not some far-off dream that is something to achieve in the future
(i.e., “My mission is to make a million dollars”) but instead a path to follow
today, a broad guiding light toward success, however that may be defined
and accomplished. The mission statement is the rock that all else is built
upon.
So when I went about deciding on what my mission statement for
trading should be, I wanted to make sure it was something that I could
focus on each and every day. Of course I wanted to make it simple and
succinct—small enough to fit on a note card. I wanted each word to be
important.
Contrary to what some may think, a mission statement alone cannot
make a trader more profitable. After all, my mission statement for golf does
not automatically lower my handicap. Becoming a profitable trader is accomplished through things like my game plan, the rules I follow, the trading
tools I use (and perfect), and the clues I look for in the market that allow
me to trade successfully. Knowing that I wanted a guiding light as well as
a rock to build my trading foundation on, my mission statement for trading currencies became: “To make the most money with the least amount of
risk.”
Let’s take a look at each of the two parts of the guiding light and rock
for trading currencies.

“To Make the Most Money . . .”
If you are reading this book (and you are not my mom or a family member), you either are currently a currency trader, have the desire to be a
currency trader, or perhaps just want to increase your knowledge about
trading trends. You heard that this book lays the progression down in a
logical, easy-to-understand format. Whatever your reason for getting to this

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c03

JWBT439-Michalowski

The Mission Statement

January 18, 2011

18:51

Printer: Yet to come

71

point, what all traders are trying to do is take some pool of money or capital
and make more money through trading. Clearly, if traders do not have this
as their mission, then they are cheating themselves and should not trade
at all.
Making money is what it is all about. Traders should think about making money. They should focus on the positive and keep the thought of
losses off to the side. Will there be losses? Of course there will, but before we talk about them, let’s focus not only on making money, but making
the most money.
I could have easily said the first part of the mission statement was “to
make money,” but instead I added the qualifying word “most.” Needless to
say, I think the word is very important. Let me explain.
With my experience, I could trade the EURUSD and make a pip or two
pretty easily. The bid-to-ask spread is fairly narrow. The price has good
high-to-low trading ranges, and the market has enough up and down volatility. In fact, there are plenty of auto trading programs for sale that take advantage of these characteristics and try to entice beginning traders to their
high win/loss scalping programs.
Is it the way to make the most money trading? I don’t think so. In fact,
it can and often does the opposite. In Chapter 1, I outlined the case where
including and paying away the bid-to-ask spread of 2 pips, a move of 3 pips
is needed to scalp a 1-pip profit in the EURUSD. That same 3-pip move
in the opposite direction of the trade creates a 5-pip loss with the normal
2-pip bid-to-ask spread.
Including the spread, being right 84 percent of the time using a scalping
strategy of making a 1-pip profit would bring in 84 pips of profit. The 16
losing trades of 5 pips would subtract 80 pips. The 4-pip overall gain for
such a success rate is a lot of pressure to be right.
What if you were only right 75 percent of the time? In this case 75
pips of gains (75 × 1 pip gain = +75 pips) would be made and −125 pips
of losses (25 × −5 pip loss = −125 pips) would accrue for a net loss of
50 pips. Being right 75 percent of the time is a great success ratio. Losing
50 pips is not a great result for being right so many times.
This way of trading is not the way toward making the most money.
Successful traders—the ones who make the most money—have to work
harder. How is it done? Our game plan in the next chapter will start to
explain the hows and whys of making the most money, and the rest of the
book will take us further along the trend-trading journey.
Will We All Make Money? To make the most money, you need a combination of market and trading knowledge, and quite frankly, a little luck.
The luck part of the equation may sound random, but as I will explain later
in the chapter, successful traders tend to make their own luck. First, let’s

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c03

72

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

18:51

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

look at the market and trading knowledge needed for making the most
amount of money.
Market and Trading Knowledge In this book I have already told you
the six attributes of successful traders. Follow them. Failure to follow them
will likely lead to trading losses. I have now told you the mission statement
for currency traders. Use it as your guiding light and foundation. There
are other things I will tell you that will increase your market and trading
intelligence and provide a logical progression for increasing success as a
currency trader. In other words, for making the most money, I will start
broad and will get more specific as the book progresses.
For example, in subsequent chapters I will tell you what the game plan
is for the mission statement. You will need to know and follow the game
plan. I will tell you the rules for the game plan. You will need to know and
follow the rules. I will tell you what technical tools to use and why. You
will need to know and use the technical tools and have faith in them. I will
tell you the clues the market gives for anticipating trends and why. You will
need to know and follow the clues the market gives you. I will tell you to
stay on the trend until it tells to you exit the trade—especially if you are
anticipating a trend. You will need to be disciplined enough to stay on the
trend.
I will tell you all these things in a progressive step-by-step process,
but ultimately, you need to do it all. If you do, you’ll be a smarter trader
who naturally makes the most money, just like the mission statement
says.
Retail currency traders need to focus on making the most money they
can each and every day given their abilities. The amount they make is
largely dependent on market and trading knowledge that they will learn
over time. It is unrealistic to think that someone will automatically be a
five-star trader from day one, even after reading this book. That is a lot to
ask for. Trading is just not that easy.
However, having a mission statement to make the most money does
help focus attention on a guiding light, on the rock of foundation for your
trading each and every day, and the lessons from this book will be built
upon that rock. Traders should think and perhaps even say out loud, “My
mission today is to make the most money.”
The Right Kind of Luck There are two types of luck. One type of luck
is the bet-red-or-black blind luck. This is the bad luck that ultimately leads
to failure. The other type of luck is a risk-defined luck. Successful traders
tend to benefit from this type of calculated luck. It is a piece of making the
most amount of money.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c03

JWBT439-Michalowski

The Mission Statement

January 18, 2011

18:51

Printer: Yet to come

73

Traders who trade without a reason—who buy because the market
price is rising and sell because the market price is falling—tend to rely on
blind luck for making the most amount of money. This is the bet black or
red on the roulette wheel type of luck, but worse. The reason it is worse is
that since these traders do not have a reason to do a trade, they probably
don’t have a reason or price level to get out of the trade either. Failure to
know specific risk means the risk of loss is unlimited. The trader does not
know when he is wrong. He does not know when the market bias is no
longer bullish and is now bearish.
These types of traders tend to have losses that are larger than those
who trade because of a reason. They need to rely on luck being on their
side, and a lot of it. I have seen these types of traders come and go rather
quickly. If you are this type of trader, my advice is to change. It is unlikely
you will have any long-term success.
Other blind-luck-reliant traders are the ones who put on a new position right before the monthly U.S. Unemployment report (or another key
economic release or event) because they have a hunch it will be stronger
or weaker than expected. The fact is that there are 300 million people
in the United States; if Nonfarm Payroll is plus or minus 150,000 people away from consensus, it can cause a violent reaction one way or the
other. If a trader guesses right, it is pure, blind L-U-C-K. The trader who
does this type of trade does not know why the scheduled report would be
off consensus. Professional economists with PhDs at companies such as
Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Citibank, or Deutsche Bank get paid a
lot of money to model and estimate how many jobs are created any given
month. I would think that they would know more than the average trader
who has a hunch.
A retail trader who comes up to me at a trade show and tells me how he
put a new position on through Unemployment (or another key release) and
made a killing in 30 seconds is telling me that he drank the devil’s Kool-Aid.
If someone who does this wants to be your buddy, distance yourself from
him or her. Down the road, that trader will do the same thing, and when
it does not work out as hunched, the loss will be larger, because getting
out of a losing position is harder than taking a profit in a fast market. That
trader will disappear in time. If you are this type of trader, change. This is
not the way to make the most money.
I like to tell traders that successful traders make their own luck, and
with that luck they are in a better position to make money. How do successful traders make their own luck? Isn’t a lucky trade something that should
not have happened, but did? Therefore, how can successful traders predict
a lucky turn of events that leads to a successful trade?
It isn’t so much that they predict what may happen; it is more that
they protect themselves from the trade going against them, and therefore
