
Failing to give a good short signal
For the losing example of a bearish doji star, I present Figure 8-15, which is a
chart of the stock for Apple Computer (symbol AAPL). The bearish doji star I
highlight in the figure showed up during a bullish trend, and you can see that
this chart includes a nice up day followed by a doji. All the bearish doji star
criteria are in place, but the pattern fails swiftly and mercilessly, and the
trend continues with a very strong up day directly after the pattern. The
potential Apple trade goes rotten.
My failure level for a bearish doji star is the high of the signal day, as opposed
to that day’s open or close. Using the combined open and close area of the
doji doesn’t provide much room for volatility on a stop. If the stock opens
just slightly up the next day, then it will hit the buy stop, which is very likely
to happen even in the case of a trend reversal. In order to avoid regular
market noise forcing me out of a trade, I prefer to rely on the high of the
signal day for my stop exit.

The bearish meeting line
Although rare, the bearish meeting line pattern is worth understanding as
you build your arsenal of double-stick bearish patterns that signal a trend
reversal. This line can be a clear indication of a change in trend due to the
stark contrast of the two days that combine to form the pattern.

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 169

Chapter 8: Utilizing Bearish Double-Stick Patterns

Figure 8-14:
A bearish
doji star
pattern
working on
a chart of
INTC.

Figure 8-15:
The bearish
doji star
pattern fails
on a chart of
AAPL stock.

Understanding how to identify the bearish meeting line
If you’re looking for an ideal visual representation of the bearish meeting line,
it doesn’t get any better than Figure 8-16.

169

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 170

170 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

Figure 8-16:
A straightforward
example of
the bearish
meeting line
pattern.

On the setup day of the bearish meeting line, as with most of the two-day
bearish patterns, you see a strong up day. Then, on the signal day, you notice
a gap opening, which quickly entices some sellers. The selling continues until
the close. A long black candle is the result, with the close of the day being very
near its low. The close of the signal day also happens to be very near the close
of the setup day, and the meeting of these lines gives the pattern its name.

Trading on the bearish meeting line
For an example of the bearish meeting line pattern producing a scenario that’s
ripe for a successful trade, see Figure 8-17. That’s a chart of the aluminum
maker Alcoa (symbol AA). As a producer of a material used in many everyday
products, Alcoa is another stock that has strong ties to the overall economy.
AA is a volatile stock at times, creating both long and short opportunities.
A definite uptrend exists on this chart — the first criteria for keeping any eye
out for a bearish reversal signal. The setup day is a very nice up day, and
then the signal day opens with a gap higher. The bulls are ruling the trading
activity, and the situation is perfect for a successful bearish meeting line
pattern.
If you were watching this pattern develop, you’d be pleased to see that sellers come in and push prices lower than the previous day’s close, and
although the stock rebounds a little, the price settles on the signal day near
where the stock closed on the setup day.

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 171

Chapter 8: Utilizing Bearish Double-Stick Patterns

Figure 8-17:
A bearish
meeting line
pattern that
turns out
well on a
chart of AA.

Then the trend reversal begins. And what a trend reversal it is! Six black candles line up in a row, signaling that the uptrend has definitely ended. Any
trader not prepared on the day the signal was completed misses out on a
good part of the outstanding downtrend.
To get in on the close of a day that a pattern is completed, watch for the patterns as they develop during a trading day. Usually, with five to ten minutes
left in a trading day, you can tell whether a pattern is forming or not. The
problem for you if you’re a new or part-time trader is that you probably have
a job or other responsibilities that may prevent you from being available to
trade during these important time periods. Be sure to factor in your own
availability when developing your trading strategy.

An unsuccessful bearish meeting line
An example of the bearish meeting lines failing to signal an uptrend reversal
appears in Figure 8-18, which is a chart of the futures contract that trades on
the level of the Euro currency versus the U.S. dollar. The uptrend is in place,
and the formation appears as it should. This pattern is very encouraging for a
trader who’s been waiting for a good time to short. In this example, however,
that enthusiasm from a short seller is fleeting.
The day that follows the pattern proves it to be invalid. Prices trade higher than both the open and the high of the pattern’s signal day, making it
clear that the pattern is a bust.
When shorting based on the bearish meeting line pattern, I usually place my
stops on either the high of the signal day or the open of the signal day.

171

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 172

172 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

Figure 8-18:
The bearish
meeting line
pattern fails
on a chart
of Euro
currency
futures.

The bearish piercing line or
dark cloud cover pattern
Another two-day bearish reversal pattern is the bearish piercing line, also
known as the dark cloud cover, because some say that the signal day is an
ominous dark cloud that hangs over the setup day. It requires a little use of
your imagination.

Identifying the bearish piercing line pattern
You can see a straightforward illustration of the bearish piercing line in
Figure 8-19. Just like all the bearish two-stick reversal patterns I describe in
the preceding sections of this chapter, this pattern must appear in an uptrend.
Also, in keeping with the other bearish reversal patterns, the setup day for
the bearish piercing line is a bullish day. The signal day is a long black candle
with an opening that’s higher than the setup day’s high. The signal day indicates that some sellers came rushing in, pushing prices down through the
setup day’s opening price and below its midpoint.

Making trades based on the bearish piercing line
The bearish piercing line pattern can be used to put on a profitable short, as
you can see in Figure 8-20. This chart shows the bearish piercing line on a
chart of Intel (INTC).

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 173

Chapter 8: Utilizing Bearish Double-Stick Patterns
The pattern occurs in what appears to be the late stages of an uptrend. The
price is still working higher, but not with as much momentum as it did where
I’ve pointed out the first stage of the uptrend. If you see a reversal pattern
when you believe a trend is starting to lose steam, that’s more encouraging
than when the pattern appears in a strong trend. In later chapters I discuss
how to use indicators to make these distinctions (see Chapters 11, 14,
and 15).

Figure 8-19:
The bearish
piercing line
pattern.

Figure 8-20:
The bearish
piercing line
pattern at
work on a
chart of
INTC.

173

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 174

174 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
Falling short with the bearish piercing line
This INTC chart is another example of the limited amount of time you may
have for initiating certain trades. Unless you keep a close eye on the chart,
you miss your chance to put on a successful short. So what does a bearish
piercing line pattern look like when the pattern fails? For an answer, see
Figure 8-21.

Figure 8-21:
The bearish
piercing line
pattern fails
on a chart
of DELL.

Figure 8-21 shows a chart of the stock for another technology company, Dell
Inc. (symbol DELL), which was founded by Michael Dell. (Maybe I’m too
focused on the market, but how cool would it be to have your name become
a stock symbol?) Here you can see a bearish piercing line that occurs during
an uptrend. The uptrend continues on, and the failure of the pattern (and the
appearance of higher prices) takes a couple of days. If you jump the gun on
this pattern and put on a short without a smart stop, you see some losses.

Making a Profit with Bearish
Trend Patterns
In addition to double-stick patterns that tell a trader it’s time to sell or put on
a short after an uptrending move, some patterns also indicate a downtrend
continuation is on the horizon. These patterns can tell you when you still
have room to profit on a short. You can also turn to them when you’re looking to buy a stock that’s been in a downtrend and looks to be “getting cheap.”
A bearish double-stick trend continuation pattern can let you know that a
stock is going to get cheaper and can therefore be had at an even lower price.

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 175

Chapter 8: Utilizing Bearish Double-Stick Patterns

A quick note on trend strength
Allow me to point out an interesting side note
and comparison of Figures 8-20 and 8-21. The
successful bearish piercing line occurs when
the trend appears to be moderating. On the
DELL chart, which contains the failing pattern,
the opposite occurs. The trend is strong, but the
pattern appears after an acceleration of
momentum. This burst of uptrend momentum

can indicate to an observant trader that even
though a bearish pattern has appeared, it’s
probably smart to use caution when putting on
a short. It can also signal that a quick exit may
very well be in order. Remember to keep on the
lookout for these increases in trend strength. To
help you train your eye, I’ve highlighted the relevant area in Figure 8-21.

All the two-day bearish trending patterns covered in this section require that
the market or stock in question be in a down-trending mode. Determining the
trend can be subjective and can also be a matter of the time frame in which
you’re trading. I go into great detail on determining trend in later chapters
(especially Chapter 11), but for this section, just concentrate on the pattern
and don’t worry as much about whether you agree with my assessment of
the prevailing trend.

The bearish thrusting lines
The first two-day pattern that indicates the continuation of a downtrend is
the bearish thrusting lines pattern. I like this pattern because the signal day
is an up day. You may scratch your head and wonder why I would like an up
day that indicates the continuation of a downtrend. At first blush it does
sound counterintuitive, but the presence of an up day on the signal day of
this pattern means that a great opportunity exists to put on a short at prices
higher than the previous day of the downtrend.

Understanding how to spot the bearish thrusting lines
Figure 8-22 shows you exactly what the bearish thrusting lines look like on a
chart. Again, the prevailing trend should be down, and the setup day is a long
black candle. On the signal day, prices open weak, but then the bulls come in
and try to reverse the trend and take over. They seem to be succeeding, but
they’re not quite strong enough to get prices to the upper half of the candlestick that was created by the setup day’s trading. This activity means that
although the bears don’t completely control the day, they’re still around and
are eager to reassert themselves in the coming days.

175

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 176

176 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

Figure 8-22:
The bearish
thrusting
lines
pattern.

Trading on the bearish thrusting lines
For an example of the bearish thrusting lines working well, turn to Figure 8-23
and a chart of the stock for the Toll Brothers (symbol TOL), which is a highend home-building company. During the recent contraction of real estate
prices, the publicly traded home-building stocks lost a lot of ground, and TOL
was no exception.
The bearish thrusting lines actually pop up three times on this chart, and for
each of those three occurrences, the stock’s price drops for days after the
pattern appears. For the sake of emphasis, I added a downtrend line to show
the continuing downtrend.

Figure 8-23:
The bearish
thrusting
lines pattern
works on
a chart
of TOL.

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 177

Chapter 8: Utilizing Bearish Double-Stick Patterns
A successful trade based on the bearish thrusting lines in this chart starts
with the close of the first pattern’s signal day. If you’re short from the top of
this downtrend, you definitely feel like a skilled trader. You can easily monitor
the continuation patterns and follow the trend as it heads down. But where
would you exit the short?
An exit would be prudent when the price trades over the hand-drawn line on
the chart. (See Chapter 11 for more information on how to draw trendlines.)
At that point the downtrend has been broken, and the easy money on the
short has been made, so be smart and take your tidy profit and move on.

Recognizing a disappointing bearish thrusting line pattern
Want to see what happens when the bearish thrusting lines fail? Look no farther than Figure 8-24, which is a chart of the futures contracts that trade
based on the level of the Japanese Yen versus the U.S. dollar. You can see that
toward the end of this downtrend, two double-stick patterns actually fail to
indicate the end of the downtrend. Both two-day patterns and the failing days
are highlighted on the chart.
I hate to see the patterns in Figure 8-24 fail. They both start out with so much
promise! Both patterns appear in downtrends and meet the criteria of having
a long black candle setup day followed by an up signal day that retraces some
of the long black candle day’s area but doesn’t close higher than its midpoint.
The failures occur when the highs of the signal days are violated on the days
that follow each pattern. You can even say that the violations occur when
days that follow the patterns have prices that exceed the midpoint, open, or
high of the setup day. It doesn’t matter which level you choose — they all get
violated, the patterns fail, and the trends turn upward quickly.

Figure 8-24:
The bearish
thrusting
lines fail at
the end of a
downtrend
on the Yen
futures.

177

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 178

178 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
The bearish separating lines
The next continuation or trending pattern is referred to as the bearish separating lines pattern. If you flip back to Chapter 7, you can read all about this
pattern’s bullish counterpart.

Identifying the bearish separating lines
The setup day of the bearish separating lines pattern is a long white candle,
which can make some bears or shorts a bit nervous when it appears in a
downtrend. A little relief for those factions comes on the signal day, however,
when the opening price is near the setup day’s open. That relaxes them a bit,
and they decide that the up day wasn’t justified, so they keep right on selling
on the open of the signal day. But what happens to the bulls that had a ball
on the setup day? They can’t take the heat, so they sell their positions, and
the price just keeps on trending lower and lower. For a graphical representation, check out Figure 8-25.
This pattern is somewhat rare because it’s unusual for the open of the signal
day to be equal or near the setup day’s open. It really amounts to a gap down
opening, with all the prices from the setup day not even trading on the signal
day. Short-term buyers on the setup day hardly have a chance to get out with
a profit on the signal day, which is a very discouraging prospect for a buyer.

Understanding how to trade on the bearish separating lines
The example I use in Figure 8-26 for illustrating how you can use the bearish
separating lines for your trading purposes is an unusual stock chart for this
book. The stock represented is Inco (symbol N), a large producer of the metal
nickel. The model is uncommon because Inco merged out of business with
another company at the beginning of 2007, and it doesn’t trade publicly in the
U.S. anymore. Still, though, the example is a sound one, and it shows you how
the bearish separating lines can really sing when the conditions are just right.
Figure 8-26 clearly shows a downtrend in place, but then a couple of white
candles appear and make the shorts a little twitchy. The second white candle
in the highlighted area is the setup day of the bearish separating lines pattern. It reveals that either some bulls think the price is right to buy or the
shorts are starting to take their profits and get out. However, the signal day
of the pattern shows the price opening near the open of the setup day. Behold
the bearish separating lines! That means the bears aren’t done selling, and
they push the price lower throughout the day and keep the downtrend going.
The pattern in Figure 8-26 is very well formed, but it may not be the best pattern to rely on if you’re interested in initiating a new trade. If you trade it on
the close, you sell at the bottom of a long black day, so quite a bit of ground
will be covered in the direction you want to trade. This particular pattern is
best used as a confirmation that the downtrend is intact, and you’re lucky to
see it if you want to hold onto a short position for a little while longer.

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 179

Chapter 8: Utilizing Bearish Double-Stick Patterns

Figure 8-25:
The bearish
separating
lines
pattern.

Figure 8-26:
The bearish
separating
lines
working
beautifully
on a chart
of Inco.

The failing bearish separating line
Just when you thought you’d always love the bearish separating lines, here I
come with an example of what happens when they go bad. Figure 8-27 is a
chart of General Electric (GE), a conglomerate that stretches from the NBC

179

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 180

180 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
television networks to appliances to aircraft engines. You’d be hard pressed
to find someone who hasn’t been exposed to a branch of GE at some point in
his life. (I say that, of course, with my CNBC on in the background.)
The downtrend on the chart in Figure 8-27 is a strong one, and when the pattern appears, it looks like the downtrend has been underway for several
weeks. The setup day of the pattern is an attempt by some buyers to pick a
cheap place to buy. Then, on the signal day, the bears take over from the
open and push prices lower. But notice that on the day immediately after the
pattern, the open and high of the signal day are both violated. That’s a pretty
good sign that the pattern may not be indicating that the trend will continue.
Shortly after the pattern in Figure 8-27 is violated, a trend reversal occurs. If
you’re considering buying before you see the bearish separating lines, that
pattern may keep you from doing so. If you’re short and you see the pattern,
you may have waited to cover. Because the pattern didn’t hold and the trend
was broken, buyers can change their minds more easily and start buying.
That’s certainly the case here, and you can see that the price of GE heads
higher for several days as a result.

The bearish neck lines
The last bearish double-stick pattern in this chapter is the bearish neck lines,
and just like its bullish counterparts from Chapter 7, this pattern is more of a
pattern classification than one single pattern.

Figure 8-27:
The bearish
separating
lines fail
on a chart
of GE.

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 183

Chapter 8: Utilizing Bearish Double-Stick Patterns

Figure 8-30:
A failure of
the bearish
neck lines
pattern.

183

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 181

Chapter 8: Utilizing Bearish Double-Stick Patterns
Recognizing bearish neck lines
Bearish neck lines have two types: bearish on neck lines and bearish in neck
lines. The difference between the patterns is so small that you don’t have to
separate them out into two sections.
Figure 8-28 includes both bearish in neck and bearish on neck patterns. The
only difference is that the wick of the in neck setup day may overlap some
with the signal day of the pattern. Both variations have a long black candle
for the setup day followed by a gap down and a rebound attempt that manages to trade back only to the close of the setup day. The bears hold their
ground at this level.

