
These ratios vary depending on the type of lending an institution does, as
well as the point of the business cycle in which they are taken. All of these
metrics are found in banks’ financial reports, and they can be compared to in-

dustry averages by logging on to the FDIC Web site, www.fdic.gov.

Return on Equity and Return on Assets

These metrics are the de facto standards for gauging bank profitability. Gen-
erally, investors should look for banks that can consistently generate mid- to
high-teen returns on equity. Ironically, investors should be concerned if a

bank carns a level not only too far below this industry benchmark, but also

3“Bank deposits get interesting,” The McKinsey Quarterly, 2 (2002).

241


242

BANKS

Understanding Leverage

Given the size of the average bank's asset base relative to equity, it’s not difficult to
imagine a doomsday scenario. Eamings serve as the first layer of protection against
credit losses. If losses ina given period exceed eamings, a reserve account on the bal-
ance sheet serves as a second layer of protection. Banks must have a pool of reserves
to protect sharehalders, wha hold only a small stake in the company because of the
leverage employed.

If losses in a period exceed reserves, the difference comes directly fram shareholders’
equity. Equity is an accounting-based expression of a company's net worth, and it's criti-
cal for banks. Go back to the basic balance sheet equation: Assets = Liabilities + Equity.
Liquidate the company and equity represents anything that's left over. Eliminate equity,
and the only party left with any claim on the assets is creditors. When lasses at a bank
start destroying equity, turn out the lights.

Leverage is easily expressed as a ratio: assets/equity. The average bank has a lever-
age ratio in the range of 12 to 1 or so, compared to 2 to 1 or 3 to 1 for the average
company. Leverage isn't evil. It can enhance retums, but there are inherent dangers.
For example, if you buy a $100,000 home with $8,000 down, your equity is 8 percent.
In other words, you're leveraged 12.5 to 1, which is pretty typical for a bank. Now, if
something atypical happens and the value of your home suddenly draps ta $90,000
{just 10 percent), your equity is gone. You still owe the lender $92,000, but the
house isn’t worth that much. You could walk away from the house $8,000 poorer
and still owe $2,000, Highly leveraged businesses put themselves ina similar
situation.

This doesn’t mean all leverage is bad. As a rule, the more liquid a company’s balance
sheet, the more the company can be leveraged because its assets can be quickly con-
verted to cash at a fair price.

too far above it. After all, many fast-growing lenders have thrown off 30 per-
cent or more ROEs just by provisioning too little for loan losses. Remember,
it can be very easy to boost bank’s earnings in the short term by underprovi-
sioning or leveraging up the balance sheet, but this can be unduly risky over
the long term. For this reason, it’s good to see a high level of return on assets,

as well. For banks, a top ROA would be in the 1.2 percent to 1.4 percent range.


HALLMARKS OF SUCCESS FOR BANKS

Efficiency Ratios

The efficiency ratio measures noninterest expense, or operating costs, as a
percentage of net revenues. Basically, it tells you how efficiently the bank is
managed. Many good banks have efficiency ratios under 55 percent (lower is
better). For comparison, the average efficiency ratio of all insured institu-
tions in the fourth quarter of 2002 was 58.4 percent, according to the FDIC.
Look for banks with strong efficiency ratios as evidence that costs are being

kept in check.

Net Interest Margins

Another simple measure to watch is net interest margin, which looks at net
interest income as a percentage of average earning assets. Virtually all banks
report net interest margins because it measures lending profitability. You'll
see a wide variety of net interest margins depending on the type of lending a
bank engages in, but most banks’ margins fall into the 3 percent to 4 percent
range. Track margins over time to get a feel for the trend—if margins are ris-
ing, check to see what’s been happening with interest rates. (Falling rates gen-
erally push up net interest margins.) In addition, examine the bank’s loan
categories to see whether the bank has been moving into different lending
areas. For example, credit card loans typically carry much higher interest rates
than residential mortgages, but credit card lending is also riskier than lending

money secured by a house.

Strong Revenues

Historically, many of the best-performing bank investments have been those
that have proven capable of above-average revenue growth. Wide margins have
generally been elusive in a commodity industry that competes on service quality.
But, some of the most successful banks have been able to cross-sell new ser-
vices, which adds to fee income, or pay a slightly lower rate on deposits and
charge a slightly higher rate on loans.

Keep an eye on three major metrics: (1) net interest margin, (2) fee income
as a percent of total revenues, and (3) fee income growth. The net interest mar-
gin can vary widely depending on economic factors, the interest rate environ-
ment, and the type of business the lender focuses on, so it’s best to compare

the bank youre interested in to other similar institutions. Fee income made up

243


244. BANKS

42 percent of bank industry revenue in 2001 and has grown at an 11.6 percent
compound annual rate over the past two decades. A large and diversified com-
pany such as Fifth Third generates more than 40 percent of its net revenues
from fee income, whereas smaller, less diversified companies such as thrifts
(c.g., Golden West) get just 10 percent to 12 percent of income from fees. Make
sure, therefore, that you're comparing similar companies and that you under-
stand the company’s strategy. As always, examine the number over a period of

time to get a sense of the trend,

Price-to-Book

Because banks’ balance sheets consist mostly of financial assets with varying
degrees of liquidity, book value is a good proxy for the value of a banking
stock. Assuming the assets and liabilities closely approximate their reported
value, the base value for a bank should be book value. For any premium
above that, investors are paying for future growth and excess earnings. Sel-
dom do banks trade for less than book, but if they do, the bank’s assets
could be distressed. ‘Typically, big banks have traded in the two or three
times book range over the past decade; regionals have often traded for less
than that.

A solid bank trading at less than two times book value is often worth a
closer look. Remember, there is almost always a reason the bank is selling at a
discount, so be sure you understand the risks. On the other hand, some
banks are worth three times book value or more, but we would exercise cau-
tion before paying that much. Bank stocks are volatile creatures, and you can
find good values if you're patient—especially because even the best banks will
generally be hit hard when any high-profile blowup occurs in the financial
services sector. Lining up several banks for a relative P/B valuation isn’t as
good as putting together a discounted cash flow model, but for this industry,
it can be a reasonable approximation of the value of the business.

These metrics should serve as a starting point for seeking out quality bank
stocks. Overall, we think the best defense for investors who want to pick their
own financial services stocks is patience and a healthy sense of skepticism.
Build a paper portfolio of core companies that look promising and learn the
businesses over time. Get a feel for the kind of lending they do, the way that
risk is managed, the quality of management, and the amount of equity capital


INVESTOR’S CHECKLIST

the bank holds. When an opportunity presents itself—and one always does—

you'll be in a much better position to act.

Investor's Checklist: Banks

> The business model of banks can be summed up as the management of
three types of risk: credit, liquidity, and interest rate.

> Investors should focus on conservatively run institutions. They should
seek out firms that hold large equity bases relative to competitors and
provision conservatively for future loan losses.

> Different components of banks’ income statements can show volatile
swings depending on a number of factors such as the interest rate and credit
environment. However, well-run banks should generally show steady net
income growth through varying environments. Investors are well served to
seek out firms with a good track record.

> Well-run banks focus heavily on matching the duration of assets with the
duration of liabilities. For instance, banks should fund long-term loans
with liabilities such as long-term debt or deposits, not short-term fund-
ing. Avoid lenders that don’t.

> Banks have numerous competitive advantages. They can borrow money at
rates lower than even the federal government. There are large economies
of scale in this business derived from having an established distribution
network. The capital-intensive nature of banking deters new competitors.
Customer-switching costs are high, and there are limited barriers to exit
money-losing endeavors.

> Investors should seek out banks with a strong equity base, consistently
solid ROEs and ROAs, and an ability to grow revenues at a steady pace.

> Comparing similar banks on a price-to-book measure can be a good way

to make sure youre not overpaying for a bank stock.

245




18

Asset Management and Insurance

LIKE BANKS, ASSET managers and insurance companies make profits from
other people’s money. Asset managers charge a fee for investing clients’ money
in stocks or bonds, and insurance firms invest the money they receive from
customers’ insurance premiums to generate additional earnings on top of their
core underwriting businesses. However, the basic economics, and hence the
economic moats, of these two groups of firms couldn't be more different.
Asset management is incredibly lucrative, and even a poorly managed asset
manager is likely to post stellar financial results. Historically, asset managers
have been excellent investments, and they're well worth getting to know. By
contrast, the insurance industry is extremely competitive, making it tough to
build a lasting economic moat. In this chapter, we'll dig into the nuts and
bolts of how these firms make money and highlight what you should look for

when examining asset managers and insurers.

Asset Management
With huge margins and constant streams of fee income, asset managers are

perennial profit machines. However, these companies are so tied to the

Rachel Barnard, Dreyfus Neenan, and Matthew Scholz with Pat Dorsey.


248

ASSET MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE

markets that their stock prices often reflect oversized doses of the current op-
timism or pessimism prevailing in the economy, which means it pays off to
take a contrarian approach when your'e thinking about when to invest. The
best asset managers can present truly outstanding investment opportunities

when they are selling at the right price.

What Makes Asset Managers Tick

Most people are familiar with mutual funds, but what about the companies
that manage them? Asset management firms run money for their customers
and demand a small chunk of the assets as a fee in return. This is lucrative
work and requires very little capital investment. The real assets of the firm are
its investment managers, so typically compensation is the firm’s main expense.
Even better, it doesn’t take twice as many people to run twice as much money,
so economies of scale are excellent. This means that increases in assets under
management—and, therefore, in advisory fees—will drop almost completely
to the bottom line. All this adds up to stellar operating margins, which are
usually in the 30 percent to 40 percent range—something you won't see in
many industries.

The majority of asset managers we cover have economic moats, especially
if money management is the company’s main business segment. Attaining
scale in this industry is evidence of a solid moat. Beyond the favorable eco-
nomics mentioned previously, asset managers also benefit from reaching a
level of maturity and scale that is almost impossible for upstart firms to du-
plicate. Gathering assets takes time, and gaining significant scale (at least $10
billion in assets under management) takes a track record. Most funds toil in
obscurity until their third birthday, and even then, it takes years to build up
an asset base. This puts large, established asset managers at a huge advantage.

Asset managers create wide economic moats by establishing a dominant
presence in a profitable segment of the industry. The most important compet-
itive advantages we look for are diversification (both in products and cus-
tomers) and stickiness of assets (money that stays with the firm even when

times are tough).

Diversification: Because of their close ties to the market itself, asset man-

agement stocks tend to move in tandem with the broader equity indexes.


ASSET MANAGEMENT

Many investors think that selling investment products in a bear market is like
selling popsicles at the North Pole. But in truth, the correlation to any par-
ticular market is more difficult to pin down because many asset managers
now sell a broad array of products, from money markets to bonds to equities
to hedge funds, all of which thrive under different conditions.

Diversity of products is one way asset managers overcome market fluctu-
ations. Bonds and money markets, which may look as dull as ditch water in
a great equity market, can be an oasis in a bear market. Even better, having a

large stable of diverse funds can ensure that assets stay with the company.

Asset Stickiness: _If customers bailed out at the first sign of trouble, fund firms
would have a volatile time of it. But the most desirable assets tend to be
sticky. Institutions and pension funds, in particular, like to stick with a man-
ager once they have a relationship. Wealthy investors often enjoy the red-
carpet treatment too much to dump their wealth management firm, even
when their investments haven't performed well. Assets that are held in tax-
deferred portfolios, such as 401(k)s and IRAs, also tend to move around less
than assets in taxable accounts. Government regulations discourage cashing
out early, and a long-term horizon helps to keep many retirement customers
invested for long periods.

Direct-sold retail funds can be great for investors, but sometimes they can
work against the fund companies that market them. Throughout the recent
bear market, advisor-sold funds did a better job in retaining their assets be-
cause financial advisors were able to prevent clients from selling in a panic. A
little handholding goes a long way in convincing clients to ride out the tur-

bulent markets.

Asset Management Accounting 101
The single biggest metric to watch for any company in this industry is assets
under management (AUM), the sum of all the money that customers have en-
trusted to the firm. Because an asset manager derives its revenue as a percent-
age of assets under management, AUM is a good indication of how well—or
how badly—a firm is doing.

Unlike a bank or insurer, where big losses can cause the firm to become

insolvent, big losses in asset management portfolios are borne by customers.

249


250 ASSET MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE

Big losses will affect fee income by reducing AUM, but an asset manager
could lose well over half the value of its assets under management and still re-
main in business. In a worst-case scenario, customers could withdraw their
remaining dollars and the firm could fold if its fee income became inade-
quate to support its operations. But because asset management requires al-
most no capital investment, these companies can pare back to the bone to

remain in business.

Key Drivers of Asset Management Companies

The level of assets under management is the biggest driver of revenue for an
asset manager, but not all assets are created equal. Money managers typically
charge higher fees to manage stock portfolios than to manage bonds or money
market funds. More specialized funds, such as foreign-stock funds, real estate,
or high-yield bond funds, often carry the highest fees. Institutions and large
investors can count on volume discounts if they place multiple millions or bil-
lions with one firm, whereas retail investors pay steeper fees for small accounts.
This means that an asset manager may see a 10 percent increase in overall
AUM, but only an 8 percent increase in revenue if, for example, sales of bond
funds outpaced sales of equity funds.

Beyond tracking the ups and downs of particular asset classes, we like
to keep a close eye on just where changes in AUM come from. Market
movements—appreciation or depreciation of securities prices—can have a
huge effect, so much so that many asset managers can almost be considered
as leveraged bets on the market. Firms with a heavy concentration in equities,
such as Janus or London-based Amvescap, have seen their stocks soar during
bull markets and market rallies. These market movements lift AUM without
any new money moving in or out of funds, and this increases revenue from
investment management fees.

But the best asset managers are not simple bets on the market. Investors
should look for asset management companies that are able to consistently
bring in new money and don’t rely only on the market to increase their AUM.
Look for net inflows (inflows higher than outflows) in a variety of market con-
ditions. This is a signal that the asset manager is offering products that new in-

vestors want and that existing investors are happy with the products they have.


ASSET MANAGEMENT

Inside the Back Office

Custody and asset services are the lesser known sidekick of asset manage-
ment. Like many sidekicks out there, this one does much of the boring work
and doesn’t garner much glory or recognition. (Think of Tonto feeding the
horses day in and day out while the Lone Ranger gets to do the more exciting
stuff.) However, custody operations are essential to many pension plans, in-
surance companies, asset managers, and even wealthy individuals who need
someone to keep track of their investments and perform the back office ac-
counting work every day.

The custody and asset servicing business works on a principle similar to the
asset management business, but with lower fees and more economies of scale.
Many trust banks such as State Street and Bank of New York have huge cus-
tody operations that manage trillions of dollars in assets. Custodians don’t in-
vest the money they are entrusted with; they just keep track of it. Mutual fund
companies frequently outsource their back offices to custodians because they
don’t want the hassle of record keeping. Custodians keep track of the securities
that their customers buy and sell, collect dividends, and calculate an accurate
value at the end of the day. Many offer a huge array of additional services, such
as performance analytics, risk management, and pension consulting.

This business requires a hefty investment in technology and a penchant
for absolute accuracy. It isn’t particularly profitable, however, until you col-
lect well over a billion dollars in custodial assets. Fees for custody typically
come in below .os percent of assets under custody, making scale essential to

support the necessary technology investment.

Key Drivers of Custody Companies

Revenues in this industry are primarily driven by the level of assets under cus-
tody. Because economies of scale are so significant here, higher levels of assets
under custody are a sign of competitive advantage. Bigger operations can pay
for leading-edge technology and make a larger profit from each additional
dollar of custody fees. This bigger-is-better model has fueled increasing con-
solidation, with smaller players exiting and custodial assets being concen-
trated with the largest players. As a result, barriers to entry have risen, and

small operations have little chance of attaining competitive scale. This gives

251


252

ASSET MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE

the largest players, such as State Street and Bank of New York, wide eco-
nomic moats.

Watch out for custody firms loan portfolios, though. Most custodians
also lend money to their clients as part of their overall service relationship. As
with any bank, these loans can become too concentrated in one company,
one industry, or one sector. Many of these loans are not very profitable for
the banks, but they can be one of the largest risk factors. Bad loans can easily
eat into a profitable custody operation. For example, during the tech and
telecom bubble of the 1990s, Bank of New York loaned billions of dollars to
cable and telecom companies, forcing it to write off the bad loans when
many of these firms collapsed. This ate into the profits from its lucrative

global custody business, which was then the largest in the world.

Hallmarks of Success for Asset Management Companies
Asset managers can be great investments, but it’s important to buy into the

right ones. We recommend seeking the following qualities:

> Diversity of products and investors: Asset managers and custodians benefit
from having a diverse pool of managed assets. Swings in the markets can
take a grinding toll on one-trick ponies. Janus Capital is a good example
of an asset manager with all its eggs in one basket. Because its assets were
mostly in growth stock funds, the firm's shares were killed when the stock
market fell in 2001 and 2002. Diversified firms such as Franklin Re-
sources have enjoyed much greater stability.

> Sticky assets: Firms that are revolving doors can be extremely volatile.
Asset managers who attract the buy-and-hold crowd, including institu-
tional investors and retirement savers, can count on a steadier stream of
fees in varying market conditions. With its large retirement savings busi-
ness, for example, T. Rowe Price enjoys relative stability in its equity as-
sets under management.

> Niche market: Asset management is an increasingly crowded field, as attrac-
tive profits have lured many firms into the industry. Those companies with
unique products and capabilities have more control over pricing and less
