
T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[11]

hold your money, they’ll pay you for the privilege. Each
year, you’ll collect interest from the bank, and in most
cases, the longer you agree to let them hold your money,
the higher the interest rate you’ll get. If you agree to keep
your $1,000 with the bank for five years, you might collect
something like 5 percent in interest payments per year. So
the first year you collect $50 in interest on your $1,000
original deposit, and now you will have $1,050 in the bank
at the beginning of year 2. In year 2, you collect another
5 percent interest on the new, higher total of $1,050, or
$52.50 in interest, and so on through year 5. After five
years, your $1,000 will grow into $1,276. Not bad, and
certainly a lot better than the mattress plan.
Which brings us to Plan C. This plan is known as “who
needs the bank?” There’s an easy way to just skip the bank
altogether and lend to businesses or to a group of individuals yourself. Often businesses borrow money directly by
selling bonds. The corner bakery won’t usually sell these,
but larger (multi-million-dollar) companies, such as McDonald’s, do it all the time. If you purchase a $1,000 bond from
a large company, for example, that company might agree to
pay you 8 percent each year and pay back your original
$1,000 after 10 years. That clearly beats the crummy 5 percent the bank was willing to pay you.
There’s one little problem, though: If you buy a bond
from one of these companies and something goes wrong

[12]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

with its business, you may never get your interest or your
money back. That’s why riskier companies—say, Bob’s
House of Flapjacks and Pickles—usually have to pay
higher interest rates than more solid, established ones.
That’s why a company’s bonds have to pay more than the
bank. People need to make more money on their bond to
make up for the risk that they may not receive the
promised interest rate or their original money back.
Of course, if you’re not comfortable taking any risk
of losing your $1,000, the U.S. government sells bonds,
too. While there is nothing completely riskless in this
world, lending money to the U.S. government is the closest any of us will ever get. If you are willing to lend the
U.S. government your money for 10 years, the government might, for example, agree to pay you something like
6 percent per year (if you lend for shorter periods of
time—say, five years—the rate will usually be lower,
maybe 4 or 5 percent).
For our purposes, the bond we’ll be looking at most is
the U.S. government bond that matures (pays off the
original loan) after 10 years. We’ll be looking at that one
because 10 years is a long time. We’ll want to compare
how much we can earn from a safe bet like a U.S. government bond with our other long-term investment
choices. So if the annual interest rate on the 10-year

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[13]

government bond is 6 percent, that essentially means that
people who are willing to lend their money out for 10
years, but are unwilling to take any risk of losing their
original investment or of not receiving the promised interest rate, can still expect to receive 6 percent each year on
their money. In other words, for people willing to lock
their money up for 10 years, the “no risk” rate of return
is 6 percent per year.
It’s important to understand what that means. It
means that if anyone asks you to loan them money or to
invest with them over the long term, they better expect to
pay you more than 6 percent a year. Why? Because you
can get 6 percent a year without taking any risk. All you
have to do is lend money to the U.S. government, and
they’ll guarantee that you receive your 6 percent each
and every year, along with all of your money back after 10
years. If Jason wants money for a share of his gum business, that investment better earn you more than 6 percent per year, or no way should you do it! If Jason wants
to borrow money over the long term, same deal. He better expect to pay you a lot more than 6 percent. After all,
you can get 6 percent risk free by lending to the U.S.
government!
And that’s it. There are only a few things you need to
remember from this chapter:

[14]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

Quick Summary

1. You can stick your money under the mattress. (But
that plan kind of stinks.)
2. You can put your money in the bank or buy bonds
from the U.S. government. You will be guaranteed
an interest rate and your money back with no risk.*
3. You can buy bonds sold by companies or other
groups. You will be promised higher interest rates
than you could get by putting your money in the
bank or by buying government bonds—but you
could lose some or all of your money, so you better
get paid enough for taking the risk.
4. You can do something else with your money. (We’ll
talk about what in the next chapter.)
And I almost forgot,
5. Hot air rises.
Hey, I did learn something from that balloon after all.
Thanks, Johnson Smith.
*Bank deposits up to $100,000 are guaranteed by an agency of the U.S.
government. You must hold your bank deposit or your bond until it matures
(possibly 5 or 10 years, depending upon what you buy) to guarantee no loss
of your original investment.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[15]

I’m going to make your life even simpler. As I write
this, the 10-year U.S. government bond rate is substantially lower than 6 percent. However, whenever
the long-term government bond is paying less than 6
percent, we will still assume the rate is 6 percent. In
other words, our other investment alternatives will, at
a minimum, still have to beat 6 percent, no matter
how low long-term U.S. government bond interest
rates go. The big picture is that we want to make sure
we earn a lot more from our other investments than
we could earn without taking any risk. Obviously, if
long-term U.S. government bond rates rose to 7 percent or higher, we would use 7 percent or that higher
number. Now that’s really it.

Chapter Three

OKAY. WHAT ELSE CAN YOU DO with your money? Let’s face
it: Putting money in the bank or lending it to the government is really boring. Hey, I know! Why don’t we just go
to the track and bet it all on a horse! Nah, I actually tried
that—didn’t work out too well. I even tried the dog races.
That’s where a bunch of greyhound dogs run around in a
circle chasing a little mechanical rabbit. It’s fun to watch,
and you get to hang out with some really great people.
Some of them even have teeth!
You know what, though—on second thought, maybe
that’s not such a good idea, either. I kind of figured it
wasn’t for me after my dog actually caught the rabbit. My
little guy got trampled by the other dogs on the first turn,

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[17]

got up, and started running the wrong way. Unfortunately, the mechanical rabbit zips around the track at
about 60 miles an hour, and when my dog, the one I had
placed my faith in and my money on, took a flying leap at
the rabbit speeding toward him . . . let’s just say it wasn’t
pretty (all right, since you’re probably concerned—the
dog slammed into the 60-mile-per-hour rabbit at full
speed, flew 30 feet in the air, and was tragically disqualified, which meant, alas, I had lost all of my money).*
In any case, now that we’ve explored most of the logical alternatives for your money (though I’m sure they
race worms and various crustaceans some place I haven’t
found yet), let’s look at one more. How about investing in
a business? After all, Jason’s going to grow up someday.
Maybe he’ll open up his own gum store. Better yet, maybe
he’ll open up a whole bunch of gum stores (usually
referred to as a “chain” of stores) under some catchy
name like Jason’s Gum Shops.
Let’s assume that Jason personally trains all the salespeople in his unique brand of gum selling and that the
chain is wildly successful (it could happen). Now Jason
comes to you willing to sell half his business (he wants to
buy a new pair of sunglasses, a real limousine, and maybe
a house for himself and the lucky Mrs. Jason). Only now
*And yes, the dog was fine.

[18]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

he’s asking for big bucks, and we’ll have to do some serious figuring before we can decide whether to take Jason
up on his offer.
It turns out that Jason’s grown up quite a bit since the
days when he scootered himself around town, and he now
wants a hefty $6 million for half ownership of his business.
Of course, 6 million bucks is more than most of us can
afford, but, luckily, Jason isn’t looking to sell half ownership of his business all to one person. In fact, Jason has
decided to divide ownership of his business into a million
equal pieces, or shares (as they’re referred to on Wall
Street). Jason’s plan is to keep 500,000 shares for himself
and sell his other 500,000 shares for $12 apiece, or $6
million in total. Anyone interested in buying part of
Jason’s business at that price can buy one share (for $12),
a hundred shares (for $1,200), a thousand shares (for
$12,000), or pretty much any number of shares they want.
If you were to buy, for example, 10,000 shares costing
$120,000, you would then own 1 percent of Jason’s Gum
Shops (10,000 shares divided by the 1-million-share total).
That 1 percent doesn’t mean that you would own the
spearmint gum department or a small piece of one of
Jason’s stores. Your 10,000 shares, or 1 percent ownership, of Jason’s Gum Shops means that you would be entitled to 1 percent of the future earnings of the entire
Jason’s Gum Shops business. Now, of course, all you

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[19]

would have to do is figure out whether paying $120,000 for
1 percent of Jason’s future gum profits is a good deal.
(This is where our analysis gets a little sticky; we have to
be good gumshoes so we don’t blow it and have our money
chewed up and spit out. . . . Anyway, you get the idea.)
Luckily, Jason has provided us with a lot of information. Since we already know that Jason wants $12 for each
share in Jason’s Gum Shops and that there are 1 million
shares in total (this is referred to as 1 million shares outstanding), this means that Jason thinks his business is
worth $12 million (and therefore he thinks that 1 percent
of his business is worth the $120,000 we just talked
about). Well, that’s all fine and dandy, but what matters
here is what we think it’s worth. So let’s take a look at
some of the other information Jason has given us.
It seems that last year Jason sold a total of $10 million
worth of gum from the 10 stores in the highly successful
Jason’s Gum Shops chain. Of course, the $10 million is
how much gum Jason’s stores sold, but unfortunately, $10
million isn’t how much profit Jason made. Obviously,
Jason’s stores ran up a few expenses along the way. Naturally, there was the cost of the gum that Jason sold—that
totaled $6 million. That left him with $4 million in profits. But wait, we’re far from finished.
There was the rent Jason had to pay for the use of his
10 store locations; then there were those pesky employees

[20]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

who for some reason expected to get paid for selling gum
and keeping the stores clean and running smoothly; there
were electricity and heating costs, trash removal, and
accounting and all kinds of administrative costs (so Jason
could keep track of all the money and gum flying all over
the place)—and that stuff adds up. In this case, another $2
million in expenses to be exact. That got Jason’s business
down to $2 million in profits. But as you suspected, we’re
not done yet.
Jason’s business had to pay taxes. The government
needs money to provide services to its citizens, and profitable businesses must pay their share of taxes to keep it
going. In the case of Jason’s Gum Shops, that tax is equal
to 40 percent of income (a fairly standard rate for many
businesses). So 40 percent of the $2 million in profits that
Jason’s gum business earned last year had to go to the
government in the form of taxes. Since 40 percent of $2
million is $800,000, that left Jason’s Gum Shops with a
net profit of $1.2 million.
Actually, Jason provided us with all that information
about last year’s income in a very neat table, known as an
income statement (see Table 3.1).
So there you have it. Jason’s Gum Shops earned $1.2
million last year. Jason thinks that makes the business
worth a total of $12 million. He is willing to sell us a piece
of that business, in any size up to half the entire business,

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[21]

TABLE 3.1 Jason’s Gum Shops Annual Income Statement
(For the Last 12 Months)
Total sales

$10,000,000

Cost of goods sold
(i.e., the gum)
Gross profit

−6,000,000
4,000,000

Selling, general, &
administrative expenses

−2,000,000

Income before taxes

2,000,000

Taxes (@40%)

−800,000

Net income

$1,200,000

at that $12 million valuation (i.e., $6 million for half, $1.2
million for a 10 percent stake, $120,000 for 1 percent
ownership, and one share equaling one-millionth of the
business for a measly $12). Should we do it? To keep it
simple, let’s take a look at what we’ll be getting for each
$12 share.
Well, Jason has divided his business into 1 million
equal shares. That means, if the whole business earned
$1,200,000, each share earned one-millionth of that
amount. Since $1,200,000 divided by 1,000,000 is $1.20,
each $12 share was entitled to $1.20 in earnings. Is that a

[22]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

good deal? Let’s look at it this way. If we invest $12 for a
piece of Jason’s business and it earns us $1.20 in the first
year, our first-year return on our investment would be
$1.20/$12, or 10%
A 10 percent return in our first year! Pretty darn
good, right? In Chapter 2 we discussed that, at the very
least, we had to beat the 6 percent annual return from a
10-year U.S. government bond. That’s because buying
those bonds would earn us 6 percent without having to
take any risk. Since earning 10 percent is clearly more
than earning 6 percent, ipso fatso, is it then true that paying $12 for a share that earns $1.20 a good deal?
Well, life isn’t quite that simple (but as we’ll see in a
later chapter, almost!). The bottom line is—we’re off to a
great start, but we have to consider a few more things
before we can make up our mind.
First, $1.20 per share is what Jason’s Gum Shops
earned last year. We have to determine whether we think
the business will earn that $1.20 in the coming year—or
more than that—or maybe less. Last year’s earnings may be
a good starting point for estimating next year’s earnings,
but it may not. If Jason’s Gum Shops doesn’t earn $1.20
next year, the business won’t be earning that 10 percent

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[23]

we expected on the $12 per share we just paid—it could be
higher—but it could be lower.
Second, once we come up with our estimate for how
much Jason’s business will earn next year, we have to
determine how confident we are in our prediction. If we’re
taking a wild guess because we have no idea whether gum
sales are steady from year to year, whether Jason’s gum
stores are just a fad, or whether new competition from
other candy stores will affect Jason’s profits, then our
estimate may be suspect. But we have to be reasonable. If
we’re not sure whether earnings will be $1.50 or $2.00
per share, that kind of uncertainty is fine. Both of those
numbers will represent that Jason’s business is earning
more than that 10 percent on our initial $12-per-share
cost. On the other hand, if we’re uncertain whether the
earnings will be 20 cents per share or $1.20, then our
guaranteed 6 percent from the government bond may
start to look a whole lot better.
The third little detail we haven’t yet considered is that
next year is only one year. Even if Jason’s Gum Shops
earns $1.20 next year (or a lot more or a lot less), what
about all the years after that? Will earnings keep growing
every year? Maybe each store will keep selling more gum
each year, and earnings will increase that way. Or maybe
if 10 stores can make $1.20 per share, getting to 20 stores

[24]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

in a few years will cause earnings to grow to $2.40 per
share or even higher? Of course, the gum business could
always turn sour (sorry) in the next few years, causing
gum earnings to remain stuck at levels well below $1.20
for a long time. And there’s more . . .
Okay, you’re beginning to panic. I can feel it. This
stuff is too hard. How are you going to figure it all out?
How can anyone? And even if you take your best shot, am
I expecting you (and my kids, for that matter) to “gamble”
real money on a pile of guesses and estimates? And, oh
yeah, aren’t there tons of MBAs, PhDs, smart financial
types, and professional investment analysts, not to mention full-time money managers, trying to figure out pretty
much the same things? How can little old you compete
with all those hardworking, smart, sophisticated guys?
All right already, enough, calm down. Sheesh, can’t I
take you anywhere? Have a little faith. Hang in there. I’ll
do that summary thing, tell you what’s important to
remember, and we’ll move on. Man, if I have to hold your
hand for every little thing . . .
So, here’s what you need to know:
1. Buying a share in a business means you are purchasing a portion (or percentage interest) of that
business. You are then entitled to a portion of that
business’s future earnings.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[25]

2. Figuring out what a business is worth involves estimating (okay, guessing) how much the business will
earn in the future.
3. The earnings from your share of the profits must
give you more money than you would receive by
placing that same amount of money in a risk-free
10-year U.S. government bond. (Remember: Last
chapter we set 6 percent as your absolute minimum
annual return when government bond rates fall
below 6 percent) and
4. No, I haven’t forgotten about the magic formula.
But you’re going to have to stop bugging me about
it, okay? Sheesh!

Chapter Four

GREAT, FIGURING OUT WHAT A BUSINESS is worth isn’t easy.
After lots of guessing and estimating, maybe you get it
right and maybe you get it wrong. But what if you could?
What if you could figure out what a business was really
worth? Is there something you could do with that information? Is there really a place like I promised in the first
chapter, a place where you can buy a business for half its
true value? A place where you can get $1,000 of value for
only $500? You bet there is. But first, let’s spend a few
minutes in business school.
For the past nine years, I have taught an investing
course to a group of graduate business students at an Ivy
League university. Needless to say, this is a pretty smart

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[27]

group of students. Each year, on the first day of class, I
walk in and open the newspaper to the financial section.
Found there are pages and pages of tables with lots of
numbers in tiny print. (Sounds great so far, right?) Anyway, posted in these tables is a list of company names, and
next to each name is a bunch of prices.
“Call out the name of a big, well-known company,” I
say. The students come up with companies like General
Electric, IBM, General Motors, and Abercrombie &
Fitch. Actually, it doesn’t really matter what companies
the students shout out. My main point is so easy to
make, any company name in almost any industry, large or
small, well-known or not, will do. The result is always
the same.
I look in the paper next to General Electric and read
off the numbers. “It says here that the price for one share
of General Electric was $35 yesterday. It also says here
that the highest price that General Electric shares have
sold for over the last year was $53 per share. The lowest
price for a share over the last year was $29.
“For IBM, it’s the same thing. You could have purchased one share of IBM yesterday for $85. Over the past
year, shares of IBM have sold for as much as $93 and for
as little as $55.
“General Motors sold for $37 per share yesterday.
But over the last year, shares have sold for between $30

[28]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

and $68. For Abercrombie & Fitch, which was selling for
$27 per share yesterday, the range of prices per share over
the last year has been between $15 per share at the lowest
and just over $33 per share for a high price.”
I then point out that that’s a pretty wide range of prices
for shares and a pretty short period of time for them to
change so much. Looking at the price for shares over a twoto three-year period would give us an even wider range.
So here’s the question that I always ask: How can this
be? These are big, well-known companies. Each of these
companies has divided its ownership into millions (and
sometimes billions) of equal shares, just like Jason did
with his gum shops. Initially, companies sell their shares
to the public (to both individuals and big institutional
investors). After that, though, the people who buy these
shares are free to sell them to anyone they want.
Each day the newspaper lists the names of thousands
of companies and the price at which people have been
buying and selling an ownership share in each. The trading back and forth of these ownership shares takes place
in a number of locations and over computer networks.
These ownership shares are referred to as shares of stock,
and collectively, this buying and selling activity is referred
to as the stock market.
A company as large as IBM or General Motors might
have divided its ownership stake into something like a

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[29]

billion equal shares. That means that if at one point during the year you can purchase one share of General
Motors for $30 (and for our example we assume the ownership of General Motors has been divided into 1 billion
equal pieces, or shares), then the implied price to purchase the entire company (all 1 billion shares) would be
$30 billion. However, if at some point during the same
year, General Motors shares could have been purchased
for $60 each, that would indicate that the cost to purchase
all of General Motors would be $60 billion.
So I ask the question again: How can this be? Can the
value of General Motors, the largest car manufacturer in
North America, change that much within the same year?
Can a company that large be worth $30 billion one day
and then a few months later be worth $60 billion? Are
they selling twice as many cars, making twice as much
money, or doing something drastically different in their
business to justify such a large change in value? Of
course, it’s possible. But what about the big price changes
in IBM, Abercrombie & Fitch, and General Electric?
Does something happen each and every year to account
for large changes in the value of most companies?
Remember, every year the results are the same. For
pretty much any company that my students name, the
range of high and low prices, over the course of only one
year, is huge. Does this make sense? Well, to save the
