
fortitude to make effusion of blood, except the cause of it be worth." [See "Life and
Character of Lord Bacon," by Thomas Martin, Barrister-at-law.]
The most remarkable event connected with duelling in this reign was that between Lord
Sanquir, a Scotch nobleman, and one Turner, a fencing-master. In a trial of skill between
them, his lordship's eye was accidentally thrust out by the point of Turner's sword. Turner
expressed great regret at the circumstance, and Lord Sanquir bore his loss with as much
philosophy as he was master of, and forgave his antagonist. Three years afterwards, Lord
Sanquir was at Paris, where he was a constant visitor at the court of Henry IV. One day,
in the course of conversation, the affable monarch inquired how he had lost his eye.
Sanquir, who prided himself on being the most expert swordsman of the age, blushed as
he replied that it was inflicted by the sword of a fencing-master. Henry, forgetting his
assumed character of an antiduellist, carelessly, and as a mere matter of course, inquired
whether the man lived? Nothing more was said, but the query sank deep into the proud
heart of the Scotch baron, who returned shortly afterwards to England, burning for
revenge. His first intent was to challenge the fencing-master to single combat, but, on
further consideration, he deemed it inconsistent with his dignity to meet him as an equal
in fair and open fight. He therefore hired two bravos, who set upon the fencing-master,
and murdered him in his own house at Whitefriars. The assassins were taken and
executed, and a reward of one thousand pounds offered for the apprehension of their
employer. Lord Sanquir concealed himself for several days, and then surrendered to take
his trial, in the hope (happily false) that Justice would belie her name, and be lenient to a
murderer because he was a nobleman, who, on a false point of honour, had thought fit to
take revenge into his own hands. The most powerful intercessions were employed in his
favour, but James, to his credit, was deaf to them all. Bacon, in his character of Attorneygeneral, prosecuted the prisoner to conviction; and he died the felon's death, on the 29th
of June, 1612, on a gibbet erected in front of the gate of Westminster Hall.
With regard to the public duel, or trial by battle, demanded under the sanction of the law,
to terminate a quarrel which the ordinary course of justice could with difficulty decide,
Bacon was equally opposed to it, and thought that in no case should it be granted. He
suggested that there should be declared a constant and settled resolution in the state to
abolish it altogether; that care should be taken that the evil be no more cockered, nor the
humour of it fed, but that all persons found guilty should be rigorously punished by the
Star Chamber, and these of eminent quality banished from the court.
In the succeeding reign, when Donald Mackay, the first Lord Reay, accused David
Ramsay of treason, in being concerned with the Marquis of Hamilton in a design upon
the crown of Scotland, he was challenged by the latter to make good his assertion by
single combat. [See "History of the House and Clan of Mackay."] It had been at first the
intention of the government to try the case by the common law, but Ramsay thought he
would stand a better chance of escape by recurring to the old and almost exploded
custom, but which was still the right of every man in appeals of treason. Lord Reay
readily accepted the challenge, and both were confined in the Tower until they found
security that they would appear on a certain day, appointed by the court, to determine the
question. The management of the affair was delegated to the Marischal Court of

Westminster, and the Earl of Lindsay was created Lord Constable of England for the
purpose. Shortly before the day appointed, Ramsay confessed in substance all that Lord
Reay had laid to his charge, upon which Charles I put a stop to the proceedings.
But in England, about this period, sterner disputes arose among men than those mere
individual matters which generate duels. The men of the Commonwealth encouraged no
practice of the kind, and the subdued aristocracy carried their habits and prejudices
elsewhere, and fought their duels at foreign courts. Cromwell's Parliament, however, -although the evil at that time was not so crying, -- published an order, in 1654, for the
prevention of duels, and the punishment of all con cerned in them. Charles II, on his
restoration, also issued a proclamation upon the subject. In his reign an infamous duel
was fought -- infamous, not only from its own circumstances, but from the lenity that was
shown to the principal offenders.
The worthless Duke of Buckingham, having debauched the Countess of Shrewsbury, was
challenged by her husband to mortal combat, in January 1668. Charles II endeavoured to
prevent the duel, not from any regard to public morality, but from fear for the life of his
favourite. He gave commands to the Duke of Albemarle to confine Buckingham to his
house, or take some other measures to prevent him flora fighting. Albemarle neglected
the order, thinking that the King himself might prevent the combat by some surer means.
The meeting took place at Barn Elms, the injured Shrewsbury being attended by Sir John
Talbot, his relative, and Lord Bernard Howard, son of the Earl of Arundel. Buckingham
was accompanied by two of his dependants, Captain Holmes and Sir John Jenkins.
According to the barbarous custom of the age, not only the principals, but the seconds,
engaged each other. Jenkins was pierced to the heart, and left dead upon the field, and Sir
John Talbot severely wounded in both arms. Buckingham himself escaping with slight
wounds, ran his unfortunate antagonist through the body, and then left the field with the
wretched woman, the cause of all the mischief, who, in the dress of a page, awaited the
issue of the conflict in a neighbouring wood, holding her paramour's horse to avoid
suspicion. Great influence was exerted to save the guilty parties from punishment, and
the master, as base as the favourite, made little difficulty in granting a free pardon to all
concerned. In a royal proclamation issued shortly afterwards, Charles II formally
pardoned the murderers, but declared his intention never to extend, in future, any mercy
to such offenders. It would be hard after this to say who was the most infamous, the King,
the favourite, or the courtezan.
In the reign of Queen Anne, repeated complaints were made of the prevalence of
duelling. Addison, Swift, Steele, and other writers, employed their powerful pens in
reprobation of it. Steele especially, in the "Tatler" and "Guardian," exposed its impiety
and absurdity, and endeavoured, both by argument and by ridicule, to bring his
countrymen to a right way of thinking. [See "Spectator," Nos. 84. 97, and 99; and
"Tatler," Nos. 25, 26, 29, 31, 38, and 39; and "Guardian," No. 20.] His comedy of "The
Conscious Lovers" contains an admirable exposure of the abuse of the word honour,
which led men into an error so lamentable. Swift, writing upon the subject, remarked that
he could see no harm in rogues and fools shooting each other. Addison and Steele took
higher ground, and the latter, in the "Guardian," summed up nearly all that could be said

upon the subject in the following impressive words: -- "A Christian and a gentleman are
made inconsistent appellations of the same person. You are not to expect eternal life if
you do not forgive injuries, and your mortal life is rendered uncomfortable if you are not
ready to commit a murder in resentment of an affront; for good sense, as well as religion,
is so utterly banished the world that men glory in their very passions, and pursue trifles
with the utmost vengeance, so little do they know that to forgive is the most arduous
pitch human nature can arrive at. A coward has often fought -- a coward has often
conquered, but a coward never forgave." Steele also published a pamphlet, in which he
gave a detailed account of the edict of Louis XIV, and the measures taken by that
monarch to cure his subjects of their murderous folly.
On the 8th of May, 1711, Sir Cholmely Deering, M.P. for the county of Kent, was slain
in a duel by Mr. Richard Thornhill, also a member of the House of Commons. Three days
afterwards, Sir Peter King brought the subject under the notice of the Legislature, and
after dwelling at considerable length on the alarming increase of the practice, obtained
leave to bring in a bill for the prevention and punishment of duelling. It was read a first
time that day, and ordered for a second reading in the ensuing week.
About the same time the attention of the Upper House of Parliament was also drawn to
the subject in the most painful manner. Two of its most noted members would have
fought, had it not been that Queen Anne received notice of their intention, and exacted a
pledge that they would desist; while a few months afterwards, two other of its members
lost their lives in one of the most remarkable duels upon record. The first affair, which
happily terminated without a meeting, was between the Duke of Marlborough and the
Earl Pawlet. The latter, and fatal encounter, was between the Duke of Hamilton and Lord
Mohun.
The first arose out of a debate in the Lords upon the conduct of the Duke of Ormond, in
refusing to hazard a general engagement with the enemy, in which Earl Pawlet remarked
that nobody could doubt the courage of the Duke of Ormond. "He was not like a certain
general, who led troops to the slaughter, to cause great numbers of officers to be knocked
on the head in a battle, or against stone walls, in order to fill his pockets by disposing of
their commissions." Every one felt that the remark was aimed at the Duke of
Marlborough, but he remained silent, though evidently suffering in mind. Soon after the
House broke up, the Earl Pawlet received a visit from Lord Mohun, who told him that the
Duke of Marlborough was anxious to come to an explanation with him relative to some
expressions he had made use of in that day's debate, and therefore prayed him to "go and
take a little air in the country." Earl Pawlet did not affect to misunderstand the hint, but
asked him in plain terms whether he brought a challenge from the Duke. Lord Mohun
said his message needed no explanation, and that he (Lord Mohun) would accompany the
Duke of Marlborough. He then took his leave, and Earl Pawlet returned home and told
his lady that he was going out to fight a duel with the Duke of Marlborough. His lady,
alarmed for her lord's safety, gave notice of his intention to the Earl of Dartmouth, who
immediately, in the Queen's name, sent to the Duke of Marlborough, and commanded
him not to stir abroad. He also caused Earl Pawlet's house to be guarded by two sentinels;
and having taken these precautions, informed the Queen of the whole affair. Her Majesty

sent at once for the Duke, expressed her abhorrence of the custom of duelling, and
required his word of honour that he would proceed no further. The Duke pledged his
word accordingly, and the affair terminated.
The lamentable duel between the Duke of Hamilton and Lord Mohun took place in
November 1712, and sprang from the following circumstances. A lawsuit had been
pending for eleven years between these two noblemen, and they looked upon each other
in consequence with a certain degree of coldness. They met together on the 13th of
November in the chambers of Mr. Orlebar, a Master in Chancery, when, in the course of
conversation, the Duke of Hamilton reflected upon the conduct of one of the witnesses in
the cause, saying that he was a person who had neither truth nor justice in him. Lord
Mohun, somewhat nettled at this remark, applied to a witness favourable to his side,
made answer hastily, that Mr. Whiteworth, the person alluded to, had quite as much truth
and justice in him as the Duke of Hamilton. The Duke made no reply, and no one present
imagined that he took offence at what was said; and when he went out, of the room, he
made a low and courteous salute to the Lord Mohun. In the evening, General Macartney
called twice upon the Duke with a challenge from Lord Mohun, and failing in seeing him,
sought him a third time at a tavern, where he found him, and delivered his message. The
Duke accepted the challenge, and the day after the morrow, which was Sunday, the 15th
of November, at seven in the morning, was appointed for the meeting.
At that hour they assembled in Hyde Park, the Duke being attended by his relative,
Colonel Hamilton, and the Lord Mohun by General Macartney. They jumped over a ditch
into a place called the Nursery, and prepared for the combat. The Duke of Hamilton,
turning to General Macartney, said, "Sir, you are the cause of this, let the event be what it
will." Lord Mohun did not wish that the seconds should engage, but the Duke insisted
that "Macartney should have a share in the dance." All being ready, the two principals
took up their positions, and fought with swords so desperately that, after a short time,
they both fell down, mortally wounded. The Lord Mohun expired upon the spot, and the
Duke of Hamilton in the arms of his servants as they were carrying him to his coach.
This unhappy termination caused the greatest excitement, not only in the metropolis, but
all over the country. The Tories, grieved at the loss of the Duke of Hamilton, charged the
fatal combat on the Whig party, whose leader, the Duke of Marlborough, had so recently
set the example of political duels. They. called Lord Mohun the bully of the Whig
faction, (he had already killed three men in duels, and been twice tried for murder), and
asserted openly, that the quarrel was concocted between him and General Macartney to
rob the country of the services of the Duke of Hamilton by murdering him. It was also
asserted, that the wound of which the Duke died was not inflicted by Lord Mohun, but by
Macartney; and every means was used to propagate this belief. Colonel Hamilton, against
whom and Macartney the coroner's jury had returned a verdict of wilful murder,
surrendered a few days afterwards, and was examined before a privy council sitting at the
house of Lord Dartmouth. He then deposed, that seeing Lord Mohun fall, and the Duke
upon him, he ran to the Duke's assistance, and that he might with the more ease help him,
he flung down both their swords, and, as he was raising the Duke up, he saw Macartney,
make a push at him. Upon this deposition a royal proclamation was immediately issued,

offering a reward of 500 pounds for the apprehension of Macartney, to which the
Duchess of Hamilton afterwards added a reward of 300 pounds.
Upon the further examination of Colonel Hamilton, it was found that reliance could not
be placed on all his statements, and that he contradicted himself in several important
particulars. He was arraigned at the Old Bailey for the murder of Lord Mohun, the whole
political circles of London being in a fever of excitement for the result. All the Tory party
prayed for his acquittal, and a Tory mob surrounded the doors and all the avenues leading
to the court of justice for many hours before the trial began. The examination of
witnesses lasted seven hours. The criminal still persisted in accusing General Macartney
of the murder of the Duke of Hamilton, but, in other respects, say the newspapers of the
day, prevaricated foully. He was found guilty of manslaughter. This favourable verdict
was received with universal applause, "not only from the court and all the gentlemen
present, but the common people showed a mighty satisfaction, which they testified by
loud and repeated huzzas." ["Post Boy," December l3th, 1712.]
As the popular delirium subsided, and men began to reason coolly upon the subject, they
disbelieved the assertions of Colonel Hamilton, that Macartney had stabbed the Duke,
although it was universally admitted that he had been much too busy and presuming.
Hamilton was shunned by all his former companions, and his life rendered so irksome to
him, that he sold out of the Guards, and retired to private life, in which he died heartbroken four years afterwards.
General Macartney surrendered about the same time, and was tried for murder in the
Court of King's Bench. He was, however, found guilty of manslaughter only.
At the opening of the session of Parliament of 1713, the Queen made pointed allusion in
her speech to the frequency of duelling, and recommended to the Legislature to devise
some speedy and effectual remedy for it. A bill to that effect was brought forward, but
thrown out on the second reading, to the very great regret of all the sensible portion of the
community.
A famous duel was fought in 1765 between Lord Byron and Mr. Chaworth. The dispute
arose at a club-dinner, and was relative to which of the two had the largest quantity of
game on his estates. Infuriated by wine and passion, they retired instantly into an
adjoining room, and fought with swords across a table, by the feeble glimmer of a tallowcandle. Mr. Chaworth, who was the more expert swordsman of the two, received a mortal
wound, and shortly afterwards expired. Lord Byron was brought to trial for the murder
before the House of Lords; and it appearing clearly, that the duel was not premeditated,
but fought at once, and in the heat of passion, he was found guilty of manslaughter only,
and ordered to be discharged upon payment of his fees. This was a very bad example for
the country, and duelling of course fell into no disrepute after such a verdict.
In France, more severity was exercised. In the year 1769, the Parliament of Grenoble
took cognizance of the delinquency of the Sieur Duchelas, one of its members, who
challenged and killed in a duel a captain of the Flemish legion. The servant of Duchelas

officiated as second, and was arraigned with his master for the murder of the captain.
They were both found guilty. Duchelas was broken alive on the wheel, and the servant
condemned to the galleys for life.
A barbarous and fiercely-contested duel was fought in November 1778, between two
foreign adventurers, at Bath, named Count Rice and the Vicomte du Barri. Some dispute
arose relative to a gambling transaction, in the course of which Du Barri contradicted an
assertion of the other, by saying, "That is not true!" Count Rice immediately asked him if
he knew the very disagreeable meaning of the words he had employed. Du Barri said he
was perfectly well aware of their meaning, and that Rice might interpret them just as he
pleased. A challenge was immediately given and accepted. Seconds were sent for, who,
arriving with but little delay, the whole party, though it was not long after midnight,
proceeded to a place called Claverton Down, where they remained with a surgeon until
daylight. They then prepared for the encounter, each being armed with two pistols and a
sword. The ground having been marked out by the seconds, Du Barri fired first, and
wounded his opponent in the thigh. Count Rice then levelled his pistol, and shot Du Barri
mortally in the breast. So angry were the combatants, that they refused to desist; both
stepped back a few paces, and then rushing forward, discharged their second pistols at
each other. Neither shot took effect, and both throwing away their pistols, prepared to
finish the sanguinary struggle by the sword. They took their places, and were advancing
towards each other, when the Vicomte du Barri suddenly staggered, grew pale, and,
falling to the ground, exclaimed, "Je vous demande ma vie." His opponent had but just
time to answer, that he granted it, when the unfortunate Du Barri turned upon the grass,
and expired with a heavy groan. The survivor of this savage conflict was then removed to
his lodgings, where he lay for some weeks in a dangerous state. The coroner's jury, in the
mean while, sat upon the body of Du Barri, and disgraced themselves by returning a
verdict of manslaughter only. Count Rice, upon his recovery, was indicted for the murder
notwithstanding this verdict. On his trial he entered into a long defence of his conduct,
pleading the fairness of the duel, and its unpremeditated nature; and, at the same time,
expressing his deep regret for the unfortunate death of Du Barri, with whom for many
years he had been bound in ties of the strictest friendship. These considerations appear to
have weighed with the jury, and this fierce duellist was again found guilty of
manslaughter only, and escaped with a merely nominal punishment.
A duel, less remarkable from its circumstances, but more so from the rank of the parties,
took place in 1789. The combatants on this occasion were the Duke of York and Colonel
Lenox, the nephew and heir of the Duke of Richmond. The cause of offence was given by
the Duke of York, who had said, in presence of several officers of the Guards, that words
had been used to Colonel Lenox at Daubigny's to which no gentleman ought to have
submitted. Colonel Lenox went up to the Duke on parade, and asked him publicly
whether he had made such an assertion. The Duke of York, without answering his
question, coldly ordered him to his post. When parade was over, he took an opportunity
of saying publicly in the orderly room before Colonel Lenox, that he desired no
protection from his rank as a prince and his station as commanding officer; adding that,
when he was off duty, he wore a plain brown coat like a private gentleman, and was
ready as such to give satisfaction. Colonel Lenox desired nothing better than satisfaction;

that is to say, to run the chance of shooting the Duke through the body, or being himself
shot. He accordingly challenged his Royal Highness, and they met on Wimbledon
Common. Colonel Lenox fired first, and the ball whizzed past the head of his opponent,
so near to it as to graze his projecting curl. The Duke refused to return the fire, and the
seconds interfering, the affair terminated.
Colonel Lenox was very shortly afterwards engaged in another duel arising out of this. A
Mr. Swift wrote a pamphlet in reference to the dispute between him and the Duke of
York, at some expressions in which he took so much offence, as to imagine that nothing
but a shot at the writer could atone for them. They met on the Uxbridge Road, but no
damage was done to either party.
The Irish were for a long time renowned for their love of duelling. The slightest offence
which it is possible to imagine that one man could offer to another, was sufficient to
provoke a challenge. Sir Jonah Barrington relates, in his Memoirs, that, previous to the
Union, during the time of a disputed election in Dublin, it was no unusual thing for threeand-twenty duels to be fought in a day. Even in times of less excitement, they were so
common as to be deemed unworthy of note by the regular chroniclers of events, except in
cases where one or both of the combatants were killed.
In those days, in Ireland, it was not only the man of the military, but of every profession,
who had to work his way to eminence with the sword or the pistol. Each political party
had its regular corps of bullies, or fire-eaters, as they were called, who qualified
themselves for being the pests of society by spending all their spare time in firing at
targets. They boasted that they could hit an opponent in any part of his body they pleased,
and made up their minds before the encounter began whether they should kill him,
disable, or disfigure him for life -- lay him on a bed of suffering for a twelve-month, or
merely graze a limb.
The evil had reached an alarming height, when, in the year 1808, an opportunity was
afforded to King George III of showing in a striking manner his detestation of the
practice, and of setting an example to the Irish that such murders were not to be
committed with impunity. A dispute arose, in the month of June 1807, between Major
Campbell and Captain Boyd, officers of the 21st regiment, stationed in Ireland, about the
proper manner of giving the word of command on parade. Hot words ensued on this
slight occasion, and the result was a challenge from Campbell to Boyd. They retired into
the mess-room shortly afterwards, and each stationed himself at a corner, the distance
obliquely being but seven paces. Here, without friends or seconds being present, they
fired at each other, and Captain Boyd fell mortally wounded between the fourth and fifth
ribs. A surgeon who came in shortly, found him sitting in a chair, vomiting and suffering
great agony. He was led into another room, Major Campbell following, in great distress
and perturbation of mind. Boyd survived but eighteen hours; and just before his death,
said, in reply to a question from his opponent, that the duel was not fair, and added, "You
hurried me, Campbell -- you're a bad man." --- "Good God!" replied Campbell, "will you
mention before these gentlemen, was not everything fair? Did you not say that you were
ready?" Boyd answered faintly, "Oh, no! you know I wanted you to wait and have
