
A Trading Manager
It used to puzzle me why institutional traders as a group performed so much better
than private traders. An average private trader in the United States is a 50-year-old
married, college-educated man, often a business owner or a professional.You would
think this thoughtful, computer-literate, book-reading individual would run circles
around some loud 23-year-old who used to play ball in college and hasn’t read a book
since his junior year. In reality, institutional traders as a group outperform private
traders year after year. Is it because of their fast reflexes? Not really, because young
private traders perform no better than older ones. Nor do institutional traders win
because of training, which is skimpy in most firms.
A curious fact: when successful institutional traders go out on their own, most of
them lose money. They may lease the same gear, trade the same system, and stay in
touch with their contacts, but still fail. After a few months, most cowboys are back
in head-hunters’ offices, looking for a trading job. How come they could make
money for the firms but not for themselves?
When an institutional trader quits his firm, he leaves behind his manager, the
person in charge of discipline and risk control. That manager sets the maximum
risk per trade. It is similar to what a private trader can do with the 2% Rule. Firms
operate from huge capital bases and their risk limits are much higher in dollar terms
but tiny in percentage terms. A trader who violates his risk limit is fired. A private
trader can break the 2% Rule and nobody will know, but an institutional manager
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

52. A COMEBACK FROM A DRAWDOWN

213

watches his traders like a hawk. A private trader can throw confirmation slips in a
shoebox, but a trading manager quickly gets rid of impulsive people. He enforces
discipline that saves institutional traders from disastrous losses, which destroy many
private accounts.
In addition to setting a risk limit per trade, a manager sets the maximum allowed
monthly drawdown for each trader. When an employee sinks to that level, his trading privileges are suspended for the rest of the month. A trading manager breaks his
traders’ losing streaks by forcing them to stop trading if they reach their monthly
loss limit. Imagine being in a room with co-workers who actively trade, while you
sharpen pencils and get asked to run out for sandwiches.Traders do all in their power
to avoid being in that spot. This social pressure creates a serious incentive not to lose.
People who leave institutions know how to trade, but their discipline is often external, not internal. They quickly lose money without their managers. Private traders have no managers. This is why you need to become your own manager. The 2%
Rule will save you from disastrous losses, while the 6% Rule will save you from a
series of losses. The 6% Rule will force you to do something most people cannot do
until it’s too late—break a losing streak.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

PA R T 1 0

Practical Details

W

ill you be buying stocks that break out to new highs? Shorting double tops?
Buying pullbacks? Looking for trend reversals? Those approaches differ from
each other, and you can make or lose money with each of them. You need to select
a method that makes sense to you and feels emotionally comfortable. Choose what
appeals to you, what matches your abilities and temperament. There is no such thing
as generic trading, any more than there is a generic sport.
To find good trades, you need to define the pattern you want to trade. Prior to
using any scan, you need to have a crystal-clear picture of what it should look for.
Develop your system, and test it with a series of small trades to make sure you have
the discipline to follow your signals.You have to feel certain that you’ll trade the pattern you’ve identified when you see it.
Different styles of trading call for different entry techniques, different methods of
setting stops and profit targets, and very different scans. Still, there are several key
principles that apply to all systems.

■■53. How to Set Profit Targets:

“Enough” Is the Power Word

Setting profit targets for your trades is like asking about pay and benefits when
applying for a job.You may end up earning more or less than expected, but you need
to have an idea of what to expect.
215

216

PRACTICAL DETAILS

abc

FIGURE 53.1â•… VRSN with 13- and 26-day EMAs, the Impulse system, and a 4% envelope. MACD 12-26-9.
(Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Swing Trade: Taking Profits in the Value Zone
This record of shorting VeriSign Inc. (VRSN) comes from my trade journal. It was one of
several stocks that developed a setup for my “false breakout with a divergence” strategy.
The last three days on this chart are marked a, b, and c. On day “a” VRSN broke out
and closed above resistance, marked by a horizontal dashed line, while MACD-Histogram
couldn’t even rise above zero. The next day, marked “b,” VRSN opened below the orange
line, showing that the previous day was a false upside breakout (some would call it an
upthrust). As soon as MACD-Histogram ticked down, creating a bearish divergence, the
pattern was completed, and I immediately went short.
VRSN kept sinking all day and closed lower. The next day, marked “c,” it tried to form a
base, and since the daily price was already in the value zone, I decided that it was enough
and covered my shorts. Taking an 82 cent profit on 3,000 shares brought in $2,460 before
commissions. I could have made more by holding longer, but in swing trading, fast quarters
are better than slow dollars. Taking profits in the value zone reduces the level of uncertainty
and cuts the time your trade remains at risk.

Write down your entry level, profit target, and stop for every planned trade in
order to compare your risk and reward. Your potential reward should be at least
twice as big as your risk. It seldom pays to risk a dollar to make a dollar—you might
as well bet on color at a roulette table. Having a realistic profit target and a firm stop
will help you make a go/no-go decision for any trade.
Early in my trading career I didn’t think of profit targets. If anybody asked me
about them, I’d answer that I didn’t want to limit my profit potential. Today, I would
laugh at such an answer. A beginner without a clear target price will feel increasingly
happy as his stock goes up and more despondent as it grinds down. His emotions will
prime him to act at the worst possible times: continue to hold and add to his longs at
the top and sell out in disgust near the bottom.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

217

53. HOW TO SET PROFIT TARGETS

EGO, 25 min

EGO, 5 min
D

A
B

F

C

FIGURE 53.2â•… EGO 25- and 5-minute charts with 13- and 26-bar EMAs, the Impulse system, and
Autoenvelope. MACD 12-26-9. (Chart by TradeStation)

Taking Profits of a Day-Trade near the Upper Channel Line
This record of buying Eldorado Gold Corp. (EGO) comes from my trade journal. It illustrates
using Triple Screen for day-trading and profit-taking. The strategic decision to buy EGO
was taken on a 25-minute chart in area A, where the moving average turned up and the Impulse system changed to green (notice that on the previous day there was a false downside
breakout—it indicated that this stock didn’t want to go down and may be setting up to rally).
My trading strategy here was “pullback to value,” which I executed on a 5-minute chart,
as prices gapped up at the open but then pulled back into the value zone (area B). I went
long at $9.51; my initial target was $9.75, near the upper channel line on the 25-minute
chart, with a stop at $9.37, for a nearly 2:1 reward/risk ratio. Since this was a day-trade,
I had it on my screen all day long.
At first, with the uptrend being so strong, I considered taking it overnight, but then bearish divergences began to develop in area C, and I placed an order to sell at $9.75. That
turned out to be the high of the day, and my order wasn’t filled. As prices turned down from
their bearish divergence on a 5-minute chart, I scrambled to lower my sell order to $9.70.
It was filled, and I was out with a profit before the close. Taking a 19-cent profit on 2,000
shares brought in $380 within a few hours.

When calculating a trade’s profit potential, we run into a paradox. The longer
your expected holding period, the bigger the profit potential. A stock can rally much
more in a month than in a week. On the other hand, the longer your holding period, the higher the level of uncertainty. Technical analysis can be quite reliable for
shorter-term moves, but many unpleasant surprises will occur in the longer run.
In an earlier chapter on choosing the time horizon for trades, we examined our
three main options.The holding period for position trades or investments is measured
in months, sometimes years. We may hold a swing trade for a few days, sometimes
weeks. The expected duration of a day-trade is measured in minutes, rarely hours.
Moving averages and channels help set profit targets for swing trades. They also
work for day-trades; only there you need to pay more attention to oscillators and
exit at the first sign of a divergence against your trade. Profit targets in position trading are usually set at previous support and resistance levels.

218

PRACTICAL DETAILS

FIGURE 53.3â•… IGOI with 13- and 26-day EMAs, the Impulse system, and a 4% envelope. MACD 12-26-9.
(Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Setting a Profit Target for a Long-Term Trade at the Resistance Level
At the right edge of the weekly chart, iGo, Inc. (IGOI) is trading slightly above $3, with
a rising EMA confirming a new uptrend. Its previous major top was above $60 (notice a
kangaroo tail), two recent intermediate rallies had fizzled out, the most recent one near
$15, and the previous one near $22 (all marked with purple dashed lines). If this is the
start of a new bullish trend, it would be reasonable to set the first profit target near $15,
the next near $22.

The three targets mentioned above—moving averages, channels, and support/
resistance levels—are fairly modest. They don’t have you shooting for the moon, but
are realistic. Keep in mind that “enough” is a power word—in life as well as trading. It puts you in control, and by getting “enough” in one trade after another, you’ll
achieve excellent results over time.
How to define “enough”? I believe that moving averages and envelopes, along with
recent support and resistance levels can show us what would be “enough” for any
given trade. Let me illustrate this with several examples: one a swing trade, another
a day-trade, and the third a long-term investment.
VRSN was a fairly common example of a modest swing trade: entering near one
of the channel lines and taking profits in the value zone between the two moving
averages (Figure 53.1). This isn’t elephant hunting; this is rabbit hunting, a much
more reliable activity.
The EGO day-trade in Figure 53.2 illustrates buying a pullback into the value
zone during an uptrend, with a profit target at the upper channel line. I used an oscillator to speed up my exit when the market wouldn’t let me exit at the initial target.
“Fallen angels” is the name of a scan I use to look for possible investment candidates. It marks stocks that have fallen over 90% from their peaks, stopped declining,
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

54. HOW TO SET STOPS

219

bottomed out, and slowly began to rise. A stock that had lost 90% of its value has
every right to die, but if it chooses to live, it’s likely to rally.
The best time to look for “fallen angels” is when a bear market starts showing signs
of bottoming. That’s when you find many candidates that survived bear attacks and
are starting to get up from the floor. This example shows an old bull market darling
IGOI that got badly mauled but stopped declining and began to rise. The weekly
chart in Figure 53.3 shows two prior attempts to return to the multiyear peak area.
Each of those rallies retraced just about half of the previous bear market.
Is this going to be an easy trade? Far from it. First of all, the latest bottom was
near $2, and if you place your stop there, your risk per share will be quite high, and
you’ll have to reduce trade size. Also, the expected rally may take anywhere from a
few months to several years to get going. Are you prepared to wait that long, with
your capital tied up? Last but not least, the volume of this stock is low. It will rise if
prices rally, but if the rally fizzles out, selling will not be easy. Taking all these factors
into account, you can see how hard it is to buy for the long haul.

■■54. How to Set Stops:

Say No to Wishful Thinking

A trade without a stop is a gamble. If you’re after thrills, better go to a real casino.
Take a trip to Macao, Las Vegas, or Atlantic City, where a gambling house will serve
you free drinks and may even comp you a room while you’re having fun. Gamblers
who lose money on Wall Street receive no freebies.
Stops are a must for long-term survival and success, but most of us feel a great
emotional reluctance to use them. The market reinforces our bad habits by training
us not to use stops. We all have been through this unpleasant experience: you buy
a stock and set a stop that gets hit and you exit with a loss—only to see your stock
reverse and rally just as you originally expected. Had you held that stock without a
stop, you would’ve profited instead of losing. Getting repeatedly whipsawed like that
makes you feel disgusted with stops.
After several such events, you start trading without stops, and it works beautifully
for a while. There are no more whipsaws. When a trade doesn’t work well, you get
out of it without a stop—you have enough discipline. This happy ride ends after a
large trade starts going bad.You keep waiting for it to rally a bit and give you a better
exit, but it keeps sinking. As the days go by, it inflicts more and more damage on your
account—you’re being chewed up by a shark. Soon enough your survival is in danger, and your confidence is shattered.
While you trade without stops, the sharks circling the perimeter of every account
grow bigger and meaner. If you trade without stops, a shark bite is only a question of
time.Yes, stops are a pain—but using them is a lesser evil than trading without them.
This reminds me of what Winston Churchill said about democracy: “It is the worst
form of government except all the others that have been tried.”
What should we do? I suggest accepting the irritation and the pain of stops but
focusing on making them more logical and less unpleasant.

220

PRACTICAL DETAILS

In my previous book The New Sell and Sell Short, I dedicated a long chapter to the
intricacies of placing various types of stops. Rather than repeat myself here, I’ll offer
you a quick summary.

Place Stops outside the Zone of “Market Noise”
Put a stop too close and it’ll get whacked by some meaningless intraday swing. Put it
too far, and you’ll have very skimpy protection.
To borrow an engineering concept, all market moves have two components: signal and noise. The signal is the trend of your stock. When the trend is up, we can
define noise as that part of each day’s range that protrudes below the previous day’s
low.When the trend is down, we can define noise as that part of each day’s range that
protrudes above the previous day’s high.
SafeZone stops are described in detail in Come into My Trading Room. They measure market noise and place stops at a multiple of noise level away from the market.
In brief, use the slope of a 22-day EMA to define the trend. If the trend is up, mark
all downside penetrations of the EMA during the look-back period (10 to 20 days),
add their depths, and divide the sum by the number of penetrations. This gives you
the Average Downside Penetration for the selected look-back period. It reflects the
average level of noise in the current uptrend. You want to place your stops farther
away from the market than the average level of noise. That’s why you need to multiply an average downside penetration by a factor of two or greater. Placing your stop
any closer would be self-defeating.
When the trend, as defined by the EMA slope, is down, we calculate SafeZone
on the basis of upside penetrations of the previous bars’ highs. We count each upside
penetrations during a selected time window and average that data to find the Average
Upside Penetration. We multiply it by a coefficient, starting with 3, and add that to
the high of each bar. Shorting near the highs requires wider stops than buying near
quiet, sold-out bottoms.
Like all systems and indicators in this book, SafeZone is not a mechanical gadget to
replace independent thought.You have to establish the look-back period, the window
of time during which SafeZone is calculated.You also need to fine-tune the coefficient
by which you multiply the average penetration, so that your stop goes outside the
normal noise level.
Even when not using SafeZone, you may wish to follow its principle of calculating
an average penetration against the trend that you are aiming to trade—and putting
your stop well outside the zone of market noise.

Don’t Place Your Stops at Obvious Levels
A recent low that sticks out like a sore thumb from a tight weave of prices draws
traders to place stops slightly below that level. The trouble is most people place their
stops there, creating a target-rich environment for the running of stops. The market
has an uncanny habit of quickly sinking back to those obvious lows and triggering
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

54. HOW TO SET STOPS

221

stops before reversing and launching a new rally. Without trying to assign blame for
raiding stops, let me suggest several solutions.
It pays to place your stops at non-obvious levels—either closer to the market or
deeper below an obvious low. A closer stop will cut your dollar risk but increase the
risk of a whipsaw. A deeper stop will help you sidestep some false breakouts, but if
it gets hit you’ll lose more.
Take your pick. For short-term swing trading, it generally pays to place your stops
tighter, while for long-term position trades, you’d be better off with wider stops.
Remember “the Iron Triangle of risk control”—a wider stop demands a smaller
trade size.
One method I like is Nic’s stop, named after my Australian friend Nic Grove.
He invented this method of placing a stop not near the lowest low, but at the second
lowest (more shallow) low. The logic is simple—if the market is sliding to its second
lowest low, it is almost certain to continue falling and hit the key low, where the bulk
of stops cluster. Using Nic’s stop, I get out with a smaller loss and lower slippage than
would occur when the markets drop to more visible lows.
The same logic works when shorting—place your Nic’s stop not “a tick above the
highest high” but at the level of the second highest high. Let’s review some recent
examples of both longs and shorts in Figure 54.1.
You may want to explore several different systems for placing stops, such as Parabolic, SafeZone, and Volatility stops, described in the books mentioned above. You
can get fancy or you can stay plain, but keep in mind the most important principles:
first, use stops; and second, don’t place them at obvious levels, easily visible to anyone looking at that chart. Make your stops a little tighter or wider than average—
stay away from the crowd because you don’t want to be an average trader.
For the same reason, avoid placing stops at round numbers. If you buy at $80,
don’t place a stop at $78 but at $77.94. If you enter a day-trade at $25.60, don’t
place a stop at $25.25—move it to $25.22 or even $22.19. Round numbers attract
crowds—put your stop a little farther away. Let the crowd take the first hit, and
perhaps your own stop will remain untouched.
Another method, popularized by Kerry Lovvorn, is to use Average True Range
(ATR) stops (see Chapter 24 for the explanation of the ATR). When you enter
during a price bar, place your stop at least one ATR away from the extreme of that
bar. A two ATR stop is even safer.You can use it as a trailing stop, moving it at every
bar. The principle is the same—place your stop outside the zone of market noise.
(Figure 54.2)
One of the advantages of using trailing stops is that they gradually reduce the
amount of money at risk. Earlier we discussed the concept of “available risk” (Chapter 51). As a trade followed by a trailing stop moves in your favor, it gradually frees
up available risk, allowing you to make new trades.
Even if you don’t use SafeZone or ATR stops, be sure to place stops at some distance from recent prices.You don’t want to be like one of those fearful traders who
jam their stops so close to current prices that the slightest meaningless fluctuation is
certain to hit them.

222

PRACTICAL DETAILS
KO

A

ISRG

A

BCD

B D
C

FIGURE 54.1â•… Daily charts with 13-day EMA, the Impulse system, and MACD-Histogram 12-26-9.
(Charts by Stockcharts.com)

Nic’s Stops—Long KO and Short ISRG
On the chart of The Coca-Cola Company (KO), we see a false downside breakout with a
bullish divergence. The Impulse system has turned from red to blue, permitting buying. If
we go long, where should we place our stop?
Bar A—the low was $37.10
Bar B—the low was $37.05
Bar C—the low was $36.89 (a false downside breakout, exceeded the low A by 21 cents).
Bar D—the low was $37.14
The crowd will have set its stops below 36.89, but Nic’s stop will go to $37.04—a cent
below the second lowest recent low, the bottom of bar B.
On the chart of Intuitive Surgical, Inc. (ISRG), we see a false upside breakout with a
bearish divergence. The Impulse system has turned from green to blue, permitting shorting. If we go short, where should we place our stop?
Bar A—previous peak reached $447.50
Bar B—the high was $444.99
Bar C—the high was $447.75 (a false upside breakout, exceeded previous peak by
25 cents).
Bar D—the high was $442.03
The crowd will have its stops above $447.75, but Nic’s stop will go to $445.05—a few
cents above the second highest recent high, the top of bar B.

The concept of signal and noise can help you not only place intelligent stops but
also find good entries into trades. If you see a stock in a strong trend but don’t like
to chase prices, drop down one timeframe. For example, if the weekly trend is up,
switch to the daily chart, and you’ll probably see that once every few weeks, it has
a pullback below the value zone. Measure the depths of several recent penetrations
below the slow EMA to calculate an average penetration (see Figure 39.3). Place a
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com
