
The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

89

bias stemming from a faulty application of the representativeness heuristic can explain why subjective technicians fall prey to an illusion of order
in charts that were, in fact, produced by a random process.
To explain how chartists make this mistake, which is rather subtle, we
will take a brief detour by considering a more easily understood case of
heuristic bias caused by representativeness reasoning.
As mentioned earlier, reasoning by representativeness is premised on
the notion that a class of objects or events can be represented by a class
stereotype-a typical example that possesses the class's key distinguishing characteristics. Often this line of reasoning works well. However, it
fails when an object's most noticeable features are not reliable indicators
of the object's class. In other words, when the characteristics that most
draw our attention are not relevant in judging the object's class l46 reasoning by representativeness tends to fail. Unfortunately, intuitive judgment
tends to be based on the most obvious features of an object or event regardless of whether these features are truly useful indicators of its class.
Reasoning by representativeness estimates the probability than an
object belongs to a given class by considering the degree of match between the object's most salient attributes and the most salient attributes
of the class stereotype. The greater the number of matching attributes,
the higher the adjudged probability that the object is indeed a member of
the class in question. "Modern psychologists hypothesize that our concepts of categories (classes) like bank tellers, feminists, microcomputers, skunks, and all kinds of things are represented cognitively as lists of
attributes that we believe are defining characteristics ofthose entities."147
This is illustrated in Figure 2.19. In many instances this fast and frugal
classification rule gives accurate results. People would not use such a
rule it if it did not.
Let's consider an example where the application of the representativeness rule leads to an erroneous judgment about an object's class.
Imagine that you have just taken your seat on a commercial airline flight
and you become concerned that a person (the object) seated next to you
may be a terrorist (the class). Your apprehension is aroused because the
person has the following obvious characteristics: man of apparently Middle Eastern origin, mustache, 25-30 years of age, wearing a turban, reading the Koran, and appearing nervous. Your conclusion that the man may
very well belong to the class of terrorists occurred quite spontaneously
because his obvious characteristics are similar to a set of characteristics
that was also possessed by (i.e., is representative of) the terrorists who
conducted the attacks of September 11, 2001. Your inference was based
on the representativeness heuristic. Now consider how you would have
reacted if the passenger were a young Middle Eastern man but was wearing blue jeans and a tee-shirt with an obscene logo, had on a New York

90

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

C

•

K

Q

•,

Object

of
Uncertain
Class

Stereotypical Class Member

Class
FIGURE 2.19 Classification by number of matching attributes.

Yankee baseball cap instead of a turban, was reading a copy of Playboy
instead of the Koran, and was listening to rock music on an iPod while
blowing chewing-gum bubbles. You would not have been worried. Intuitive judgments of class rest on the assumption that the most obvious
characteristics of an individual are reliable indicators of that individual's class.
Judgments based on representativeness can err because they fail to
take into account statistical and/or logical elements of a situation that are
truly relevant to an accurate judgment about its class. The probabilistically correct way of estimating the class of an event or object is called
Bayes' theorem,148 which is derived from the axioms of probability theory.
If it were applied to the airline passenger suspected of being a terrorist, it
would take into account such things as the proportion of terrorists in the
world (Le., the base rate of the class of terrorists), the proportion of people in the world that possess the set of observed characteristics (i.e., the
base rate of the pattern), and the proportion of terrorists that have this
pattern of characteristics (Le., the conditional probability that these characteristics are present given that the individual is in fact a terrorist). When
these values are plugged into the equation that expresses Bayes' theorem
we obtain the conditional probability that the person is a terrorist, given
that they possess the pattern of characteristics.

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

91

Because intuition operates on the basis of representativeness, rather
than Bayes' law, we tend to commit an error called the base rate faUacy.
This is the failure to consider the base rate statistics characterizing a situation. Terrorists, fortunately, are very rare (i.e., have a very low base rate).
Thus, among the entire set of people who possess the same salient characteristics as the terrorists of 9/11/01, the fraction that are actually terrorists
is extremely small. Perhaps only one person in a million with these traits
is actually a terrorist. This fact is highly relevant to judging the likelihood
that the person seated next to us is dangerous. However, we tend to neglect base-rate statistics because intuitive judgment is focused on the attention-grabbing features of a situation or object rather than relevant facts
such as a base-rate.
An example of fallacious reasoning by representativeness was displayed by market analysts who predicted that a deflationary depression
would follow the stock market crash of October 1987. They were captivated by the very noticeable similarity between the behavior of the stock
market in 1929, which did lead to a deflationary depression, and its behavior in 1987. Both witnessed market crashes. This glaring similarity took
analysts' attention away from significant dissimilarities between 1987 and
1929. In other words, 1987 and 1929 were different with respect to factors
that do have some predictive information with respect to deflationary collapses. An examination of market crashes over the last 100 years shows
that a price crash is not a reliable predictor of a deflationary depression.
Another error associated with representative reasoning is called the
conjunction fallacy, a failure to take into account a basic law of logic
telling us that a proper subset must contain a smaller number of objects
than the larger set to which it belongs. The set horses is a proper subset of
the larger set, animals. It follows that horses must be fewer in number
than animals in general, which includes horses, bluebirds, aardvarks, and
so forth. However, when people rely on the representativeness rule, they
seem to ignore this law of logic and commit the conjunction 149 fallacy. In
one experiment conducted by Tversky and Kahneman,150 subjects were
presented with the following description:

Linda is 31 years old, single, outspoken, and very bright. She majored in philosophy. As a stUdent, she was deeply concerned with issues of discrimination and social justice, and also participated in
antinuclear demonstrations. Which possibility is most likely? (1)
Linda is a bank teller, or (2) Linda is a bank teUer AND is active in
the feminist movement.
Astoundingly, 85 percent of the subjects responded that it was more
likely that Linda was a bank teller AND active in the feminist movement

92

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

than that Linda was simply a bank teller. This conclusion ignores the logical relationship between a set and a proper subset. Subjects became so
fixated on the fact that Linda possessed a set of salient characteristics that
matched an intuitive stereotype of a feminist, that they committed the
conjunction fallacy. Clearly, the set of women who are both bank tellers
and active in the feminist movement is a subset of a larger category which
contains all female bank tellers including those who are feminists and
those who are not. Other studies confirmed these findings and led Tversky
and Kahneman to conclude that people's probability judgments are biased
by the addition of salient detail. Even though each additional detail describing an object reduces the probability that such an object exists, \5\
when people reason by representativeness, additional detail increases the
number of characteristics that match a class stereotype, thus increasing
an intuitive estinlate of probability. The conjunction fallacy is illustrated
in Figure 2.20.
The conjunction fallacy can have disastrous consequences when it
seeps into jury verdicts. For example, consider which of two possibilities
would seem more likely 152:
1. The defendant left the scene of the crinle.
2. The defendant left the scene of the crime for fear of being accused of
murder.

Bank Tellers
Who Are
Feminists

FIGURE 2.20 The conjunction fallacy.

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

93

The second hypothesis involves a conjunction of "left the scene" and
"fear of accusation." Because the second alternative is a subset of the first,
it is by definition less probable. Clearly, there are reasons for someone's
leaving a crime scene other than fear of being accused, like going to pick
up the dry cleaning. However, the additional detail of the second hypothesis lends a ring of plausibility because it increases a sense of match to actions that would be representative of a guilty party.

THE REPRESEN11\TIVENESS IIEURISTIC AND THE
ILLUSION TRENDS AND PA1'TERNS IN CHARTS:
REAL AND FAKE
So far the representativeness heuristic has been discussed with respect to
its use in classifying objects. In fact, the heuristic is also involved in a
more abstract type of classification judgment that is central to the practice of subjective TA: judging that a sample of data evidences trends and
patterns and is, therefore, worthy of further analysis or alternatively that
the data is a random hodge-podge not worthy of further analysis.
Bear in mind the judgment about whether a data set appears random
or nonrandom is not made with conscious awareness or intention. It occurs as automatically and unconsciously as the judgment involved in recognizing the face of a friend. All heuristic judgments, including reasoning
by representativeness, occur automatically and without conscious awareness. As a result, when a chartist concludes that a sample of price history
contains authentic patterns and trends (i.e., that the data is nonrandom)
and is, therefore, worthy of analysis, it is not a matter of controlled thinking. That is to say, the chartist does not consciously pose the question:
"Does this data appear as if it contains exploitable order and structure."
Although heuristic judgments slip into our thinking unnoticed, they
can have a profound influence on our beliefs. The problem is that heuristic thinking fails to take into account important features of the data that
are relevant to determining if it does contain authentic patterns and
trends that might be exploited with further analysis.
In a previous section, I asked you to create an artificial price history
(random-walk chart) by flipping a coin 300 times. If you did not do so
then, I urge you to do so now. Not only will it make this section more
meaningful, it may permanently change the way you look at charts. To
quote Martha Stewart, "that's a good thing."
If this was your first exposure to data generated by a random process,
you may be surprised by how nonrandom it looks. You may not have expected to see formations that look like chart patterns (head-and-shoulders,

94

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

double top, etc.). The question we must consider is this: Why does this sequence, which we know to be random in origin, give the appearance of
having authentic patterns and trends. Or, said differently, why does data
generated by a purely random process appear as if it were generated by
a process governed by rules, which, if discovered, would make prediction possible?
Your chart may have looked something like Figure 2.21.
The bottom line is this: That which appears to be nonrandom is not
necessarily nonrandom. My contention is that the perception of trends
and patterns in randomly generated data occurs because of a faulty application of the representativeness heuristic. Specifically, the heuristic creates a faulty intuitive notion of how random data is supposed to look. That
is to say, it produces a false stereotype of randomness. Thus, when we
view data that does not appear to match this false stereotype, we automatically and erroneously conclude that the data is nonrandom. From this
flawed conclusion, it is a short leap to the equally false perception of patterns and the equally false notion that the patterns contain predictive
information.
One consequence of representativeness-based reasoning is the expectation that an effect should resemble its cause. This is often reasonable. The Earth (big cause) is responsible for gravity (big effect), while a
mere pebble in our shoe causes only a minor annoyance. However, the
rule that an effect should resemble its cause does not always hold. The
1918 flu pandemic, a big effect, was caused by a creature of submicroscopic proportions.
How does this relate to charts of asset prices? A set of data on a chart
can be seen as an effect of a process, the activity of a financial market.
The process is the cause whereas the data is the effect. A chart of our

Price

Time
FIGURE 2.21

Data from a random process that appears ordered.

95

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

body's hourly temperature over a 24-hour period is an effect caused by a
process that happens to be our body's metabolism.
Because representativeness-based thinking operates involuntarily beneath conscious awareness, when we view the chart of an asset's price
history, we tend to draw an automatic conclusion about the nature of the
process that generated the chart. Perhaps, if stock charts looked something like the trace in Figure 2.22, the pioneers of TA would have been less
likely to see exploitable structure, and the practice of TA would never
have been born. This data is supposed to approximate an intuitive stereotype of randomness: haphazard, disorderly, and without any hint of trend.
On the basis of the representativeness heuristic, we presume that if a
process (the cause) is random, its effect (the data) should also appear random. As a consequence of this assumption, any sample of data that deviates from the presumed stereotype of randomness, because it manifests
some sense of pattern or trend, is concluded to be the product of a nonrandom process. Stock charts give the appearance of having been generated by a nonrandom process. In other words they match an intuitive
notion of order and predictability. Bear in mind that financial markets may
indeed be nonrandom to some degree and hence be amenable to prediction. However, that is not the issue here. Rather the issue is can nonrandom structure that is amenable to prediction be detected by visual
inspection and intuitive appraisal?
As mentioned previously, the deficiencies of reasoning by representativeness are due to an excessive focus on obvious appearances and the simultaneous disregard of important statistical and logical features. As will
be explained in Chapter 4, one of the most important features of a sample
of data, from the standpoint of data analysis, is the number of observations
comprising the sample. Valid conclusions about a sample of data must
take the number of observations into account. Moreover, the statistical

Price

Time

FIGURE 2.22
nontrending.

Intuitive stereotype of random data: haphazard, disordered,

96

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

characteristics of a large number of observations are required to accurately represent the true nature of the process that generated the data
(e.g., random or nonrandom). Conversely, small samples of data often
convey the illusion of patterns and trends because the statistical characteristics of a small sample of data can be wildly unrepresentative of the
data generating process.
I contend that the belief that visual chart analysis is a valid method for
detecting trends and patterns is based on a flawed chain of thinking that
goes something like this:
1. On the basis of the representativeness heuristic, it is erroneously
thought that data generated by a random process should look random-a formless haphazard flip-flop without any hint of patterns, organized shapes or trends.
2. This stereotype is erroneously assumed to manifest in all samples of
random data, irrespective of the number of observations comprising
the sample.
3. A small sample of data is examined and it appears not to match the intuitive stereotype of randomness.
4. The data is thus deemed to be the product of a nonrandom process.
5. Nonrandom processes are amenable to prediction, hence it would be
reasonable to look for patterns and trends in the data to make predictions.
This is illustrated in Figure 2.23.
The principal flaw in this chain of reasoning is the failure to consider
the matter of sample size (step 2 of the preceding list). The presumption
that a sample of data can accurately reflect the nature of the data generating process, irrespective of the number of observations comprising the
sample, violates an important principle of formal data analysis, the Law of
Large Numbers. Reasoning by representativeness fails to respect the Law
of Large umbers. In other words, it commits the crime of small numbers
or sample size neglect. The penalty is automatic membership in The Fools
of Randomness l53 club.
The Law of Large Numbers and the Crime
of Sample Size Neglect

The Law of Large Numbers tells us that sample size is of paramount importance because it determines the confidence we can have in inferences
based on a sample of data. Also known as the Law of Averages, the Law of
Large Numbers tells us that only samples comprised of large numbers of

97

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

Does The Data Contain Predictable Order?
Yes: Data sample does not match intuitive stereotype of randomness

7
Data Sample

Stereotype
Random
Data

Non-Random
Process

FIGURE 2.23 Data is presumed to be amenable to prediction because it does
not match an intuitive stereotype of randomness.

observations reliably and accurately reflect the characteristics of the
process that generated the sample. Or, said differently, only large samples
can inform us about the characteristics of the population from which the
sample came. Thus, the larger the number of coin tosses, the more closely
the proportion of heads in the sample will reflect an essential truth about
fair coins: the probability of heads is 0.50. The bottom line is we can have
greater confidence in what we learn from large samples than from small
ones. The Law of Large Numbers will be discussed in greater depth in connection with statistics in Chapter 4. For the present discussion, what is
important is the connection between the Law of Large Numbers and the
appearance of illusory patterns and trends in small samples of data.
Small samples can be misleading because they can manifest characteristics that are very different from the true characteristics of the process
that generated the sample. This explains why a small segment of a pseudostock chart-one that was actually generated by a random process-gives
the appearance of authentic patterns and trends. Of course, by design,
such a chart cannot have real trends and patterns. Thus, a reliable conclusion about whether a sample of data was the result of a random or nonrandom process cannot be obtained from a small sample. This is depicted
by Figures 2.24 and 2.25. When the parts (small samples) ofthe chart look
nonrandom, an illusion of nonrandomness is created in the entire chart,
when they are put together.
Coin-toss experiments illustrate how small samples can produce misleading impressions. The obvious statistical characteristic of this random

98

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Random Process

Small Sample
Illusory Uptrend

Small Sample
Illusory H&S Pattern

Small Sample
Illusory Downtrend

FIGURE 2.24 The illusion of trends and patterns in small samples-data generated by a random process.

process is that there are two equally likely outcomes. This is the basis for
an expectation that the proportion of heads is 0.50. This intuition is indeed correct when the number of tosses is large. In a sample of 100,000
tosses, the proportion of heads will be extremely close to 0.50. If one were
to repeat this experiment many times, the proportion of heads would always be very close to 0.50. In fact, it would be unlikely to fall outside the
range of 0.497-0.503. 154
The problem is intuition pays no attention to sample size or the Law
of Large Numbers. So we also expect 0.50 heads to appear in all samples.
Although it is true that the expected proportion of heads in any sample is
always 0.50, even for just two tosses, the proportion of heads that will ac-

Price

r·······························:

Illusory Up-Trend

Illusory Down-Trend
Time

FIGURE 2.25 If small parts of a chart look orderly, the whole chart assumes a
nonrandom look.

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

99

tually appear in a given small sample can depart significantly from 0.50. In
ten tosses, for example, three heads (0.30) or seven heads (0.70) can easily happen. In a sample of 100,000 tosses, 0.30 heads (30,000) or 0.70
(70,000) would be virtually impossible with a fair coin.
Another faulty intuition about random processes is that outcomes
should alternate (up/down, head/tail) more than they really do. When people are asked to imagine what a sequence of coin tosses would be like,
they tend to imagine sequences that show far more head Itail alternation
than would really occur in a random sequence. 155 In reality, random
process displays less alternation and longer streaks of similar outcomes
(up, up, up) than is widely believed. Therefore, when a set of data does
not match the false expectation of an alternating sequence, it gives rise to
the illusion of a trend. For example, it seems intuitively correct that a coin
toss would be more likely to produce the sequence H,T,H,T,H,T than the
sequence H,H,H,H,H,H. However, both sequences are, in fact, equally
probable,156 so we come away with the erroneous impression that the former sequence suggests a random process whereas the latter suggests a
process that displays a trend.
Because random sequences actually alternate less and streak more
than our intuitive conception, sequences that actually are random appear
as if they are nonrandom. For example, the average basketball player
makes about 50 percent of their shots, similar to the probability of getting
heads. Thus, there is a reasonably good chance of making four, five, or
even six shots in a row if 20 shots are taken in a game. In other words,
chance favors the appearance of what sports fans call a hot-hand, 157 which
is, in fact, nothing more than a streak typical of a random sequence.
The erroneous notion that random processes should alternate more
and streak less is responsible for two false perceptions: (1) the clustering iUusion, and (2) the gambler's faUacy. In this context, the term cluster refers to a clump, either in time or space, of similar events. A cluster
of similar outcomes in a random time series gives the illusion of a trend
that has momentum and this creates the false expectation that the trend
should persist. The gambler's fallacy is the equally false expectation that
a cluster of similar outcomes should not occur, and when one does, it
gives rise to the false expectation that a reversal is due. The gambler's fallacy is exemplified by a person who thinks a tail is more likely after a
string of heads.
It is an observer's prior beliefs about a process that determines
whether he will fall prey to the clustering illusion or the gambler's fallacy. Suppose a person is observing a process that is, in fact, random but
does not realize that it is. That person will tend to fall prey to the clustering illusion if they hold a prior belief that the process is nonrandom
and that it should manifest trends. Sooner or later a streak occurs, and
