
OQ: 50 how did you break the news to the big man?

A : [remember a couple of things that Friday: I was going home
on the subway and on the train back to Long Island to my parents’
house, and it was the only time in my life where a train was coming
at me and I actually considered possibly jumping in front of it. It
was the first and only time in my life I ever thought about suicide.
But I had hit such a low I couldn't believe what I did and every
single step of analysis told me what a shmuck and idiot I was, and
now I had to go explain this to my father. It wasn’t bad enough
that I lost all of my money, but I lost some of his too. Surprisingly,
he was actually very good about it because I was sitting there and
he came home and asked me how did we do today [laughter]. I
was speechless for a moment and then I explained the whole thing
to him and he was pretty forgiving of it and understanding. He
then left me alone and about two days later he just asked me what
did you learn from all this. So then I went through the list of how
I did everything wrong. That you can’t trade when you're taking
exams. You've got to put in orders, you've got to put in stop-losses,
and you have to learn all of your orders before you do things. I also
told him that you have do more homework on the trades, research
what’s going on, and don’t trade before crop reports on your first
day. That’s one of the riskiest things in the world that you can do.
So that was pretty much my baptism under fire.

Q.: what happened next? You had $2,000 left in the account, did
you continue trading or did you stop?

A : We stopped trading that account, and it was a year or two
later when I actually opened an account on my own with what I
had, which was like $5,000. I opened an account that allowed me

167


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

to trade shares, options, and also let me buy options on futures. I
traded a little bit of that and by then I learned a little bit more. I was
also much more defensive. I think I might have made maybe $300
on it over a 6- to 12-month period. After that I graduated from
school and wound up getting a job on the floor at the commodity
exchange as an order clerk—which is pretty much how everybody
starts out. I'll never forget that story. It was the summer of 1988
and I had two jobs offers. One was from Citibank as a Forex trader
and the other was as a clerk on the commodity exchange. At the
time, the Forex job was offering $24,000 a year and the clerk was
$16,000. Back then 24K was a good starting salary for someone out
of college. For someone earning 16K, it was pathetic if they had
a college degree. I remember coming home that evening and my
mom said, “Well, how did it go today?” I said, “Pretty good. I got
two job offers and I picked one.” She goes, “Oh, okay. Well, when
do you start at Citibank?” I said, “No, I’m starting on the floor
next week. Then she asked: “Did you learn anything at school, one
job for $24,000 another one for $16,000—come on, the choice is
obvious.” Then she asked why we were paying all this money for
school [laughter].

Q.: When you were on the floor as a clerk, could you trade for
yourself or was it forbidden?

A : It was forbidden. You had to do your job, and my job was
to take orders from customers. It would have been a conflict of
interest if I had positions on as I was trying to service the clients.
My primary responsibility was to take their orders, cancel their
orders, report their fills, and not be trading my own accounts or
anything like that. I got really lucky, you know the stock market
crashed in 1987 and there was a pretty much a recession on Wall
Street from 1988 to 1989—people were not hiring aggressively. I
got lucky in that I got offered a job by someone I didn’t know on the
floor. What I found out about the floor was that there’s two kinds
of people down there and I hate to say it, but this is what I saw.
There were really nice, good people who are losers in the markets,

168


THE TREASURE HUNTER

but you know they would be your best friends and they would loan
you their last buck to buy lunch if you did a bad gold trade or
something. Then there were a bunch of rich, ruthless jerks. That
was the kind of the delineation between the two types of traders on
that floor—it is a very competitive environment. I got lucky in that
through chance I just happened to get a job with a guy who was
rich, who knew what he was doing in the markets, who was making
money, and was also actually a nice person who cared about your
career, not just how much money he could make off you working
for him. It was just the luckiest thing that happened to me. One
of the reasons I took that job on the floor instead of working with
Citigroup is that he had promised me if I studied the market and
learned it, if I picked it up quickly I would be in the ring trading
within 6 to 12 months.

Q.: That's pretty fast!

A : Yes, really fast, most people take three to five years. So I
jumped at the chance because I wanted to go as quickly as possible
into the trading side, I didn’t want to be answering phones all day.
So this really excited me about the job and I'll never forget what
happened next. When you're on the phones, you make friends with
the people next to you. They are your competitors, but you are also
chatting about what you are doing this weekend, what you are doing
with a girlfriend, and this and that. So about three months into my
job, a so-called friend of mine was next to the silver pit with me
and the market was really slow and it was getting time to go home
for the weekend. All of the sudden he looks at me and he’s like,
“Indi, what are you doing down here, you've got a college degree”

Q. pia most clerks not have college degree?

A : No, a lot of them didn’t actually. So he said what are you
standing down here getting underpaid, answering telephones for?
When you could be doing something else upstairs. You know, at
an investment banking firm or a trading firm or something like
that. I said to him, well these guys promised to put me in the ring

169


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

in about 6 to 12 months, and all I heard was this sheepish laugh.
Then I thought, “Oh no, so being told you will be put in the ring
in 6 to 12 months is the same thing as someone telling you that the
check is in the mail.” I felt like I had been had and thought that I’m
probably going to be down here for three to five years answering
phones unless something changes. But I stood behind this trader
every day for 6 months and afterwards would pick his brain clean.
I was his clerk, so I asked him why are you doing these trades, why
are buying this, why you selling that? Low and behold, believe or
not, about 9 to 12 months later I was in the ring trading sugar and
coffee options. I was getting my revenge on some of those guys,
and that’s how it started on the floor.

Q.- pia somebody on the floor stake you?

A : Yes, the guy I worked for also had shares in different trading
companies. So he owned shares, sometimes big interests in a trad-
ing group on the sugar exchange, and one on the oil exchange, and
back then there were about five different commodity exchanges
on one trading floor in the World Trade Center building. So one
corner of the building was the cotton exchange, one corner was the
coffee, sugar, and cocoa exchange, one corner was the COMEX
gold exchange, one corner of the building was the New York Merc
Crude Oil markets, and then in the middle was a small little New
York futures exchange that traded stock index futures and, I think,
the CRB index. So he had shares in a company that was trading
on the softs, which are coffee, sugar and cocoa, and as soon as
that opening went up, I went for the interview with the director of
that company, which was at a local bar, as most of my commodity
interviews were. After a few beers and probably several questions
about sports I got the job [laughter].

Q.:s0 first you were taking orders and just fulfilling orders?

A: Yes.

170


THE TREASURE HUNTER

QO - How much longer before you began to take positions?

A : As I mentioned earlier, I started as a clerk and then it took
about 9 or 10 months before I got into the ring, and I started
trading a company account. I was so excited by that. You go into
broker training for about a month before you're going into the ring.
Part of your day is spent on the phones taking orders, but the other
part is to go over to the pit that you're going to be trading in and
observe for an hour every other day or so. Then maybe twice a
week you have classes after the markets are all closed. You go into
the pit that you're going to be trading in and they do simulated
trading and teach you how to do open outcry, which is really a fun
and a thrilling process, and how to quickly get your mind ready to
execute orders and multiple orders when the markets are falling
and rising—also how to cross trades and execute buy and sell orders
at the same time. So that was really thrilling, and I was really loud
and vocal in it, and so was everyone else. Then, when it comes
to your first day in the trading pit you see every newbie, who was
very loud in training, is basically standing there with their arms
crossed. Except for me of course, I had to go wild. I start yelling
and screaming and making markets and doing trades. I remember
one of the other newbies from the class looked over to me during
the second or third day in the pit. He was like, “What the hell
are you doing, do you know exactly what you're doing, yet?” I was
like, “No, but I’m just trying to react to the order flow.” Then low
and behold that relaxed feeling paid off because in my first month
trading open outcry, I made $40,000, and I thought okay, now it’s
going to happen. I’m going to be the next George Soros, this is how
it’s going to start.

: The reason it happened was because you were just reacting
to order flow? That is you were basically fading the offers, buying
the bids and the market was relatively quiet so you were able to
make the spread?

A: It was a little bit different then, the market was pretty busy. So
I was fading orders, market making, scalping in and out, and when

171


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

everything netted out, I was buying options and hedging it. So I
had basically a long volatility position, which will be profitable if the
underlying moves significantly. So I was making money two ways,
first scalping and collecting on the bid offer spread, which was
paying some bills, and then building that into a long-term, long-
volatility position as the market was going crazy. Option volatilities
were getting more and more pumped as the gyrations in price
increased, and then I thought, I’m going to take this strategy and
run with it until I become billionaire. Naturally, about a month
or two later, I had lost all of that money. Volatility contracted
[laughter] and, of course, then everyone really wants to hit you on
the options at that time.

Q.: once you started making bids, there is no way to offset it,
right, because nobody wants the other end of it?

A : Nobody wants the other end of it when volatility is contracting.
So I got stuffed and probably lost all that I made plus about another
40 or 50 thousand. My equity swings were going wild.

Q.: whe's money was it?
A : Itwas the trading firm’s.

Q.: How much of a line did they give?

A : I don’t remember exactly, but we pretty much had access to
funds. I mean millions, if you wanted it. But they were watching
you and every few days you'd be meeting with a risk manager.

Q_: Were they screaming at you when you started going from
plus 40K to zero to minus 10K, minus 20K?

A : They weren't really screaming at me. They were very happy
with the first month, obviously. They didn’t really warn me about

172


THE TREASURE HUNTER

being long the volatility. I guess they thought this guy knows that
now’s the time to be long vol. They did mention it, at one stage,
that my equity swings were getting a little bit too wide for what
they do. They said we told you to buy and sell options and they
looked at my position and, let’s say, sugar was trading at 10 cents
at the time, and they said, hey, you are long the 10-cent calls, you
are long on the 11-cent calls, but in the 9-cent calls you should sell
something. Don’t just buy every strike [laughter].

Q_.: Long strikes all across the board right?

A : Anyway, at the end of the year, I tried to grind my way back,
and I’d been in the ring for six months since, I think I had got in
May 1989 or June, and by December that’s the yearend. So by the
first month, let’s say it was May 1989, I made 40 grand and then
the second month I lost 20, and the third month maybe 40 and
then treaded water back and forth. But by the end of the year I
was down about 20. It was time to go in for a review, so I figured,
“Okay, well, I’m fired. I’m out of here.” So it’s the end of the year,
and I'll never forget it, I go into the interview and the director
sits me down and he looks across the table and he’s like, “You had
a pretty good year.” I’m like, “Oh, cool. They got the wrong file
[laughter].” The way it worked was that you had a base salary of
$24,000 plus 20 percent of the profits that you made. So I asked
the director, “What’s my bonus?” He said, “No, you don’t have a
bonus, you’re down 20,000, but you had good year for a first year.”
He said that most of our guys get killed in their first year, and he
said that you were active so you should have lost 100 to 200,000
dollars this year. I was like, uh, okay, and from that day on I just
decided all right, Indi, you are either going to have to learn how
to do this like a professional and learn money management skills,
not just shoot your mouth off by saying taken and sold. Otherwise
next year, they're probably not going to be as forgiving. If you are
down again, you'll be looking for another job doing something you
probably don’t love as much as this, because trading was exciting
for me.

173


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.:s0 how long did you trade in the pit?

A : I traded for that company for three years.

Q.: How were those years? The next year, when you said you
were going to get serious about money management, what were
your equity swings like then?

A : Very controlled, and I started to make anywhere from $100,000
to $300,000 depending on how much opportunity I was given.
When the markets threatened me by going against me and I didn’t

know what was going on, I would really play defense. Really cut
back.

Q.: What would that mean when you played “defense”? Could
you cut your positions?

A : Pd cut my positions. In other words, if I was long vols, and
I owned several strikes and the thing went against me and wasn’t
turning for whatever reason, I’d cut the trade, take the loss, get
out.

Q.- pia you then try to make money scalping?

A : Yes. You could make money scalping, but not all of the time.
When the markets are slow you couldn't. If the market got really
dead or slow I’d leave the pit. One of the areas where I find my
trading is horrible is when the markets are dead. I do one thing
that is stupid. I want to trade, open my mouth, or, in the electronic
format, buy and sell stuff on the screen and then wind up with
a graveyard position. I get the crap that no one else wants just
because I couldn't keep still, and now I will probably die with this
stuff.

174


THE TREASURE HUNTER

Q.- what would you do to avoid that?

A : Get out of my positions and then get out of the pit.

Q.: where would you go?

A : I would just go into the lunchroom or go downstairs and look
at where other markets were going. Maybe go over and look at
some other market on the floor that I wasn’t a member of, but see
what’s going on there. Basically, I would just get out of that area
where I was going to get tempted to lose money.

Q.: How long would you take a break for?

A: As long as it took. However, you've got to be careful. You can’t
be working for a company and play pinball all day down in the
pizza parlor because the markets are slow. So I would go in there
and see what was going on, if I saw that the quagmire was starting
again, I would either stay in the pit and just shut up, or see if there
were any new pretty clerks on the floor. I would have some other
way of amusing myself besides trading commodities or bidding and
offering on these options. It was only when the markets go crazy
that you find big wide spreads, you find gaps, and you find things
that are mispriced. So I kind of wait for that, cherry pick, if you
will.

Q.- pia meeting with a risk manager every few days, help your
trading by having accountability because you had to report to some-
one your results?

A. No, really that’s an internal process. Most of the risk managers,
the people I've dealt with, they're usually failed traders or someone
who doesn’t really have the first clue about what’s really going

175


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

on. They can yell at you after the fact, but they can’t offer you
constructive advice. It’s an internal thing. You have got to come
to terms with the fact that you are going to be a professional
trader, that you are going to manage your risk, and you are going
to study these options or these strike prices or the relationships for
them so that you can quantify your risk. You must come up with
your own methodology on how you are going to calm down and
control risk, and be professional, and try to be the house in a casino
instead of just a player. It’s a really an internal thing. These guys
can help you a little bit. But a lot of them don’t have that much
better insight than you do, and none of them are as motivated as
you are in terms of trying to make money and be successful in the
business. That’s what I found, they're not going to be your savior,
so you better do it yourself.

: Was your trading style organic, was it basically something
you learned yourself, or something that you modeled off somebody
else?

A : It was a combination of things. When I decided to become
professional after that first year of the $20,000 loss. I ate, breathed,
slept, and drank commodities. I read everything about the markets.
I would read the Market Wizards book about Tony Saleba, and
tried to understand what he was doing. Okay, I don’t want to get
too technical, but he was doing butterflying in the front months
and back spreading in the back months, and scalping in the middle
to pay for the whole thing. So I looked at that idea. I started to
remember what my mentor in the business was doing when I was
standing behind him and he was trading gold options and things
like that.

Q.. what was he doing exactly?

A : He was lucky back then. You were able to get conversions
done where you were able to buy puts, buy futures and sell calls

176


THE TREASURE HUNTER

and lock in profits and link butterflies for zero [a butterfly strategy
links a number of option positions in hopes that the underlying will
remain in a narrow trading range] and sell them out to the order
flow for a buck or something.

Q:s0 string a hundred butterflies all together, so if one of them
made a hit, he would score?

A : Yeah, and other things like that such as linking butterflies for
zero, combined with cashing in on being able to trade the bid-offer
spread, and having a string of butterflies on and one of them, was
going to be in the money. Gold was less hectic and less volatile in
the mid- to late 1980s than it was earlier.

Q.: Was he trading strictly options?

A: yes.

Q.:or was he trading other instruments as well? Like hedging
with the underlying?

A : He was hedging with the underlying. We all were.

Qu echanically, where was the underlying trading, was it trad-
ing right next to you, how was the hedge done physically?

A : We had an order taker in the futures ring that worked for the
company. So I would be in the option pit and let’s say I bought 10
put options and the delta was 0.5 and the market was trading at
10.60. I'd immediately yell to him, “Greg, buy me five!” And then
he’d buy five futures against the put options I had just bought, and
then he’d report back something like, you know you bought them
at 10.71 and I'd yell FU or something [laughter]. And then right
after I bought 10.71, it would drop back to 10.60 [laughter].

177


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: Now you currently don’t trade in the pit. So how long did you
actually spend trading for the company in a pit?

A : I worked for that company for three years and, at the end
of the third year, I’d saved enough money to buy a seat. I bought
a seat on the cotton exchange because one day I was literally
laying down in the sugar options pit because it was one of those
periods where nothing was going on in the market and this had
been actually going on for a month or two and the market was
just horrible and I'll never forget what happened next. I was laying
down, literally looking up at the ceiling, and I heard a roar from
one of the quadrants, like a riot had broken out or something. I
ran over there and my company had given me a cotton exchange
seat as well, which I never used. I went over there and there was a
crop report and this was in 1991, I think. There was a crop report
in orange juice and the orange juice market went up 40 percent in
one day and the place was crazy.

Q.: was there some kind of freeze in Brazil or something?

A : It was a crop report that everyone miscalculated. Everyone
expected the crop to increase and, for some reason, the crop ma-
terially decreased because of some citrus aphid or some bug or
something and, of course, the whole ring was short along with the
market going into this report and it was pandemonium. They had
security guards, and if you did not have a cotton exchange badge
you could not go walk through that quadrant. Whether you were
going to the bathroom or going to lunch, you couldn’t go there.
I had the badge. So I went in the middle of the pit and it was
pandemonium, yelling, screaming, insanity. This is what I loved
and I couldn’t help it, but I started reacting to order flow [laugh-
ter]. Then I thought, “Okay, idiot you better go downstairs and
run some options theoretical values before you start shooting your
mouth off in here.” I did and then went back in there and it was
lot of fun. Now the problem was that we already had a prop trader
trading orange juice and I was the sugar guy. But, I thought, this

178


THE TREASURE HUNTER

is exciting and he didn’t mind that I was over there so I traded for
a few days there, scalped, made some money, but it was really this
guy’s turf and I didn’t want to step on his toes. So I went back to
sleep in the sugar pit. Near the end of the year, I thought to myself,
after this year, you have enough money to buy a seat on the cotton
exchange for yourself and you have some money left over to put
in your account. That place is going to be cooking for six months
afterwards, I mean, they just dropped a bomb over there and re-
verberations are going to go for at least six months till that thing
dies. Why don’t you take a shot on your own. Instead of making
20 percent of what you make, make a hundred. So that’s what I did.
