
64

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

toward their use. If, however, we use them to make deﬁnitive or exclusive trading decisions, we can be tempted to
draw in lines under and over every little zigzag in price
movement, projecting ahead onto the right edge of the
chart myriad competing and conﬂicting lines. A chart too
full of trend and channel lines will only lead to indecision.
The following one-year chart of QQQQ (Figure
2.16) demonstrates well how you can get too carried away
with trend and channel lines. Just how are you supposed to
get a solid read of this chart?
It is best, therefore, to use trendlines only to give us
the big picture. When in doubt, remember KISS (Keep It
Simple, Stupid!). In other words, try to incorporate as
many highs and lows (price point touches) as possible as
you draw your lines and try to contain as much price action
as possible. Use trendlines only to focus on major trends
and channels, and, as we will see in greater detail later, they
will become very useful tools indeed.

Figure 2.16

QQQQ with too many trendlines.

BECOMING A CHART READER

65

EYEBALLING THE CHARTS
Now that you have your charts set up, input each of the
stocks on your primary watch list so that you can eyeball,
or take a quick glance at, their daily charts. Don’t worry if
you do not yet have a watch list of stocks set up to monitor. In Chapter 9, I will show you how to set up an awesome watch list of the best stocks available for trend
trading, and how to keep this list updated over time so that
you always have only the best markets available to you.
Here, I just want to introduce you to what will soon
become a daily discipline for you: eyeballing the charts for
current or developing setups.
Depending on which charting package you use, you
can go through your watch lists, 10 at a time, page by page,
or you can scroll through a drop-down menu of your watch
list stocks and with the click of the mouse call up the daily
chart for each one. Some charting packages will even let
you set up a slide-show function that will scroll automatically through your lists for you. You simply sit back, watch,
and take notes. It should be said that one advantage to saving your watch lists in a Web-based service rather than
your charting package is that then if you, like me, trade
from different computers, you will always have instant
access to your watch lists through the Web. If your watch
lists are saved only to your charting software, you will only
be able to access your lists from the computer they are
saved on unless you take the time to export and import the
lists (a lot more easily said than done!).
Sometimes it is helpful to take your primary watch list
and divide it into smaller lists. There are several ways to do

66

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

this. You can, for example, divide by sector, by price, by
index afﬁliation, or by some other scheme. I prefer to divide
by sector, since I regularly monitor sector charts and like
to key my trades off them. If, for example, I see the semiconductor sector ﬂashing a fresh buy signal, I’ll go to my
semiconductor watch list and focus only on those stocks.
The same is true for steel stocks, ﬁnancials, Internets,
China stocks, alternative energy plays, and so on. You can
also make saved watch lists of those stocks that turn up on
your special screens, as outlined later, but that have not yet
given buy or sell signals. In any case, you will run through
these watch lists at the end of each trading day, looking for
new setups.
The eyeballing process is the bread and butter of
trend traders. As technical analysts, our primary source of
input is the price chart.The only way to receive that input
is to lay your eyes on a number of them, day in and day out.
Tune out the news, tune out CNBC, tune out the spam
e-mail for “Hot stocks moving now!,” tune out your buddy
at the gym who has a hot stock tip. Your complete and
entire investment discipline requires only that you eyeball
the charts.
It is also important that before you begin eyeballing
the charts on your primary watch list, you ﬁrst ask yourself, “What do I expect the broader markets to do over the
next few days?” If you expect a bullish period, then you will
be eyeballing primarily for bullish setups. If you expect a
bearish period, then you will be eyeballing primarily for
bearish setups. If you are unsure about the general market
direction, then you will be eyeballing for both bullish and
bearish setups. (Don’t worry if you don’t yet know how to

BECOMING A CHART READER

67

determine the general trend expectations of the broader
markets. We will be covering that later.)

THE HERMENEUTICAL PROBLEM
I wrote my doctoral dissertation at Oxford on hermeneutics, the study of how the mind understands and applies
the content of written texts. One of the things we can
learn from this study is that no one reads texts in a vacuum. Whether we are reading the Bible or the nightly
newspaper, we each bring our own experiences, biases,
and personal preferences to what we are reading, and
these in turn can inﬂuence how we understand and apply
what we read.
A stock chart functions very much like a text. Like a
text, a stock chart speaks to us about something we need to
understand, but instead of using ordinary language, it uses
price bars, candlesticks, moving averages, volume, and
other technical indicators. Together, these are trying to tell
us a story—a story about the underlying company’s successes and failures and (if we listen very carefully) the
future prospects of its publicly traded shares. But there is
a problem in our ability to hear clearly what the chart wants
to say to us, and it is a hermeneutical problem. The problem, simply put, is this: our prejudices (or our “prejudgments”) get in the way.
Let’s say, for example, that you plug into an Apple iPod
at the gym, and you use an Apple Macintosh at the ofﬁce,
and you do your creative writing at Starbucks on an Apple
MacBook. You are a big fan of Apple’s products. Steve Jobs
is your hero. You genuﬂect every time you pass the Cuper-

68

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

tino exit on Highway 101. Okay, that’s a bit much . . . but
you get the point. You really like the company, think they
can do no wrong, and believe their stock price is going to
go “to da moon,” as they say. These are prejudices, and they
might prevent you from hearing what the stock chart wants
to tell you.
Back in January of 2006, Apple (AAPL) could do no
wrong. It was the darling of the street. Its stock price was
hitting new all-time highs, up near $90 per share. Its products, especially the iPod, were seen everywhere. Rumors
were ﬂying about new products: an iPhone, an i-TV, and
so on. However, the daily chart was trying to say something
that only a few traders were willing to hear: not all was
right with the way the shares were behaving. There were
subtle sell signals forming in key indicators, like the
MACD and stochastics. Sure enough, the next month the
stock options backdating scandal hit the company and
shares plummeted over the next two quarters to $50 (since
then, of course, the iPhone did come out and AAPL shares
ramped up to nearly $150!).
The moral of that story: ignore the hype, ignore the
news, ignore your own prejudices, and just listen to what
the chart is telling you. As much as possible, “bracket your
prejudgments” (to use philosopher Edmund Husserl’s
phrase) and just tune in to the chart. As I like to tell my
trading clients: price and volume—that is all you need to
know to trade well.
Here is another example, but of a different kind.
Broadwing (BWNG) is a company with a multifaceted
footprint in the Internet sector. Through its subsidiaries,

BECOMING A CHART READER

69

the company provides data and Internet, broadband transport, and voice communications services to several large
communications service providers. In late spring of 2006,
the company was hit with a string of events that sent its
earnings and its shares into a tailspin. Earnings announcements failed to meet Street expectations. There were unexpected changes in management. With really poor timing,
the company priced a large convertible debenture offering,
which further diluted shares. Price plummeted from a high
of $16.44 to a low of $8.26, for a loss of nearly 50 percent.
Former hedge fund manager Jim Cramer, on his hit CNBC
show Mad Money, called Broadwing a “dog” and told his
audience to sell it.
However, the chart of BWNG told us otherwise. As
price skidded to lows below $10 per share—a point that
normally takes a stock off the radar screen of professional
traders—certain indicators were pointing to the fact that
the stock was under accumulation. Momentum in the
latest sell-offs was waning, and the stock was ripe for a
turnaround. Bullish divergence was seen in several key indicators, telling us it was time to buy, not sell, shares.
Sure enough, three months later, shares had climbed to
$13 per share before they announced they were being
bought out by one of their competitors at a 20 percent
premium.
Again, the moral of the story is this: just check the chart.
If you don’t like the chart, don’t play the shares no matter
what the talking-head experts say. If the Street says sell but
the chart says buy, go with the chart. Always go with the
chart.

70

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

To read, understand, and apply what the chart is trying to tell you, you will have to face up to the hermeneutical problem. Again, this problem states that you have
prejudices, biases, and personal preferences that may inhibit
your hearing clearly what the chart has to say. Bracket
them. Ignore them. Tell them to shut up! Just let the chart
speak.

CHAPTER
3

developing a
trader’s mind

T

HERE are two types of traders who will buy this book,

read it, and put one or more of its systems into practice in
the markets. The ﬁrst type will be successful, making
money regularly from the markets, while the second type
will consistently lose money until he or she ﬁnally gives up
on trading altogether. The sad fact is that most traders will
fall into the second category, and only a small percentage
of those who buy this book will fall into the ﬁrst category.
What is the difference between these two camps—
between the successful trader and the losing trader? Believe
it or not, the determining factor has nothing to do with
education, nothing to do with innate intelligence, nothing
to do with economic or business smarts. The difference is
strictly psychological. No one can deduce a universal personality proﬁle from the set of winning traders. Among
successful traders, you will ﬁnd introverts and extroverts,
feeling types and thinking types, levelheaded automatons
and passionate impulsives. But there are certain traits of
character they hold in common. The trader who successfully puts these trading systems into practice is one who
possesses all of the following:
71

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

72

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

• Self-discipline
• The ability to take responsibility
• A positive attitude toward success
• A keen understanding of risk
• The ability to maintain an open mind

The trader who unsuccessfully puts these trading systems into practice is more than likely lacking in one or
more of the these qualities of character. Note that these are
qualities of character, not personality. Attend any one of the
three annual U.S. Trader’s Expo symposia at which gather
hundreds of wildly successful stock, options, and futures
traders, and you will ﬁnd every possible personality type
represented (including some that probably should be on
medication). But you will also ﬁnd a narrow range of character traits—those listed here—that serve the trading
career well.
In short, one’s character or state of mind has a lot
more to do with trading success than one’s personality. I
won’t be saying too much about this topic, since there are
many excellent resources available that can give you a much
more detailed education. But what I have to say here might,
in fact, be the most important part of this book. As the
long-term successful trader you long to be, it is essential
that you pay attention to the psychological side of your
trading. You may have the world’s most robust, most profitable trend-trading system at hand, but if fear, anxiety,
panic, laziness, greed, or some other unhelpful mental state
dominates your frame of thinking, you are much less likely
to make that system work for you. Even 100 percent
mechanical systems require a human hand to pull the trig-

DEVELOPING A TRADER’S MIND

73

ger at each new signal. Like it or not, that hand is connected
to a brain that makes it work.

CONTROLLING EMOTION
Contrary to popular opinion, there is not a speciﬁc emotional archetype that is ideal for the successful trader. Some
portray the ideal trader as an emotionless robot, with ice
for blood and a computer for a brain. But the truth is,
highly proﬁtable traders come in all sorts of emotional varieties. Think of Jim Cramer, the screaming, saliva-spewing
host of CNBC’s popular Mad Money show. Cramer is anything but emotionless, and by most accounts (including his
own) his turn as a hedge fund manager was very successful. No, it’s really not essential to trading that you curb
your emotional enthusiasm and trade like a machine.
Indeed, I believe that a passionate feeling for the markets,
a “ﬁre in the belly,” is a real plus for the trader. What else
is going to keep you coming back day after day to the
tedious, often boring research that needs to be done? What
else will get you back in the game after a losing streak?
What is essential is not rooting out all emotion while
you are trading—an impossible task, in any case—but managing your emotions as they arise. When emotions cause
impulsive trading, trading against the plan, trading against
your best instincts, experience, and education, they are
problematic. Any emotional state that undermines conﬁdence in your edge as a trader will pose serious obstacles
to your success. With the trading systems outlined in this
book, you now have your edge on the markets. But that
edge is worthless if it is not managed appropriately. As Ed

74

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

Seykota, the great futures trader, likes to say (and I paraphrase), trading is mostly about numbers, but once you’ve
mastered the numbers, it’s all about psychology.
The primary cause of failure in trading is not a bad
trading system but bad trading psychology. Good trading
psychology can best be deﬁned as any mental condition that
allows you enough conﬁdence in your trading and money
management strategies to hang on to your winners and cut
short your losers. The ﬁrst act, hanging on to winners,
requires the trader to possess a state of mind that is comfortable with success and that avoids self-sabotage. The latter act, keeping losses small, requires a hard-nosed realism,
an appreciation for risk, a mind open to the possibility that
you are wrong, and the self-discipline to stick with predetermined exit rules.
Developing this kind of winning trading attitude is no
small task. Fortunately, there are several excellent resources
available that have helped thousands of traders do just that.
The ﬁrst book I recommend is Mark Douglas’s best-selling
Trading in the Zone. I believe this to be the best resource
currently available for helping traders develop the right
attitude toward the markets they are trading. Douglas is
president of Trading Behavior Dynamics, Inc., which develops seminars on trading psychology for brokerages, banks,
and money managers. Douglas emphasizes that having a
healthy respect for risk, a willingness to think in terms of
probabilities instead of certainties, and an open mind
toward whatever market expectations you may have are
essential ingredients in the winner’s mindset.
Douglas has conveniently included a trader’s personality inventory test (it is better termed a “character inven-

DEVELOPING A TRADER’S MIND

75

tory” test) in his book. Once this test is assessed, you will
have a clear idea where you might be stuck emotionally and
in terms of your core beliefs—that is, the test uncovers
those speciﬁc mental attitudes that are the cause of so much
trading failure. Douglas is convinced that as you align your
core beliefs as a trader with what can rightly be expected
from the markets over time, you will have the mental apparatus in place to take just about any trading system to the
heights of success.
Here is how Douglas himself describes the essence of
his work in Trading in the Zone:
As long as you are susceptible to the kinds of
errors that are the result of rationalizing, justifying, hesitating, hoping, and jumping the gun, you
will not be able to trust yourself. If you can’t trust
yourself to be objective and to always act in your
own best interests, achieving consistent results will
be next to impossible. . . . The irony is that, when
you have the appropriate attitude, when you have
acquired a “trader’s mind-set” and can remain
conﬁdent in the face of constant uncertainty, trading will be as easy and simple as you probably
thought it was when you ﬁrst started out. So, what
is the solution? You will need to learn how to
adjust your attitudes and beliefs about trading in
such a way that you can trade without the slightest bit of fear, but at the same time keep a framework in place that does not allow you to become
reckless. That’s exactly what this book is designed
to teach you (Douglas, p. 15).

76

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

A second resource I can recommend is the longer,
more complex work of Van K. Tharp, entitled Trade Your
Way to Financial Freedom. Despite the title, Tharp’s book
does not outline a speciﬁc set of trading systems you can
use to trade for a living. Instead, Tharp focuses on what it
takes—mentally, emotionally, philosophically—to develop,
trade, and stick with your own trading methodology. His
essential point is that trading systems need to be matched
to trading temperaments, so the better you can understand what kind of person you are, the better the trader
you will be.
In a chapter Tharp admits to be “the most difﬁcult to
understand,” the author outlines six variables that must be
taken into account in any winning trading system: reliability, proﬁt-to-loss ratio, transaction costs, trade frequency,
initial account size, and position sizing. Tharp carefully
outlines the importance of each of these variables, then
relates them to the concept of expectancy, or what sort of
returns you can reasonably expect a trading system to produce over time. As these variables change within a particular trading strategy, so will what can be expected of the
strategy in terms of its returns. Consequently, with a simple tweaking of these variables, you can work toward a customized optimization of your trading system based on your
particular trading psychology and objectives.
Tharp has over 20 years’ experience working with
individual and institutional traders as a consultant for the
development of trading systems. He also manages a company, the International Institute of Trading Mastery, Inc.,
that produces home seminars on systems development and
testing. Tharp’s Web site (www.iitm.com) contains a wealth

DEVELOPING A TRADER’S MIND

77

of resources for traders, including a free trading personality test and simulated trading game. Tharp nicely summarizes his trading philosophy in these words taken from the
conclusion to Trade Your Way to Financial Freedom:
First, you cannot trade the markets—you can
only trade your beliefs about the market. As a
result, it is important for you to determine
exactly what those beliefs are. Second, certain
key beliefs, which have nothing to do with the
market, will determine your success in the markets. Those are your beliefs about yourself. What
do you think you are capable of doing? Is trading for success important to you? How worthy of
success do you believe yourself to be? Weak
beliefs about yourself can undermine trading
with a great system (Tharp, pp. 322–323).

VALUES-BASED TRADING
The last resource I’d like to mention is a book that makes
no mention of trading but has tremendous application
to cultivating a healthy trading psychology. The book
made its appearance in late 2005 and quickly rose to the
top of the New York Times best-seller list. Early in 2006 the
author was interviewed by Time magazine.* Needless to
say, the impact of the book has been tremendous. Not only
have the author’s teachings been taken up by the general
* John Cloud, “Happiness Isn’t Normal,” Time, February 13, 2006. Much
of the description of Acceptance and Commitment Therapy in what
follows is taken from this article.

78

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

public, they have also caused an important reassessment—
though not without debate—of traditional psychological
therapies.
The book is provocatively titled Get Out of Your Mind
and Into Your Life. Its author, Steven Hayes, is a professor
of psychology at the University of Nevada—Reno. After
suffering from a series of unexpected panic attacks—so
severe that he couldn’t properly teach his classes—Hayes
pursued research into various models of therapy designed
to overcome depression and anxiety. It seemed natural that
Hayes, as former president of the Association of Behavioral
and Cognitive Therapies, would turn to these dominant
schools of psychology to treat himself. But he soon found
that neither behavioral nor cognitive modiﬁcation could
effectively treat his particular illness. Hayes then began to
incorporate the Eastern practice of mindfulness into his
therapy, with positive results. To this he also added the discipline of consciously committing himself, not to what his
emotions dictated, but to the values that matter most to
him, to his personal convictions and beliefs. And with this
amalgam came his healing—and a new form of psychological therapy as well.
What Hayes had discovered during his experiments
in self-healing came to be called Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT). Today ACT stands alongside the
psychoanalytical, behavioral, and cognitive schools of therapy as the next big wave in psychotherapeutic practice.
ACT has generated an impressive pedigree of clinical support, with healing claims for everything from addictions to
schizophrenia. Skeptics dismiss it as a passing fad, but there
is a growing contingent of professional counselors who are

DEVELOPING A TRADER’S MIND

79

embracing its primary mantra: Accept who you are and commit yourself to who you want to become.
So how does ACT work, and of what use is it to trading? In short—you will have to read Get Out of Your Mind
for the full version—ACT proposes that whenever we have
a negative thought, instead of deprogramming it as cognitive therapy suggests, we should embrace it. We are to
acknowledge the thought with attention and mindfulness,
for as we do so, Hayes insists, we distance ourselves from
the thought and therefore negate its power. So, for example, instead of saying, “I am depressed,” we are to say, “I
am having the thought that I’m depressed.” In this way the
thought becomes something I have rather than something
I am. As such, it is much more easily discarded.
The second step in ACT, then, is to commit yourself
to what you most value. Having mindfully defused the
power of the negative thought, you must then just step out
in faith into what is believed to be the right course of action,
even if your emotions are not supportive. To facilitate this
commitment, Hayes recommends spending quality time
outlining your personal philosophy (or philosophies) of life,
what you value most highly, what you want to accomplish
before dying, and so on. This then gives you a kind of road
map to follow during the darker times.
I am incredibly excited about the possibility of applying this new therapy to trading. Here is how I envision
ACT being used by the active trader: imagine that every
time you have a negative thought about your trading, you
were also able to detach yourself from, and thus defuse, the
thought before it affected your trading decisions. I know
how negative the trader’s mind can be at times. I have per-
