
57

Download at www.wowebook.com

58

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

BOX 5.1 FUNGIBILITY
Fungibility is the interchangeability of financial assets on identical terms. Often a
stock, future, or option will be traded on more than one exchange. It is especially
important that the financial asset being purchased on one exchange and sold on
another is fungible. In other words, if a trader buys an S&P contract on the Singapore
exchange and sells the same contract (as defined by asset, amount, currency, and
expiration) on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, he or she must be sure that the contracts are fungible, that they are exactly interchangeable, and they can be cleared
through either exchange. Some exchanges trade the same contracts, but they are not
members of the same clearinghouse, the entity that makes and takes delivery. Thus, a
purchase in one exchange would not be accepted for delivery in the other exchange.
When trading in offshore markets, fungibility can become a serious problem.

IN WHAT TYPES OF MARKETS CAN TECHNICAL ANALYSIS BE USED?
Markets are simply meeting places of buyers and sellers. Markets can be categorized in many
ways. They can be categorized by the assets being traded, the manner in which the borrowers and
lenders meet, or by the type of contract that is executed. Let us begin by dividing markets into
categories based on how organized or integrated the market is. Using this type of division results
in four different types of markets: direct search markets, brokered markets, dealer markets, and
auction markets.
The direct search market is the least organized market structure. With this type of market,
buyers and sellers must seek and find each other directly. For example, suppose that Elizabeth
wants to buy a used washer and dryer for her new apartment. Elizabeth might search the classified ads in her local newspaper for a seller of a washer and dryer. Generally, low-priced, nonstandard goods are traded in the direct search market. This type of market is characterized by
sporadic participation by the market players.
The next level of market organization, the brokered market, addresses the direct search
market problem of the buyer and seller finding each other. In markets where the volume of trading in a particular good is sufficiently high, brokers can specialize in bringing buyers and sellers
together. One of the most familiar examples of a brokered market is the real estate market.
Through specialization and economies of scale, the real estate broker is able to provide search
and matching services to clients at a cost much lower than the clients’ private search costs would
be. The broker is able to earn a commission by providing these search and matching services for
the buyer and seller. Brokered investment markets work similarly, with brokers matching buyers
and sellers of financial assets for a commission.
A third type of market structure, the dealer market, arises when the trading in a particular
type of asset becomes sufficiently heavy. Unlike brokers, dealers trade assets for their own
accounts. Specializing in particular types of assets, these dealers post bid and ask prices and

Download at www.wowebook.com

59

Chapter 5 An Overview of Markets

stand ready to buy and sell at these prices. The NASDAQ is an example of a dealer market for
stocks. The dealer offers to buy securities at the bid price and offers to sell the securities at the
ask price. The dealer’s profit margin is known as the bid-ask spread. The dealer market saves
market players search costs by providing readily available information about the prices at which
they can buy and sell securities. The securities traded in dealer markets are usually substitutable
and liquid, with the dealers standing ready to purchase or sell securities providing the liquidity.
Thus, dealer markets generally have the characteristics necessary to use technical analysis.
The most highly integrated market is the auction market. In an auction market, all participants converge at one place to buy or sell a good. The centralized facility can be a location, a
clearinghouse, or even a computer. An important aspect of the auction market is that all information about offers and bids is centralized where it is readily accessible to all buyers and sellers. As
all of the market participants converge, buyers and sellers need not search for each other, and a
mutually agreeable price can be established, eliminating the bid-ask spread. Assets such as art,
jewelry, and antiques are sold in periodic auction markets. The New York Stock Exchange is an
example of a continuous auction market.
Some auction markets can be studied using technical analysis, while others cannot. For
example, auction markets in paintings could not be subject to technical analysis because a painting is unique and not substitutable with another painting. The auction market for U.S. Treasury
bills, however, can be analyzed with the tools of technical analysis because U.S. Treasury bills
are highly liquid securities and are easily substitutable. Because organized exchanges are structured for continuous trading in liquid, substitutable assets, they are usually subject to technical
analysis.

TYPES OF CONTRACTS
Now let us look at categorizing markets by the type of contract that is executed. Two broad contract catgories are the cash market and the derivative market. The futures market and the option
market are subcategories of the derivative market. Table 5.1 shows the types of assets that might
be bought and sold in the cash, futures, and option markets.
TABLE 5.1

Asset Categories Traded in Cash, Futures, and Option Markets

Type of Asset Traded

Cash Market

Futures Market

Option Market

Common Stock
Commodities:
Agriculturals
Metals

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Interest Rates
Foreign Exchange (FOREX)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Indexes
Mutual Funds
Exchange Traded Funds (ETF)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Download at www.wowebook.com

60

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

Cash Market
The cash, or spot, market is the oldest type of market. In the cash market, a contract is entered
into that will result in immediate exchange of the agreed-upon items. Different rules and conventions regarding the meaning of “immediate” apply depending upon the type of asset being
traded. For example, when foreign currencies are being exchanged, delivery is usually instantaneous or at least within two days. In the case of common stock, the delivery period is three days.
In the case of cash commodities, each market has its own rules and conventions. Cash indexes
trade almost exactly like common stocks, and their delivery is regulated by the exchanges upon
which they are traded.
The stock market, the most widely recognized cash market, is open to the public. In the
cash commodities markets, the prime producers or consumers of the commodity traded often
dominate. For example, Nestle is a large participant in the cocoa cash market; Exxon is a major
participant in the oil cash market; Citibank is a major participant in the financial cash market
(bonds, notes, fed funds, etc.); and UBS is a principal participant in the FOREX (foreign
exchange) cash market.
As technical analysts, the cash markets in which we are principally interested are the common stock and index cash markets that are available on the public stock exchanges. Cash markets
can be leveraged but not usually as much as the other vehicles. The amount of leverage in the
stock market, as well as the option market, is controlled by the Federal Reserve and the
Securities and Exchange Commission, but various ways of getting around the regulations have
been developed through the use of derivative markets and private arrangements with lenders.
Nevertheless, the average trader or investor is bound by the Federal Reserve regulations, which
presently require that for stocks and indexes, a minimum of 50% of market value must be in cash
for overnight positions and 25% for intraday positions. This means that the trader or investor can
have a 2-to-1 margin for overnight holdings and a 4-to-1 margin for pattern trades intraday. For
each $1, up to $2 in securities can be purchased or sold short overnight, and $4 in securities can
be held within the day. There are different rules for day traders, for holders of U.S. Treasury
securities, for market makers, and for shares selling under $5, and the various exchanges and
brokerage firms can have tighter margin requirements if they want. Before contemplating the use
of margin, the investor or trader should inquire at the intended brokerage firm what rules and regulations would be applicable to the trading or investing style desired.
Liquidity in the cash stock markets is excellent. The volume of trades and amount of
money transacted each day suggest that willing buyers and sellers can always be found. The only
time that the U.S. exchanges adjust trading or close down is when the exchange’s computers go
down, when a major event or severe weather affecting the United States occurs, or when the
stock averages rise or decline a certain large amount, say in a panic. In the instance of a large
price change, the NYSE reacts in two ways depending on its severity. When predetermined limits, called circuit breakers, based on a percentage change in the Dow Jones Industrial Average
are reached, the exchange closes down all trading for a limited time. As of the first quarter of
2010, for example, should the Dow decline more than 1,050 points (10%) in a day before 2:00
p.m. EST, the exchange would close for an hour. After 2:00 p.m. but before 2:30 p.m., it would
close for 1/2 hour, and after 2:30 p.m., it wouldn’t close at all. Should the Dow decline 2,100
points (20%) within a day, the exchange would stop trading for two hours unless it was after 2:00

Download at www.wowebook.com

61

Chapter 5 An Overview of Markets

p.m., in which case it would close for the day. Should the Dow decline 3,150 (30%) points within
the day, the exchange would halt trading for the remainder of the day. The limits adjust each
quarter based on the Dow level for the previous quarter and have only triggered a shutdown once,
on October 27, 1997, when the Dow Jones Industrial Average declined 550 points by 3:30 p.m.

BOX 5.2 EXCHANGE-TRADED FUND (ETF)
In the past 20 years, a security called an exchange-traded fund (ETF) that replicates
an index fund or a basket of assets has become extremely popular as a trading and a
hedging vehicle.
History—A failed attempt to create a similar investment vehicle in 1989 at the
American Stock Exchange and the Philadelphia Stock Exchange was the first ETFtype security. It intended to simulate the S&P 500. A year later, the Toronto Stock
Exchange successfully introduced freely traded index funds of Canadian stocks,
emulating the Toronto Stock Exchange 35 and 100 averages.
Nathan Most (who died in December 2004 at the age of 90), an executive of the
American Stock Exchange, seeing the success of the funds in Toronto, created in
1993 the first such fund to replicate the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index. It was a
Standard & Poor’s Depository Receipt (SPDR), and the ticker symbol was SPY.
Consequently, it earned the nickname “Spyder” that is now seen on the TV ads. It is
the most traded ETF traded, even today.
Structure—ETFs hold assets, similar to a mutual fund. Ordinarily, large institutional dealers buy and sell shares directly from the ETFs in exchange for large blocks
of the underlying assets in the fund. These dealers then become market makers in
these ETF shares and trade them on the exchanges similarly to common stocks.
Because the shares are backed by the underlying assets, arbitrage keeps their value
close to the price of the underlying assets. From the retail standpoint, the ETF is then
equivalent to a mutual fund with liquidity. The difference between them and mutual
funds is that they trade all day, can be bought or sold at any time during the day, and
unlike closed-end funds, trade with only a very small discount. (The Wall Street
Journal, November 2008, reported an average deviation of 1% during the market turbulence of that time, and as high as 10% in some thinly traded issues.) As retail
demand for the ETF increases, a small temporary premium develops that incites the
dealers to exchange more assets for the ETF shares. The constant arbitrage between
the assets prices and the ETF price keep the two generally in parity.
The largest ETF with the most trading volume is still the Spyder, but numerous
others have come on the market. Close behind are the QQQQs (the “Cubes”), replicating the NASDAQ 100, and the DIAs (“Diamonds”), replicating the Dow Jones
Industrial Average.
Advantages—In most cases, ETFs distribute dividends (or reinvest them), thus
eliminating the dividend spread seen in the index futures and options markets; they
(continued)

Download at www.wowebook.com

62

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

are taxed like stocks; and they do not require an uptick to be sold short. They have a
lower expense ratio than mutual funds and do not have load fees, redemption fees, or
short-term trading fees. The cost of transacting them is a normal brokerage fee just
as if they were stocks. Capital gains are payable upon sale of the ETF, unlike with
mutual funds where a capital gain can be incurred during the ownership period.
Finally, ETFs, by their nature, are transparent. You, as the investor, know exactly
what assets the ETF holds, unlike a mutual fund that may buy and sell assets
between reporting periods.
Styles—Replication of stock market indexes is the most common form of ETF.
Next in popularity are commodities ETFs (and a variant called Exchange Traded
Commodities). These invest in commodities such as precious metals, energy, and
agriculturals. There are hidden dangers in holding these investment vehicles because
their underlying is often a position in the futures markets and are rolled forward with
each expiration, causing a “cost to roll” above the value of the underlying commodity. Finally, there are three other important styles: U.S. government bond funds, currency funds, and actively managed funds.
Leverage—ETFs can be leveraged just as if they were common stocks under the
Federal Reserve margin regulations. However, in the past few years, leveraged funds
appeared that promise to double or triple daily returns both upward and downward
(called inverse funds). The speculator can now leverage a position beyond the margin requirements, but at the same time also expose a position to larger risk of capital
loss. These leveraged funds incur additional costs during volatile markets because
they are backed by various derivative positions that are bought and sold continually
to balance the underlying portfolio risk.

Derivative Markets
The term derivative describes a financial contract that “derives” its value from some other
investment vehicle, often called the underlying. The primary use for derivatives is to hedge
against risk of loss in the underlying or to speculate with high leverage. Aside from the risk of
loss from the hedge or speculation decreasing in value, both hedging and speculation take on
additional risks such as counterparty risk, the risk that the party on the other side of the derivative contract may fail to deliver. However, most derivatives have not had this problem, and are
used principally to transfer risk between investing parties. In this sense, derivatives are thought to
cushion economic downturns. In specific instances, however, the derivative market increased
volatility, as occurred during the “insurance programs” in 1987, when equity portfolio managers
to protect against losses in their portfolios sold S&P 500 futures as the market declined and thus
contributed further to the market decline that turned into a crash in prices not seen ever before.
The most common derivatives are futures, options, and swaps, traded either on exchanges,
where their prices are visible, or over the counter, where their prices are hidden. The principal
underlying vehicles are commodities, equities, FOREX, interest rates, and credit markets.

Download at www.wowebook.com

63

Chapter 5 An Overview of Markets

Futures Markets
Futures contracts that are traded in the futures markets are contracts in which the buyer and seller
agree to trade at specific terms at a specific future date. Futures markets are often incorrectly
called commodity markets more from historical usage than as a realistic description. Futures
markets first developed in the agricultural markets as forward contracts, mostly in the grain markets, to provide a hedge for farmers and banks against crop failure or surplus. To understand the
development of the futures market, suppose that you are a wheat farmer. You are concerned about
the market price of wheat at harvest time. If the price is not as high as you anticipated because of
a bumper crop of wheat, your profits will suffer. American Bread Company (ABC) is also concerned about the price of wheat, although ABC’s concern is the opposite of yours. ABC’s fear is
that a poor wheat crop will lead to rising wheat prices, which translates into higher input costs
and lower profits for ABC. You and ABC can ease your concerns by entering into a forward contract. In this forward contract, you would agree to sell a particular amount of wheat to ABC at a
particular future date and at a price you set now. This reduces your risk and ABC’s risk, you
know what to expect as far as your income, and ABC locks in the price of its input.
Although individuals wrote forward contracts for many years, the contracts were first
traded in the United States on the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) in 1848. However, the trading was cumbersome because the contracts were nonstandard: They each had different delivery
dates and different commodity quality specifications. To address this issue, the CBOT developed
the standardized contracts we know today as “futures contracts” in 1865 (Brecht, 2003).
The CBOT, often referred to as “The Board of Trade,” is the oldest futures exchange in
North America. Ironically, the largest is the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME Group), often
called the “Merc,” that now owns the CBOT and the NYMEX. Today, there are a number of
futures exchanges throughout the world, many specializing in contracts of specific underlying
assets. Futures exchanges are becoming a minigrowth industry as developing nations are organizing markets to trade especially in local products. As Table 5.2 demonstrates, some of the largest
futures exchanges are outside of North America.
TABLE 5.2 Ten Largest Futures Exchanges in Derivative Trading Volume
Rank in 2008

Volume Exchange

(in Millions Contracts)

1

CME Group (includes CBOT & NYMEX)

3,278

2
3
4
5
6
7

Eurex (includes ISE)
Korea Exchange
NYSE Euronext (includes all EU and US)
CBOE (includes CFE)
BM&F Bovespa
Nasdaq OMX Group (includes all EU & US)

3,173
2,865
1,676
1,195
742
722

8
9
10

National Stock Exchange of India
JSE South Africa
Dalian Commodity Exchange

590
514
313

Source: Futures Industry Magazine (March/April) 2009

Download at www.wowebook.com

64

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

Futures, unlike stocks, are contracts and represent an agreement to purchase or sell a very
specific amount and quality of asset at the expiration date. Most nonfinancial contracts are either
closed in the marketplace by selling or buying before their first delivery day or are “delivered.”
For example, if you own one contract in sugar and do not sell it before the delivery day, you are
obligated legally to accept delivery of several railroad boxcar loads of sugar at your railhead.
Major dealers in these commodities have the facilities to take or make delivery; most speculators
do not. When a trader buys a futures contract then, he does not own anything other than an obligation to take delivery on the delivery day of the commodity underlying the contract. Because
the contract is not a specific title of ownership, it is never executed until the delivery day. It is
traded back and forth between buyers and sellers, similar to how musical chairs are played, only
the music stops on delivery day. Financial futures contracts are different from commodity futures
contracts in that they settle on delivery day with cash based on the closing prices of the underlying securities or index.
When a position is initiated in a futures contract, the brokerage firm requires a good faith
deposit that requires the trader to make good on any fluctuation in the contract price value. As
the price of the contract rises and declines, the good faith deposit is increased or decreased by the
amount of the price value change. When the deposit declines below a certain level, the brokerage
firm requires that more funds be added to the account. Otherwise, the brokerage firm closes the
position.
Margin requirements change as the price of the contract changes, as the price level or
volatility changes, or if the exchange determines that the price may change significantly.
Exchanges determine the minimum requirements for their contracts, and brokers may set rates
higher but not lower than the exchange requirements. There are two types of margin—initial and
maintenance. Initial is the amount necessary in the account before an order can be placed. Maintenance margin is the minimum amount necessary to keep an account active. This margin
changes each day with the movement of the contract price.
Futures contracts trade in a series of contract months, and each is a unique contract group.
The May 2005 Heating Oil futures are different from the June 2005 Heating Oil futures. They are
substitutable for their specific contract months but not for each other. On a futures contract, the
expiration day, the specific description of the underlying, and the contract size are constants
while the price fluctuates. Financial futures are the same in this respect. Their expiration months
are quarterly (March, June, September, and December) for each year.
The advantages of futures relative to stocks are many. Futures do not require an uptick for
short-selling; they are highly leveraged; and they have a favorable tax benefit. Any futures trade is
automatically allocated 60% to long-term gain/loss and 40% to short-term gain/loss. Furthermore,
at year-end, the brokerage firm sends only one piece of paper with the net gain or loss for the year
rather than a wheelbarrow full of transaction tickets needed to fill out the IRS Schedule D.
The danger of futures centers on its leverage and, in some instances, its illiquidity. Counterparty risk is alleviated through guarantees enforced by the exchanges on all participating parities. The margin requirement for most futures contracts is less than 10%. It is not required that
futures traders use all their margin. Indeed, prudent money management would suggest otherwise, but the danger of trading without protective stops (see Chapters 13, “Breakouts, Stops, and
Retracements,” 22, “System Design and Testing,” and 23, “Money and Risk Management,” for
usage of stop orders) and a reasonable money management method (see Chapter 23) has been the
