
Minnesota Stupid
The stupid thing I did was sit back and say, “Gee, I managed to take $10,000 and turn it into a little over $100,000. Now I’m going to try to take this remaining
$100,000 and turn it into $1,000,000. Let’s do this!”
The first time I tried this, the experiment ended quickly, much like taking a Band-Aid and ripping it off with a flick of the wrist. It took all of six weeks to grind my
capital down from $100,000 back toward the neighborhood of $10,000. Sure, it surprised me, but I chalked it up to bad luck. I rolled up my sleeves and went back to
work. About a year later, I had built up my account to just over six figures, and then I paused and did the same thing. First, I took money out to buy real estate. Next, I
decided to try turning $100,000 into a million dollars yet again. This time I lasted four months, but the result was the same: back to $10,000 and change. Hmmm. Third
time’s the charm?
A few years after graduating from college, I was engaged to be married. I was in a nice swing trading rhythm. I had built up my small stake back into a $150,000
trading account. I took modest profits out of the account at the end of the month, and I was getting closer to my goal of quitting my job as a financial analyst to become
a full-time trader. At the time, my fiancée and I were living in Austin, Texas, but we were contemplating a move to Korea to teach English and just to try something
different. We thought it’d be a bonding experience.
Then the company I was working for offered me a promotion and a transfer to M inneapolis, M innesota. We thought about it, and in our youthful “wisdom” decided
that M innesota was probably a lot like Korea—cold. We moved to M inneapolis in the mid-1990s, during two of the coldest winters in the history of the city. Outside
our apartment, the wind chill hit 40 below zero, and our cars wouldn’t start. Inside our apartment, my fiancée, who had never seen snow before, sat. She was
miserable.
I took taxis to and from work and came home to find her in the living room with a mask over her nose, sanding the apartment walls for the second time. Even I could
29

see that she was stir-crazy. Then she issued an ultimatum: “Get us a house with a garage so that our cars will start; we’re getting the hell out of here.”
It took a few months, but by M ay, just as the snow had melted, we found a house with a heated garage. I’d never heard of such a thing, but it sounded like the right
thing to have. I planned to put down $30,000 at closing. About a week before closing, I sat and stared at my $150,000 trading account and wondered how it was going
to affect me—psychologically—to take my account down to $120,000. I was in a comfortable rhythm. The money I was pulling out of my account I mostly put into
rare coins that I planned to hold for years, so I didn’t have a lot of liquid assets other than my trading account. I liked my account size. I didn’t want to change it. I had
only a week before the closing to decide what to do.
As I thought about it more, I chose to make just one big trade, enough to earn $30,000 so that I could take out the down payment and still maintain my $150,000
trading account. It was so logical that I truly thought it was a genius idea. I would do one of my normal setups—just with much bigger size. And I would watch it like a
hawk. I started flipping through the charts, and there it was. The OEX 100 was knocking up against a serious downtrend line on the daily charts.
The next day at the office, I set up my laptop, poured myself a cup of coffee, and watched the charts. (By this time I’d been promoted into my own office, so it
wasn’t difficult to do some swing trading while I worked.) The market started to rally, and it hit right into that mega-downtrend line. M y heart rate quickened. I
phoned my broker and bought 100 OEX puts at $8.00. Immediately, the market came down, and in 20 minutes I was up $10,000.
I thought, wow, this is going to work out faster than I’d hoped! The next thing I saw was a small kickback rally that brought new highs, and the options dropped to
$7.00. I believed this was the deal of the century. I mean, I loved them at $8.00! I called my broker and bought 100 more puts at $7.00, which put my entire $150,000
into the trade. I skipped meetings and didn’t go to lunch. I did not take my eyes off the screen. By the end of the day, the market had edged down off its highs and I
went home with an open position that was up around $12,000. I wasn’t going to take home a loser, so this fit into my plan of taking a “green” position home
overnight. In fact, my thought was that I could close out this trade at the open, hit my goal, and live happily ever after.
But when I woke the next morning and turned on CNBC, I saw a green arrow indicating that the Dow futures were up +130 points. I turned off the TV, shook the
remote, and turned it back on. The green arrow was still there. Ouch. I was hosed. I’d been trading long enough at this point to realize a couple of things. First, I wasn’t
going to make $30,000 on this trade. Second, my main goal now was to contain my losses. I knew that this opening gap had a high probability of retracing half its
opening range (to where the Dow was only up +65). I calculated that if I sold my puts at that level, I’d be out with about a $20,000 loss on the trade.
I got to my office. I turned on the charts. I watched and watched, and I waited and waited, but the retracement never came. Dazed, I stared at my account. The next
day the markets gapped up again and rallied. For good measure, they did that for the following two days as well. I don’t remember this time at all. I do remember at
some point that it was the day before we were supposed to close on the house, and I needed to sell out my position so that I could have money to buy the house. I had
no idea what the options were even trading for (I couldn’t look). I just told my broker to sell. By the time the dust settled and I was able to check my account balance,
I noticed that my $150,000 trading account had evaporated into the tidy sum of $8,000 and change. At this point I did what any man in his right mind would do—
which means that I sure as hell did not tell my fiancée. For good measure, I stared at the charts a little longer. M aybe I was only dreaming this and I would wake up at
any moment.
Finally I got up, went to the bank, and maxed out my credit cards in order to get the down payment. I went to the closing and handed over the $30,000 check, at
which point the mortgage officer said, “Wait. I thought this was coming from an investment account. We need to see where this money came from.”
I acted ignorant. “Uh, what are you talking about? There’s the money right there. Right in front of you.” M y real estate broker started to get angry at the closing
agent (he didn’t know what was going on). An hour later, the agent finally allowed us to close on the house. I kissed my fiancée good-bye (she had no clue what was
going on), drove to the par 3 golf course down the road, and attempted to play a round of nine holes. I drove. I chipped. I putted. And I threw up. I did that for five
holes. M y nerves were shot, and I felt horrible. After I’d calmed down, I asked myself, “What do I want?” I knew I could raise another trading stake. All I had to do
was sell one of my real estate holdings. But did I want to continue to go down this road of uncertainty? How could I quit my job and rely on a trading income if I did
stupid crap like this?
I loved—and still love—analyzing the markets. I love placing and managing the trade. It’s an intellectual challenge. And it’s an emotional challenge—not letting your
emotions actually zip down your arm and into your fingertips and onto the keyboard. But most of all, it’s where my passion lies, and where it has lain since I placed
my first trade.
Still, I decided that I wouldn’t trade again until I figured out what I’d been doing right and wrong up to this point. I knew I could make money trading—why
couldn’t I keep it? For the next year, I thought, studied, talked to other successful traders, and read.
During this time I came across a book by M ark Douglas called The Disciplined Trader. This book was a real eye-opener in that M ark showed how to turn everyday
stressful trading situations into “normal” trading behavior. His follow-up book, Trading in the Zone, is also excellent. His books have had a huge impact on me, and
they are required reading for anyone I’m working with. M ark’s insights, as well as my long discovery period, finally gave me the answer: whenever I focused on the
setups and not the results, I did fine. But whenever I focused on the results and not the setups, I got killed. Why is this? Once I got my hands on a decent-sized trading
account, I would start to think things like, “I want to turn this account into a million dollars.” Or even better, “I just need to make a quick 30 grand for the down
payment on the house.”
Instead of focusing on the setups, I was focusing on making a million dollars or, in the case of the house, a $30,000 down payment. This caused me to jump into the
trading habits that ruin all traders: betting it all on one trade, not using a stop because the trade “had to work out,” and focusing on making a million bucks instead of
waiting patiently for a high-probability trade setup. All of these habits guarantee trading failure in the long run. Yes, it would have been easier to just blame it on my
mother for hitting me with a wooden spoon once when I was a kid, but at some point we have to step up and take responsibility for our own actions. By focusing on
“making money,” a trader will see a lot of opportunity where there is none.
Once this revelation sank in, I started to do two things differently. First, I started wiring any profits out of my trading account at the end of each week. This kept
me focused on producing a smaller, steady income, as opposed to making a grand killing. I later refined this and today call it “cash flow trading,” and I’ll talk more
about this specific trading methodology shortly. (In trading, there is trading for cash flow and trading to create wealth—they are very different.)
I also discovered that wiring money out was a great way to protect profits—the market can’t have them if they are safely tucked away out of reach. I use these
profits mostly for longer-term investments like land and gold, but I also set aside some of the money for fun—after all, we are only here once, as far as I know. And
one important thing I realized from another successful trader is that there is no need to trade every day. I started to notice that there were days when I didn’t take a
trade—not because I didn’t want to, but simply because the setup I was waiting for didn’t occur.
Second, I started a competition among the various setups I used. This way, I could measure the performance of every one of my setups at the end of each month.
The setups that made money I kept using. The setups that lost money I dumped. This was incredibly important to my trading. The only way I could keep my
competition going was to execute my trade setups the same way each and every time. I did this in blocks of 25 trades. This had the added benefit of removing much of
30

the importance from any trade I happened to be in at the time. It was just “trade 13 out of a series of 25”— no big deal. And any time I deviated from a standard setup,
I marked this down in my trading journal as an “impulse trade.” I kept track of my performance on these, too. After about six months of tracking my impulse trades
(wow, this market is going higher; I have to get in), I realized that they were not making me any money and were in fact preventing me from making a living as a trader.
Yes, they were fun. But they weren’t helping.
In working with other traders, I see impulse trading as one of the most common reasons for people getting their heads handed to them. They don’t have a plan. They
just get long when that feels right, and they get short when that feels right. Or they just get bored. I’ve literally had traders in my office who have visited to work
specifically on their impulse trades—only to sneak in orders when I wasn’t looking. The urge to jump in and be a part of the action is that powerful. It’s like a drug
addiction, and like most addictions, it never works in the long run. M y method for dealing with them is to simply sit next to them and watch them trade—and to do
exactly the opposite of what they’re doing. At the end of the day or the week, we compare our profit and loss statements, and that usually tells the story. This is a
win/win situation because it is a great lesson for the impulse traders—there are actually people out there doing the exact opposite of what they are doing and making
money—and it is a mostly profitable exercise for me.
The cure for impulse trading is patience, and also understanding integrity—a topic that we are sneaking up to shortly. Patience is such an important quality for a
trader—both in learning what setups best work for you, and in waiting for those setups to occur. Impulse traders who cannot own up to this bad habit need to stop
trading and go to Vegas. The end result will be identical—they will lose all their money. But at least in Vegas the drinks are free.
If people are stuck in a relationship with an individual who berates their best efforts and undermines their dreams, then it is time to leave this individual and move
on. It was in this vein that I “broke up” with my impulse trading. I liked my impulse trading. It was fun. It made me feel good. It was exciting. But the bottom line was
that my impulse trading was undermining my potential and preventing me from realizing my dreams of being a full-time trader. Once this realization took hold, I took
immediate steps to cut that cancer out of my life. This included a reward and punishment system that I discuss later in this book, in the chapter on formulating a
business plan.
In the end, I stuck with my friends who believed in me—the setups that worked when I gave them half a chance. Once I was able to follow my setups consistently,
exactly the same way each and every time, I was able to make the transition to trading full time. A large part of my transition was mental and developing what I call a
“professional state of mind.”
Oh, and by the way, it wasn’t until years later, when I was doing a talk at a Traders Expo in Las Vegas and telling the story about the “M innesota Stupid House”
that my wife actually learned of the event. She was sitting in the audience, and I’d totally forgotten that I had never told her. Everyone around her started asking,
“Wow, how did you handle that?!” Afterwards she came up to me with a sweet smile and a few blinks of the eyes and said, “So what else haven’t you told me?”

Why Do Most Traders Have to Blow Out an Account Before It All Sinks In?
Trader psychology is one of those subjects that doesn’t seem to matter until it really matters, like when you’re changing a flat tire or when your three-year-old
daughter yells out in the middle of traffic, “No, Dad, I have to go poop now!” You think the issue will never arise, or it won’t apply to you, or you’ll figure it out
before the moment of truth. However, that moment of truth tends to happen at the least convenient moment, typically when things are about to go from bad to much,
much worse. It’s one thing for your daughter to say she has to poop in the car, but it’s a whole new ballgame when she actually cuts one loose.
The term itself, trader psychology, inevitably gets thrown around with greater and greater frequency as a trader nears the goal of trading the markets successfully,
because the closer a trader gets to being consistent, the more apparent it becomes that his greatest enemy is rarely the individual on the opposite side of the trade. Far
more often—as is the case in so many aspects of life—our worst enemy is the person we look at in the mirror each morning. Unfortunately, most traders, myself
included, never realize this until they blow out an account. “Wow,” they say. “I didn’t think that would ever happen to me.” Seasoned traders call this the price of
tuition.
The first psychological issue that traders find themselves butting up against is addiction. When people hear traders talking about addiction, they often think about
gambling, an addiction to the rush of placing the trade, the anticipatory thrill as a trader establishes a position and hopes that it goes her way and brings in tons of cash.
And yet that all pales in comparison to the addiction to being right or, worse, not being wrong. It drives human behavior into the realm of absurdity.
For example, placing a trade that will make money as long as that market doesn’t crash overnight is a reasonable setup and a reasonable assumption. Stops can be
used. Risk can be assessed. In the early morning of January 17, 1995, an earthquake hit in Japan, causing its stock market to take a nosedive. One particular trader saw
this unfolding, watched his losses mount, and started doubling and tripling up in order to recoup his position and make money on the trade by bringing down his
average cost. When the bounce failed to materialize, the trader, Nick Leeson, bolted out the door, leaving a note that said, “I’m sorry.” This trade lost $1.3 billion and
bankrupted Barings Bank. Although this is an extreme example, it happens every day around the world with much smaller accounts. M aybe $5,000 doesn’t seem like
much in comparison, but if that is your entire trading stake, losing that amount can be just as devastating as losing $1.3 billion. Okay, maybe not quite as devastating,
but you get the idea.
In many facets of life having to do with careers, an addiction to being right is a strength. It forces us to work harder to meet our goals and to prove to ourselves and
to others that we can, in fact, accomplish what we’ve set out to do. It can cause us to view a potentially devastating setback as a mere learning experience, and onward
we go, dusting ourselves off and getting back on the horse for another ride. It’s like the movie Rocky each and every trading day. No one thought an uneducated but
kind-hearted debt collector for a loan shark could get a shot at the world heavyweight championship. But he did, and he proved that everyone was wrong and showed
everyone that he was right, and it made a great movie. It’s a fantastic life lesson in persistence and in following your dreams. But if you try that in trading—try holding
on to a losing trade until it turns back into a winner, just so you can prove to everyone that you aren’t wrong—you’ll get your ass handed to you. M aybe it won’t
happen on this current trade and maybe not on the next one, but it will happen, and it will lead to a blown-up account. True, not many of us will ever bring down a
bank, but wiping out your life savings is a close second. Trading is the only profession that punishes tenacity by taking your money. Be tenacious in learning how to
become a better trader, not in proving that you are right on this current trade.
But it’s not just the human need to be right that makes trader psychology such a complex battle, it’s that other great power of the human mind—the power of
rationalization. This is a topic I’ve already touched upon, but it’s worth another quick look from a slightly different angle.
In the film The Big Chill, Jeff Goldblum’s character discusses this subject in a particularly salient manner.

Michael: Don’t knock rationalization. Where would we be without it? I don’t know anyone who’d get through the day without two or three juicy
rationalizations. They’re more important than sex.
31

S am: Ah, come on. Nothing’s more important than sex.
Michael: Oh yeah? Have you ever gone a week without a rationalization?
Rationalizing the events on your screen means rewriting the story of what’s actually happening in a way that feels comfortable to you, that makes your position
seem like the correct one. “This trade isn’t going to go against me for long,” thinks Joe Trader. “They aren’t going to shake me out!” And if it works out, Joe Trader
compliments himself for being the genius that he is. He just knew it would work out, especially this particular trade. Call it a gut feeling. And, of course, since it did
work out, it just proves that his analysis was spot on. “You know,” he muses, “I think it’s time for me to up my trading size on this next one.”
A person can gloss over reality in nearly all areas of her life, reshaping her interpretations of events to put her in a favorable light and keeping that pristine image
intact. After all, it’s okay to ignore your kids when you’re on the computer if you’ve got VITTD (very important things to do)—or so goes the rationalization. None
us wants to admit when we are being a shitty parent.
In trading, however, at the end of the day, the result is right there on your profit and loss statement. No matter how “right” you persuaded yourself you were, a loss
that was incurred when you were trying to prove yourself right is still a loss, and your story doesn’t mean a thing to a neutral-minded market. The P&L is the great
equalizer. It reveals you for who you really are, and in many instances the picture ain’t pretty. Unfortunately, most people would rather do anything other than
confront themselves, their ideal image of who they are. It’s not fun. Believe me, I thought I had much better qualities as a person before I got into analyzing my trading
personality. And this is why trading has such a high failure rate. Flaws explode onto the P&L. They must be addressed—not just in theory, not just through a few
notes in a trading journal, but in practice, on each and every trade. The game changed for me when I committed to becoming a better trader on each and every trade, as
opposed to rationalizing why I was right on every trade.

The Trader Mindset: What Is the Best Way for Getting, and Keeping, Your Head in the Game?
Great trading, like greatness in any profession or art, is a kind of balancing act. Each trade requires us to split ourselves into two parts: caution and boldness. We need
the caution to be patient, the courage to get in and the courage to stay in a winning trade, and the caution to protect our gains once we have them—but not too
aggressively, so that we don’t get stopped out on a mere wiggle. And most important is the courage to admit that our trade is wrong and to get the hell out. Great
trading is all of these things, which is why great traders are so rare. This balancing act is the reason so many type A personalities perform so badly in the markets.
While they may possess boldness, courage, and decisiveness, they frequently lack the caution, patience, and ability to accept that their first impression was the wrong
one. Or, more simply, they lack the ability to concede that, while their setup might have been as attractive as a Swedish au pair, it just didn’t go the way they expected
it to go. The market doesn’t care if the setup was a good one. It’s still going to do whatever it wants to do.
Something happens at the beginning of a trade, a psychological battle. It’s that classic scene of a devil on one shoulder and an angel on the other. One tells you to
hang in there with all your might, that things are going to go your way eventually, no matter what the evidence suggests, and the other screams in your ear to preserve
your capital, to get out, to take a tiny profit or a tiny loss. Just get out! It’s a powerful sensation, especially for the beginning trader, which is why a clear trading
strategy is critical. A trading plan in which you can place your faith is like a pair of mufflers, blocking out the sound of that noisy chorus. Trading without a game plan
is like swimming in the Amazon River with a couple of raw steaks strapped to your waist. You might get some good exercise, but the longer you are in the water, the
greater your chance of a violent end.
It’s when you’re not trading your plan that fear takes hold, and when fear takes hold, it’s easy for you to lose perspective and exit too early, cutting your
opportunity for profitability off at the knees. Yet fear can also cause traders to do something that seems the total opposite of fear. It can cause traders to ratchet up
their nerve and stay in the trade long after signs of danger have presented themselves. That is, fear triggers an irrational boldness. It takes courage to stay in a trade, that
much is certain, but the lesson that too many traders learn too late is that it takes just as much courage, if not more, to get out of a trade that’s clearly not working. The
greater a trader’s nerve, the greater his chances of ruin.
I often think of the words of a great general who said, “Retreat is a perfectly legitimate military tactic.” Of all the parallels between war and trading, none may be
truer than this one. There is no shame in taking a small loss. In fact, when taking a small loss prevents you from taking a big one, it should be considered a victory. If
things aren’t going the way you hoped, preserve your capital and live to fight another day. And always remember, reentry is only a commission away. Go flat, take a
walk, and clear your head. The market isn’t going anywhere.
It sounds simple enough, as if you could simply resolve at the start of every trade that you will exit neither too early nor too late, and you will have courage in the
right measure at the right times, but it’s actually a tremendous shift in perspective for most traders. We are all geniuses when we’re looking at the charts in hindsight.
It’s making decisions in real time, clearly not knowing what exactly is going to happen next, that makes or breaks a trader. Anyone can tell you what you should have
done.
Great flexibility is required when you’re looking at the markets. There is a certain Zen attitude that is reached by the greatest of traders. In fact, this is one of the
terrific, sometimes hilarious, paradoxes of the trading world: meeting serious traders in their seriously expensive suits, who amidst their talk about the hard-core daily
battle between the bears and the bulls sprinkle in Zen proverbs. “There’s no meaning to a flower unless it blooms.” Or, perhaps more relevant, “No ego, no pain.” The
people who have learned these lessons are the ones who make money in the market, because they have learned that when you are forming an opinion of the market,
that’s all you are doing: forming an opinion. You must leave room for chance. And when you see that your opinion was the wrong one, you must have the courage to
get out and the faith to accept another difficult truth: the opportunity will always come around one more time. Again, the markets aren’t going anywhere.
Once a trader accepts the constant flow of the market, that endless renewal of opportunity, then he understands that there is no need to enter the market on halfconvictions. Just sit back and wait until a setup has laid itself out with clarity. Not a maybe or an almost—it’s simply there, period. In the meantime, a trader’s main
job is to fight off his boredom and stay flat. Traders who take on a position out of boredom then spend their time managing that mediocre trade while good ones pass
them by. Getting in too early and getting out too late just means that someone else is eating your lunch that day. Your stop loss is another trader’s first target.
The markets change daily. Literally—there is never the exact same combination of orders and trader actions from one day to the next. The gravity of that fact can be
hard to grasp when you read about the same kinds of setups or anticipate the same kinds of moves day after day. But the market truly is continually changing and
forming new combinations. There is an infinite number of possibilities on any given day, at any given minute. Did you know that each time you shuffle a deck of cards,
the odds are that no deck of cards in history has ever been in that precise order? In fact, the odds against it are staggeringly astronomical. Imagine what that suggests
about the markets, in which the variables are tremendous by comparison. For that reason, it is critical that you take a fresh look every day to consider the possibilities,
not merely in relation to what you saw yesterday or the day before, but in terms solely of this moment, today. You must always ask yourself, “What is the market
32
