
338


THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER

until there is a reversal in the trend. Plainly put, if he is short, he
will only get out of the trade if the prior candle’s high is broken. If
he is long, he will only exit if the prior candle’s low is broken. Note
that Paul follows the classic definition of trend with an uptrend
defined by higher lows while a downtrend is defined by lower
highs. This is a very simple, disciplined approach that keeps Paul
in position for those few long-trending trades that can account for
the disproportionate amount of profits. Although Paul’s approach
is exceedingly simple, by executing every detail of his trading plan
with discipline and precision, he has become very successful.

Don’t Overtrade

One of the most common mistakes traders make, especially when
they are trading on a shorter-term basis, is to transact too much.
Almost every trader is guilty of overtrading, and the consequences
of this practice can be quite costly, especially in commission-based
markets such as electronic futures. Take, for example, a typical
$10,000 account that trades electronic e-mini futures. Trading just
one contract 20 times per day at very low $5 per round trip com-
mission rates would debit the account $100/day even if the trader
managed to break even on all of his trades. After only 20 days the
account would lose 20 percent of its value just through the bleed
of commissions. One of Paul strongest attributes as a trader is that
he remains disciplined and very selective in his setups. As he says,
there are only two to three good moves in the market on any given
day. By not overtrading, Paul puts himself only into the highest-
probability setups and at the same time keeps his transaction costs
toa minimum.

339




CHAPTER 12

FX FAMILY VALUES
MARCELINO LIVIAN

When we asked Marcelino, Livian—who simply goes by his last
name—how he approaches FX trading. His response was, “I never
lose.” Most of us would like to approach the market with the same
attitude and results. With a return of 80 percent over the past four
years, Livian seems to have come very close to his mark. Having
traded the Forex markets since the early 1990s, almost a decade
before it went electronic, he can tell you all about the headaches of
exchanging one currency for another physically and opening up a
local bank account to earn the interest. Nowadays, he has gone fully
electronic and has still managed to maintain an average return of
20 percent a year. However, the most interesting aspect of his story
is not his trading, but how trading has improved the bond within
his family. He has been married to his wife for 29 years, with whom
he has three beautiful children. This couple looks far younger than
their years. Livian has used finance to teach his now grown children
the importance of making their money work for them rather than
sit idle in a bank account. Now, trading currencies not only has
become the talk of the dinner table, it has also been the source of
multiple calls from his children on a weekly basis. His success in the

341


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

FX market has enriched his bank account, but, more importantly,
it has enhanced his relationship with his family.

Timing really helped us on this interview as we were able to
invite Livian and his wife, who live in Spain, into our offices for an
afternoon chat during their vacation in New York.

Q, : Livian, can you tell us a little bit about yourself?

A : [have been a businessman and an entrepreneur since I was
19 years old. My business only requires me to work about 10 to
12 hours a week. To that effect, I trade the Forex markets about
four hours a day. Over the course of the week, I'll spend about
25 hours dabbling in the financial markets. Forex has become a
very big part of my life and my family’s life as well. In fact, I have
had such great success in trading currencies that I had a talk with
my wife and children to encourage them to open up their own FX
trading accounts while, of course, making sure that they maintain
their day jobs.

Qs what kind of business do you do regularly that gives you such
good hours?

A : My main business has been public relations and helping my
wife manage our own chain of beauty salons, 35 to be exact. We
also do importing from China of such things as hairdryers and
products for the bathroom. The reason why I am very interested
in trading is because I feel that with trading, instead of just letting
your savings sit there in a bank account, you can put it to work and
hopefully multiply the fruits of your labor.

Q:s0 what was your first foray into trading? How did you become
interested in it?

A : Fifteen years ago, in Spain, there was no one who was really
doing Forex or currency trading. We didn’t even have the euro at

342


FX FAMILY VALUES

that point. But I started becoming interested in the fluctuations of
exchange rates and began to change one currency to another in a
very informal way and essentially try to speculate on how I think
currencies will move.

Q:s0 were currencies the first product that you tried trading?

A. No, I began with commodities trading in Chicago—coffee and
sugar—and then started trading the stock markets before I moved
onto currency trading.

Q_. How long ago did you start trading commodities, and why
did you decide to pick that market?

A : I started approximately 16 or 17 years ago. I began out of
eagerness or the desire to get something started because I didn’t
have an academic background. I was really looking to start with
something. I began paying attention to the price of coffee and
at the time Brazil, which exports and produces 50 percent of the
world’s coffee, had a very bad crop. So I knew that prices were
going to rise. I chose to take advantage of that, and that was when
I started to trade.

Q.: what made you eager to trade something? Has anyone in
your family ever traded before?

A : No, there was no precedence in my family. My family is
very humble. No one has previously traded. But it was really just
something instinctual for me. I’m not a good basketball player.
There are people who are good at basketball. But instinctually, I
felt that this was something I could be good at.

: So when you first started trading coffee, how much did you
start with?

A : Approximately $8,000.

343


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.. Was this from your savings or did you borrow money to do
it?

A : It was from my savings.

Q.: were you married at the time?

A: Yes.

Q: so how did your wife feel about your plan to trade?

A : She felt very good about it. Like me, she liked the idea of
making money electronically. You see, ittook a tremendous amount
of effort to really get her salon business off the ground and then to
make the money from it. Sowhen we learned about the opportunity
to make money by trading and not having to be on top of it all the
time, it sounded ideal for us.

: Did you stop trading commodities and then trade stocks or
did you do both at the same time?

A : [ stopped trading commodities when I started trading stocks
because it was more interesting for us given our infrastructure. But
then I moved to trading currencies predominately because I feel
that in Forex, I have more direct access to the market. I can enter
in my trade station and place a trade immediately as opposed to
doing stocks, where I have to call my broker and wait for him to
enter into trades and then wait for him to give me back a fill price.

Q.- when did you get started in the FX market?

A : It has been about 14 or 15 years, which means that I started
in approximately 1992 or 1993.

344


FX FAMILY VALUES

QO: s0 back in ’89 or ‘90, when you were trading it, you were
mostly doing it by shifting around money between your bank ac-
counts and not trading electronically, right?

A : Yes, it was very simple. It was something where at any given
moment I could say that I wanted to hold a certain amount in,
let’s say, the Spanish currency, the French, or, you know, if the
timing was right, the Japanese currency. At the time there was no
leverage, it was just a matter of exchanging one currency for the
other in the bank account.

Q.: What kind of returns were you looking for at the time?

A : [never had any set goals at the time because I was in it for
the long haul and simply because the Forex market interested me.

Q.: What were the spreads like when you were doing that?

A : At the time it was about 18 to 22 pips. The Japanese yen was
the least expensive to trade at the time. The Deutsche mark and
the British pound were a lot more.

Q.- When did you start trading electronically?

A : I started trading electronically about eight years ago, but not
on my own computer. I had a bank that had a direct-order line. So
I'd call in my orders and they would trade for me. I did not trade
electronically for myself until two years ago.

Q.:s0 how do decide what currencies to get into?

A : Llook at the context of the general economy, political events,
geopolitical risks and things of that nature.

345


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Qut sounds like you are more of a fundamental trader then,
right?

A: Yes.

Q.: How long would you usually hold your positions for?

A : That is a very interesting question because it’s really been
changing. At the very beginning I'd hold positions for a long time,
but things in Forex change so in reality I don’t set trades with
specific time limits in mind or timeframes in mind. Instead, I
simply just look to make money on the trades.

Quit you don’t have a time, do you have like a weekly or monthly
dollar profit target that you're looking for?

A : Yes, I do have a goal when I trade Forex. I look to make 20
percent on returns. But I do it in such a manner that the risk is
minimized—so 20 percent, but with low risk. I don’t gamble. I
don’t play the lottery. I come to Forex to make money and don’t
look at it like a bet.

Q.. what is your general risk or loss limit?

A : I don’t lose. In terms of stocks, you know you exit positions
because there’s a risk of loss, but in the Forex markets I don’t lose.
If one is attentive and very balanced, you can expect returns. I’m
not interested in what I can make in a day or if I make explosive
profits in a very short amount of time, that’s not enough. It has to
be consistent profitability over the long run or the course of the
year that I make my profits. I have a strategy that I look to make
20 percent per year with very little risk. Once I have made that
20, that’s what I take out. The only real time that I get out of my
trade is when there’s a factor, a variable in the market or something

346


FX FAMILY VALUES

changes according to my perception of the market such that I feel
like I should get out of the trade. Otherwise, sometimes I'll be in a
position and I feel like I can get a better price for it so you know I'll
get out but with intention of getting back in. Or there’s sometimes
when, let’s say, I’m losing in a position, but I’m still making money
on the interest rate, so I'll get out.

Q How do you determine very little risk?

A: Well, I really define it in terms of where the exchange rate has
been in the past. I look to buy cheap, like multiyear lows or sell
at multiyear highs. For instance, I will look at the U.S. dollar/yen
and if it’s currently trading at 110, I may look at historical data
and see that there is very little risk that it go to 100 by next year.
So I will set a band that I am willing to trade in—meaning that
I am only willing to add to my position, regardless of whether it
goes up or down within those bands. If it breaks those bands, I am
out of the trade. Also, interest is very important to me because I
am holding very long-term positions. If I am long the U.S. dollar/
Japanese yen at 110 and I earn interest on the position, the interest
income may eventually lower my entry price to 107 to 108, for
example. For my style of trading, I need to take active measures to
lower my entry price such that eventually I only need a very small
move to push me back into profits.

Q.:do you look at charts to figure out the zones?

A : Yes, while I’m studying price activity, I go back in the charts
about 25 years and I just keep on zooming in and zooming in to
see if there is any previous market activity that reflects the current
market activity—basically how the currency has behaved in the
past and how that relates to the future. It really helps a lot when I
take a look at the charts and zoom out to see the long-term trend,
go back in, zoom out, go back in, and after doing this I sit and think
about the price action.

347


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q :s0 how do you enter into trade? Do you open the entire
position at once or do you enter in increments?

A: I enter little by little.

Q.: do you go in the direction of profits or do you average down?

A : Pll buy below because I'll have a goal where, let’s say, in the
next four years I want to buy with an average of a 110.

: Your strategy sounds very much like the Martingale strategy.
How long do you end up holding these positions for?

A : Just the timeframe in which I’m able to make my 20 percent
goal. That can be six months or it can be one year. I don’t care.

: Let’s say that you want to buy the U.S. dollar/Japanese yen at
110, and you initiate your first position at that price level. Instead
of moving lower, the currency goes to 111 and it just keeps on
going up, and you're in a small position that is making money. Do
you then add to it or just stay with the small position?

A : Yes. If they continue to make money, I will also add to a
winning trade. Even if it moves to 115, I will continue to average
up because remember, with the interest rate differential, my true
entry one or two years later will be lower.

Q.:Ddo you ever go into positions where you have to pay interest?

A : I always look for favorable interest rate differentials, such
that I’m not looking for short U.S. dollar/Japanese yen positions,
instead I’m looking to long U.S. dollar/Japanese yen and I’m not

348


FX FAMILY VALUES

looking for long euro/U.S. dollar positions. I am looking to short
the euro/U.S. dollar. I don’t enter into these trades to lose, I know
no one does. But for me, this is an investment and not speculation.
Therefore, it is important for me to find ways to optimize the
probability of this trade winning, and one of the ways is to follow
the interest. Following this strategy, I have had cumulative returns
of 80 percent across the past four years.

Q.: When did you decide to trade like this, averaging up and
averaging down? Did someone teach you this?

A : Well, it was really at the point where I saw that when you're
losing, especially when you're losing on negative interest rate dif-
ferential position. The interest rate doesn’t help at all it actually
hurts you. So it’s at that point I realized that I only wanted to enter
positions that I received interest on. Not only that, I also don’t want
to enter positions into currency pairs that have very high volatility,
for instance, the British pound/Japanese yen. Even though it has
a very favorable interest rate differential, the trading range is so
high that the risk may be huge.

Q.: which currency pairs do you like to trade?

A : The U.S. dollar/Japanese yen all the way and, to a lesser
extent, the euro/U.S. dollar—but not as much the euro/U.S. dollar
in recent months because I feel the interest rate spread is going to
narrow. So presently, it’s definitely with the U.S. dollar/Japanese
yen.

Q what do you not trade?

A : [ll never trade something with an unfavorable interest rate
differential. I can’t keep track of all currency pairs so there are

349


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

a lot that I don’t trade because I just simply can’t keep track of
everything. Occasionally I will trade the British pound/U.S. dollar,
but not often. As for the commodity currencies [the Australian
dollar (AUD), the New Zealand dollar (NZD) and Canadian dollar
(CAD)], there are too many factors that impact them, especially
New Zealand, which has a very tiny population. This can make the
economy very volatile.

: Do you have only one position on at a time, or will you trade
euro/U.S. dollar and U.S. dollar/Japanese yen or just U.S. dollar/
Japanese yen by itself, one at a time?

A : will trade more than one currency pair at a time.

Q.: What is the longest timeframe you've held a trade?
A. Eight months.

Q,: shortest?

A : Two or three minutes.

Q.: How often do you check the price of the currency when you
are in a position?

A : It really depends on the day, because there are certain days
that I don’t look at the computer or price action whatsoever and
those are the best days. But then there are other days where I'll
look at the computer and markets four to six times a day. I can be
at my computer for two hours straight or for five minutes, it really
depends. On average though, like I mentioned earlier, I spend four
hours per day from Monday through Friday looking and checking

350


FX FAMILY VALUES

the markets and its more pleasure than work for me because I
really like the Forex market.

Q.- can you tell us about what you do in those four hours since
you are really in it for the long haul?

A : Well, I'll never sit at a computer for four hours, that’s way
too boring. Instead maybe one day I'll get up, I'll have breakfast,
I'll take a look the charts, to see what happened overnight, then
maybe later on I'll do some analysis on price action, look at charts
for a certain amount of time, zoom out, zoom in. Otherwise I just
read the news for any given day from international news wires, the
New York Times, Le Monde from France, the Spanish press, things
like this.

Q.: How complicated is your trading setup?

A : Very simple. I have one computer, one screen, and nothing
else.

: What is the best and most memorable trade that you have
made?

A : Well, in terms of one big trade, I never really had one big
trade because I'll enter a position and I'll hold multiple positions
and it’s really in terms of how I’m doing per day. Or, let’s say, in
recent memory we had a very good March, but it’s never really
that one big trade that is very memorable. I mean in terms of long-
term memory, I remember buying the U.S. dollar/Japanese yen
(dollar/yen) at 92 and then later selling it 112.

Q : How long did you hold that for?
A : Eleven months.

351


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: That is a very long time for most people, so how often do you
end up adjusting your trades?

A : [never really change trades because I'll have a trade and I'll be
in that trade as long as it takes to achieve a certain goal or position.
I never trade to make myself rich over night, for instance, because
one day that may work, but the next day it won't. I really look at
my yearly performance to see exactly how I’m doing.

Q.: What was your worst trade ever?

A : My worst trade was with the euro/U.S. dollar sometime ago.
I was trading the euro/U.S. dollar and U.S. dollar/Japanese yen
and I was making some very good trades. I had it with this bank
that then decided there was too much risk exposure in my account
and started arbitrarily closing positions such that I ended up losing
about $700,000 because the bank took it upon itself to close out
these positions. Meanwhile, had those positions been left open, I
would have made money in three or four months’ time. But in the
end I had two options. I could have gone to the courts or I could
have just gone on my way and learned from this. ’'m a person who
avoids conflict so I really decided just to leave it be.

Q:s 700,000 in losses, that’s a lot of money. What kind of leverage
do you use?

A : Two percent, or 50 to 1.

Q.: can you tell us a little bit about how trading has impacted
your family?

A : Lam a big believer of teaching my children the value of letting
your money work for you instead of sitting dormant in the bank. In

352


FX FAMILY VALUES

fact, I remember when my children were little and Christmas time
came around, I would actually give them shares in companies. This
was very unique because there’s very little finance culture in Spain,
and this was seen as strange in my family. At the time, I would buy
five or seven shares of a specific company, like Microsoft, and tell
them this was a company in the United States. The total value of
the shares were no more than $100.

Q How many children do you have?
A : Three. Two boys and one girl.

: How did they feel when you gave them shares? Were they
upset or were they happy?

A : Well, I told them these were shares in American companies
and they were part owners of this American company and they just
viewed the American technological sector with wonderment.

: How old were they when you started giving them these
shares?

A : Well, the smallest child was 6 years old, the other ones were
9 years old and 12 years old.

Q.p id you give them any toys as well?

A : [Laughter.] Yes, toys and a couple of shares.

This has gone very well for them because now they're in their
twenties and it’s really helped boost their savings. More recently
though, they've become so interested in Forex that they've sold
all their previous holdings in stocks and really dedicated more
time to the Forex market.

353


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q, : Does your wife trade as well?

A : She has mini-account. She’s seen me doing this for years and
decided to trade for herself. But she trades a bit differently. She'll
open and close positions throughout the day and trade little by
little. She does it to make some extra spending cash. She’s actually
been doing quite well, such that she’s taken out an average of
about $2,000 a month, and she’s very happy with that. The best
thing about her trading is the fact that we have something else
to talk about. We can talk about our children, the weather—and
how we think the Forex market is moving. It creates a much more
interesting dialogue, fosters a lot more cooperation. Basically, it
helps to improve our marriage.

Q: Do you ever take opposite trades?

A : No. That never happens, we have a system such that if she’s
trading the British pounds/Japanese yen, then I'll be trading the
US. dollar/Japanese yen.

Q.: Do you extract your profits on a regular basis like she does?

A : Well, we don’t necessarily take money out of the account, and
when we do it’s not because we need it, we'll occasionally just take
money out of the account and buy something for ourselves. More
generally, we'll aim to take about 12 percent of our total profits out
of our trading accounts, and we take money out one to two times
a year.
