
Historical Perspective

been a radical shift in what is considered an antitrust violation.
Market share is no longer viewed in a static but in a dynamic
context. Competition need not be preserved within a given industry because companies can compete with each other across industry lines. Bottles compete with cans, plastic competes with glass,
aluminum with steel. Technological advances can open up avenues of competition that did not exist previously. Long-distance
telephone service is the best example: what had been considered
a natural monopoly has become a highly competitive market.
Moreover, the U.S. market is no longer viewed in isolation: international competition protects the interests of the consumer, especially when the dollar is so strong, and the national interest
dictates the consolidation of *U.S. producers into fewer and
stronger units. Whether these considerations will remain as valid
in the future as they seem at present is open to question; but,
while they prevail, large-scale combinations do not face the political obstacles they would have encountered in previous administrations. I call the process the "oligopolarization~'of America.
Under the Carter administration any large-scale acquisition,
like the purchase of Utah International by General Electric, provoked an antitrust investigation that slowed down the transaction
even if it did not abort it. It was generally believed that companies
above a certain size were both immune from attack and disqualified from making significant corporate moves. They lived in a sort
of suspended animation with managements safely ensconced and
confined to operating their existing businesses. Since this view
was rarely challenged, it was not corroborated by evidence but
prevailed in the form of a bias. The bias found expressinn in stack
valuations. Smaller companies were perceived as having greater
exposure to corporate activity and in consequence tended to be
more highly priced. Between 1974 and 1979 the shares of small
companies outperformed large ones by a considerable margin,
and investors specializing in small capitalization stocks enjoyed
a field day. Corporate activity, such as leveraged buyouts, was in
fact concentrated in that sector.
After 1980 there was a gradual but perceptible shift. The size of
deals increased and industries once considered immune became
susceptible to attack. For instance, a few years ago beleaguered
companies used to acquire radio or TV stations as a way of defending themselves; now the industry is up for grabs. Both ABC
and RCA (which owns NBC) were taken over in friendly deals
and CBS, under attack, gained a new controlling shareholder.

,

The "Oligopolarization"of America

133

The trend was not qecognized at first, but as it spread from
industry to industry it captured the imagination of investors and
it is now fully reflected in share valuations. Since 1980, relative
performance has shifted back in favor of large capitalization
stocks, and mergermaqia has undoubtedly played a part in the
move. As the process continues, a point will be reached when
expectations exceed re+lity and the stock prices of the candidates
will hamper the conclusion of deals. The spread between pre-deal
prices and the pdees actually paid has already narrowed but the
pace of transactions has not yet slackened. Mergermania has generated a momentum of its own and undoubtedly there will be
'some deals concluded 'at unreasonable prices before the process
exhausts itself.
Looking at mergermania analytically, we may classify the reflexive interaction as primarily self-defeating or self-correcting. If
there is a self-reinforcing connection, it is lateral rather than vertical: it expands the number and size of companies affected rather
than raising stock valses to unsustainable heights. There is relatively little vertical or price action. Successful acquirers, such as
GAF Corp., attain higher stock prices and, if they can successfully
recapitalize themselves, they can swallow another company. If
the process lasts long%enough, favorites will emerge with premium valuations that will make it easier for them to fulfill expectations. Mesa Petroleum was in the process of emerging as such a
premium company until Unocal stopped it in its..tlfacks. On the
other hand, Esmark has gone full circle, first acquiring and then
being acquired.
The self-reinforcing connection comes at first from the elimination of a negative bias. What has been done with one company
can be done with another and, encouraged by success, people
attempt what had not been thought possible before. Eventually
excesses are bound to develop. In order to get a better insight we
must take a closer look at the players. First, there are the merger
and acquisition departments that engineer the corporate transactions; then there are the lawyers who dream up new attacks and
new defenses; the actual acquirers; the providers of credit; and
the arbitrage traders who hold the stocks before and during deals
and often become active participants; finally, there are the regulators who are supposed to supervise the process. All the participants, with the exception of the regulators, stand to earn very
large profits from successful transactions.
Excessive profits often lead to other excesses, especially when

134
I

I

Historical Perspective

credit is involved. There is not much point in listing them in a
general way. Each transaction is high drama and drama is constructed out of human foibles. A narrative of specific events
would recount many mistakes, exaggerations, abuses, as well as
some bold maneuvers and brilliant inventions. In this respect,
mergermania does not differ from other activities that generate
windfall profits. There is a general predilection to pursue such
activities until some failures exert a discouraging effect. When
credit is used on a large scale, failures can mdwball. We have
already had at least one occasion when a large arbitrage trader,
Ivan Boesky, was forced to liquidate his positions, forcing some
others to do iikewise. There has also been much concern about
the debt accumulated in leveraged buyouts. Until recently most
of the credit came from banks. As we have seen, they were trying
to grow their way out of their difficulties after the international
debt crisis, and leveraged buyouts provided a ready market. But
the regulatory authorities started to discourage bank lending for
leveraged buyouts even before the twin crises of the Continental
Illinois Bank and the Financial Corporation of America. For a
time it looked like financing would dry up, and the pace of corporate activity did slow down. That was in the second half of
1984 just after some large oil companies had been gobbled up; the
elections were approaching and it was felt that additional takeovers might be politically embarrassing. Mergermania resumed
with renewed vigor after the elections but the main source of
financing shifted from banks to junk bonds. The shift was proba- '
bly dictated by necessity-Unocal sued Security Pacific Bank for
providing credit to a corporate enemy-but it turned out t~ be a
technical improvement. Junk bonds are more flexible and more
easily arranged; they also offer some wrinkles that can be exploited for tax purposes. Drexel Burnham, the dominant force in
junk bond financing, can provide almost unlimited funds at short
notice.
Will it all come to a bad end? That is impossible to predict. As
we have seen, the main reflexive connection is a self-correcting
one. The boomhust model we have developed for conglomerates
is not applicable. It is quite likely that the process will burn itself
out after it has swept all the ground that is susceptible to it. But a
disaster cannot be ruled out. The net effectis to introduce a great
deal of debt into the restructured companies. A number of different scenarios could lead to situations where the debt is difficult

The "Oligopolarization" of America

135

to service. If the Impe~ialCircle is reversed and the dollar falls
just as the economy slips into recession, interest rates may also
rise at the same time and highly leveraged companies would confront the worst of all ,possible worlds. In the more immediate
future, a precipitous f?ll in oil prices could endanger the cash
flow of heavily indebted oil companies like Phillips Petroleum.
One major default mi@ unravel the magic circle of junk bond
holders.
Up till now, mergermania has not had a detectable influence on
the fate of the Imperial Circle. It has probably reduced physical
investment activity in the United States by making managements
more oriented isward 'the short term, but investment remained
surprisingly strong until recently. Mergermania has probably contributed to credit demands and induced banks to borrow abroad
in order to lend at home; but when the role of the banks diminished, the influx of capital from abroad continued. If there is a
reflexive connection, it*is too subtle to be readily discerned: it has
to do with the generaliattraction the United States holds for foreign capital at the present time.
Another, more ominous, connection is beginning to surface. A
great deal of credit is employed in the acquisition of companies;
the credit is then repaid by disposing of the assets that served as
collateral. Both activities, the nonproductive use of credit and the
sale of collateral assets, aggravate the prevailing deflationary
trends. Mergermania may thus hasten the unwinding of the Imperial Circle.
Assuming that the process does not end in disaster, what is its
overall effect? We find a mixed bag. In contrast to the conglomerate boom where most of the activity was confined to the stockmarket, many changes will have occurred in the real world. On
balance, the profitability of corporations will be enhanced, assets
redeployed, and stodgy managements shaken up. Industiies will
have become more oligopolistic. As long as the Imperial Circle
prevails these changes are desirable and probably necessary for
the survival of many industries. If and when the competition from
imports abates, the changes may turn out to be just the opposite
of what is appropriate to the new conditions.* Accepting merger* P.S., February 1987: The stock market has begun to reflect the excess profits
expected from the "oligopolarization" of America after price competition from
abroad has abated.

136
t

I

Historical Perspective

mania as a process of adjustment, we encounter a problem that is
inherent in a world of reflexive interactions: adjustment to what?
It is like shooting at a target when the act of shooting moves the
target.
Even if corporate restructuring qualified as an adjustment process, it would benefit from being slowed down. If the pace were
slower, fewer deals would be made because the rate of return
would become less favorable. That would be an improvement
because there is a tendency to make more deals than are justified
by long-term economic considerations. The tax laws are primarily
responsible, but the participants playing with other people's
msuey must ahso share part of the blame. England has a takeover
panel that reviews the rules of the game; we could benefit from a
similar arrangement.
On the level of theory, this analysis shows that the boom/bust
model is not directly applicable to all reflexive processes. With
this lesson in mind, we shall now address the question: what will
be the eventual outcome of the Imperial Circle?

P.S.,DECEMBER 1986
As it happened, mergermania outlasted the Imperial Circle. Junk
bonds suffered a few nasty moments when oil dropped below $10
and LTV Corp. defaulted, but the market recovered. Both the equity and the junk bond holders of leveraged buyouts have been
greatly helped by the decline in interest rates, although junk
bonds have lagged behind high-quality bonds. The Tax Reform
Act of 1986 has had the perverse effect of accelerating the pace of
transactions prior to its taking effect on January 1,1987.
Then came the Boesky affair and the arbitrage community was
shaken to its core. The full extent of the scandal is not yet known
but can be easily imagined. The investigation has already immobilized many of the major players, and it is going to change the
way the game is played. By and large, the speculative excesses
generated by mergermania will be removed; what will be left is
the continuing restructuring of American corporations. The net
inflow of cash into junk bonds will be reversed and the extent to
which buyouts can be leveraged will be greatly reduced. Most
important, it will become more difficult to refinance deals when
they turn sour, and the junk aspect of junk bonds will become
more apparent.

The "Oligopolarization"of America

137

In short, the Boesky affair constitutes not the end of corporate
restructuring but rather a well-defined and highly dramatic turning point in the reflexive aspect of mergermania. As in other similar instances, it will be some time after the turning point when
the casualties surface. The EPICS of mergermania are yet to come.
(EPIC was the subsidiary that pushed the Community Savings
Bank of Maryland into bankruptcy.)

I

PART THREE

THE STARTING POINT: AUGUST 1985

We shall take up the history of the Imperial Circle at around the
elections of 1984. Until then, the Imperial Circle had operated
without a hitch with both the U.S. economy and the U.S. dollar
continuing to rise. The central bankers of the world were fully
aware that the situation was unsound and ultimately unsustainable, and there was an episode at the beginning of 1984 when they
tried to talk down the dollar but the attempt failed and the dollar
rose higher than ever. The economy continued so strong that it
overcame even a modest rise in interest rates. Forei ners holding
dollar-denominated financial assets were really r 'ng it in. So
were those exporting to the United States. Surprisingly, American
industry hung in there in the face of severe pressure from imports,
reluctant to transfer manufacturing abroad and trying to stay competitive by investing in high technology. The critical point was
reached around the final quarter of 1984.The pace of the economy
was beginning to slacken and interest rates started to ease but the
dollar, after an initial dip, continued to rally. Prevailing opinion
had linked the strength of the dollar to the strength of the economy and to the interest rate differential. When the dollar refused
to weaken, the last of the trend fighters gave up and the exchange
rate went through the roof. That was the straw that broke the
camel's back: American industry started in earnest to switch to
imports and to foreign-based manufacturing. The strong dollar
finally became an American problem.
The conduct of U.S. economic policy underwent a significant
change after the elections. Treasury Secretary Donald Regan and

&

141

142
I

t

The Real-Time Experiment

presidential adviser James Baker switched places. Until then, the
Federal Reserve and the Treasury had been at loggerheads, but
now an understanding was reached between them. Slowing down
the Imperial Circle became the clear-cut objective. It was to be
achieved by reducing the budget deficit and relaxing monetary
policy. America's main trading partners were encouraged to give
their policy the opposite twist, engaging in fiscal stimulation but
keeping up interest rates. It was hoped that under these influences
the dollar would finally decline. Treasury Secretary Baker went
so far as to express willingness to discuss a reform of the exchange
rate system prior to the Bonn economic summit in May 1985, but
he failed to follow through. He was also unsuccessfuI in ga'ining
control of the budget-cutting process in Congress; nevertheless,
the administration is clearly determined to accept whatever form
Congress chooses for cutting the budget.
The dollar did respond with a thump, falling by about 15%
against the German mark. Then it stabilized for about three
months, and recently it started declining again. The adjustment
so far is unlikely to bring any significant relief to industry. The
economy is now divided into two segments: the tradable goods
sector is in recession with the capital goods sector particularly
weak, but the service and defense sectors are still strong. Interest
rates have fallen significantly and that is stimulating the economy, but as long as the dollar remains anywhere near its present
level, much of the stimulation will find its way abroad through
increased imports. Most important, the pressure on profits in the
tradable goods sector is unlikely to relent.
What is the outlook? We can draw up two scenarios. In the first
the dollar declines by, say, 20-25% bringing relief to the tradable
goods sector. Inflation may pick up a little, although the rise in
import prices may be compensated for by a decline in oil prices,
but the economy recovers, putting a floor under the dollar. This
is the so-called soft landing scenario. Its prospects are better than
at any time since the inception of the Imperial Circle because
the authorities have finally recognized the need to bring the selfreinforcing process under control and are cooperating to that end.
It is conceivable that the ever more violent swings in exchange
rates will moderate as-unannounced and unrecognized as usual
-we pass from a system of free floating to a system of managed
floating.
The other possibility is that the dollar refuses to decline and,
when it finally breaks, it does so precipitously. At first, foreign

The Starting Point: August 1985

143

exporters absorb whatever small decline occurs and do not raise
their selling prices in the face of a weakening market. The tradable
goods sector continues under pressure, and the weakness threatens to spread to the other sectors. The Federal Reserve, determined not to allow the economy to slip into recession because of
the dire consequences it would have on the banking system, continues to pump money into the economy but much of the stimulation continues to leak out in the form of imports. Eventually, a
critical point is reached when foreigners become reluctant to hold
dollars, long-term interest rates rise in the face of rising money
supply numbers, the ddllar declines precipitously, and inflation
prospects deteriorate even as the ecouomy enkm+nb a full
fledged recession.
This may be called the disaster scenario, because a recession
would expose an exceedingly fragile financial structure to a test
that it is unlikely to withstand without severe damage. The heavily indebted countries have barely entered into Phase 3 of their
adjustment process. A ;weakening in demand for their exports
could push them back into Phase 2 and the setback may be more
than they can bear. At home, the adjustment process is even less
advanced. A recession kould reduce the earnings capacity of borrowers; it would also undermine the resale value of the assets that
serve as collateral. As banks try to liquidate foreclosed property
they set into motion a self-reinforcing process: other borrowers
are pushed over the brink. The process is alreadysrnder way in
the oil patch and in farming; in a recession it would spread to
other sectors of the economy.
This is where we stand at present (August 1985). As a market
participant, I must make some decisions based on my evaluation
of the probable course of events. The theory of reflexivity, as it
has been developed so far, does not yield any clear-cut predictions, but it can be helpful in formulating my views. I have used
it in that capacity before and I shall attempt to do so now.
I propose an experiment. I shall record the views that guide me
in my investment decisions at the present time and I shall revise
them on a real-time basis while the book is in preparation. I shall
terminate the experiment when the book goes to the printer and
the reader will be able to judge the results. This will provide a
practical test of the value, if any, of my approach. It will also
provide an insight into the decision-making process of one market
participant.
A few words of explanation are needed about the investment

144

,

I

The Real-Time Experiment

fund I manage.* Quantum Fund is a unique instrument: it uses
leverage; it operates in many markets; and, most important, I manage it as if it were my own money-which it is to a large extent.
Many funds share one of these features, but I do not know of any
other that combines them all.
The best way to understand the role of leverage is to think of an
ordinary investment portfolio as something flat and loose, as its
name implies. Leverage adds a third dimension: credit. What was
a loosely held together, flat portfolio becomes a tightly knit threedimensional structure in which the equity base has to support the
credit used.
Leveraged funds usually employ their borrowed capital in the
same way as their equity base. That is not the case in Quantum
Fund. We operate in many markets, and we generally invest our
equity in stocks and use our leverage to speculate in commodities.
Commodities in this context include stock index futures as well
as bonds and currencies. Stocks are generally much less liquid
than commodities. By investing less than our entire equity capital
in relatively illiquid stocks, we avoid the danger of a catastrophic
collapse in case of a margin call.
In managing the Fund, I distinguish between macroeconomic
and microeconomic investment concepts. The former usually dictate our exposure in the various commodity markets, including
the stock market, while the latter find expression in our stock
selection. Thus the ownership of a specific stock has both a macro
and a micro aspect in the sense that it affects the total size of the
Fund's stock market exposure, and, if it is a foreign stock, it also
affects the Fund's currency exposure. By contrast, a stock index
or currency position has only a macro aspect. We can, of course,
always neutralize the macro aspect of a stock position through
stock indexes and currency futures.
As far as currencies are concerned, I believe that a system of
fluctuating exchange rates presents an existential choice: one cannot avoid having one's equity invested in some currency, and not
making a decision about currency exposure is also a decisionunless, of course, one were to buy a currency option, in which
case one would pay a measurable price for avoiding the choice.
The logical consequence of my attitude is that I feel obliged to
make a decision about currencies even if I do not have a well* Written in January 1987.

The Starting Point: August 1985

'

145

formulated macroeconomic investment concept. The results
can be disastrous. Sometimes I envy my more ignorant fundmanaging colleagues who do not know that they face an
existential choice; for instance, they avoided the losses I incurred in the 1981-198E period when the dollar continued to
appreciate.
It can be seen that Quantum Fund combines some of
the features of a stock market fund with those of a commodity
fund. Historically, Quantum Fund operated at first almost exclusively in stocks; only as macroeconomic conditions became increasingly unstable did bonds and currencies assume increased
importance. In the last few years macroeconomic speculation has
become paramount. The degree of leverage we employ is much
more modest than in pure commodity funds, and the exposure in
various markets serves t~ balance as well as to leverage the portfolio.
The Fund's maximum exposure in any direction is subject to
self-imposed limits. If one relied on the limits imposed by margin
regulations, one would be asking for trouble, because one would
be forced to liquidate positions at the most inconvenient moments. One needs a safety margin over and above the margin
requirements. The safety margin can be quantified by looking at
the uncommitted buying power, but it is not a reliable measure
because different types of investments carry widely divergent
margin requirements. For instance, most U.S. s t o a s require a
50% margin, foreign stocks only 30-35% and the margin on S&P
futures is only 6%. Where to limit one's exposure is one of the
most difficult questions in operating a leveraged fund, and there
is no hard and fast answer. As a general rule, I try not to exceed
100% of the Fund's equity capital in any one market, but I tend to
adjust my definition of what constitutes a market to suit my current thinking. For instance, I may add non-market-related stocks
and market-related stocks together or keep them separate as the
mood takes me.
Generally speaking, I am more concerned with preserving the
Fund's capital than its recent profits, so that I tend to become
more liberal with self-imposed limits when my investment concepts seem to be working. Where to draw the line between capital
'
and profit is no easy task when practically the entire capital consists of accumulated profits. The historical record up to the beginning of the experiment is summarized below. It will be seen that
