
I mentioned that patterns are rarely if ever as perfect as the textbooks teach. In this case, AIG
formed one more rally or bounce off the neckline horizontal trendline support at $1,300.00, forming a
second right shoulder before breaking the neckline. Chartists call this a double shoulder head and
shoulders. Price triggered an official entry on the April 2006 break under $1,300.00 per share. At this
time (or even before this), you could have determined the price projection pattern target to be
$1,180.00 as defined above. Traders would have put stops above the second right shoulder at the
$1,380.00 level and entered on a breakdown under $1,300.00 to play for a target (take off the
position) at $1,180.00 which actually wasn't an ideal reward-to-risk relationship, certainly not the
two-to-one that makes pattern trading worthwhile from an edge-based standpoint. However, the trade
did meet its price objective and actually formed a second pattern during the decline. Can you spot the
bear flag pattern that formed while traders were short AIG to target the $1,180.00 level? If not, we'll
discuss the flag patterns later so you can come back and find it. Yes, smaller patterns can form within
larger patterns.
Once price hit the target level, those who were trading short to play for the head and shoulders
target began to buy back their shares to cover their short positions, adding demand to the market and
stabilizing the price at the $1,180.00 level.
Understand the underlying supply/demand relationship that developed as this pattern completed.
Walk through the chart, stepping inside the shoes of the professionals (distributing), technical chart
traders (waiting for a break, then taking the breakdown, then exiting at the target), and the amateur
trader who bought near the highs (usually on the head or right shoulder) and could not understand why
they bought shares in a company with a rising trend, yet the price started falling; feel their pain as they
consider whether or not to keep holding on to a losing position while the stock keeps falling, and keep
in mind they don't know where the pain of loss will end, meaning they are experiencing the pain of
loss and are selling all the way down at different levels as the pain of a losing position is too much to
endure.
Refer to Chapter 3 on the Range Alternation Principle to identify this as a horizontal trend channel
with an overhead expensive resistance line at the $1,400.00 level, lower cheap support line at

$1,300.00, and value area (midpoint) at $1,350.00. Another way to view the head and shoulders
portion is as a consolidation pattern that should lead to a range expansion move once investors break
the lower support line as a positive feedback loop develops, sending price to find value (buyers) at a
lower level.
Head and shoulders appear on all timeframes, from monthly charts down to one-minute charts, but
the intraday patterns will not involve as many participants as the higher timeframe patterns on daily or
even weekly charts. Remember that the psychology of the reversal will be proportional to the scale of
the pattern. Larger-scale head and shoulders patterns will involve many more market participants and
many more emotions, from skilled experts to brand new trading novices than the intraday patterns.
While the parameters and definitions are the same for all timeframes, the psychology (greed, fear,
hope, despair, confusion, frustration) and participants are different. The same is true for all chart
patterns.

INVERSE HEAD AND SHOULDERS
As a reference, the opposite pattern to a bearish Head and Shoulders Reversal pattern at the highs is a
bullish Inverse Head and Shoulders Pattern at the lows. In order to cover more patterns in a single
chapter, I won't go into as much detail as for the standard head and shoulders description, but do
realize that, while the targets, labels, descriptions, stop-loss, and entry are identical (but in reverse),
the psychology is dramatically different when a market transitions from a bear market downtrend into
a consolidation period and then into a bull market uptrend than when the market reverses from up to
down. Instead of going through a distribution period, a stock is experiencing an accumulation period
marked by active purchasing of shares by the professionals instead of selling to lock-in profits.
Traders enter long at the breakout from the neckline, place a stop-loss either beneath the right
shoulder swing low or the low of the head, and then target an identical move, except this time the
distance from the head to the neckline is added to the breakout from the neckline instead of being
subtracted.

Different Emotions from Bear to Bull
One major reason that the psychological dynamics of supply and demand are different is because the
amateur trader or small retail investor is less likely to short stock than they are to buy it, and so we do
not see the same panic to buy to cover their short sales for a loss when the market is rising as we see
the panic to sell the previously purchased that decline in value as price falls. Usually, tops are made
with euphoria and optimism from the smaller investors while bottoms are made with disgust, anguish,
despair, and fear from the general public. The forces that carry a stock up are not the panicked,
desperate forces that carry it down. Keep this in mind when trading bullish and bearish chart patterns
and how it fits into the Life Cycle of a price move as explained in Chapter 7.
Let's look at the example from Boeing (BA) from its recovery rally during 2009 in Figure 5.3.
FIGURE 5.3 Boeing Daily Chart Inverse Head and Shoulders 2009

Like AIG, Boeing did not form the perfect textbook inverse head and shoulders as it transitioned
through an accumulation phase and reversal from a downtrend to an uptrend throughout 2009. Price
formed a left shoulder with no sign of trend reversal in sight in late 2008 at the $35.00-per-share
level, then formed a new swing low under $30.00 per share in March 2009 which would later
become known as the head of the pattern that was forming. Price broke the dominant trendline (not
drawn) as it rallied above $40.00 per share in late April 2009 (along with the 20- and 50-day EMAs,
not shown) as the head completed and price retraced up to the forming horizontal trendline which
would later be known as the neckline at the $53.00-per-share level. Price also formed positive
momentum divergences on this final push to a new low, indicating that odds were shifting to favor a
potential trend reversal.
Price retraced one more time, forming a higher low in July at the $40.00-per-share level before
rallying to break to a high of $55.00 in late September 2009, which triggered an official entry to buy
shares for a potential head and shoulders confirmed breakout. Like AIG, price had a final trick up its
sleeve, falling unexpectedly back under the neckline, but not falling low enough to trigger a stop loss
of traders who located their stops under the right shoulder at the $40.00 level. We had a second break
above the neckline in December, triggering a second-chance entry and then the positive feedback loop
developed, with those who were short the stock being forced to cover as new longs, including chart
traders playing the neckline break of the inverse head and shoulders pattern, buying—both of which
drove the price higher. Price rallied almost without a meaningful retracement until the stock hit the
expected price pattern projection target of $76.00 per share, which added the distance from the
neckline to the low of the head ($23.00) to the breakout price of $53.00 per share. Price found
resistance and then sold off sharply from that level, in part due to chart traders who were taking
profits from the price projection target of the pattern (among other reasons of course).

AIG Example: Inverse Head and Shoulders
Here is a view of the same chart of the same period, but adding a trendline, the corresponding 20- and

50-day exponential averages along with the 200-day simple moving average, and the 3/10 MACD
Oscillator—which highlighted the dramatic positive momentum divergence at the low (see Figure
5.4).
FIGURE 5.4 AIG Head and Shoulders Resolution. Daily Chart: 2005–2006

I have referenced four specific points in the chart using letters A, B, C, and D. Let's make sense of
this chart one element at a time:
A. Trendline Break: Price breaks above the trendline as drawn, connecting multiple swing
highs in the context of the prevailing downtrend.
B. Positive 20- and 50-day EMA Cross: The 20-day EMA is the dashed line while the 50day EMA is the solid line. One of the first steps toward a trend reversal, which usually
occurs about the same time as we see a trendline break, is a bullish cross of the 20-day
EMA—a shorter average—above the 50-day EMA—a longer average. Price also began
rallying above these averages. Notice that price stayed consistently beneath these averages
during the downtrend. As the head develops, professional traders and chartists are starting
to see signs of a reversal. Notice also the clear positive momentum divergence that formed
on the absolute low under $30.00 per share. The 3/10 Oscillator shows a triple-swing
positive momentum divergence when comparing the oscillator low to the corresponding
price lows. An arrow highlights this development.
C. 200-day SMA Cross: Price broke and closed above the 200-day simple moving average,
which is the defining line between a bull and bear market to some analysts. A close above
the 200-day moving average is one of the last bullish confirmations to occur that indicates
that odds have shifted to favor a trend reversal and that it is now safe to begin trading long
and risky to continue selling the stock short.
D. Neckline Break: Price finally crosses the horizontal resistance line that comprised the
neckline of the inverse head and shoulders pattern, triggering an official entry for those
chartists who only trade chart patterns.

The purpose of this example is to combine the prior chapters and layer a price pattern on top of the
analysis. A stock must transition from a bear market to a new bull market and often undergoes not only
a consolidation phase (range alternation), but shows specific signals that the trend is changing, such
as the indications mentioned above (trendline breaks, positive momentum divergences, EMA
crossovers and breaks, and so on).
Notice also the negative momentum divergence, shown with an arrow from January to March 2010,
which preceded the sell-off that occurred at the price pattern projection target of $76.00 per share.
Even if you were not trading the head and shoulders pattern, you could have labeled this target and
then observed the negative momentum divergence that formed as price continued to new recovery
highs in 2010. This describes another way that price projection targets can be helpful, especially
when combined with other signals.
A trader long Boeing into the $75.00 level could have taken profits as a result of the inverse head
and shoulders target being hit in conjunction with a lengthy negative momentum divergence, while
more aggressive traders could have put on a new short-sale position, with a stop-loss just above
$75.00, as price turned down from this level, perhaps when combined with a bearish reversal candle
(a doji and shooting star reversal candle formed at the $75.00 level, though that is not clear from the
chart).
Now do you see why it is more important to assess the larger picture of what is happening with the
stock rather than rushing out and buying a stock because it happens to be forming an interestingsounding pattern? It takes extra work to identify a stock in a transition phase, but the extra work is
worth it in the form of the consistent profits and higher confidence that come from specific entries and
low-risk locations to place stops if an unexpected event occurs.

BULL FLAG
Bull and bear flags also would likely make the top three in a poll of most popular trading patterns,
most likely due to their popularity and ease of recognition. Flags are much more common than head
and shoulders patterns, and also occur on all timeframes, from monthly charts down to the one-minute
charts.
Flags are impulse patterns that derive their forecasting ability (for the next likely swing) from the
principle that momentum precedes price. Recall from Chapter 2 that momentum has a leading edge on
price. Stated in trading terms, if we see price and momentum form a high simultaneously, we would
then expect a higher high yet to come in price. It takes great force to propel an object into motion (in
our case, a sudden imbalance in the supply/demand relationship) but it takes less force to keep a
moving object in motion. Bull flags are a great example of how this concept of motion and physics
plays out on the price charts.
There are three specific components to a bull flag, as labeled in Figure 5.5:
FIGURE 5.5 An Ideal Image of a Bull Flag

The initial impulse (the pole)
The retracement (the actual flag)
The measured move (an equal reaction swing to the pole)
As in physics, an object tends to stay at rest until a force interacts with the object, setting it in
motion. That is the logic behind the pattern of the bull flag. It's not our goal to predict when the initial
force will interact with the object, or in this case, when the sudden supply/demand imbalance will
propel price higher in a sharp impulse move. It's like the left shoulder of the head and shoulders
pattern—you can't know the pattern is forming until it is nearing completion.
Another analogy that helps understand the bull flag (or bear flag) reaction is like a stone being
dropped into a calm pond. There is an initial burst of energy that sends the waves moving, and then
those waves later become ripples as the energy is dispersed. The initial thrust (supply/demand
imbalance) that begins a flag pattern is the rock being dropped into calm waters, and the actual trade
setup is similar to riding a wave or ripple that originates from the initial move.
Recall the second portion of the momentum principle: when price and momentum form a new high,
odds favor a higher high yet to come in price after an initial pullback. The flag portion of the pattern
represents this initial pullback in price, and the trade that we take, buying the breakout of the flag, is
taking advantage of the higher high yet to come component of the momentum principle.

Rules for Trading a Bull Flag
What are the general rules for trading a bull flag? Chart traders want to put on a new position in one
of two locations when they believe they are trading a bull flag pattern that has developed on the chart.

Aggressive traders want to buy shares as close to the bottom of the flag as possible, as price often
moves within a descending short-term parallel trend channel, or as price forms a reversal candle at
the bottom of the parallel trendline channel. This strategy allows for a closer stop, which enhances the
edge of the pattern (see Chapter 8).
The more conservative trader would enter a position long only when price broke the upper parallel
trend channel as price officially broke outside of the flag portion of the pattern, perhaps on a strong
bullish candle (like a marabozu or bullish engulfing). While there are advantages for waiting for
confirmation to be sure that you are trading a flag pattern, the disadvantage comes in the form of a
more distant stop-loss, which is still placed under the lower boundary of the descending parallel
trend channel.
The bull flag target is one of the easiest price projection target calculations you can make. Simply
measure the horizontal price distance of the pole portion of the formation—the initial impulse from
low to high prior to the retracement—and then add this value to the bottom of the parallel trend
channel when price officially breaks out of the trend channel and begins rising. Doing so will reveal
the upper price projection target.
Alternatively, some traders insist on projecting the measured move target from the upper trend
channel directly at the break-out price rather than the lower trend channel from the bottom of the
retracement. Again, there is no magic formula that makes all patterns work perfectly, so you will have
to experiment with a few flags on your own to find which of the two methods for price projection
works best for you and your trading style. For the purpose of the discussion here and forward, I will
be projecting the price target from the low of the trend channel at the price swing low of the
retracement instead of the upper trend channel.
A trader would look to exit the position as price approaches or achieves the upper price projection
target, particularly if a reversal-style candle forms such as a doji, shooting star, or bearish engulfing.
A very aggressive trader might even look to initiate a short-sale position at the price target, placing a
stop loss just beyond the target and playing for a retracement back to a rising moving average or other
lower, unspecified small target.

Why a Bull Flag Works
A bull flag is an impulse pattern that reflects the reactions from investors and traders to an initial
impulse, or sudden shift in the supply/demand relationship. Perhaps the initial impulse begins as some
sort of short-squeeze or range breakout play, but the impulse sets the stage for future reactions in price
in the direction of the initial impulse.
Traders who were long prior to the initial impulse might see the impulse rally giving them an
unexpected windfall profit, and so they will sell the shares they own at any weakness, which usually
explains in part the downward reaction that comprises the flag portion. Take into account also that
other traders may be initiating a short-sale position to take advantage of a price move that is
overextended from its shorter-term moving average such as the 20-period EMA. They may also exit
from a signal via an overbought indicator reading—a sell signal—in a popular oscillator like the
stochastic or RSI. The combination of buyers taking sudden profits and new short-sellers trying to
take advantage of the mean-reversion principle (prices that are overextended tend to return to an
average price) helps explain why price might retrace or sell off after an initial rally.
However, the supply/demand balance has shifted after the initial impulse, and after traders have

sold their shares or have already gotten short (pushing the price down), a new dynamic or shift in the
supply/demand relationship takes over as traders begin to buy as price falls back to a support level
(such as a moving average or Fibonacci retracement price). At the same time, those who took a shortsale position begin to buy back shares to cover their short sale for a profit.
Now, we have a combination of bears buying back to cover and new bulls buying stock, either
because the fundamental situation of the stock has changed (perhaps an earnings report or some other
announcement caused the initial impulse spike that created the pole), or because they are reacting to a
bull flag that they believe is forming on the chart. Remember, chart patterns can be self-fulfilling
prophecies. Either way, price begins to rally in a similar impulse move as it did for the pole, and
price rallies up to the target with traders buying either at the support level, above the breakout from
the declining trendline that comprises the flag, or somewhere after the breakout, as traders feel they
are missing the move so they rush in to buy shares.
Like the head and shoulders, traders who are specifically buying because they see a bull flag on
their chart will then take their profits as price approaches and tests the price projection target.
Because the target is easy to calculate, many traders will be aware of this target level in advance and
might consider selling just because price has reached the upper price target, especially if traders
observe any reversal candle or other confluence resistance level. Traders may even decide to take
profits, similar to that of the end of the initial impulse, when they start to see price fall after a sudden
rise; they want to lock-in profits they have gained. As usual, aggressive short sellers might try to take
advantage of the situation and initiate new short-sale positions, all of which serve to alter the
supply/demand relationship in favor of supply (selling).

Putting a Bull Flag in Context
Bull flags are popularly described as continuation patterns, and most commonly appear in already
established uptrends. It is rare, though possible, to see a bull flag form in the context of a prevailing
downtrend; you are more likely to see bear flag retracements up that lead to continuation moves down
in a downtrend. Again, the context where the pattern forms is important.
Bull flags are less common within the context of a lengthy trading range, or range compression
period in price. In fact, the failure rate of bull (or bear) flags is higher when a bull flag develops in
what looks to be an initial impulse that forms completely within the confines of a well-established
trading range. Within the context of a larger range, price is less likely to achieve the upper price
projection target.
However, it is possible to see a bull flag form after an immediate breakout from a trading range or
range contraction period in price. In this sense, you can actually position yourself to trade not only the
breakout from the established trading range, but also a potential bull flag that develops, from the
initial retracement, after a breakout impulse occurs. Remember that the initial impulse indicates a
sudden imbalance—in favor of the buyers/demand—in the established supply/demand relationship.
Look for price to form a new momentum high in the 3/10 Oscillator, Rate of Change, Momentum, or
other unbound oscillators to confirm the recent high that has formed in price. Make sure that price is
indeed forming a new swing high, or else you might not be looking at a bull flag in formation. Look
for the combination of new indicator swing high along with a new price swing high, not necessarily
making an absolute new high, but a high above recent swing highs in price and the indicator.

Enhancing a Bull Flag
After the initial impulse occurs, there are two additional components you can watch to increase the
odds of trading a bull flag successfully.
The first level to watch is the initial retracement. Remember you have two possible entry points
from the pattern itself. An aggressive trader wants to buy shares as close as possible to the expected
bottom of the retracement phase, while a conservative trader wants additional proof that price is
indeed forming a bull flag, and thus will wait until price has began its initial move up from a support
zone and broken above the upper parallel trend channel that comprises the flag.
Buying after price has broken above the upper trendline is simple, but you can enhance where you
enter a position closer to the lows, which gives you a double advantage: first, your stop-loss will be
closer to your entry if you buy close to the swing low as opposed to waiting for the confirmed break
above the upper channel. Second, your target, and thus potential profit in the trade, will be a larger
distance from your entry than if you waited for confirmation via a break above the trend channel. By
placing a smaller stop and playing for a larger target, you enhance the probabilities of a successful
outcome over waiting for confirmation and a later entry when trading bull flags.
Using a more aggressive strategy will result in more stop losses being hit than if you waited for
confirmation. A trader who waited for confirmation would put on fewer positions than one who
entered long on a market that did not rally off support as expected. Each individual trader must
determine the tradeoff between a superior reward/risk relationship and a higher accuracy rate (a
result of waiting for confirmation).
Let's look at a few ways to enhance the odds of finding a reasonable swing low price to enter a
position as close to the low as possible, while still having a reasonable stop-loss order in the event
that price continues falling and does not trigger an official bull flag entry.
First, there is the parallel trend channel itself. No matter the timeframe on which you are trading, the
definition of a bull flag calls for a declining parallel trend channel to form, which connects the prices
during the retracement portion of the flag formation. If you see that price has spent some time in a
short-term parallel trend channel after an initial impulse, and is currently at the low of the channel,
you can enter a position close to the low of the parallel trend channel.
Second, if we add another layer of confirmation to the pattern, you would only enter a position long
at the lower trend channel if a corresponding reversal candle, such as a doji, bullish engulfing,
spinning top, or hammer formed as price rallied off the low of the parallel trend channel. You might
not be able to name the candle, but look for a lower shadow to form which may actually extend
slightly beneath where you drew the trend channel. If price breaks above the high of this candle, then
enter a position immediately and place a stop just beneath the low of the candle.
Third, you can look to see if price has retraced to any corresponding short-term moving average,
specifically the rising 20-period exponential or simple moving averages, for an extra layer of
confirmation. The same logic is true for self-drawn price trendlines. Some traders will enter a
position just because price has retraced to a rising moving average or established price trendline in
the context of an uptrend. A flag can retrace to a rising short-term moving average and thus trigger
traders to enter positions, driving the price higher, along with providing a good reference level under
which to place stops (the moving average). Although it's not as common, look for the potential for the
parallel trend channel to intersect with a rising moving average.
Fourth, you can draw a Fibonacci Retracement grid from the low of the impulse swing to the high of
