
into a fifth wave. I like that idea, especially when we consider that

Fibonacci relationship such as 1.618 relative to the first wave. I

down up pattern the oscillator wants, and then we can break down

5 is frequently equal in size to the first wave or will develop a

is incomplete? A more complex correction would incorporate the

It is important to know for price projection purposes that wave

Take a closer look at wave iv up in Figure 10.7. What if wave iv

longer time horizons would do for us now.

projections, and Gann. Gann will have the highest weighting.

for a pattern that best fits our market view. Ha! Let's see what the

tive reversal signal we have in place in Figure 10.6, Fibonacci swing

might see us change our time horizon and think we are looking

To determine the target for the price low, I will combine the nega-

of graphing a future path as shown in Figure 10.7. Someone else

a new low, and then we can see what else the market will give us.

ing up to a longer time horizon, rather than going to the trouble

rent fourth wave is incomplete, and then we can expect a decline to

remove some of our subdivisions in the seven-minute chart by mov-

and-fill scenario, so let's go with the following game plan. The cur-

Someone might think it would have been much easier to just

There are no cycle lows on the horizon to challenge the back-

282

•

CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

DJIY-15 min

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 2 8 3

DJIY-60 mm
07/24/98 0=89373 +44

07/24/9S C=89399 +52
93500

1-93000
92500
92000
-91500
-91000
-90500
-90000
-89500
-89000
-88500
-88000
10:45

'7/17

' '7/20 '

'7/21

7/22

7/23

eh'

' '6/12' ' ' ' 6 / 1 8 ' ' '

'6^4'

' '6/30'

'

W

'''7/13'''

'7/17'

'

'7/23

Figure 10.9
Source: TradeStation. © TradeStation Technologies

it is the most direct and displays fewer back-and-fill retracements.

7/24

However, you might notice the pattern of sharp breaks throughout
Figure 10.8
Source: TradeStation. © TradeStation Technologies

wave 5 in this interpretation and the increasing volatility. These
visual clues in Figure 10.8 are harder to read than the indicator

Figure 10.8 is the exact data that was displayed in the sevenminute chart now plotted in a 15-minute bar chart. The labels

signals that we discussed in Figure 10.6, but the wave count is
clearly intact and defines a five-wave structure in this time horizon.

might have been made from the price high to the current low in

down in this interpretation still appears to be the strongest because

offered in Figure 10.9. While we can still see that afive-wavepattern

to plot the X axis. The wave structure that unfolds within wave 3

ute bar chart in Figure 10.6 remain visible in the 60-minute chart

not touched this chart other than to change the time period used

waves in a 60-minute chart? The labels applied to the seven-min-

labels in place that were added to the seven-minute chart. I have

pressed into a 15-minute chart, will it continue to look like five

time horizons in TradeStation, that system will try to keep the

If an extending five-wave pattern can hold together when com-

in this chart are those we used in Figure 10.6. When you change

284

• C A L C U L A T I N G M A R K E T PRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 2 8 5

someday by an unexpected surprise.

the completion of a five-wave pattern and the decline unfolding now

beyond the boundaries of your o w n market, you may be clobbered

was advancing. T h i s prior work shows that we were working toward

and do not review the global picture to see what m i g h t be brewing

still has the o l d labels displayed f r o m the analysis w h e n the market

also happen. I f you get too complacent i n the shortest t i m e horizons

what has just come into view. T h e rally that developed into the h i g h

horizon does not w a r n you that a change is brewing? Yes, this can

this longer time frame, we must consider w i t h m u c h greater interest

completed five-wave rally displayed i n the 60-minute chart. O n the

Figure 10.9 fits into an even bigger picture for this market.

chart w i t h i n Figure 10.10 shows the current decline relative to the

it is becoming clear we must k n o w how this current five-wave rally i n

into a rally that has been f o r m i n g an extending pattern. T h e top right

we now have to step back and look at an even longer time horizon as

Figure 10.9, we want to see how this latest five-wave structure fits

wave w o u l d have been the most likely target for a m i n o r pullback. So

N o w that we have a completed five-wave rally present i n

has already exceeded the previous fourth wave. T h e previous fourth

corresponds to the five-wave rally highlighted i n a box i n the daily

it. W h i l e I work f r o m the smallest b u i l d i n g blocks possible and work

T h e second arrow to the right i n this weekly chart marks the low that

Elliott Wave Principle differently f r o m the way Bob Prechter applies

bottom right, using a compressed x axis, is the weekly D J I A chart.

W h a t you are seeing demonstrated is one of the ways I apply the

upward into a longer time h o r i z o n , he starts w i t h an extremely l o n g
h o r i z o n interpretation and then looks for substructure w i t h i n progressively shorter t i m e frames to c o m p l e m e n t his longer h o r i z o n
view. I take the approach o f b u i l d i n g f r o m the small and w o r k i n g
upward because m y risk management dictates accuracy i n the very
short t i m e horizons. I can be less accurate i n the really big picture
because I a m always revising the underlying components w i t h i n a
market as they develop. I have little interest i n the really big picture
just as long as I ' m trading f r o m the right side over the next few hours
or days. Prechter, o n the other hand, cannot change his view every
few minutes or days because his greater interest is i n the really big
picture that may define major pivots w i t h i n terms of decades. So this
is one way that we apply the Wave Principle differently.
I spend extensive t i m e reviewing t h e bigger picture w h e n m y
short-horizon b u i l d i n g blocks begin to step o f f track or they are out
of sync and challenge the longer-horizon view. But what i f the short

Figure 10.10
Source: TradeStation. © TradeStation Technologies

286 • CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 287

the market ultimately develops. Good night.

ject of a great debate. The debate concerned a triangle pattern, and

developed several pages ago in Figure 10.6. Let's see what pattern

that were used in the past are still present. This pattern was the sub-

has been slipping nicely within our down up scenario that was

10.10. You will see that all the former signals and wave interpretations

but not tonight. It is now 4 a.m. on July 25, and the Globex session

at the window displaying the daily S&P 500 futures data in Figure

I will walk through the approach I use for longer horizon work,

ing us that an expansion to its present scale could develop. Now look

these indices and the underlying S&P 500 sectors themselves. So

from the present high. No wonder our seven-minute chart is warn-

be the next step to study our weekly and monthly bar charts for

the market showed respect to this same mathematical grid derived

need to show you how I analyze long-horizon charts as that would

the remaining arrows bring to your attention prior pivot levels where

I've seen enough to know this could get ugly. To go further, I will

test that we discussed in the Fibonacci chapter. It does pass this test as

is on my screen. I do not need all the answers to trade tomorrow.

that formed in October 1997 would meet the internal relationship

time target. I do not care what this current Elliott wave pattern

and what is being tested is to see if the current high and major low

wave pattern is present that developed into a major Gann price and

data. The weekly chart, bottom right, has a Fibonacci grid added,

we will come back to this chart if the DJIA makes its own triangle.
We will discuss corrective patterns later.
The price high in this chart may in fact be the resolution of a
largefive-wavepattern that began in October 1997. The guideline

Corrective Waves

to bindfive-wavecycles together.

going to lead to a fairly healthy correction with all the evidence

Elliott wave vocabulary to include the corrective patterns that serve

Composite Index when it diverged dramatically with the RSI is

more useful than letter shapes and direction, we need to build our

fourth wave is admittedly very large. The sell signal present in the

futures market. But to discuss these down up patterns in terms

have arrived already within this target zone. But the range of the

in Figure 10.6 is what has developed in the DJIA and S&P 500

will target "the vicinity of the previous fourth wave." Hello. We

The down up market action our indicators warned us could occur

that the Wave Principle provides us with is that afive-wavepattern

more than one individual building block is generally required to

may not be correct. All 1 really care about is that a possible Elliott

terns should look like in a real market environment. In addition,

the high? That interpretation from the October 1997 low may or

these patterns should look like, but it is not as clear what the pat-

tional five-wave pattern marked from the October 1997 low into

cycle. It is clear what a textbook line drawing representation of

averages in this chart will be violated. Also what about that addi-

it difficult to see the patterns that correct a completed five-wave

we therefore know the long-term trend lines marked by moving

structure within price data fairly rapidly, some people may find

show that a bottom is not in place in this time horizon either, and

While most people will develop an ability to see a five-wave

building against the DJIA. The indicators in the daily S&P chart

288 • CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

complete a market correction, and there is some confusion about

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 289

•the following shapo is folded into a cube shape, which picture best represents the

the connector between these individual patterns, the dreaded X
wave. I can understand why the confusion exists because I too had
to struggle with corrections until Dave Allman taught me how to
feel the pattern for an individual structure. Feel a pattern? Yes.
Allman walks you through hundreds of sequential charts to help
you gain a feel of a particular pattern in his Advanced Workshops.
Although I cannot do that here, I can provide some analogies that

• 2

Which of the designs best completes the following sequence?

may help you.
Before we look at our first corrective pattern, you need to know

Q

the level of aptitude you presently have for working with graphic
patterns that change their orientation. I am dyslexic in that tables
of numbers and letters are difficult for me to read. Tabular characters tend to transpose their positions in my mind's eye. I am not

• 3

II ^ [in—
nil 1 1/ Ml

L-iiiii

II

n—

III! J

= liiiiTI
» 4

0

Which of the figures below the line of drawings best completes the senes?

r,

an options trader for that reason because the strike price tables
and calculations for delta, gamma, and theta in tabular form are a
visual nightmare for me. I work with them only on rare occasions

0

D

!/•

Which of the figures below (he drawings best completes the series 9

and with great anguish. But the flip side of this limitation is that
I have a photographic memory and a graphic aptitude that more

9

than compensates for the tabular weakness. The point is that you

«

ilk

may not know that graphic puzzles are difficult for you. Corrective
patterns are just puzzles once you know their underlying building
blocks. Let's try a quick visual test to see where your starting point
might be located.

M E N S A International

http://www.m9nsa.org

Figure 10.11

There are four graphic puzzles in Figure 10.11. You should give

are like graphic puzzles, and markets frequently ask us to "complete

International. Their Web site can be found at www.mensa.org.

similar to a market problem. Elliott wave corrective wave patterns

an introductory sample quiz, considered elementary, by MENSA

why these questions have the solutions they do and why each is very

original guidelines for these questions. These four questions are from

and these questions are from their Mensa Workout page. I'll explain

yourself no more than four minutes to select your answer based on the

290 • C A L C U L A T I N G M A R K E T P R I C E O B J E C T I V E S

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle

• 291

a decline, rotated it 180 degrees, then pasted it to the back of the

accounts. That is the fun part!

Figure 10.7 showed one example where I copied the first portion of

when we "complete the series" correctly, we put money in our trading

relationship that is developing within a market's price structure.

the series." The difference is that our quizzes are more fun because

rotated 180 degrees with each new frame as the stick is alternating

the markets will create for us. The correct answer is B.

The stick simply shows that the orientation of the entire graphic is

long, and the first question in the quiz is far easier than the puzzles

side opposite the stick decreases by one. The correct answer is C.

tion is the type of puzzle an Elliott wave trader is solving all day

number of lines on the side with the stick will increase by one, the

The reason such a bold analogy can be offered is that the first ques-

Elliott wave application when adding indicator signals. While the

environment about as comfortably as I work with options tables.

While this problem is harder than the first, it is very much like an

will be applying R.N. Elliott's wave patterns in a real-time market

actual data in that chart. Question 3 is the same type of puzzle.

If you had any trouble with the first question in this quiz, you

The second question in the quiz shows how you might be

sides. The correct answer requires a final rotation.

it is the only solution offered that fits in the series.

versus a stock index. Nonetheless, it is the same pattern. In ques-

row has lines radiating into the center. The correct answer is E as

may not be a distinct N when you look at it in the data for Euros

while the second only had five? The first row is solid. The second

terns. For example, the up-down-up or N pattern referred to eadier

the series." D i d you notice that the first column had six petals,

interference or noise. Market character can impact corrective pat-

Question 4 is another graphic puzzle asking you to "complete

thrown off balance by different market character that serves as

issue again, and it is no reflection on one's intellect. Please accept

seminar or conference.

bonds are a breeze (ugh). It is a left-brain/right-brain development

am not giving you the answer to this revised question; maybe in a

day long without effort. Even duration and convexity calculations in

relationships have already been defined to extend the series. No, I

your firm who can manipulate delta, gamma, and theta tables all

you would be asked in an actual Mensa test. The mathematical

using this particular instrument. I bet you are the options wizard in

ing for the missing fourth shape?" That would be closer to what

Elliott piano, but most likely you will never learn to play the music

be the next pair of shapes that follow within this series after solv-

you will learn the mechanics of how to press the correct keys on the

easy question. A harder question would have been, "What would

struggled with all of these questions, please accept that with work

circles. The black and white colors simply alternate. This is an

and you will likely have little trouble. At the other extreme, if you

hexagons would be followed by two exterior hexagons with inner

ready to charge ahead into any corrective pattern at full speed

vice versa. The correct answer is A. Two outer circles with internal

How did you do? I f these questions were easy for you, we are

tion 2 when the outer shape is a hexagon, the center is a circle and

indicators from prior chapters will be applied in a real-time scenario.

the orientation of a pattern to correctly identify the mathematical

that this next section may be harder for you, but stick with it as the

Question 3 is one I really like as you frequently have to change

292 • CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

Our indicators told us to look for a price movement that would
look like the letter N. This pattern fits into the family of corrective

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle * 293

higher than would have been possible from a solid surface. All divers must then abide by the force of gravity.

subdivided into afive-wavecycle.

below the board's horizontal level. The resulting displacement will

which can be in the direction of the larger trend, will not be easily

diving board, but then his weight presses the diving board down

will frequently be obvious is that the b-wave portion of the move,

diver takes the same approach by taking a step to the edge of the

our task much easier. The market action will get choppy, and what

hand, the Expanded Flat pattern is the diver on a springboard. The

will always be hard to count. The process of elimination makes

under your feet before your final jump from the edge. On the other

is that the final move to the edge of the platform or springboard

much higher than the start of your first leap because there is no give

for a moment at the top of Figure 10.12. What is important to know

edge of the platform, then jump as high as possible. You do not get

it. Here is the key to this entire pattern: Forget the 3-3-5 references

is a solid structure. You jump up, land with both your feet on the

that the market action is counter to thefive-wavepattern preceding

left of Figure 10.12 is the diver taking off from the platform, which

movements of the "dive," or correction, are labeled a-b-c to identify

into the air. The Flat pattern is the exact same feel. The Flat on the

for a declining market as demonstrated in Figure 10.12. The three

themselves, you saw divers launch themselves from a springboard

pattern can develop in an upward trending market as can develop

ment on television and never watched any of the televised events

board or platform in a weightless environment. Hence, the same

the Summer Olympic Games. Even if you saw only an advertise-

pattern is that the "diver" can bounce on either side of the diving

you ever watched a springboard diving competition? Think back to

The only difference between the diving analogy and the market

patterns called "Flats." They are illustrated in Figure 10.12. Have

ter what kind of three-wave pattern it is. The middle leg within Flat

The spring displacement of the diving board then projects the diver

If it is not afive-wavestructure, it has to be a three. It doesn't mat-

be lower than it was with the approaching step toward the edge.

corrections will be choppy because there is a lot going on. A diver
Flat (3-3-6)

Expanded Flat (3-3-5)

will lift only one knee before planting both feet on the edge of the
board. Why? Because he is about to change his direction of trend and
he needs to stabilize his prior movement before he can be projected
in a new direction. That is exactly what the market is doing. Don't
get hung up on categorizing all the internal squiggles. If you can
sniff out a b-wave, you have it made. The point I am trying to make
is that it doesn't matter if the first leg looks like a five because the
choppy pattern to the edge of a diving board is far more important.
Feel them first in your gut. The problem with representative line

Figure 10.12

294 • CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 295

over, look at this page from the next page while holding the page in

wave patterns used without the aid of other indicators are deadly.

rective pattern under the springboard. Can't see it? Flip your book

pattern's action within a market. In my opinion that is why Elliott

illustrated in Figure 10.12 except that Bonds are forming the cor-

charts for these patterns is that you never get a chance to feel the

Bias problem solved.)

type of tension or inner expectation that we might have when we

put it in MS Paint. The image can be flipped and inverted easily.

Flat patterns in Figure 10.13. The indicators contribute the same

front of a light source. (When you trade take a screen capture and

Look what happens when we add an oscillator to the corrective

know how a springboard should ultimately move when it is overextended from a horizontal position.

In the September Bond chart in Figure 10.13 notice the positive
reversal marked in the Composite Index that forms in the oscillator

the perfect textbook pattern in the real world.

former trend. The character in this 20-minute chart is exactly what

it had to move well past the start of wave a? No. So don't look for

Flat pattern is completed, the Bond market is slow to resume the

does not move much past the origin of wave a. Did anyone ever say

is meant by "different character for a market." Once the Expanded

posite Index forms a double top. Notice that wave b in this example

in Figure 10.13. A very short hme horizon was selected to show what

lows on either side of the asterisk. At the top of wave b the Com-

A 20-minute September Bond futures chart is displayed on the left

end of afive-wavepattern in Figure 10.4. The top of wave c of (4)
