About the author
assim Nicholas Taleb is the founder of Empirica Capital LLC, a
crisis-hunting hedge fund operator, and a fellow at the Courant
Institute of Mathematical Sciences of New York University. He has held
a variety of derivative trading positions in New York and London and
worked as an independent floor trader in Chicago. Taleb was inducted
in February 2001 in the Derivatives Strategy Hall of Fame.
Taleb received an MBA from the Wharton School and a Ph.D. from
University Paris-Dauphine. He is the author of Dynamic Hedging:
Managing Vanilla and Exotic Options (Wiley, 1997).

BY

The Hidden Role of Chance
in the Markets and in Life

NASSIM NICHOLAS TALEE

eg
•
T E X E RE
New York • London

CONTENTS

Preface and Acknowledgments

xiii

Chapter Summaries

xvii

Prologue

1

Mosques in the Clouds

1

P A R T I: SOLON'S WARNING - SKEWNESS, ASYMMETRY,
INDUCTION

One: If You're So Rich Why Aren't You So Smart?
Nero Tulip
Hit by Lightning
Temporary Sanity
Modus Operandi
No Work Ethics
There Are Always Secrets
John the High-Yield Trader
An Overpaid Hick

7

11
11
11
12
14
16
17
17
19

viii

CONTENTS

The Red-Hot Summer
Serotonin and Randomness
Your Dentist Is Rich, Very Rich

-

Two: A Bizarre Accounting Method
Alternative History
Russian Roulette
An Even More Vicious Roulette
Smooth Peer Relations
Salvation Via Aeroflot
Solon Visits Regine's Night Club
George Will Is No Solon: On Counterintuitive Truths
Humiliated in Debates
Risk Managers
Three: A Mathematical Meditation on History

21
22
24
26
26
27
28
29
30
32
34
37
38
40

Europlayboy Mathematics
The Tools
Monte Carlo Mathematics
Fun in My Attic
Making History
Zorglubs Crowding the Attic
Denigration of History
The Stove Is Hot
My Solon
Distilled Thinking on Your PalmPilot
Breaking News
Shiller Redux
Gerontocracy
Philostratus in Monte Carlo: On the Difference Between Noise
and Information

40
41
43
45
45
46
47
48
50
51
51
53
55

Four: Randomness, Nonsense, and the Scientific Intellectual

60

Randomness and the Verb
Reverse Turing Test

56

60
62

CONTENTS

The Father of All Pseudothinkers
Monte Carlo Poetry
Five: Survival of the Least Fit - Can Evolution Be Fooled by
Randomness?
Carlos the Emerging Markets Wizard
The Good Years
Averaging Down
Lines in the Sand
John the High-Yield Trader
The Quant Who Knew Computers and Equations
The Traits They Shared
A Review of Market Fools of Randomness Constants
Naive Evolutionary Theories
Can Evolution be Fooled by Randomness?
Six: Skewness and Asymmetry
The Median Is Not the Message
Bull and Bear Zoology
An Arrogant 29-Year-Old Son
Rare Events
Symmetry and Science
The Rare Event Fallacy
The Mother of All Deceptions
Why Don't Statisticians Detect Rare Events?
A Mischievous Child Replaces the Black Balls
Seven: The Problem of Induction
From Bacon to Hume
Cygnus Atratus
Niederhoffer, Victorian Gentleman
Sir Karl's Promoting Agent
Location, Location
Popper's Answer
Open Society

ix

64
64

68
68
71
72
72
74
75
78
78
81
82
84
84
86
88
89
90
93
93
96
97
99
99
100
100
i03
105
106
108

vii

CONTENTS

Nobody Is Perfect
Pascal's Wager
Thank You Solon

_

108
109
110

P A R T lis MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS - SURVIVORSHIP AND
O T H E R BIASES

111

It Depends On the Number of Monkeys
Vicious Real Life
This Section

114
115
115

Eight: Too Many Millionaires Next Door

117

How To Stop the Sting of Failure
Somewhat Happy
Too Much Work
You're a Failure
Double Survivorship Biases
More Experts
Visibility Winners
It's a Bull Market
A Guru's Opinion
Nine: It Is Easier To Buy and Sell Than Fry an Egg
Fooled by Numbers
Placebo Investors
Nobody Has To Be Competent
Ergodicity
Life Is Coincidental
The Mysterious Letter
An Interrupted Tennis Game
The Birthday Paradox
It's a Small World!
Data Mining, Statistics, and Charlatanism
The Best Book I Have Ever Read!
The Backtester
A More Unsettling Extension

117
117
118
119
120
120
122
122
123
125
127
127
128
129
131
131
132
132
132
133
134
134
136

CONTENTS

XI

The Earnings Season: Fooled by the Results
Cancer Cures
Professor Pearson Goes to Monte Carlo (Literally):
Randomness Does Not Look Random!
The Dog That Did Not Bark: On Biases in Scientific
Knowledge
I Have No Conclusion

136
137

Ten: Loser Takes All - On the Nonlinearities of Life

142

The Sandpile Effect
Enter Randomness
Learning to Type
Mathematics Inside and Outside the Real World
Buridan's Donkey or the Good Side of Randomness
When It Rains, It Pours

142
144
144
146
147
148

Eleven: Randomness and Our Brain: We Are Probability
Blind

149

Paris or the Bahamas?
Some Architectural Considerations
From Psychology to Neurobiology
Our Natural Habitat
Kafka in a Courtroom
An Absurd World
Kahneman and Tversky
Neurobiology
Examples of Biases in Understanding Probability
We Are Option Blind
Probabilities and the Media (More Journalists)
CNBC at Lunch Time
You Should Be Dead by Now
The Bloomberg Explanations
Filtering Methods
We Do Not Understand Confidence Levels
An Admission

139
140
141

149
150
152
153
154
156
157
158
159
160
162
163
163
164
166
168
168

xii

CONTENTS

P A R T I l l s W A X IN MY E A R S - LIVING W I T H RANDOMITIS

I Am Not So Intelligent
The Odyssean Mute Command

_

Twelve: Gamblers' Ticks and Pigeons in a Box
Taxi-Cab English and Causality
The Skinner Pigeon Experiment
Philostratus Redux
Thirteen: Carneades Comes to Rome: On Probability and
Skepticism

169

172
173
175
175
178
179

182

Carneades Comes to Rome
Probability the Child of Skepticism
Monsieur de Norpois's Opinions
Path Dependence of Beliefs
Computing Instead of Thinking
From Funeral to Funeral

183
184
185
187
188
190

Fourteen: Bacchus Abandons Antony

191

Notes on Jackie O.'s Funeral
Randomness and Personal Elegance

192
194

Epilogue: Solon Told You So
Beware the London Traffic Jams

196
196

Notes

197

Index

198

About TEXERE

204

PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

his book is the synthesis of, on one hand, the no-nonsense
mathematical trader (self-styled "practitioner of uncertainty") who
spent his life trying to resist being fooled by randomness and trick the
emotions associated with uncertainty and, on the other, the aesthetically
obsessed, literature-loving human being willing to be fooled by any form
of nonsense that is polished, refined, original, and tasteful. I am not
capable of avoiding being the fool of randomness; what I can do is
confine it to where it brings some aesthetic gratification.
Much has been written about our biases (acquired or genetic) in
dealing with randomness over the past decade. My rules while writing
this book have been to avoid discussing (a) anything that I did not either
personally witness on the topic or develop independently, and (b)
anything that I have not distilled well enough to be able to write on the
subject with the slightest effort. Everything that remotely felt like work
was out. I had to purge the text from passages that seemed to come from
a visit to the library, including the scientific name dropping. I tried to
use no quote that does not naturally spring from my memory and does
not come from a writer whom I have intimately frequented over the
years (I detest the practice of random use of borrowed wisdom - much
on that, later). Aut tace aut loquere meliora silencio (only when the
words outperform silence).

XIV

PREFACE

AND

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I tried to make the minimum out of my direct profession of
mathematical trader. Markets are a mere special case of randomness
traps. I discuss them in an illustrative way as I would jn a dinner
conversation with, say, a cardiologist with intellectual curiosity (I used
as a model my second-generation friend Jacques Merab).
Some acknowledgments: first, I would like to thank friends who can
be considered rightful co-authors. I am grateful to New York intellectual
and expert in randomness Stan Jonas (I do not know any other
designation that would do him justice) for half a lifetime of conversations
into all subjects bordering on probability with the animation and the zeal
of the neophyte. I thank my probabilist friend Don Geman (husband of
Helyette Geman, my thesis director) for his enthusiastic support for my
book; he also made me realize that probabilists are born, not made many mathematicians are capable of computing, but not understanding,
probability (they are no better than the general population in exerting
probabilistic judgments). The real book started with an all-night
conversation with my erudite friend Jamil Baz during the summer of
1987, as he discussed the formation of "new" and "old" money among
families. I was then a budding trader and he scorned the arrogant
Salomon Brothers traders that surrounded him (he was proved right). He
instilled in me the voracious introspection about my performance in life
and really gave me the idea for this book. Both of us ended up getting
doctorates later in life, on an almost identical subject matter. I have also
dragged many people on (very long) walks in New York, London, or
Paris, discussing some parts of this book, such as the late Jimmy Powers,
who helped nurture my trading early on, and who kept repeating
"anyone can buy and sell", or my encyclopedic friend David Pastel
equally at ease with literature, mathematics, and Semitic languages. I
have also engaged my lucid Popperian colleague Jonathan Waxman in
numerous conversations on the integration of Karl Popper's ideas in our
life as traders.
Second, I have been lucky to meet Myles Thompson and David
Wilson, when they both were at J. Wiley & Sons. Myles has vision - he
is the reverse "me too" publisher. He understands that books need not
be written to satisfy a pre-defined labeled audience, but that a book will
find its own unique set of readers - thus giving more credit to the reader
than the off-the-rack publisher. As to David, he believed enough in the

XIV P R E F A C E

AND

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

book to push me to take it into its natural course, free of all labels and
taxonomies. David saw me the way I view myself; someone who has a
passion for probability and randomness, who is obsessed with literature
but happens to be a trader, rather than a generic "expert". He also saved
my idiosyncratic style from the dulling of the editing process (for all its
faults, the style is mine). Finally, Mina Samuels proved to be the greatest
conceivable editor: immensely intuitive, cultured, aesthetically
concerned, yet nonintrusive.
Many friends have fed me with ideas during conversations, ideas that
found their way into the text. I can mention the usual suspects, all of
them prime conversationalists: Cynthia Shelton Taleb, Helyette Geman,
Marie-Christine Riachi, Paul Wilmott, Shaiy Pilpel, David DeRosa, Eric
Briys, Sid Kahn, Jim Gatheral, Bernard Oppetit, Cyrus Pirasteh, Martin
Mayer, Bruno Dupire, Raphael Douady, Marco Avellaneda, Didier
Javice, Neil Chriss, and Philippe Asseily.
Some of these chapters were composed and discussed as part of the
"Odeon Circle", as my friends and I met with a varying degree of
regularity (on Wednesdays at 10 p.m. after my Courant class) at the bar
of the restaurant Odeon in Tribecca. Genius loci ("the spirit of the
place") and outstanding Odeon staff member Tarek Khelifi made sure
that we were well taken care of and enforced our assiduity by making
me feel guilty on no-shows, thus helping greatly with the elaboration of
the book. We owe him a lot.
I must also acknowledge the people who read the MS, diligently
helped with the errors, or contributed to the elaboration of the book
with useful comments: Inge Ivchenko, Danny Tosto, Manos
Vourkoutiotis, Stan Metelits, Jack Rabinowitz, Silverio Foresi, Achilles
Venetoulias, and Nicholas Stephanou. Erik Stettler was invaluable in his
role as a shadow copy editor. All mistakes are mine.
Finally, many versions of this book sat on the web, yielding sporadic
(and random) bursts of letters of encouragement, corrections, and
valuable questions which made me weave answers into the text. Many
chapters of this book came in response to readers' questions. Francesco
Corielli from Bocconi alerted me on the biases in the dissemination of
scientific results.
This book was written and finished after I founded Empirica, my
intellectual home, "Camp Empirica", in the woods in the back country

XIV

PREFACE

AND

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

of Greenwich, CT, which I designed to fit my taste and feel like a hobby;
a combination of an applied probability research laboratory, athletic
summer camp, and, not least, a crisis hunting hedge fund operation (I
had experienced one of my best professional years while writing these
lines). I thank all the like-minded people who helped fuel the stimulating
atmosphere there: Pallop Angsupun, Danny Tosto, Peter Halle, Mark
Spitznagel, Yuzhang Zhou, and Cyril de Lambilly as well as the
members of Paloma Partners such as Tom Witz who challenged our
wisdom on a daily basis or Donald Sussman who supplied me with his
penetrating judgment.

One: If You're So Rich Why Aren't You So Smart?
An illustration of the effect of randomness on social pecking order and jealousy,
through two characters of opposite attitudes. On the concealed rare event. H o w
things in modern life may change rather rapidly, except, perhaps, in dentistry.

Two: A Bizarre Accounting Method
On alternative histories, a probabilistic view of the world, intellectual fraud, and the
randomness wisdom of a Frenchman with steady bathing habits. H o w journalists
are bred to not understand random series of events. Beware borrowed wisdom: how
almost all great ideas concerning random outcomes are against conventional
sapience. On the difference between correctness and intelligibility.

Three: A Mathematical Meditation on History
On Monte Carlo simulation as a metaphor to understanding a sequence of random
historical events. On randomness and artificial history. Age is beauty, almost
always, and the new and the young are generally toxic. Send your history professor
to an introductory class on sampling theory.

Four: Randomness, Nonsense, and the Scientific Intellectual
On extending the Monte Carlo generator to produce artificial thinking and compare
it with rigorous non-random constructs. The science wars enter the business world.
Why the aesthete in me loves to be fooled by randomness.

xviii

CHAPTER

SUMMARIES

Five: Survival of the Least Fit - Can Evolution Be Fooled by
Randomness?
A case study on t w o rare events. O n rare events and evolution. H o w J ' D a r w i n i s m "
and evolution are concepts that are misunderstood in the non-biological world. Life
is not continuous. H o w evolution will be fooled by randomness. A preparation to
the problem of induction.

Six: Skewness and Asymmetry
W e introduce the concept of skewness: why the terms "bull" and " b e a r " have limited
meaning outside of zoology. A vicious child wrecks the structure of randomness. An
introduction to the problem of epistemological opacity. The penultimate step before
the problem of induction.

Seven: The Problem of Induction
O n the chromodynamics of swans. Taking Solon's warning into some philosophical
territory. H o w Victor Niederhoffer taught me empiricism; I added deduction. W h y
it is not scientific to take science seriously. Soros promotes Popper. That bookstore
on 2 1 s t and Fifth Avenue. Pascal's wager.

Eight: Too Many Millionaires Next Door
Three illustrations of the survivorship bias. W h y very few people should live on Park
Avenue. The millionaire next door has very flimsy clothes. An overcrowding of
experts.

Nine: It Is Easier To Buy and Sell Than Fry an Egg
Some technical extensions of the survivorship bias. On the distribution of "coincidences" in life. It is preferable to be lucky than competent (but you can be caught).
The birthday p a r a d o x . M o r e charlatans (and more journalists). H o w the researcher
with w o r k ethics qan find just about anything in data. On dogs not barking.

Ten: Loser Takes All - On the Nonlinearities of Life
The nonlinear viciousness of life. Moving to Bel Air and acquiring the vices of the
rich and famous. W h y Microsoft's Bill Gates may not be the best in his business (but
please do not inform him of such a fact). Depriving donkeys of food.

Eleven: Randomness and Our Brain: We Are Probability Blind
O n the difficulty of thinking of your vacation as a linear combination of Paris and
the Bahamas. N e r o Tulip may never ski in the Alps again. Some discussion of
behavioral discoveries. Some manifestations of probability blindness taken out of a
textbook. A little more on journalistic pollution. W h y you m a y be dead by now.

CHAPTER

SUMMARIES

xix

Twelve: Gamblers' Ticks and Pigeons in a Box
On gamblers' ticks crowding up my life. W h y bad taxi-cab English can help you
make money. H o w I am the fool of all fools, except that I am aware of it. Dealing
with my genetic unfitness. N o boxes of chocolate under my trading desk.

Thirteen: Carneades Comes to Rome: On Probability and Skepticism
C a t o the censor sends Carneades packing. Monsieur de Norpois does not remember
his old opinions. Beware the scientist. Marrying ideas. The same Robert Merton
helping the author start his firm. Science evolves from funeral to funeral.

Fourteen: Bacchus Abandons Antony
Montherlant's death. Stoicism is not the stiff upper lip, but the illusion of victory of
man against randomness. It is so easy to be heroic. Randomness and personal
elegance.

PROLOGUE
4 -

Mosques in the Clouds
his book is about luck disguised and perceived as non-luck (that is,
skills) and, more generally, randomness disguised and perceived as
non-randomness (that is, determinism). It manifests itself in the shape of
the lucky fool, defined as a person who benefited from a disproportionate share of luck but attributes his success to some other, generally
very precise, reason. Such confusion crops up in the most unexpected
areas, even science, though not in such an accentuated and obvious
manner as it does in the world of business. It is endemic in politics, as it
can be encountered in the shape of a country's president discoursing on
the jobs that "he" created, "his" recovery, and "his predecessor's"
inflation.

T

We are genetically still very close to our ancestors who roamed the
savannah. The formation of our beliefs is fraught with superstitions even today (I might say, especially today). Just as one day some
primitive tribesman scratched his nose, saw rain falling, and developed
an elaborate method of scratching his nose to bring on the much-needed
rain, we link economic prosperity to some rate cut by the Federal
Reserve Board, or the success of a company with the appointment of the
new president "at the helm". Bookstores are full of biographies of
successful men and women presenting their specific explanation on how
they made it big in life (we have an expression, "the right time and the
right place" to weaken whatever conclusion can be inferred from them).

2

PROLOGUE

This confusion strikes people of different persuasions; the literature
professor invests a deep meaning into a mere coincidental occurrence of
word patterns, while the financial statistician proudly detects
"regularities" and "anomalies" in data that are plain random.
At the cost of appearing biased, I have to say that the literary mind
can be intentionally prone to the confusion between noise and meaning,
that is, between a randomly constructed arrangement and a precisely
intended message. However, this causes little harm; few claim that art is
a tool of investigation of the Truth - rather than an attempt to escape it
or make it more palatable. Symbolism is the child of our inability and
unwillingness to accept randomness; we give meaning to all manner of
shapes; we detect human figures in inkblots. I saw mosques in the clouds
announced Arthur Rimbaud the 19th-century French symbolic poet.
This interpretation took him to "poetic" Abyssinia (in East Africa),
where he was brutalized by a Christian Lebanese slave dealer,
contracted syphilis, and lost a leg to gangrene. He gave up poetry in
disgust at the age of 19, and died anonymously in a Marseilles hospital
ward while still in his thirties. But it was too late. European intellectual
life developed what seems to be an irreversible taste for symbolism - we
are still paying its price, with psychoanalysis and other fads.
Regrettably, some people play the game too seriously; they are paid
to read too much into things. All my life I have suffered the conflict
between my love of literature and poetry and my profound allergy to
most teachers of literature and "critics". The French poet Paul Valery
was surprised to listen to a commentary of his poems that found
meanings that had until then escaped him (of course, it was pointed out
to him that these were intended by his subconscious).
More generally, we underestimate the share of randomness in about
anything, a point that may not merit a book - except when it is the
specialist who is the fool of all fools. Disturbingly, science has only
recently been able to handle randomness (the growth in available
information has been exceeded by the expansion of noise). Probability
theory is a young arrival in mathematics; probability applied to practice
is almost nonexistent as a discipline.
Consider the left and the right columns of Table P.l. The best way to
summarize the major thesis of this book is that it addresses situations
(many of them tragicomical) where the left column is mistaken for the

3 PROLOGUE

Table P.l Table of Confusion
Presenting the central distinctions used in the book
GENERAL
Luck

Skills

Randomness

Determinism

Probability

Certainty

Belief, c o n j e c t u r e

K n o w l e d g e , certitude

Theory

Reality

A n e c d o t e , coincidence

Causality, law

Forecast

Prophecy
MARKET PERFORMANCE

L u c k y idiot

Skilled investor

Survivorship bias

Market outperformance
FINANCE

Volatility

R e t u r n (or drift)

Stochastic variable

Deterministic variable
PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING

Noise

Signal
LITERARY CRITICISM

N o n e (literary critics d o

Symbol

n o t seem t o have a n a m e
for things they d o n o t
understand)
PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE
Epistemic probability

Physical probability

Induction

Deduction

Synthetic proposition

Analytic p r o p o s i t i o n

right one. The sub-sections also illustrate the key areas of discussion on
which this book will be based.
The reader may wonder whether the opposite case might not deserve
some attention, that is, the situations where non-randomness is
mistaken for randomness. Shouldn't we be concerned with situations
where patterns and messages may have been ignored? I have two
answers. First, I am not overly worried about the existence of
