
Chapter 8: Finding Companies Based on Their Fundamentals
You may notice that valuation metrics aren’t used in this screen. That’s
because growth stocks appear overvalued using traditional metrics like P/E or
price to sales ratio (P/S). These metrics can be incorporated, if you want, to
identify supposedly cheap growth stocks. For example, the previous screen
can be amended to add a criterion that the P/E of a screened security is less
than or equal to the P/E of the overall market.

Applying a growth screen when you want to short
If you’re looking for high-priced stocks that exhibit poor price performance,
consider using this type of screen. Many of the same criteria used in the preceding screen are the same. This one differs in that it looks for securities
exhibiting strong negative earnings growth rates rather than positive ones. It
also looks for companies with poor price performance (via the relative
strength rating). Finally, this screen introduces a new field called “Earnings
Surprise” to help you find companies that are disappointing Wall Street.
Companies often release poor news slowly, which creates a “drip drop”
effect. This is often found in companies with negative earnings surprises.
Following are the figures to use in a growth screen when you want to short:
 Last closing share price ≥ $5
 Average daily volume (last 50 days) ≥ 100,000 shares
 EPS growth (most recent quarter versus year-ago quarter) ≤ –25 percent
 P/E ≥ industry average
 Last quarter earnings surprise ≤ –10%
 Relative strength rating ≤ 20
The first two fields identify “tradable” securities trading above $5 per share
with average daily volume of 100,000 shares or higher. The third criterion
focuses on companies that have stubbed their feet — earnings growth was
negative in the recent quarter, potentially signaling a worsening profit picture
for coming quarters. But you want to short overvalued companies — and
that’s why the fourth criterion restricts your search to companies with P/E
ratios above their industry average. The earnings surprise criterion helps
you identify companies that aren’t managing Wall Street expectations well.
The final criterion indicates companies with poor price performance —
a prerequisite for identifying shares of companies that are likely to fall.

When value is in vogue
Value stocks are characterized by low valuations, first and foremost. Value
screens must home in on the valuation metric via popular statistics like P/E,
PEG ratio, or the price to sales ratio (P/S). You don’t emphasize earnings
growth rates or sales growth in value stocks. Although finding a company

177

178 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
with strong earnings growth rates makes a value stock that much more
attractive, don’t exclude a company for consideration (on the long side of
the market) just because earnings may not be growing rapidly and, in fact,
may be declining.

Using a value screen to find leading value stocks
A value screen is most helpful when value stocks are outperforming the
market. Value stocks are characterized by their industries and their valuations relative to the overall market.
Here’s a value screen you may use to focus on promising candidates by
using the P/S valuation metric (remember, this is just one example, and one
I recommend — you should experiment and develop your own screen for
selecting securities):
 Last closing share price ≥ $5
 Average daily volume (last 50 days) ≥ 100,000 shares
 P/S ≤ 1.25
 Dividend yield ≥ 1.0%
 Return on equity ≥ 18%
 Relative strength rating ≥ 80
The first two fields restrict you to an investment universe that trades often
and above $5 per share. The next ranking restricts you to so-called cheap
securities, as measured by P/S. Value stocks often pay dividends, so I like to
see some dividend payout. But beware of companies that pay dividends of 10
percent or more. These companies are often distressed and about to cut
their dividend payments. Finally, the relative strength ranking helps ensure
you concern yourself only with securities performing in the top 20 percent of
the market. These securities tend to outperform the market in the near term.

Applying a value screen when you want to short
If you want to short value stocks, you can make some tweaks to the preceding screen. Now, you’re looking for poor price performance rather than
strong price performance. You’re also searching for negative earnings
surprises — a sign that the company is disappointing Wall Street and may
continue to do so.
Following is the value screen to use when you want to short:
 Last closing share price ≥ $5
 Average daily volume (last 50 days) ≥ 100,000 shares
 P/S ≤ 1.25

Chapter 8: Finding Companies Based on Their Fundamentals
 Dividend yield ≥ 1.0%
 Relative strength rating ≤ 20
 Last quarter earnings surprise ≤ –10%
The first four fields are unchanged from the value screen on the long side.
These criteria narrow the universe of securities to actively traded value
stocks. The final two criteria, however, identify value stocks that have
faltered. A stock that sports a weak price rank (in the bottom 20 percent
of the market) is a sign that the firm has fallen on hard times or that the
valuation has gotten too extreme. A negative earnings surprise is another
sign that the company is no longer able to meet Wall Street’s expectations.

Assessing your screening results
After completing your screen, you need to have some kind of ranking system
so you can focus on the most promising candidates first and work your way
down. You can rank securities by their P/E ratios, for example, from lowest to
highest if you’re looking for swing trading candidates on the long side of the
market. Or you can rank securities by their return on equity or price to free
cash flow ratios. Ranking helps you push the cream to the top.
HGS Investor allows users to create “combo rankings,” which allow ranking
based on two or more measures (like 30 percent weight on EPS rank and 70
percent weight on P/E).
When identifying a promising swing trading candidate using a fundamental
screen, the right security should jump out at you. You shouldn’t have to do a
lot of equivocating or questioning. Here’s how to analyze your results:
 If the security is one you want to go long in, verify that it exhibits strong
earnings, has a low valuation, and is in a well-performing industry.
 If you’d rather short the security, make sure it shows declining earnings
growth, has a high valuation, and is in a poor-performing industry.

Deciding Which Approach to Use
Which approach should you use? As much as you may hate to hear it, this
question doesn’t have a right answer. The approach you choose is solely
dependent on your style of trading. Do you prefer to identify the ripe
industries that are poised to take off? If so, use the top-down approach.
Do you enjoy developing screens and then examining the filtered results
for promising candidates? In that case, use the bottom-up approach.

179

180 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
Fundamentals-based investors are usually bottom-up oriented. Swing traders
and technical traders are often top-down oriented. However, a fundamentalsbased trader can be top-down, and a technical swing trader can be bottomup. Remember: There’s no right or wrong way. The promising candidates
are the ones that you find regardless of whether you begin with a top-down
or bottom-up approach.
Ideally, a security you find by using the bottom-up approach can also be
found by using a top-down approach. But employing both approaches simultaneously is complex and time consuming. Choose one and stick to it so that
you perfect identifying promising industries (if you’re a top-down type) or
securities that are under- or overvalued on the grassroots level (if you’re a
bottom-up type).

Chapter 9

Six Tried-and-True Steps for
Analyzing a Company’s Stock
In This Chapter
 Getting familiar with the company you want to swing trade
 Examining its financial stability and earnings and sales data for clues to

the bigger picture
 Seeing how the competition’s share price measures up — relatively speaking

A

nalyzing a company is kind of like going grocery shopping without a
shopping list. You can go to the store and look around for what you
want, but without having something in mind, you spend a great deal of time
walking through aisles trying to think whether you need more of this or more
of that. Taking a list along is much more efficient. You know what you need to
get and are less likely to be swayed by impulse buys scattered throughout
the store. (Why exactly are grocery stores selling DVDs en masse, anyway?
Are Americans now buying their favorite movies and their deli meats at the
same time?)
In this chapter, I clue you in to the Six Step Dance. Consider it your grocery
list of what to look for when analyzing a stock you want to buy or sell. These
six efficient, reliable steps aren’t set in stone. I didn’t pick them up from some
secret society that holds the keys to the “right” way to evaluate companies.
Instead, I offer you the process I use when looking at a potential investment
and how to tell whether this method of analysis is right for you.

The Six Step Dance: Analyzing
a Company
Forget the salsa or polka. The Six Step Dance isn’t a real dance. It’s actually
a way to look at a company’s fundamentals to quickly determine whether
shares are over- or undervalued. Table 9-1 shows you how the Six Step
Dance compares to three other analysis methods — forgoing fundamental

182 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
analysis, analyzing stocks via EPS ranking, and using extensive modeling in
Microsoft Excel — in terms of time efficiency, accuracy, and appropriateness
for swing trading.
Note: Time isn’t a luxury for a swing trader. Hence, the list in Table 9-1
isn’t exhaustive. You’re not going to have to call a company’s suppliers or
customers and inquire about their business operations. (I’m not even
sure how much outperformance such an exercise would really add to an
investment portfolio in the long run!)

Table 9-1

Comparing Fundamental Analysis Tactics

Analysis Method

Time Efficiency

Accuracy
Level

Appropriate for

No fundamental
analysis

Very time-efficient

No accuracy

Day traders

EPS ranking

Very time-efficient

Average

Day and swing
traders

Six Step Dance

Time-efficient

Above average

Swing traders

Extensive
modeling

Not time-efficient

Most accurate

Long-term
investors

If fundamental analysis isn’t your cup of tea, you can forgo it at your own
peril. Forgoing fundamental analysis entirely is time-efficient because it
requires no time on your part with regard to studying what makes a company
tick. But because you have no yardstick to measure with, you’ve no idea
whether the shares of a company you buy are expensive or cheap. This
approach is most appropriate for day traders. Day traders trade on news,
volume, and momentum. They pay little attention to a company’s earnings,
balance sheet, or competitive position in the industry.
Earnings per share (EPS) ranking is also time-efficient but with the added
benefit of being somewhat accurate when it comes to selecting securities.
Day and swing traders can benefit from incorporating EPS ranks into their
trading.
Extensive modeling is what Wall Street analysts do. They spend hours
poring over 10Ks, 10Qs, and other SEC filings and use Microsoft Excel to
forecast financial statements three to five years into the future. They call
competitors, suppliers, and end customers to understand how a company’s
products are selling in the marketplace. They even visit the company and
speak with management. The accuracy level’s high here. But as I show you
in Chapter 7, that doesn’t mean analysts draw the right conclusions in their
recommendations.
The Six Step Dance falls somewhere in the middle of the bunch shown in
Table 9-1. It’s time-efficient after you get up to speed on how to do it. The

Chapter 9: Six Tried-and-True Steps for Analyzing a Company’s Stock
analysis of your first few companies using this method is a slow process, but
you should be able to quickly review a company by using the Six Step Dance
before too long.
You don’t need to run through all six steps for every company that crosses
your desk. Many companies will fail one or two of the steps and be thrown out
of your trading idea box. You’re not an analyst with a deadline to meet for
your portfolio manager; you are the portfolio manager. Use your time wisely
and address all the key points before you enter a trade, and you’ll be able to
quickly go through a list of companies and exclude those that just don’t have
promising fundamentals.

Taking a Company’s Industry
into Account
A company’s potential profits depend on the nature of its industry. For
example, some companies require significant start-up costs to launch. Think
about how expensive it’d be to enter the commercial airline market. Today,
Boeing and Airbus make nearly all commercial aircraft. To launch your
own commercial airline business, you’d have to have billions of dollars to
research, design, produce, and market planes. The costs of entering the food
service business, on the other hand, are much lower. That’s why Tommy
from down the street can have a lemonade stand. These cost considerations
play into the economics of a sector, which determine how much profit
potential companies within that sector have.
The first step in your stock analysis is to understand the nature of the industry in which a company operates. Peter Lynch, the legendary Fidelity fund
manager, quips in his book that he’d never invest in a company that can’t be
explained by a child with crayons. Similarly, Warren Buffett never invests in a
company he can’t understand, which is one reason he didn’t participate in
the technology boom of the 1990s. (Then again, he didn’t participate in the
crash of 2000, either. In fact, Buffett’s company, Berkshire Hathaway, actually
bottomed the same month the Nasdaq peaked in March of 2000.)
Swing traders don’t have to be so strict. I’m not asking you to buy crayon kits
or swear off technology investments. But understanding or having insight into
an industry can help you better trade stocks in that market.
The bottom line in analyzing the nature of a company’s industry is to follow
four steps:
1. Understand how the company makes profits.
Does it profit by selling a commodity or by selling business services?
The former is tied to the economy, whereas the latter may be
growth-oriented.

183

184 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
2. Determine whether the industry is growth- or value-oriented.
This way, you have an idea of whether valuations are average, above
average, or below average.
3. Find out what rate of earnings growth is expected for the industry
as a whole in the coming three to five years.
4. Determine which stage the economy is in.
Economic cycles affect sector performance, so recognizing the relative
strength or weakness of the economy at any given time is essential.

Scoping out markets you’re familiar with
Swing trading companies in industries you know can pay off handsomely. For
example, if you’re an avid gamer or have a child who plays video games, then
you probably know that the Nintendo Wii is scoring massive success and outselling its rivals. Shares of Nintendo rose 500 percent between 2006 and 2007
on the success of that console.
Not convinced? Consider the portable music player industry and then look
at Apple’s iPod. These puppies flew off the shelves from 2003 through 2007.
As a result, shares of Apple rose 1,700 percent between 2004 and 2007.
Don’t think that just because your time horizon’s measured in days or weeks
that you can’t benefit from trends that last years. A savvy swing trader buys
the dips of shares of super-successful companies like Nintendo or Apple and
sells the mania.

Identifying what type of
sector a company is in
Every company caters to a specific market sector. As part of the Six Step
Dance, you want to first identify whether the company you’re looking at falls
into the growth sector (characterized by above-average valuations and growth
rates relative to the overall market) or the value sector (characterized by
below-average valuations and growth rates relative to the overall market).
Following are the industries I classify as growth industries:
 Consumer cyclical: This sector includes retailers, homebuilders, auto
and clothing manufacturers, cable companies, and other businesses that
cater to the general consumer.
 Healthcare: Pharmaceutical and biotech companies, HMOs, and medical
instrument manufacturers are just some of the businesses that fall
within this niche sector.

Chapter 9: Six Tried-and-True Steps for Analyzing a Company’s Stock
 Information technology: This market area is composed of software
developers and computer and semiconductor manufacturers, among
others.
 Telecommunications: Cellular service providers, fiber optic wire/cable
manufacturers, and cellphone manufacturers are just some of the telecom companies you may encounter.
And here are the industries that I group into the value sector:
 Consumer staples: This category is made up of businesses such as
grocery stores, food producers, beverage manufacturers, and cosmetic
companies.
 Energy: Drilling companies, integrated energy firms, explorers and
producers, and equipment manufacturers all work within the energy
industry.
 Financials: This market area includes banking companies, Real Estate
Investment Trusts (REITs), investment banks, insurance companies,
mortgage lenders, and so on.
 Capital goods: Aerospace and defense companies, railroad businesses,
farming product and heavy equipment manufacturers, and others meet
the needs of this category.
 Basic materials: This industry involves chemical specialty companies,
paper and steel manufacturers, and related businesses.
 Utilities: The electric and gas utilities you use daily belong in this group.

Recession

Figure 9-1:
Market sectors perform
differently
depending on the
stage of the
economic
cycle.

Economic Growth

Sectors perform differently depending on the economic cycle. Figure 9-1
shows the sectors that tend to perform best depending on the stage the
economy is in.

Capital Goods
Basic Materials
Services
Technology
Early
Expansion

Mid
Expansion

Energy

Late
Expansion

Consumer Staples
Utilities

Transportation
Consumer Cyclicals
Financials

Early
Mid
Late
Contraction Contraction Contraction

185

186 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
Companies in growth sectors usually earn higher P/E ratios than companies in
value sectors. Value sectors often feature companies that pay higher dividend
yields than companies in growth sectors. There’s no right sector to be in. If
anything, different sectors are right to be in at different times.
Be aware that market sectors determine firms’ valuations. For example, electric utilities aren’t known for their earnings growth potential. So don’t exclude
an electric utility from consideration simply because it doesn’t meet some
absolute level of earnings growth you specify. Analyze companies on a curve
based on their industry. Otherwise, you may be comparing apples and
oranges. A 15 percent growth rate for a technology firm can look amazing
when compared to a grocery store chain, but such a comparison isn’t fair.
Just because a sector is a value sector doesn’t necessarily mean that sector
can’t grow earnings at eye-popping rates. Consider the energy sector. For
much of the ’90s, the energy sector was a classic value sector with companies priced at below-average P/E ratios when compared to the market index.
But when energy prices began a magnificent climb early in the 21st century,
the energy sector transformed — temporarily — into a growth sector. So
seeing energy companies trading at 25 times earnings (a P/E ratio usually
reserved for high-growth technology companies) isn’t unreasonable, because
earnings growth rates are up significantly. But in the long term, the energy
sector is a value sector.
Just because a sector is marked as value doesn’t mean profits in that sector
will be less than profits in a growth sector. When growth is out of favor, value
sectors shine.

Quick and dirty analysis for
fundamental-analysis-phobes
Don’t like the idea of fundamental analysis? Are
you a chart reader at heart? If you answer yes
to either question, then get excited because
this sidebar’s going to brighten your day.
Some swing traders care about just one factor:
the ticker tape. They don’t care about what a
company does, what it sells, how it makes its
money, and the like. That knowledge, they may
argue, isn’t going to make them more money
when their time horizon’s measured in days.
Such an argument is half-right. The shorter your
time horizon, the more noise inherent in the
movement of a security’s price. So a company

with amazing fundamentals may still see stockprice depreciation in the short term. The returns
of such companies may be realized only by
holding for months or — gulp — years.
However, this argument ignores the fact that
strong, sustained moves in security prices are
fundamentally driven. And having a working
knowledge of the fundamentals means you’re
more likely to catch these strong moves with
legs. If you only focus on the ticker tape, you
aren’t able to distinguish short-term blips from
a strong trend that’s likely to take prices higher
quickly.

Chapter 9: Six Tried-and-True Steps for Analyzing a Company’s Stock

The solution to this quandary is the earnings per
share (EPS) rank, which tells you how a particular company’s earnings compare to the rest of
the market’s earnings. The ranking appears
each day for all stocks that trade on the Nasdaq
and both the New York and American Stock
Exchanges. It can be found in a second (so it’s
not time consuming to incorporate into your
analysis), but still provides a yardstick to measure a firm’s fundamentals relative to the overall market.
Created by Investor’s Business Daily founder
William J. O’Neil, EPS rank compares a company’s earnings per share growth in the last
two quarters and over the last three to five
years with all publicly traded companies in the
William O’Neil database. Another company that
publishes an EPS ranking is High Growth Stock
Investor (HGS Investor), a top-down software
product that provides quantitative and fundamental data on publicly traded stocks. Like
Investor’s Business Daily, the EPS ranking of
HGS Investor compares a firm’s earnings to all
other publicly traded companies in the market.
HGS Investor computes its EPS ranking by analyzing improvement in a firm’s earnings (by looking at the slope or rate of change of earnings)
over the past three years.
The EPS ranking system isn’t perfect, but it provides a quick snapshot of a company’s financial
health. Earnings ultimately drive stock prices,
and the stronger a company’s earnings growth,
the faster its shares will appreciate. EPS rank is
standardized on a 99-point scale, so the higher,
the better. A ranking of 99 means that the security’s earnings per share growth outperformed
