More from Qwerty at KAT.PH

3/396

ALSO BY MICHAEL LEWIS

The Big Short
Home Game
Liar’s Poker
The Money Culture
Pacific Rift
Losers
The New New Thing
Next
Moneyball
Coach
The Blind Side
EDITED BY MICHAEL LEWIS

Panic

Michael Lewis

Travels in the New Third World

W. W. Norton & Company
New York • London

To Doug Stumpf, gifted editor and
gentle soul, without whom it never
would have occurred to me to tour the
ruins

CONTENTS

Preface: The Biggest Short

I

WALL STREET ON THE TUNDRA

II
AND THEY INVENTED MATH

III
IRELAND’S ORIGINAL SIN

IV

8/396

THE SECRET LIVES OF GERMANS

V
TOO FAT TO FLY
Acknowledgments

PREFACE
THE BIGGEST SHORT

This book began accidentally, while I was at
work on another book, about Wall Street and
the 2008 U.S. financial disaster. I’d become
interested in a tiny handful of investors who
had made their fortunes from the collapse of
the subprime mortgage market. Back in
2004, the biggest Wall Street investment
banks had created the instrument of their
own destruction, the credit default swap on
the subprime mortgage bond. The credit default swap enabled investors to bet against
the price of any given bond—to “short” it. It

10/396

was an insurance policy, but with a twist: the
buyer didn’t need to own the insured asset.
No insurance company can legally sell you
fire protection on another person’s house,
but the financial markets can and will sell
you default insurance on another person’s
investments. Hundreds of investors had
dabbled in the credit default swap market—a
lot of people had thought, at least in passing,
that the debt-fueled U.S. housing boom was
unsustainable—but only fifteen or so had
gone all in, and placed enormous bets that
vast tracts of American finance would go up
in flames. Most of these people ran hedge
funds in London or New York; most, usually,
avoided journalists. But on this topic, at this
moment, they were surprisingly open. All
had experienced the strange and isolating
sensation of being the sane man in an insane
world and, when they talked about their experience, sounded as a person might if he
had sat alone and in silence in a small boat

11/396

and watched the Titanic steam into the
iceberg.
A
few
of
these
people
were
temperamentally ill-suited to solitude and silence. Among this subset was the manager of
a hedge fund called Hayman Capital, in Dallas, Texas. His name was Kyle Bass. Bass was
a native Texan in his late thirties who had
spent the first years of his career, seven of
them at Bear Stearns, selling bonds for Wall
Street firms. In late 2006 he’d taken half of
the $10 million he had saved from his Wall
Street career, raised another $500 million
from other people, created his hedge fund,
and made a massive wager against the
subprime mortgage bond market. Then he’d
flown to New York to warn his old friends
that they were on the wrong side of a lot of
stupid bets. The traders at Bear Stearns had
no interest in what he had to say. “You worry
about your risk management. I’ll worry
about ours,” one of them had told him. By

12/396

the end of 2008, when I went to Dallas to see
Bass, the subprime mortgage bond market
had collapsed, taking Bear Stearns with it.
He was now rich and even, in investment
circles, a little famous. But his mind had
moved on from the subprime mortgage bond
debacle: having taken his profits, he had a
new all-consuming interest, governments.
The United States government was just then
busy taking on to its own books the subprime
loans made by Bear Stearns and other Wall
Street banks. The Federal Reserve would
wind up absorbing the risk, in one form or
another, associated with nearly $2 trillion in
dodgy securities. Its actions were of a piece
with those of other governments in the rich,
developed world: the bad loans made by
highly paid financiers working in the private
sector were being eaten by national treasuries and central banks everywhere.
In Kyle Bass’s opinion, the financial crisis
wasn’t over. It was simply being smothered

13/396

by the full faith and credit of rich Western
governments. I spent a day listening to him
and his colleagues discuss, almost giddily,
where this might lead. They were no longer
talking about the collapse of a few bonds.
They were talking about the collapse of entire countries.
And they had a shiny new investment thesis. It ran, roughly, as follows. From 2002
there had been something like a false boom
in much of the rich, developed world. What
appeared to be economic growth was activity
fueled by people borrowing money they
probably couldn’t afford to repay: by their
rough count, worldwide debts, public and
private, had more than doubled since 2002,
from $84 trillion to $195 trillion. “We’ve
never had this kind of accumulation of debt
in world history,” said Bass. Critically, the
big banks that had extended much of this
credit were no longer treated as private enterprises but as extensions of their local

14/396

governments, sure to be bailed out in a crisis.
The public debt of rich countries already
stood at what appeared to be dangerously
high levels and, in response to the crisis, was
rapidly growing. But the public debt of these
countries was no longer the official public
debt. As a practical matter it included the
debts inside each country’s banking system,
which, in another crisis, would be transferred to the government. “The first thing we
tried to figure out,” said Bass, “was how big
these banking systems were, especially in relation to government revenues. We took
about four months to gather the data. No one
had it.”
The numbers added up to astonishing
totals: Ireland, for instance, with its large
and growing annual deficits, had amassed
debts of more than twenty-five times its annual tax revenues. Spain and France had accumulated debts of more than ten times their
annual revenues. Historically, such levels of

15/396

government indebtedness had led to government default. “Here’s the only way I think
things can work out for these countries,”
Bass said. “If they start running real budget
surpluses. Yeah, and that will happen right
after monkeys fly out of your ass.”
Still, he wondered if perhaps he was missing something. “I went looking for someone,
anyone, who knew something about the history of sovereign defaults,” he said. He found
the leading expert on the subject, a professor
at Harvard named Kenneth Rogoff, who, as
it happened, was preparing a book on the
history of national financial collapse, This
Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, with fellow scholar Carmen Reinhart. “We walked Rogoff through the numbers,” said Bass, “and he just looked at them,
then sat back in his chair, and said, ‘I can
hardly believe it is this bad.’ And I said, ‘Wait
a minute. You’re the world’s foremost expert
on sovereign balance sheets. You are the go-

16/396

to guy for sovereign trouble. You taught at
Princeton with Ben Bernanke. You introduced Larry Summers to his second wife. If
you don’t know this, who does?’ I thought,
Holy shit, who is paying attention?”
Thus his new investment thesis: the
subprime mortgage crisis was more symptom than cause. The deeper social and economic problems that gave rise to it remained. The moment that investors woke up
to this reality, they would cease to think of
big Western governments as essentially riskfree and demand higher rates of interest to
lend to them. When the interest rates on
their borrowing rose, these governments
would plunge further into debt, leading to
further rises in the interest rates they were
charged to borrow. In a few especially alarming cases—Greece, Ireland, Japan—it
wouldn’t take much of a rise in interest rates
for budgets to be consumed entirely by interest payments on debt. “For example,” said

17/396

Bass, “if Japan had to borrow at France’s
rates, the interest burden alone would bankrupt the government.” The moment the financial markets realized this, investor sentiment would shift. The moment investor sentiment shifted, these governments would default. (“Once you lose confidence, you don’t
get it back. You just don’t.”) And then what?
The financial crisis of 2008 was suspended
only because investors believed that governments could borrow whatever they needed to
rescue their banks. What happened when the
governments themselves ceased to be
credible?
There was another, bigger financial crisis
waiting to happen—the only question in Kyle
Bass’s mind was when. At the end of 2008,
he thought Greece would probably be the
first to go, perhaps triggering a collapse of
the euro. He thought it might happen within
two years, but he didn’t have a lot of conviction about his timing. “Let’s say it takes five

18/396

years and not two,” he said. “Let’s say it takes
seven years. Should I wait until I see the
whites of their eyes before I position myself,
or should I position myself now? The answer
is now. Because the moment people think it
[national default] is a possibility, it’s expensive. If you wait, you have to pay up for the
risk.”
When we met, he had just bought his first
credit default swaps on the countries he and
his team of analysts viewed as the most likely
to be unable to pay off their debts: Greece,
Ireland, Italy, Switzerland, Portugal, and
Spain. He made these bets directly with the
few big Wall Street firms that he felt were
least likely to be allowed to fail—Goldman
Sachs, J.P. Morgan, and Morgan Stanley—but, doubting their capacity to withstand a more serious crisis, he demanded
that they post collateral on the trades every
day. The prices he paid for default insurance,
in retrospect, look absurdly cheap. Greek

19/396

government default insurance cost him 11
basis points, for instance. That is, to insure
$1 million of Greek government bonds
against default, Hayman Capital paid a
premium of $1,100 dollars a year. Bass
guessed that when Greece defaulted, as it inevitably would, the country would be forced
to pay down its debt by roughly 70 percent—which is to say that every $1,100 bet
would return $700,000. “There’s a disbelief
that a developed country can default, because we have never seen it in our lifetime,”
said Bass. “And it’s not in anyone’s interest
to pay attention to this. Even our own investors. They look at us and say, ‘Yeah, you
got subprime right. But you’re always out
there looking for these extremely rare events
and so you think they happen more often
than they do.’ But I didn’t go looking for this
position. I was trying to understand the way
the world was working, and this came to
me.” Now that he understood the way the

20/396

world was working, he continued, he
couldn’t see how any sane person could do
anything but prepare for another, bigger financial catastrophe. “It may not be the end of
the world,” he said. “But a lot of people are
going to lose a lot of money. Our goal is not
to be one of them.”
He was totally persuasive. He was also
totally incredible. A guy sitting in an office in
Dallas, Texas, making sweeping claims about
the future of countries he’d hardly set foot
in: how on earth could he know how a bunch
of people he’d never met might behave? As
he laid out his ideas I had an experience I’ve
often had, while listening to people who
seem perfectly certain about uncertain
events. One part of me was swept away by
his argument and began to worry the world
was about to collapse; the other part suspected he might be nuts. “That’s great,” I said,
but I was already thinking about the flight I

21/396

needed to catch. “But even if you’re right,
what can any normal person do about it?”
He stared at me as if he’d just seen an interesting sight: the world’s stupidest man.
“What do you tell your mother when she
asks you where to put her money?” I asked.
“Guns and gold,” he said simply.
“Guns and gold,” I said. So he was nuts.
“But not gold futures,” he said, paying no
attention to my thoughts. “You need physical
gold.” He explained that when the next crisis
struck, the gold futures market was likely to
seize up, as there were more outstanding futures contracts than available gold. People
who thought they owned gold would find
they owned pieces of paper instead. He
opened his desk drawer, hauled out a giant
gold brick, and dropped it on the desk.
“We’ve bought a lot of this stuff.”
At this point, I was giggling nervously and
glancing toward the door. The future is a lot
harder to predict than people on Wall Street

22/396

would have you believe. A man who has been
as dramatically right about the future as Kyle
Bass had been about the subprime mortgage
bond market collapse might easily fool himself into thinking he had a talent for being
dramatically right about all sorts of other
complicated things. At any rate, I was too interested in trying to figure out what had just
happened in America to worry much about
what was going to happen in the rest of the
world, which seemed, at the time, a trivial
matter. And Bass had more or less lost interest in what had just happened in America,
because he thought what was about to happen all around the world was so much more
important. I made my excuses, and took my
leave of Dallas, and more or less dismissed
him. When I wrote the book, I left Kyle Bass
on the cutting-room floor.
Then the financial world began to change
again—and very much as Kyle Bass had imagined it might. Entire countries started to go

23/396

bust. What appeared at first to be a story
chiefly about Wall Street became a story that
involved every country that came into meaningful contact with Wall Street. I wrote the
book about the U.S. subprime mortgage
crisis and the people who had made a fortune from it, but began to travel to these other places, just to see what was up. But I
traveled with a nagging question: how did a
hedge fund manager in Dallas even think to
imagine these strange events?
Two and a half years later, in the summer
of 2011, I returned to Dallas to ask Kyle Bass
that question. Greek credit default swaps
were up from 11 basis points to 2300; Greece
was just about to default on its national debt.
Ireland and Portugal had required massive
bailouts; and Spain and Italy had gone from
being viewed as essentially riskless to nations on the brink of financial collapse. On
top of it all, the Japanese Ministry of Finance
was about to send a delegation to the United

24/396

States to tour the big bond investment funds
such as Pimco and BlackRock—to see if they
could find someone, anyone, willing to buy
half a trillion dollars’ worth of ten-year
Japanese government bonds. “This is a scenario in which no one alive has ever invested
before,” Bass said. “Our biggest positions
now are Japan and France. If and when the
dominoes fall, the worst, by far, is France. I
just hope the U.S. doesn’t collapse first. All
my money is bet that it won’t. That’s my
biggest fear. That I’m wrong about the chronology of events. But I’m convinced what the
ultimate outcome is.”
He still owned stacks of gold and platinum
bars that had roughly doubled in value, but
he remained on the lookout for hard stores
of wealth as a hedge against what he assumed was the coming debasement of fiat
currency. Nickels, for instance.

25/396

“The value of the metal in a nickel is worth
six point eight cents,” he said. “Did you know
that?”
I didn’t.
“I just bought a million dollars’ worth of
them,” he said, and then, perhaps sensing I
couldn’t do the math: “twenty million
nickels.”
“You bought twenty million nickels?”
“Uh-huh.”
“How do you buy twenty million nickels?”
“Actually, it’s very difficult,” he said, and
then explained that he had to call his bank
and talk them into ordering him twenty million nickels. The bank had finally done it, but
the Federal Reserve had its own questions.
“The Fed apparently called my guy at the
bank,” he says. “They asked him, ‘Why do
you want all these nickels?’ So he called me
and asked, ‘Why do you want all these nickels?’ And I said, ‘I just like nickels.’”

26/396

He pulled out a photograph of his nickels
and handed it to me. There they were, piled
up on giant wooden pallets in a Brink’s vault
in downtown Dallas.
“I’m telling you, in the next two years
they’ll change the content of the nickel,” he
said. “You really ought to call your bank and
buy some now.”
I doubt Kyle Bass was ever the sort of person who enjoyed sitting around an office and
staring at a computer screen. He enjoys the
unsettled life. We hopped into his Hummer,
decorated with bumper stickers (God Bless
Our Troops, Especially Our Snipers) and
customized to maximize the amount of fun
its owner could have in it: for instance, he
could press a button and, James Bond–like,
coat the road behind him in giant tacks. We
roared out into the Texas hill country, where,
with the fortune he’d made off the subprime
crisis, Kyle Bass had purchased what amounted to a fort: a forty-thousand-square-foot

27/396

ranch house on thousands of acres in the
middle of nowhere, with its own water supply, and an arsenal of automatic weapons
and sniper rifles and small explosives to
equip a battalion. That night we tore around
his property in the back of his U.S. Army
jeep, firing the very latest-issue U.S. Army
sniper rifles, equipped with infrared scopes,
at the beavers that he felt were a menace to
his waterways. “There are these explosives
you can buy on the Internet,” he said, as we
bounded over the yellow hills. “It’s a molecular reaction. FedEx will deliver hundreds of
pounds of these things.” The few beavers
that survived the initial night rifle assault
would wake up to watch their dams being
more or less vaporized.
“It doesn’t exactly sound like a fair fight,” I
said.
“Beavers are rodents,” he said.
Whatever else he was doing, he was clearly
having fun. He’d spent two and a half years

28/396

watching the global financial system, and the
people who ran it, confirm his dark view of
them. It didn’t get him down. It thrilled him
to have gotten his mind around seemingly
incomprehensible events. “I’m not someone
who is hell-bent on being negative his whole
life,” he said. “I think this is something we
need to go through. It’s atonement. It’s
atonement for the sins of the past.”
Once again a hedge fund manager had
been more or less right, and the world had
been more or less wrong. Now seemed as
good a time as any to pose the question that
had nagged at me for more than two years.
Here you are, I said, in so many words, an
essentially provincial hedge fund manager in
Dallas, Texas, whose entire adult life has
been lived within a few miles of this place.
You speak no foreign languages. You seldom
travel abroad. You are deeply patriotic: your
biggest philanthropic cause is wounded veterans. You hardly know anyone who isn’t

29/396

American. How did it even occur to you to
start spinning theories about the financial
future of these distant countries?
“It was Iceland that got me going,” he said.
“I’ve always been interested in Iceland.”
“But why?”
“Did you ever play Risk as a kid?” he asked.
“I loved playing Risk. And I would always
put all of my armies on Iceland. Because you
could attack anybody from there.”
The belief that he could attack anyone from
Iceland had led Kyle Bass to learn whatever
he could about Iceland, and to pay special attention when something happened in Iceland. He found out, for instance, that Iceland
was held up by geographers as an example of
a country with a special talent for survival
against long environmental odds. “We kept
saying, ‘These banks are out of business.’ But
the government kept saving the banks,” he
said. “And right in the midst of this Iceland
went broke. And I thought, Wow, that’s

30/396

interesting. How, after a thousand years of
getting things right and overcoming all these
natural obstacles, did they get it so wrong?”
I had my answer. His interest had started
with a board game. It was ending with another kind of board game. And Iceland was,
once again, a good place to start.

I
WALL STREET ON
THE TUNDRA

Just after October 6, 2008, when Iceland effectively went bust, I spoke to a man at the
International Monetary Fund who had been
flown in to Reykjavík to determine if money
might responsibly be lent to such a spectacularly bankrupt nation. He’d never been to
Iceland, knew nothing about the place, and
said he needed a map to find it. He has spent
his life dealing with famously distressed
countries, usually in Africa, perpetually in
one kind of financial trouble or another.

32/396

Iceland was entirely new to his experience: a
nation of extremely well-to-do (No. 1 in the
United Nations’ 2008 Human Development
Index), well-educated, historically rational
human beings who had organized themselves to commit one of the single greatest
acts of madness in financial history. “You
have to understand,” he told me, “Iceland is
no longer a country. It is a hedge fund.”
An entire nation without immediate experience or even distant memory of high finance
had gazed upon the example of Wall Street
and said, “We can do that.” For a brief moment it appeared that they could. In 2003,
Iceland’s three biggest banks had assets of
only a few billion dollars, about 100 percent
of the country’s gross domestic product.
Over the next three and a half years the
banking assets grew to over $140 billion and
were so much greater than Iceland’s GDP
that it made no sense to calculate the percentage of it they accounted for. It was, as

33/396

one economist put it to me, “the most rapid
expansion of a banking system in the history
of mankind.”
At the same time, in part because the banks
were also lending Icelanders money to buy
stocks and real estate, the value of Icelandic
stocks and real estate went through the roof.
From 2003 to 2007, while the value of the
U.S. stock market was doubling, the value of
the Icelandic stock market multiplied nine
times. Reykjavík real estate prices tripled. In
2006 the average Icelandic family was three
times as wealthy as the average Icelandic
family had been in 2003, and virtually all of
this new wealth was, in one way or another,
tied to the new investment banking industry.
“Everyone was learning Black-Scholes” (the
option-pricing model), says Ragnar Arnason,
a professor of fishing economics at the
University of Iceland, who watched students
flee the economics of fishing for the economics of money. “The schools of engineering

34/396

and math were offering courses on financial
engineering. We had hundreds and hundreds
of people studying finance.” This in a country
the size of Kentucky, but with fewer citizens
than greater Peoria, Illinois. Peoria, Illinois,
doesn’t have global financial institutions, or
a university devoting itself to training many
hundreds of financiers, or its own currency.
And yet the world was taking Iceland seriously. (March 2006 Bloomberg News headline: ICELAND'S BILLIONAIRE TYCOON "THOR"
BRAVES U.S. WITH HEDGE FUND.)
Global financial ambition turned out to
have a downside. When their three brandnew global-size banks collapsed, Iceland’s
300,000 citizens found that they bore some
kind of responsibility for $100 billion in
banking losses—which works out to roughly
$330,000 for every Icelandic man, woman,
and child. On top of that they had tens of billions of dollars in personal losses from their
own bizarre
private foreign-currency
