
 We have “professional” investors, those who manage many billions, to thank for most of this turmoil. Instead of focusing on what businesses will do in the years ahead, many prestigious money managers now focus on what they expect other money managers to do in the days ahead. 41 

 The market survived the crash, but the theory was badly wounded. How could prices have been rational both before and after? No new information had surfaced to account for such a drop. There had been no sudden change in expected future profits. Indeed, for the people who sold stocks on October 19, corporate profits were not a remote consideration. According to Robert J. Shiller, a Yale economist who surveyed nearly one thousand investors soon after Black Monday, the only news that investors had been aware of that day was news of the crash itself. In place of the cold, “unromantic” investor of Brealey and Myers, Shiller’s respondents reported sweaty palms, rapid pulse rates, and hypertension. On average, they had checked prices thirty-five times. The survey presented a microcosm of crowd psychology in action, with 40 percent of the institutional investors experiencing “a contagion of fear from other investors.” 42 
 In another blow, Eugene Fama demonstrated that the beta of a stock had no relation to its actual return. 43 Nobel prizes had been awarded for treatises on beta; now, it developed, beta was useless. But analysts and academics continued to use it. Definitions were rejiggled here and there, but the structure was left intact. Indeed, as the Economist reported, the theory itself lived on, despite the “awkward” facts. 

 As Charles Goodhart, of the London School of Economics, points out, no one has thought up a better theory. Instead, academics have tried to reinterpret the awkward evidence in less-threatening ways. 44 

 The post-crash edition of Brealey and Myers was unreformed. It conceded, in a brief passage, that Black Monday posed some problems. But on the same page, the authors again advised, “… you can trust prices.” But which prices—of the morning of October 19, or of six hours later? Never mind; the theory was “remarkably well-supported by the facts.” 45 
 In a broader sense, the theory retained its hold on the investing culture. Wall Street pros continued to flock to esoteric new instruments, and advisers continued to counsel extreme “diversification.” Berkshire shareholders, in particular, were continually being advised that they should “diversify”—that is, should sell. J. P. Morgan was trustee for one woman who had virtually all of her money in Berkshire. As her portfolio soared into the millions, her man at Morgan repeatedly (but vainly) urged her to lighten up. It did not occur to him that one investment might be better than another. He affixed a note to her statement to cover himself: “Co-trustee/beneficiary refuses to sell Berkshire Hathaway.…” 
 In a narrow sense, the persistence of the theory was a boon to Buffett’s career. Thousands of his potential competitors were taught that studying securities was a waste of time. “From a selfish point of view,” Buffett wrote after the crash, “Grahamites should probably endow chairs to ensure the perpetual teaching of EMT.” 46 But Buffett would have preferred that schools perpetuate the teaching of Buffett. In academia, he was still an “anomaly,” a “red herring,” a “three-sigma” irrelevancy. “No one,” he wrote of the theory’s proponents, 

 has ever said he was wrong, no matter how many thousands of students he has sent forth misinstructed. EMT, moreover, continues to be an integral part of the investment curriculum at major business schools. 47 

 And Buffett was not. But in the aftermath of Black Monday, Buffett was to give his most convincing lesson ever.

Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist 

   Chapter 18 SECRETS OF THE TEMPLE 

 In the fall of 1988, Coca-Cola noticed that somebody was buying its stock. Roberto C. Goizueta, the chairman, and Donald Keough, the president, were more than mildly curious about who it was. The stock had fallen 25 percent from its pre-crash high, and the mysterious investor was gulping down shares by the caseload. When Keough saw that a broker in the Midwest was doing the buying, he suddenly thought of his former neighbor. “You know,” he told Goizueta with a start, “it could be Warren Buffett.” Goizueta urged Keough to call him. 
 “Well, Warren, what’s going on?” Keough began. “You don’t happen to be buying any shares of Coca-Cola?” 
 “It so happens that I am,” Buffett replied. 1 
 Buffett asked Keough to stay mum until he was required to disclose his stake. In the meantime, he continued to accumulate the stock. By the next spring, Berkshire had acquired $1.02 billion worth, or 7 percent of the Coca-Cola Co., at an average price of $10.96 a share. When the news broke, Buffett passed it off on his Cherry Coke dependency, quipping that the investment was “the ultimate case of putting your money where your mouth is.” 2 Otherwise, he was delphic: 

 It’s like when you marry a girl. Is it her eyes? Her personality? It’s a whole bunch of things you can’t separate. 3 

 A Wall Street analyst termed it a “very expensive stock.” 4 But in a mere three years, Buffett’s stake in Coca-Cola would soar to an astounding $3.75 billion—roughly the value of all of Berkshire when it had begun investing in Coca-Cola. 
 What happened to Coca-Cola in those three years? Income per share rose 64 percent—a heady gain, but hardly enough to justify the near quadrupling of its stock. What did the trick, more nearly, was a sea change in Wall Street’s perception of the business. It suddenly dawned on investors that as popular as Coke was, it had barely scratched the surface in the planet’s most populous regions. The average American was guzzling 296 Cokes a year, compared to only thirty-nine drinks for the typical foreigner. And Coca-Cola was rushing to close the gap, aggressively expanding in markets such as Eastern Europe, France, China, and the entire Pacific Rim. It was already earning more in Japan than it was at home. 5 In places such as Indonesia, where the per capita intake was only four Cokes a year, the potential was vast. Keough crowed, “When I think of Indonesia—a country on the equator with 180 million people, a median age of eighteen, and a Moslem ban on alcohol—I feel I know what heaven looks like.” 6 By 1991, judging from its stock, Wall Street did, too. 
 But what had inspired Buffett to become the biggest single owner of Coca-Cola just before its surge? What had inspired him to invest more—much, much more—in Coca-Cola than in any previous stock? Was it just a lucky dart? Or was it, as Buffett maintained, as close to a sure thing as he had ever seen? 7 
 Many of his previous investments had hinged on specific events, or on values that could be tabulated from a balance sheet. The Washington Post had been selling for a mere fraction of its liquidation value, while GEICO, acquired for next to nothing, had been an absolute steal if one was convinced that the then troubled company would survive. Coca-Cola was different. Buffett couldn’t derive its value from the balance sheet. He couldn’t compute the value. But he could see it. 
 He was often asked, how did he determine the “value” of a stock? Conceptually, Buffett likened it to that of a bond. A bond’s value was equal to the cash flow from future interest payments, discounted back to the present. A stock’s value was figured the same way; it equaled the anticipated cash flow per share, * except that the investor had to fill in a crucial detail: 

 If you buy a bond, you know exactly what’s going to happen, assuming it’s a good bond, a U.S. Government bond. If it says 9 percent, you know what the coupons are going to be for maybe thirty years.… Now, when you buy a business, you’re buying something with coupons on it, too, except, the only problem is, they don’t print in the amount. And it’s my job to print in [to figure out] the amount on the coupon. 9 

 With this notion of value in mind, Buffett tried to find stocks whose “value” was greater—significantly greater—than their price. Buffett’s guides to finding such a stock could be summarized quickly: 

 • Pay no attention to macroeconomic trends or forecasts, or to people’s predictions about the future course of stock prices. Focus on long-term business value—on the size of the coupons down the road. 
 • Stick to stocks within one’s “circle of competence.” For Buffett, that was often a company with a consumer franchise. But the general rule was true for all: if you didn’t understand the business—be it a newspaper or a software firm—you couldn’t value the stock. 
 • Look for managers who treated the shareholders’ capital with ownerlike care and thoughtfulness. 
 • Study prospects—and their competitors—in great detail. Look at raw data, not analysts’ summaries. Trust your own eyes, Buffett said. But one needn’t value a business too precisely. A basketball coach doesn’t check to see if a prospect is six foot one or six foot two; he looks for seven-footers. 
 • The vast majority of stocks would not be compelling either way—so ignore them. Merrill Lynch had an opinion on every stock; Buffett did not. But when an investor had conviction about a stock, he or she should also show courage—and buy a ton of it. 

 Buffett did that. After the Cap Cities deal, in 1985, he sat for three long years without buying a single common stock. † And then, when Coca-Cola fell to attractive levels, he staked a fourth or so of Berkshire’s market value on that one stock. 
 The question was: why then? Coca-Cola’s stock, after all, had been cheaper years before, and the global reach of its drink was hardly new. Robert Winship Woodruff, the Georgia tycoon who became Coca-Cola’s president in 1923, had been determined to make Coke available everywhere on earth. In 1928, it was bottled in China. During World War II, the company persuaded the U.S. government to ferry fifty-nine bottling plants overseas, theoretically to boost troop morale and not incidentally to spread the soda. 10 In 1949, nine Buddhist priests presided over the opening of a plant in Bangkok. Such was Coke’s universality that in 1956, an enterprising Coke publicist set forth to find an innocent to whom he could introduce the drink. He trekked 150 miles into the Peruvian back country, encountered an Indian woman in the jungle, and, through an interpreter, explained his mission. The woman reached into a sack and pulled out a bottle of Coke. 11 
 Buffett was exposed to this wondrous beverage in about 1935. “Of a certainty,” he wrote to shareholders, 

 it was in 1936 that I started buying Cokes at the rate of six for 25¢ from Buffett & Son, the family grocery store, to sell around the neighborhood for 5¢ each. In this excursion into high-margin retailing, I duly observed the extraordinary consumer attractiveness and commercial possibilities of the product. I continued to note these qualities for the next 52 years as Coke blanketed the world. During this period, however, I carefully avoided buying even a single share, instead allocating major portions of my net worth to street railway companies, windmill manufacturers, anthracite producers, textile businesses … and the like. 12 

 Coca-Cola was the sort of “simple” business—one with pricing power and a protective “moat”—that Buffett came to crave, particularly in the 1970s, as his taste began to shift from “anthracite” to franchise companies such as See’s. Coca-Cola’s main business was not selling Coke; it was providing concentrate and syrup to bottlers and soda fountains. Such a business (unlike bottling) required little capital. What’s more, its name recognition was unique, especially overseas, where Coke outsold Pepsi four-to-one. 13 In Buffett’s terms, the brand name was a sort of a universal toll bridge. 
 However, by the seventies, though the drink had blanketed the world, the company was adrift. Sales overseas had been left to the individual bottlers, not all of whom were up to the job. Also, certain cultural proclivities slowed Coke’s acceptance (in France, opponents of Americanization made common cause with vineyards). 14 Even worse, J. Paul Austin, the chief executive, did not know what to do with Coca-Cola’s surplus cash. By mid-decade, that was a $300 million problem. Austin, a handsome, red-haired Olympic rower from Harvard, by then secretly ailing from Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s, 15 invested in a string of un-cola diversifications: water purification, wine, shrimp farming, plastics, whey-based nutritional drinks, and fruits and vegetables. Buffett thought such moves were squandering precious capital. 16 And, indeed, the average annual return on Coca-Cola’s stock during the seventies was a miserable 1 percent. 
 Goizueta, a Cuban-born chemical engineer, took over in 1981 and made Keough, a broad-smiling salesman, his number two. Goizueta’s first instinct was to continue diversifying. 17 In 1982, Coca-Cola branched into movies by acquiring Columbia Pictures, a sideshow that Buffett disliked. 18 Its annual report for that year devoted six pages to its film studio (including a full-page photo of a sunburned Dustin Hoffman) and wine business and only three pages to overseas cola sales. 
 The company also was rolling out diet Coke, which proved to be a winner. Goizueta soon began to shift his focus to the burgeoning battle for the U.S. cola market. 19 He was so caught up in fighting Pepsi-Cola that in 1985 Coca-Cola ditched the syrup formula that had served it for a century and unveiled “New Coke.” This stupendous error paid an unexpected dividend. The old drink was, truly, brought back by popular demand. 
 Buffett switched his drink from Pepsi to Cherry Coke at about the same time. The stream of cherry-flavored fizz seems to have had a catalytic effect, and he began to look at Coca-Cola’s stock with increasing interest. 20 The New Coke fiasco merely made the company more compelling to him. As Buffett explained it, Coca-Cola knew that Americans had preferred the sweeter New Coke, but when people were told about the switch, they wanted their old Coke back. The drink had “something other than just the taste—the accumulated memory of all those ballgames and good experiences as children which Coke was a part of.” 21 As Buffett dug into his research, he read everything on Coca-Cola he could find. One paragraph in a Fortune story caught his eye: 

 Several times every year a weighty and serious investor looks long and with profound respect at Coca-Cola’s record, but comes regretfully to the conclusion that he is looking too late. 22 

 This had been published way back in 1938 (when the stock, adjusted for later splits, cost forty-six cents a share). Even then, Coke had been seen as “a sublimated essence” of all that America stood for; 23 even then, the sound of a nickel dropping down the slot, followed by “a whir and a clunk” and an ice-cold bottle sliding out the chute, had been something to behold. And it had been known, even in 1938, that the potential thirst of people overseas was far from quenched. That was the thing that got to Buffett. 
 By the mid-eighties, he saw that the light had finally dawned on Coca-Cola’s management. Goizueta was divesting the company’s un-cola side ventures. And the Yale-educated sugar baron’s son, who had begun his career at a bottling plant in Havana, was paying more attention to marketing Coke overseas. 
 A case in point was the Philippines, where the San Miguel brewery, which bottled Coke as well as beer, had neglected soft drinks and allowed Pepsi to take the lead in colas. The home office invested $13 million to become a partner in its bottler, and Coca-Cola soon won back two-thirds of the market. 24 
 Spurred by success in the Philippines, Coca-Cola moved to strengthen bottling operations in Brazil, Egypt, Taiwan, China, Indonesia, Belgium, Holland, and Britain. In France, where the per capita was a dismal thirty-one drinks a year, Coca-Cola began a lengthy fight to sack its bottler. Also, the company became more attentive to margins. In Mexico, a big market with subpar profits, prices were hiked and earnings soared. The change in focus was hardly a secret—in fact, it screamed out from the pages of Coca-Cola’s annual reports. The cover of the 1986 report depicted three Coke cans perched on top of the world. Inside, the company hungrily eyed its future: 

 The potential appears limitless, and the Coca-Cola system is aggressively implementing … soft drink availability, affordability and acceptability around the world. 

 The numbers in those reports showed that Coca-Cola’s strategy was reaping a substantial payoff. From 1984 to 1987—that is, before Buffett invested—the total of gallons sold overseas rose 34 percent. 25 Profit margins on each gallon rose, too, from 22 percent to 27 percent, thus providing a double dip. In all, foreign profits surged from $607 million to $1.11 billion. 
 The larger picture was of a company redirected. Whereas in 1984 Coca-Cola had earned just a shade more than half (52 percent) of its profits overseas, by 1987 a full three-fourths of its income was international. And the untapped potential remained vast. In the fast-growing Pacific Rim, people still drank fewer than twenty-five Cokes a year; in Africa, even fewer. Even in Europe and Latin America, where Coke had been served for decades, the per capitas were less than one hundred. 26 Moreover, the profits per drink in those populous and far from sated areas were much, much higher than at home. To Buffett, it amounted to a convincing case that the “coupons” on Coca-Cola would be rising for a very long time. “What I then perceived,” Buffett wrote after his investment but before the stock had really taken off, 

 was both clear and fascinating … What was already the world’s most ubiquitous product [had] gained new momentum, with sales overseas virtually exploding. 27 

 In addition, Goizueta was using the company’s excess cash to buy back stock—the same approach that Buffett had urged on Katharine Graham at the Post. He was also grading his managers according to their return on capital. Sounding remarkably like Buffett, Goizueta, who had no training in finance, would later remark, “I learned that when you start charging people for their capital, all sorts of [good] things happen.” 28 Buffett recognized a kindred spirit. 29 
 By the latter part of 1988, Coca-Cola was trading at thirteen times expected 1989 earnings, or about 15 percent above the average stock. That was more than a Ben Graham would have paid. But given its earning power, Buffett thought he was getting a Mercedes for the price of a Chevrolet. In his own mind, he was not abandoning Graham—far from it. 

 I felt as sure of the margin of safety with Coke as when I bought Union Street Railway at 40 percent of net cash. In both cases you’re getting more than you’re paying for. It’s just that one was easier to spot. 30 

 In fact, every analyst on Wall Street had spotted it. What Buffett knew about Coca-Cola was disclosed in detail in company reports and was understood, intuitively, by the average fourth-grader. Coke, simply, was the best-known brand in the world. But with a couple of exceptions (First Boston’s Martin Romm called Coca-Cola a “strong buy”), the analysts dithered. It wasn’t their research that failed them, it was nerve. Dean Witter’s Lawrence Adelman observed, “Coca-Cola has the potential to expand profits at a rate significantly higher than the S&P 500 over the next five years.” 31 But Adelman couldn’t pull the trigger; he sent his clients a waffling “buy/hold” opinion on the stock. Roy Burry, Kidder Peabody’s man on the beat, also expected strong profit growth, but Burry was dissuaded from recommending the stock by “ uncertainty about the near-term movement of the dollar .” 32 
 A more interesting case was PaineWebber’s Emanuel Goldman, who liked Coca-Cola but preferred the more diversified PepsiCo. 33 Goldman showed the Wall Street disease of paying too close attention to the trees. Pepsi, he noted, could expect a boost from higher Frito Lay prices, better results with Mountain Dew, home delivery of Pizza Hut, a forty-nine-cent meal at Taco Bell, and healthier fare at Kentucky Fried Chicken. Buffett also looked at Pepsi (which would also turn out well). 34 But he did not have the same degree of certainty about pizza, chicken, and tacos. He could reduce Coke’s virtues to a sentence: 

 If you gave me $100 billion and said take away the soft drink leadership of Coca-Cola in the world, I’d give it back to you and say it can’t be done. 35 

 After Buffett invested in Coca-Cola he became one of its directors, but his role on the board was passive. 36 In short, anyone could have bought the stock when he did and gotten the same result. Yet Wall Streeters were dubious that much could be learned from Buffett. They maintained that he got his ideas from a network of tipsters that they, of course, could not hope to crack. As an Omaha broker said, with a knowing air, “Warren had the best network .” This fulfilled the hoariest of Wall Street clichés: that the little guy was no match for the savvy pro. 
 A few of Buffett’s negotiated deals, such as Salomon, did arise from personal connections, and Buffett’s circle of such contacts was extensive. But most of his investments were market-traded stocks. And, in fact, he instructed his brokers not to distract him with their hot ideas. 37 According to Munger, he used his contacts to investigate prospects after he had a lead. 
 Given Buffett’s usual holding period, tips would have been of dubious value—it is hard to conceive of a “tip” that would be relevant five years later. However, the “tips” rationalization absolved others who had not thought of the same ideas, and who resented Buffett’s success. Once, when an investor put in an order for yet more Berkshire, his Manhattan broker snapped, “ Warren makes mistakes, too.” It is hardly a surprise that Buffett was resented, since he made a point of mocking the complex “tools” on which other money managers relied. And some of these others, being less than anxious to slog through annual reports, were reluctant to believe that Buffett found his stocks the way he said he did. One financial editor inquired about Buffett’s “secret”—a black box, perhaps, hidden in the bowels of Kiewit Plaza? 
 Buffett kept insisting that he had no mysterious shortcut, no crystal ball. Once, a broker who was buying a house asked for his outlook on interest rates. Buffett jokingly replied, “Only two people understand that. Both of them live in Switzerland. However, they’re diametrically opposed to each other.” 38 
 Most of what Buffett did, such as reading reports and trade journals, the small investor could also do. He felt very deeply that the common wisdom was dead wrong; the little guy could invest in the market, so long as he stuck to his Graham-and-Dodd knitting. 39 But people, he found, either took to this approach immediately or they never did. Many had a “perverse” need to make it complicated. 40 This truism extended to Buffett’s family. 
 His elder sister Doris once tried to juice up her income by selling “naked options”—precisely the sort of market roulette that Buffett had scorned. Come Black Monday, Doris, who rather liked living on the edge, found herself $1.4 million in debt. 41 Warren agreed to reorganize a family trust that he administered for Doris, so that she would now get a monthly stipend from it. But he flatly refused to pay off the debt—leaving Doris no choice but to default. She was badly hurt by Warren’s refusal, and he was hurt by her subsequent spell of coolness. But bailing out a speculator went against his grain—and Warren would not break his rules, not even for his sister. 
 Of course, following Graham and Dodd would not make Doris—or most anyone else—as gifted as Buffett. At the mere mention of a stock—any stock—he could spit back a fact-filled summary of it, just as the young Warren had once recited from memory the populations of cities. Similarly, his ability for figures left his colleagues stunned. 42 (Buffett explained his penchant for mental math by saying that if he didn’t understand a figure in his head , he didn’t “understand” it; thus, no computer.) 43 
 People habitually referred to his mental processes in mechanical terms. Doris, herself, reflexively remarked how quickly information appeared on Warren’s “screen”; Mike Goldberg spoke of his “iterating” insurance policies through his memory. This agile sifting of mental index cards enabled him to recognize past patterns and, through untold repetitions, develop an investing instinct. Alas, the average investor is not endowed with a mental calculator or an on-line encyclopedia. 
 This does not imply that Buffett could not be a useful model. (A clinic with Ted Williams should make one a better hitter, even if not a .400 hitter.) Anyone is free to adopt the approach of evaluating a stock as a share of a business, rather than a blip on a screen, just as anyone is free to trade options. Munger said the Buffett style was “perfectly learnable.” 
