
The Rise of Currencies
The two most recent crises have focused attention on the foreign exchange market. In many ways, currencies are one of the best confidence
indicators for a country. When foreign investors are optimistic about the outlook for a country, they tend to buy the currency and use those funds to
invest in domestic stocks or bonds. However, when they grow concerned for economic, political, or social reasons, they will sell their foreign
holdings, dump the currency, and move the money home. When this happens on a large scale, it can cause a major move in the currency and force
the government to address the situation.
If a currency becomes too weak, as the euro did during the sovereign debt crisis, there are concerns about inflationary pressures. If it becomes
too strong, exporters cry for help because it reduces the competiveness of their goods. Extreme moves in currencies can also affect the earnings of
multinational companies. For example, if a company has a lot of accounts payable in other currencies, a strong local currency will reduce the value
of the accounts payable while a weak local currency will increase it. At the same time, exporters typically love a weak currency and despise a

strong one.
Currencies matter in different ways to different people; we will discuss this in further detail in Chapter 2. The subprime crisis that began in the
United States and the European sovereign debt crisis may have lifted currencies from the business news to the headline news, but the popularity of
currencies is not particularly new. Over the past 10 years, the forex market has grown significantly. Back in 2004, the Bank for International
Settlements reported that the daily turnover in the forex market was approximately $1.9 trillion. When they released their triennial survey again in
2010, volume had increased to $4 trillion. For the first time ever, banks also did more transactions with “other financial institutions” (think retail forex
brokers) than with other banks. Therefore, a large part of the growth in foreign exchange can be attributed to individual investors discovering the
opportunities in forex trading.

Turning Headlines into Opportunities
If history tells us anything (and we know it does), there will be more crises, large and small, in various parts of the world over the next 10 years.
When they occur, you will have the choice of being on the offense or the defense. So as my Aunt Judy always asked, how will you turn lemons into
lemonade? Hindsight is always 20/20; in retrospect, it is easy say that dot-com companies with zero to negative earnings did not deserve their skyhigh valuations or that people would eventually stop paying astronomical prices for homes, especially as inventory flooded the market and
consumers became overburdened with debt. The key is to not get caught up in the madness and be able to think rationally about whether the price
of the asset is appropriate given the risks and valuations.
Of course, this is easier said than done, but not impossible if we consider the different ways that a small investor could have capitalized on the
recent crises.
Let’s start off with the subprime crisis. As we all know, the crisis caused a number of financial institutions to fail. Some were seized by the
government; others were rescued, sold to competitors, or forced into bankruptcy. Although some people may argue that it is immoral to profit from
someone else’s misfortune, that was how Soros, Paulson, and Templeton made a large part of their wealth. Exhibit 1.1 is a daily chart illustrating
how the U.S. dollar and the Japanese yen—known as the USD/JPY currency pair—behaved after the failure of major financial institutions. The first
arrow points to the time when Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were seized. The second arrow indicates when Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy.
The third arrow points to when Washington Mutual collapsed, and the fourth indicates when the U.S. government was forced to rescue Citigroup. As
you can see, in each case the currency pair extended its losses. Even rescues or acquisitions failed to lift the dollar on the fear that more trouble
would come. Those investors who sold dollars against the Japanese yen during the subprime crisis were handsomely rewarded.

Exhibit 1.1 The Reaction of the U.S. Dollar and Japanese Yen to the Failure of Major Financial Institutions

Source: GFT Dealbook 360.

Moving on to the European sovereign debt crisis, as the events in Greece unfolded and it became more apparent that the country was headed
for financial trouble, credit rating agencies began to slash its debt rating. A credit rating agency is a company that assigns credit ratings that are
meant to show the likelihood of an issuer defaulting on its debt. Ratings are given in the form of letter grades, almost like a report card. When a

country’s rating is downgraded, it means that, for one reason or another, they’ve become more likely to default on their debt. In October 2009, one
of the leading credit rating agencies, Fitch Ratings, downgraded Greece’s sovereign debt rating to A–, triggering what later turned into a 20
percent sell-off in the euro (EUR) against the U.S. dollar. As in the case of the USD/JPY, each time Greece or another sick country within the
Eurozone was downgraded, the EUR/USD sold off. These downgrades set off waves of concern among investors because it meant that the country
was moving closer and closer to defaulting on its loans. By April 2010, Greece’s debt ratings had been slashed to junk levels. One way to capitalize
on the crisis would have been to turn the headlines into trading opportunities—or, in other words, sell when the panic begins because one
downgrade will often be followed by another.
Even if you don’t feel comfortable turning the stories into opportunities and prefer to trade on chart levels, you could have capitalized on the
moves in both currency pairs by selling the breaks of key levels. For example, 105, 100, and 95 were all important psychological levels in the
USD/JPY. The same is true for 1.45, 1.40, 1.35, and 1.30 in the EUR/USD.
Currencies are trending in nature, especially during times of panic, and therefore, joining a move may yield better results than fading it. If you are
not patient enough to sit with a trade for long, you can consider something shorter term in the direction of the prevailing market sentiment. For
example, after a downgrade, you may want to look for opportunities to sell the EUR/USD for a short-term potential profit, assuming that trouble
begets more trouble with a stop to limit the losses.

Get It? Got It? Good!
Financial crises are becoming increasingly common.
But not everyone is a loser! Legendary investors like Sir John Templeton have shown that there are bargains to be found during times of crisis.
Some professional money managers such as George Soros and John Paulson were smart to anticipate recent market meltdowns and profited big-time.
In times of crisis, currency trading is a way to turn headlines into opportunities.

Chapter Two

Rubles and Bahts and Euros—Oh, My!
Forex Isn’t as Foreign as You Think
The World Showcase in Disney World’s Epcot Center is a series of intricately built pavilions that represent 11 countries, giving visitors a taste of
different cultures and culinary specialties. It was built in 1982, 17 years before the euro, the official currency of the Eurozone, was even introduced,
and yet it manages to capture the heart and spirit of the euro.
In the World Showcase, you can walk from one pavilion or “country” to another without a passport, which makes it easier to visit and shop in more
than one “country” during a single trip. Furthermore, the same currency can be used to buy something in Japan or Italy without having to worry about
exchange rates. In the same manner, the euro provides these benefits for its members by making it easier for companies and consumers in
different countries to do business with each other by eliminating exchange rate conversions and unnecessary paperwork. As a result, intra-region
trade has increased significantly. If you have been to the World Showcase, then you can understand why the euro or a single currency is so
important. Imagine how cumbersome it would be to exchange currencies and carry a passport every time you traveled from New York to California
or Florida.
Even if you have never been to the World Showcase, the forex market may not be as foreign as you think, particularly if you have ever traveled
abroad. It is no secret that the worst place to exchange your money is at the airport. Most travelers who exchange their money at the airport are
desperate for some local currency for a taxi to their hotels. Savvier travelers will either use credit cards because the exchange rate is slightly more
favorable or take cash out of the ATM. However, even then, foreign exchange fees may be added to the transactions. Being a seasoned traveler, I
know that the smartest thing to do is to exchange your money at foreign exchange shops downtown where competition is usually heavier and the
exchange rates are better.
On a recent business trip to Australia, I compared different exchange rates. At the time, the market rate for the Australian dollar and the U.S.
dollar was 0.8750 and of course I did not expect to get that from anyone. At the airport in Sydney, they were offering currency conversion from U.S.
dollars to Australian dollars at a rate of 93 cents per dollar. In the central business district, there were vendors offering exchange rates of 89 cents
while my American Express card charged me a rate of 0.9045 with a few bucks tacked on for fees.
In today’s global markets, keeping on top of the movements in exchange rates has become extremely important. In this chapter, we will explore
how currency fluctuations affect companies, investors, property owners, and anyone who does business overseas.

Waking Up the “Local” Investor
If you are an American who invests exclusively in the U.S. stock market and could care less about exchange rates, it may be time to wake up.
Following exchange rate movements can help you make better investment decisions. During the month following the end of each business quarter,
everyone from bank analysts to longer term investors are scouring data on existing and new product lines for any information on the quarter’s
potential sales and profits. Most likely, unless they have inside information, everyone in the market is looking at the same news releases. However,
there is one consideration that rarely pops into the mind of the American investor but can mean the difference between a good quarter and a bad
one—the impact of currency fluctuations on a company’s bottom line. Too many times, companies that are expected to report good earnings for the
quarter disappoint due to either a currency’s depreciation or appreciation during those three months, as good sales are offset by adverse
conversion rates.
Currencies affect different types of U.S. companies in different ways. McDonalds, Burger King, and Starbucks, for example, have franchise
businesses where they license the right to operate their stores to local partners abroad in return for a part of their revenue. Since this revenue is
earned in foreign currencies, it has to be converted back to U.S. dollars. Therefore, a strong U.S. dollar tends to hurt their profitability while a weak
U.S. dollar promotes it. Imagine that McDonalds sells Big Macs in the U.K. for 2 British pounds each at an exchange rate of 1.80. For U.S.-based
McDonalds, who doesn’t change its international prices often and franchises some but not all of its U.K. operations, that would mean revenue of
$3.60 per Big Mac. Now suppose that the British pound weakens 20 percent, bringing the exchange rate down to 1.44. The 2 British pounds that
McDonalds charges for each Big Mac now equals revenue of only $2.88 instead of $3.60.
On a per Big Mac basis the difference is small, but compounded by the millions of Big Macs sold abroad, you can see how a strong dollar can
hurt companies such as McDonald’s, which earned 40 percent of its revenue from Europe in 2009. In the first quarter of 2010, McDonalds
competitor Burger King said they expect foreign exchange to shave earnings by up to two pennies per share. Exhibit 2.1 illustrates how a 20
percent rise and fall in the value of the British pound and U.S. dollar exchange rate can affect the amount of money McDonald’s makes per Big
Mac.

Exhibit 2.1 The GBP/USD Exchange Rate Impacts McDonalds Revenues
Price of Big Mac in Pounds Exchange Rate Revenue in U.S. Dollars
2£
2£

Rises to 2.16
1.80

$4.32
$3.60

2£

Falls to 1.44

$2.88

Similarly, technology firms with a big dependence on international sales such as Google, Priceline, and Expedia suffer when the U.S. dollar is
strong because it reduces the value of their foreign earnings. In general, when the dollar becomes too strong, U.S. multinational companies are
faced with the tough dilemma of raising prices to keep margins intact or holding prices and taking a cut in profitability. With a strong dollar, we tend
to see more disappointments than surprises in U.S. earnings, but with a weak dollar, there tends to be more positive than negative surprises (i.e.,
each Big Mac sold abroad translates into more U.S. dollars).
Companies with extensive imports or exports are also impacted by currency fluctuations. In general, U.S. companies that have significant
accounts payable in foreign currencies (such as importers) usually benefit from dollar strength and are hurt by dollar weakness. The companies that
have a significant amount of accounts receivable denominated in foreign currencies (such as U.S. exporters) usually benefit from dollar weakness
and suffer when the dollar is strong. The industries with the greatest foreign sales exposure are energy, technology, and consumer staples.
Companies that produce and export commodities also benefit from a weaker dollar because it drives commodity prices higher. There are
countless other examples of how currencies can affect earnings and savvy equity investors could find an edge by monitoring currency movements
during the quarter in addition to sales reports. The same theory applies even if your domestic market is not the United States.

Dabbling in Foreign Markets
For people who are savvy enough to invest in foreign markets, exchange rate movements are even more important because movements in
exchange rates can either compound returns or diminish them.
Imagine you were an American investor looking to invest in Asia back in 2009 because you believed Asia would be fairly immune to the financial
crisis. You decided to invest in the Singapore market because Singapore is considered the Switzerland of Asia, everyone speaks English, the
government is stable, and it is a well-developed economy. You bought shares of Singapore Airlines (SIA) because you believed that travel to Asia
would increase due to the country’s tourism initiative and because the airline has a fantastic reputation for its service and quality. In January 2009,
you bought 100 shares of SIA at S$10.50 per share for a total cost of 10,500 Singapore dollars. At the time, the U.S. dollar/Singapore dollar
exchange rate was approximately 1.46, which meant that the cost in U.S. dollars was $7,191. In December 2009, you cashed in on your investment
and returned your funds home. By then, SIA shares were worth approximately S$14.75, which put the value of your total investment at S$14,750. In
one year, you would have made a whopping 40.47 percent! When you converted the Singapore dollars back into U.S. dollars, the bank gave you
$10,461. A 40.47 percent return on $7,191 should have given you approximately US$10,102, not US$10,461. It seems like a bank error, but it
wasn’t. Between January and December of that year, the Singapore dollar strengthened against the U.S. dollar, earning you another 5 percent
because of exchange rate fluctuations!
But exchange rates can rise just as easily as they can fall. In the first six months of 2010, the euro fell 14.5 percent against the U.S. dollar. If an
American invested in the German stock market at the beginning of the year, their return in the equity market would have been negative 2.56
percent, but actual losses in U.S. dollar terms would have been closer to 17 percent due to exchange rate fluctuations.
Investors with offshore bank accounts or money abroad also need to know about exchange rates. We have all watched movies about
international spies who have money in bank accounts around the world. Most of our lives are not that glamorous but maybe you know someone with
a bank account offshore, or in another country. My good friend Marcia moved to London for work last year and opened a bank account in the U.K.
She kept her account back home because her work contract is only for three years, but for now she is paid in British pounds and her paychecks are
deposited into her London bank account. Her salary is GBP 50,000 a year.
Recently, I received a frantic call from Marcia, who was desperate for some advice. Her career doesn’t require that she follow exchange rates,
but she had overheard coworkers in the U.K. complaining about the cost of traveling to the United States. Marcia wondered why, so she asked a
few questions and found out that the British pound had fallen 7.5 percent against the U.S. dollar, which meant that she received an implicit 7.5
percent pay cut because of exchange rates, or the equivalent of roughly US$5,000 (at an exchange rate of US$1.50 per British pound). Although
she was worried about the recent drop, she was even more concerned about the possibility of further depreciation in the pound, which would have
made her wages worth less in U.S. dollar terms. One of the things that Marcia could have done was use option contracts to protect against a move
lower in the pound or to convert her money back into U.S. dollars on a more regular basis. For other people who may have made permanent moves
to another country because of immigration or other factors and kept a bank account in their home country, the same logic applies. If there is a big
currency move, the value of your savings in the foreign bank account will be affected.
It has also become more common for investors to dabble in real estate in different countries. For example, the Chinese are flush with cash these
days. It has become so popular for the Chinese to take trips to the United States, Canada, or Australia to visit property that there is a new term
known as “real estate tourism.” Outside of the United States, foreign property investment is extremely popular. I attended a property expo in
Australia once where Americans were selling land and homes in Florida at discounted rates.
When a currency is weak, there tends to be more property investment by foreigners; when it is strong, foreign investors will shy away because of
the increased premium created by the higher exchange rate. At the same time there are also Americans who have property abroad—for example,
you may be collecting rent on an apartment that you own in Paris near the Arc de Triomphe and the tenant wires you money in euros that are then
converted into U.S. dollars by your bank. In that case, if the U.S. dollar strengthens, you would likely receive fewer dollars when the euros are
converted, but if it weakens, then you would probably receive more U.S. dollars.

Small-Business Owners and Financial Officers
Foreign exchange risk also affects anyone who conducts international business or trading activity, including small businesses and financial officers
of medium- to large-sized companies. Buying or selling goods or services denominated in foreign currencies can immediately expose a company
to foreign exchange risk.
For example, one of my nephew’s favorite stores is Kid Robot in New York City. Unlike regular toy stores, this store sells quirky toys imported
directly from Japan. If the store does not use a distributor, then it most likely has to grapple with the regular fluctuations in the Japanese yen. If the
yen rises in value, the toys that they import to New York become more expensive. This may also be true for your local video rental store that carries
a large selection of foreign films. If the films are imported directly from the respective country, then its price could be affected by exchange rates.

Small businesses usually write off the movements in currencies as a cost of doing business, but large companies may choose to hedge their
exposures because they are importing hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of products. The payment may be due immediately or a few months
later depending upon the terms. If the payments are delayed, it is even more important to hedge foreign risk. Take the example of a U.S. company
that purchased AU$100,000 worth of products from an Australian company to be paid six months later. At that time, the chief financial officer
allocated US$80,000 for the payment (which was the value of the contract when it was drawn up), but six months later finds that US$85,000
converts to only $88,888 Australian dollars, which means the company needs to scramble to find another AU$11,112 to pay the bill.
What about a U.S. company that sells all American widgets abroad? How will they be affected by exchange rates? Let’s assume a smallbusiness owner sells an average of 10,000 widgets per year at a price of 20 euros per widget. At the beginning of the year, the EUR/USD
exchange rate is 1.30 and so you, the business owner, anticipated revenue to be US$26,000. Exhibit 2.2 shows how revenues would be affected
by a 10 cent change in the exchange rate. If the exchange rate fell by 10 cents, revenue would be $20,000 less than expected, but if it rises by 10
cents, it would $20,000 more. Since exchange rates can rise just as easily as they can fall, it’s absolutely essential for companies that import and
export any sizeable amount of products to monitor the foreign exchange markets and manage the risk.

Exhibit 2.2 How Changes in the EUR/USD Exchange Rate Affects Revenues

As the number of foreign exchange products increases, so do the ways to hedge foreign exchange risk. The most common way for a company to
hedge away the risk is through the use of derivative contracts such as forwards, futures, or options. A forward contract is an agreement to exchange
a specific amount of currency at a specific rate on a specific date. A futures contract acts in the same way except that futures contracts are
standardized and rarely customized. An option, on the other hand, can be standardized (traded on an exchange) or purchased over the counter and
customized to the exact business requirements. Options give the buyer the right but not the obligation to buy or sell the currency at a specified rate.
If the rate is not advantageous, the buyer can abandon the transaction. Futures and options are not suitable for everyone. Carefully consider
whether trading is appropriate for you in light of your experience, objectives, financial resources, and other relevant circumstances.
Some companies may also opt for a money market hedge that can be similar to an immediate forex conversion if the company has the money
available. If they do not, they can borrow in their local money market and use those funds to buy a money market security in the foreign currency with
the same maturity (borrowing costs and money market rate will apply) and settle both at the end of the period.
