
Forex for Beginners

Conclusion
If the possibilities seem overwhelming, consider that the majority of retail
forex investors stick to trading ETFs or major currency pairs in the spot
market. While such a choice curtails possibility and carries limitations, it
greatly simplifies the decision-making process. Ultimately, forex can be as
simple or as complex as you’d like. If you want to trade exotic currency
pairs, rare types of options, or even swaps, there are plenty of brokers that
will be more than happy to facilitate such trades for you. If you were initially
attracted to forex by its lure of simplicity, however, it’s probably best to stick
to the 100 or so currency pairs that most retail brokers offer, or to a
comparably-sized array of currency ETFs.

55

56

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?

CHAPTER

3
What Makes
Currencies
Move?
An Exploration of the Key Forces
That Cause Currencies to Fluctuate
A popular currency pair might fluctuate in price 18,000 times per day, and by
10%–20% per year.1 This implies not only a constant shift in the
supply/demand equilibrium for that currency pair, but also continuous
changes in the financial-economic relationship between those currencies. In
this chapter, I will introduce a framework for understanding these
fluctuations, both in the short term and the long term.

Fixed vs. Floating
You should recall from the discussion of history in Chapter 1 that fluctuating
currencies are actually a modern economic development. In fact, there are
still a handful of currencies that are fixed by their central banks and fluctuate
1 International Monetary Fund (IMF), “International Capital Markets,” World Economic

and Financial Surveys, September 1998, www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/icm
/icm98/pdf/file01.pdf.

58

Chapter 3 | What Makes Currencies Move?
only slightly, if at all. There are currently more than 50 currencies that fall
into this category, most of which are issued by countries in the Middle East,
Africa, or the Caribbean region, and are of little consequence to the global
economy.
The advantage of dealing in currencies with fixed exchange rates is stability.
For example, it is much easier for importers and exporters to make long-term
business decisions if they know with reasonable certainty what their
respective home currencies will be worth (relative to other currencies) five
years from now. More to the point, an artificially cheap currency provides an
invaluable boon to domestic exporters, which are able to compete at more
favorable terms with exporters from other countries.
The main disadvantage of a fixed currency is that it deprives the issuing
central bank of monetary independence. In order to uphold a currency peg, a
central bank must closely align its monetary policy with the currency to
which it is fixed in order to prevent disequilibrium and consequent unwanted
attention from speculators. In addition, currency pegs are very expensive to
maintain. Central banks must buy hundreds of billions of dollars (or an
equivalent amount of another major currency) on the open market every year
in order to constantly preserve the peg. They must further reinforce this peg
with strict capital controls so as to limit the impact of inflows and outflows
of capital on the exchange rate.
In most cases, currency pegs are extremely controversial because they
promote global economic imbalances. For example, China’s economic rise
and the United States’ growing trade deficit have been blamed on the fixing
of the Chinese yuan to the US dollar. (It has also been the subject of a tense
dispute between the two countries, and could eventually ignite a full-scale
trade war!) As a result, currency pegs are mainly used by countries with
unstable economies. The lone exceptions to this rule are Hong Kong (whose
importance as a trading hub dictates that its currency be pegged to the US
dollar), Denmark (which is part of the EU and whose krone is fixed to the
euro), and Saudi Arabia (where the linking of the dinar to the US dollar
ensures that fluctuations in the forex market don’t impact its oil export
revenues).
Currencies with fixed exchange rate regimes are naturally of little interest to
currency investors. That’s not to say that countries with fixed currencies are
not worth investing in, but rather that it doesn’t make much sense to take a

Forex for Beginners
speculative position in a currency when you have reason to believe that it
won’t move much over the next few years.
Technically, fixed currencies will still fluctuate against the currencies to
which they are not pegged. For example, the Danish krone still rises and falls
against the dollar, pound, etc., even as it remains fixed against the euro
(Figure 3-1). Still, it makes more sense to trade the USD/EUR than the
USD/DKK, due to higher liquidity and lower spreads.

Figure 3-1. The Danish krone (DKK) is pegged to the euro but floats against the US dollar

Managed Floats
The rest of the world’s major and minor currencies are governed by floating
exchange rate regimes, which means that they rise and fall in accordance
with market forces. In practice, however, it makes more sense to classify all
exchange rate regimes as managed floats because central banks claim
ultimate authority over their respective currencies. Indeed, central banks can
and do intervene in the forex markets from time to time in order to influence
exchange rates, and they are often successful in the short term in preventing
their currencies from rising.
The Swiss National Bank (SNB), for example, spent $200 billion in 2009 in
an attempt to hold the Swiss franc at the arbitrary level of €1.50 EUR/CHF.
After nine months of success, however, it was overwhelmed by the weight of
the forex markets (and a $20 billion loss) and stopped intervening. Other
central banks “tinker” with their exchange rates indirectly, by imposing
capital controls (Brazil) or by printing money and injecting it into financial
markets (United States). In any event, no central bank is actually
disinterested in its exchange rate, notwithstanding all of the rhetoric about

59

60

Chapter 3 | What Makes Currencies Move?
“free markets.” From time to time, almost every central bank takes steps that
directly or indirectly impact the relative value of their respective currencies.
China takes this practice to an extreme. While it officially abolished its fixed
exchange rate regime in 2005, its central bank has continued to intervene in
the forex markets daily on behalf of the yuan. In the process, China has
amassed more than $3 trillion in foreign exchange reserves and slowed the
yuan’s inevitable upward climb to a mere crawl.

Exchange Rate Theory
There is a large number of financial economists and a tremendous body of
literature devoted to the study of exchange rate theory. The goal has always
been to connect specific economic variables with fluctuations in exchange
rates. Unfortunately, there are too many currency pairs and too many
variables to construct a unified theory of exchange rates. In addition, the
currency markets are confounded by the role of speculators, who may not
trade rationally, overemphasizing certain variables at the expense of others.
Finally, currency markets and economic developments tend to be
autocatalytic, which is to say that they drive each other in a chicken-vs.-egg
relationship. For example, a change in the EUR/USD rate might cause the
balance of trade to shift between the Eurozone and the United States, which
in turn can cause the exchange rate to adjust further, and so on. As you can
imagine, it is difficult for economic theories to capture this two-way
causality.
Still, research has shown that the theories laid out below go at least part of
the way toward explaining why currencies rise and fall against each other
over time.

Purchasing Power Parity
The study of exchange rates begins with the theory of purchasing power
parity (PPP), which states that exchange rates should adjust so as to equalize
price levels in two countries. For example, let’s pretend that the microchip is
the only product that is traded between the United States and the Eurozone. If
the price of a microchip is $15 in the United States but €30 in the Eurozone,
you would expect the EUR/USD equilibrium exchange rate to be 2
EUR/USD. Otherwise, there would be opportunities for arbitrage (i.e.,

Forex for Beginners
buying microchips in the United States and reselling them for a surefire
profit in the Eurozone).
The Economist has taken this idea to a comical extreme by comparing the
price of McDonald’s Big Mac hamburgers across different countries and
using the results as a basis for assessing whether their respective currencies
are undervalued or overvalued relative to the US dollar. It has even attempted
to control for changes in economic size. As you can see from Figure 3-2, the
price of a Big Mac in Brazil is 50% higher than in the United States, and
150% higher when differences in labor and production costs are controlled.
The implication is that the Brazilian real is 50%–150% overvalued, relative
to the US dollar.

Figure 3-2. Big Mac Index: Local currency over/undervaluation against the US dollar2

If you’re rolling your eyes at the simplicity of this idea, rest assured that you
are not alone. There are many reasons—such as differences in relative wages,
transportation costs, import and export barriers, etc.—that would cause the
price of microchips (and Big Macs!) to differ between the United States and
other countries. In addition, there are billions of goods and services that are
traded between the United States and the Eurozone, so you clearly wouldn’t
expect the EUR/USD to adjust every time a disparity in hamburger prices
emerges.
Consequently, PPP theory has been tweaked to take into account a basket of
goods and services (instead of just one) and relative changes in prices (rather
2 “Beefed-Up Burgernomics,” The Economist, July 30, 2011, www.economist.com/node

/21524811.

61

62

Chapter 3 | What Makes Currencies Move?
than absolute levels). For example, if price inflation rates are compared
across two countries, one would expect that a country with high inflation
would suffer currency depreciation, so as to maintain exchange rate
equilibrium. To take this idea one step further, let’s assume that prices are
rising at an annual rate of 10% in the United States and 0% in Japan. All else
being equal, one would expect the US dollar to depreciate 10% (on an
annualized basis) against the yen in order to maintain equilibrium.
In fact, this is exactly what has happened. Over the last two decades, the
Japanese yen has appreciated considerably against the US dollar in spite of
economic stagnation in Japan. The reason for this is undoubtedly connected
to Japanese price stability. Whereas US price inflation has averaged more
than 3% annually for the last 25 years, Japanese inflation has averaged less
than .5%. Over the same period of time, the Japanese yen has doubled in
value against the US dollar. When you plot these two series (Figure 3-3), you
can see that the USD/JPY rate has depreciated almost perfectly in accordance
with purchasing power parity! As is also evident, however, exchange rates
are significantly more volatile than prices, and it can take many years for
inflation differentials to become fully reflected in relative currency prices.

Figure 3-3. USD/JPY rate versus US/Japan inflation differential

At the very least, the model of PPP can be used to put trade disputes into
context. For example, US politicians have long alleged that the Chinese yuan
is significantly undervalued against the US dollar and is appreciating at an
unsatisfactorily slow rate. However, PPP analysis implies that this isn’t
entirely true. For example, in 2004, the US Congress proposed legislation

Forex for Beginners
that would punish Chinese imports unless the Chinese yuan was permitted to
appreciate by 25%-40%, the amount by which economists conjectured that
the yuan was undervalued. Shortly thereafter, the Chinese government
acceded to this demand, and the yuan began a steady course of appreciation.
In 2011, the US Congress renewed calls for punitive legislation on the
grounds that the yuan hadn’t appreciated by a large enough margin. To be
sure, the Chinese currency had nominally risen only 23%. On an inflationadjusted basis, however, it had already risen by more than 30%, well within
the band targeted by Congress. As can be seen in Figure 3-4, this shows that
the argument in favor of further appreciation is fairly flimsy.

Figure 3-4. Chinese yuan appreciation has met expectations, when inflation (also known as
PPP) is taken into account

Covered Interest Rate Parity
The theory of covered interest rate parity begins where purchasing power
parity ends. In accordance with the equation below, covered interest rate
parity holds that if the US interest rate (i$) is higher than the interest rate for
another currency (ic), then the expected future exchange rate (Ft) should be
lower than the spot rate (St) in order to maintain equilibrium.

For example, if the US benchmark interest rate is 5%, the corresponding
Eurozone rate is 10%, and the current EUR/USD rate is $1.50, you would
expect the US dollar to appreciate 4.5% against the euro (to $1.43) in order
to maintain interest rate parity and eliminate the possibility of arbitrage.

63

64

Chapter 3 | What Makes Currencies Move?
(1 + 5%) = $1.43/$1.5 * (1 + 10%)
You may recall from our earlier discussion of derivatives that this model also
serves as the basis for pricing forex forward agreements.
In theory, covered interest rate parity should be a good model for
understanding exchange rates because the financial markets can adjust
instantaneously to actual and expected changes in interest rates. With
purchasing power parity, in contrast, it might take years for differences in
price inflation to be reflected in international trade patterns, and to be priced
into exchange rates.
In fact, covered interest rate parity has been shown to hold in the absence of
capital controls and high transaction costs. A corollary, known as the
International Fisher Effect, hypothesizes that an investor will only hold a
depreciating currency to the extent that the interest rate (differential) is
enough to compensate him. You can see from Figure 3-5 below, that the
actual GBP/USD rate moves inversely with the UK/US interest rate
differential (or directly with the US/UK differential). For example, it didn’t
take long for the GBP/USD rate to fall following the Federal Reserve Bank’s
cut in the federal funds rate (FFR) in the summer of 2007. The pound
recovered slightly in 2008 when the Bank of England followed suit and
similarly cut interest rates, which is exactly what the theory of interest rate
parity predicted would happen!

Figure 3-5. GBP/USD exchange rate versus US/UK inflation differential

Forex for Beginners
In the short term, however, this relationship is sometimes turned on its head.
For example, an investor that is long the Brazilian real (against the dollar)
probably doesn’t care about changes in the price of a hamburger in Brazil
(relative to the United States) because he isn’t planning on actually spending
the real on anything tangible. However, he cares very much about Brazilian
interest rates during the time that he holds the real because that will directly
impact the return that he earns on his investment.
Thus, rising interest rates may actually be accompanied by an inflow of
speculative capital, even if they are a harbinger of long-term inflation. As is
apparent from Figure 3-6, the interest rate differential between Brazil and
Japan has hovered above 10% for most of the last decade. During this period
of time, the Brazilian real has notched some impressive gains against the
Japanese yen, which is the opposite of what covered interest rate parity
would have predicted! These gains are reinforced by a phenomenon in which
declines in the interest rate differential seem to correspond with a decline in
the BRL/JPY exchange rate, as though investors will only hold the real when
interest rates are high. In other words, Brazilian speculators have targeted the
real because of—rather than in spite of—its high interest rates.

Figure 3-6. BRL/JPY exchange rate versus Brazil/Japan inflation differential

Monetary Theory
Monetarists approach exchange rate theory in terms of currency supply. If
the money supply of Country A rises dramatically relative to that of Country

65

66

Chapter 3 | What Makes Currencies Move?
B, monetarists hold that, all else being equal, Country A should experience
currency depreciation.
When thinking about monetary theory, it is important to keep in mind that a
nation’s money supply is controlled directly by its central bank, which uses
open market operations, reserve requirement ratios, and interest rates to
control its country’s money supply. If a central bank wants more currency to
circulate, it can buy bonds on the open market, lower interest rates, and/or
increase the ratio of deposits that banks can lend out. When these measures
prove to be ineffective, the central bank can inject cash directly into the
financial system through open-market operations.
During the 2008 credit crisis, for example, most of the world’s central banks
engaged in variations of quantitative easing, whereby they printed money
and used the proceeds to buy mortgage-backed securities, government bonds,
and other assets. The Federal Reserve Bank was especially aggressive,
cumulatively printing more than $2.5 trillion in new money. Some currency
analysts have connected this to the multi-year decline of the US dollar
relative to the other major currencies (Figure 3-7).

Figure 3-7. US dollar Trade-Weighted Index, Money Supply, and National Debt

Now, why would central banks deliberately manipulate the supply and
demand of their respective country’s money? Sometimes they do so in order
to influence the value of their respective currencies. Known as intervention,
this process typically involves printing money to buy an opposing currency.

Forex for Beginners
For example, if Japan decides that it wants to depress the value of the yen,
the Bank of Japan will print a substantial amount of yen and immediately
exchange this lot for US dollars, such that the forex markets have no choice
but to adjust the JPY/USD exchange rate downward.
Those who passed their college Macroeconomics 101 course know that a
sudden increase in the domestic money supply will have unintended
monetary consequences, namely inflation. All else being equal, the 5%
increase in the Japanese money supply in this case should cause a 5% acrossthe-board increase in the prices of all Japanese products. To counter this
effect, central banks sterilize their intervention by issuing an offsetting
amount of bonds so as to draw a proportional amount of money out of the
economy. As for the chunk of foreign currency that they bought on the open
market (US dollars, in this case), this is hoarded by the central bank in the
form of foreign exchange reserves. You can see from Figure 3-7 below that,
in spite of financial and economic liberalization, central bank intervention
(implied by growth in forex reserves) in the forex markets has expanded
dramatically over the last decade. China has taken this practice to an
extreme; in a never-ending effort to control the ascent of the yuan, China has
amassed $3 plus trillion in reserves!

Figure 3-8. Central bank accumulation of forex reserves3

One aspect of intervention that is important to take into account is the
inherent impact it has on other currencies. In other words, a currency cannot
just depreciate; it must depreciate relative to one or more other currencies. A
3 Bloomberg, “China Monthly Foreign Exchange Reserves,” www.bloomberg.com

/quote/CNGFOREX:IND/chart; IMF, “Currency Composition of Official Foreign
Exchange Reserves,” www.imf.org/external/np/sta/cofer/eng/cofer.pdf.

67

68

Chapter 3 | What Makes Currencies Move?
central bank has two objectives when selecting the currencies that will offset
its intervention. Primarily, it wants to maximize the economic benefit of its
intervention. If the Bank of Japan were to depreciate the yen relative to the
Polish zloty, it would have little impact on the Japanese economy because
Poland and Japan are not major trading partners. By targeting the euro or the
US dollar—as is most common—the Bank of Japan ensures that its export
sector will enjoy a direct benefit from a weaker yen.
Secondly, a central bank must act as a discerning investor since any currency
that it buys will necessarily end up on its balance sheet. Central banks don’t
want to hold cash, which loses value over time as a result of inflation.
Instead, they select liquid investments, such as sovereign debt and money
market instruments. A decision to buy the US dollar is thus a vote of
confidence in the creditworthiness of the US government and US financial
institutions. As US capital markets are probably the deepest, most liquid, and
most transparent in the world, it is perhaps unsurprising that the US dollar
remains the top choice of the world’s central banks, accounting for more than
60% of all foreign exchange reserves. Per Figure 3-9, the euro is in a distant
second place.

Figure 3-9. Central bank accumulation of forex reserves4

4 IMF, “Currency Composition of Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange
Reserves,” www.imf.org/external/np/sta/cofer/eng/cofer.pdf.

Forex for Beginners

Portfolio Balancing Model
The portfolio balancing model is basically an extension of monetary models,
but is expanded to include all debt and equity instruments and all participants
in the forex market.
Adherents to this model argue that a currency is an investable asset, like any
other, and that foreign currency should represent a component of any wellbalanced portfolio. Thus, in the context of the portfolio balancing model, an
exchange rate merely represents the equilibrium between the supply of a
country’s investable assets and foreign demand. For example, adherents to
the portfolio balancing model would argue that the explosion in US debt
shown in Figure 3-7 contributed significantly to increasing the supply of US
investable assets. Since there wasn’t a proportional increase in foreign
demand for US assets, the dollar has necessarily declined.
The portfolio balancing model also attempts to take domestic demand for
financial assets into account. For example, consider that Japan’s sovereign
debt is the highest in the world, and currently exceeds 160% of gross
domestic product (GDP). However, the yen is one of the strongest currencies.
How can this paradox be reconciled? The answer is that 95% of Japanese
sovereign debt is held by domestic savers.
On the other hand, Switzerland is generally known for its fiscal and monetary
prudence, which has resulted in an undersupply of Swiss franc currency and
more importantly, Swiss franc–denominated financial assets. At the same
time, investor interest in Switzerland and the franc is arguably in excess of
what an economy of that size would normally merit. In order for equilibrium
to be achieved, a portfolio balancing theorist would argue that an
appreciation in the franc was unavoidable.
