
The Trader’s Guide to Single-Stock Futures
Single-stock futures (SSFs) are futures contracts on individual stocks. There are currently around 130 well-known stocks, such as IBM , QCOM , EBAY, GOOG,
RIM M , and M SFT, that have futures on them. This is a recent development, since it was only in late 2000 that Congress passed legislation lifting the ban on these
products, which were already trading in Europe and other countries. There are also futures contracts available on many exchange-traded funds (ETFs). To get a
complete listing of all these futures contracts, a trader can visit www.onechicago.com. One Chicago is an electronic exchange that is a joint venture of the Chicago Board
Options Exchange (CBOE), the Chicago M ercantile Exchange Inc. (CM E), and the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT). Of course, the CBOT and CM E are now part of
the same company, CM E Group. Now, how do SSFs work and how does a trader use them?
M any brokers have been slow to adapt to these new trading instruments, but they are starting to catch on. Because they are futures contracts, traders need to have a
futures account in order to trade them. On top of that, they also need to be trading with a broker that is set up to trade them, as not every broker is equipped to handle
these trading instruments. Once that is completed, these are traded just like a normal futures contract, and they are available through eCBOT and Globex, just like the
mini-stock index futures.
Whereas mini-stock index futures contracts like the YM and ES trade quarterly, the SSFs trade monthly. Traders who aren’t familiar with the letter codes for the
various months should write this down and tape it to their wall as a reference guide. These are applicable to all futures contracts:

433

To get a quote on an EBAY (eBay Inc.) single-stock futures contract in Trade-Station, a trader would type in EBAY (underlying stock symbol) 1C (One Chicago) V
(M onth Code) 05 (Year). So the final quote for the EBAY October 2005 SSFs would look like this: EBAY1CV05.
There are a few nice features of SSFs that I find attractive. First, the “$25,000 day-trading rule” does not apply. Active traders who have a $50,000 account and tie
up $26,000 of that in options trades will suddenly find themselves out of luck. They will not be able to execute any new stock or options trades because the broker
won’t count the option value toward the traders’ equity. This situation would draw their “countable” account balance below $25,000, and traders would be locked out
of initiating any new trades. An annoying situation, to be sure. SSFs provide the leverage of “just-in-the-money” options without the restrictions constraining “pattern
day traders” and their account size. Here are a few additional key points:
• On stock accounts, a trader can get a 2:1 overnight margin, and the interest charged is the same amount a person would pay for a mediocre deal on a credit card. For
SSFs, the equivalent of a 5:1 margin is available, and there are no interest fees.
• 5:1 leverage equates to having to put up 20 percent of the purchase price of the underlying stock. A trader who buys $10,000 worth of IBM (100 shares at $100) by
using one IBM SSF contract would have to put up only $2,000. A trader who buys 10 contracts of IBM 1C at $95 ($95,000 worth of IBM ) would put up
$19,000, and so on.
• When shorting stocks, a trader has to wait for an uptick in order to get filled (although this rule should be changed soon). There isn’t any uptick rule for short selling
an SSF contract. This is becoming less important as more and more actual stocks are becoming shortable on downticks.
• One SSF contract equals 100 shares of stock.
• A 1-point move equals $100 per contract.
• These are monthly contracts that expire the third Friday of each month, just like options. If traders own a February contract on the day it is expiring, they will need
to sell the February contract and buy the M arch contract. This is also known as “rolling over” into the next month. If traders hold on to the contract through
expiration, they will have the stock “delivered” into their account. Don’t worry about forgetting, however, because brokers don’t want to deal with this, and they
will call and pester you to close out your position days before expiration.
The biggest question I get about SSFs has to do with their volume. For many of these contracts, there is not a lot of volume traded at this time, and this is an obvious
concern for traders. However, it is important to note that the “real volume” of an SSF contract is in the underlying stock itself. The LM M s (lead market makers) and
M M s (market makers) for SSF products make their living buying and selling SSF contracts and immediately hedging or arbitraging that position with the underlying
cash stock. Because of this, they will fill any order that is in line with the underlying volume of the stock. Since most of these stocks trade millions of shares, getting a
fill is not an issue. There have been days when I’ve been the only one trading the SSF, and yet I have had no problem getting into and out of the position. On those
days, which rarely happen anymore because volume is steadily growing, it’s fun knowing that I’m the only person in the entire world who made money on that trade.
The other question I get from traders involves the spreads. If there aren’t any orders coming in, then the LM M s and M M s will keep the spreads wide. This is so
that they don’t end up trading against each other. However, once a real order comes in, they will close the bid and ask to be in line with those on the underlying stock
and snap it up. Because of this, I never use market orders when I’m getting into an SSF trade. I just look to see where the underlying stock is trading and place a limit
order based on the price of the underlying stock.
The other thing to remember about SSFs is that their charts are pretty much worthless at this time. The volume is sporadic, so the charts aren’t very clean. The best
thing to do is to chart the underlying cash stock and then base all decisions to get into and out of the SSFs on the underlying stock. What I will do is set up the chart of
an underlying cash stock and then put the quotes for both the cash stock and the SSF contract below it so that I can see where the current bid/ask is located. However,
434

because most of my trades in the SSFs are swing trades, I don’t even watch the charts intraday. I just set up my limit orders the night before based on the cash chart
and then wait until the end of the day to see if I’m filled.
We’ll look at a couple of sample plays on EBAY and QCOM in a moment. First I want to discuss options quickly.

The Only Way to Play Individual Stock Options
I’m writing this section based on the premise that the reader knows at least a little about what options are and how they work. If not, that’s okay. There are plenty of
websites out there that explain them in detail, and I would recommend reading more about what options are and how they work if you plan on using them. I’m just
going to give you a quick rundown and share how I incorporate them into my trading plan. (Of course, this new edition of the book has a new chapter on options,
Chapter 5.)
There are many complicated option strategies available, and many people spend hundreds of hours looking for the perfect strategies to generate “guaranteed
income.” M ost of these strategies work great when the markets are range-bound— which they are most of the time. Then along comes the inevitable big rally or
watershed decline, and all these people get thrashed. For a period of years in the mid-1990s, a lot of traders and funds made a nice living selling naked puts. These are
put options whose writers do not have a short position in the stock on which they have written the put. The goal here is to have the options expire worthless, so that
the put writers collect the premium. M any books started popping up on the shelves about “taxi-driver millionaires” who discovered this “amazing get-rich-quick”
trading strategy. Then along came October 27, 1997.
The markets had been drifting down through October, and many of the taxi drivers, as well as several large funds with a few hundred million in assets, were busy
selling naked puts. The brokers who worked with the funds started getting nervous because the positions had gone against the funds to the point where it wouldn’t
take much of a further decline to start forcing margin calls. The brokers, who didn’t quite understand the strategy that the funds were using, started to place discreet
calls to other traders asking what would happen “if the Dow dropped a couple of hundred more points” over the next week or so. The answer was easy—these funds
would be forced to dump their positions because of margin calls, and this would create tremendous downward selling pressure in the overall markets. The S&P 500
floor traders at the CM E got wind of this and started prepping for the slaughter.
On October 16, 1997, the Dow broke through its most recent uptrend line, as seen at point 1 in Figure 22.1. The Dow then rallied and closed at 8034.65 on October
22, just below its broken trend line, at point 2. This is a common occurrence in all markets—once a trend line is broken, the markets will come up and test it one last
time before rolling over. I call this “kissing the trend line goodbye.” On October 24, at point 3, the Dow closed at 7715.41, down 319.24 points. This started the round
of forced margin calls after the close, which was on a Friday. The margin call selling would take place on M onday. The Dow opened M onday at 7633.14, down 82.27.
Then the forced selling via the margin calls began—and the S&P pit traders, who knew what was happening, simply stepped back and walked away from the bids.
With no support in the markets, the Dow dropped quickly and closed at 7161.39, down 554.02 points on the day, as seen at point 4. By the time the closing bell rang
on M onday, everyone who was selling naked puts for a living had lost a substantial amount of money. The funds that were involved not only lost all the money under
their management, but ended up owing money to the brokers. Well, more correctly, the people who had invested in the fund lost all their money, and ended up owing
more than they had put into the fund. M any metaphors come to mind here, but I will pass, as most of them are quite graphic in nature. Once all these people were
cleaned out, the markets were set to rally. The very next day, the markets pushed down to new lows, touching 6927 at point 5, having shed just over 1,000 points in
three trading days, before putting in a hard bottom. The Dow then closed at 7498.32, up 336.93 points on the day, and went on to rally steadily from there. Once all of
the naked put sellers were cleaned out, there was nothing to do but resume the uptrend.

435

Figure 22.1
Okay, so how do I use options? The main way I use options is as a means for owning a stock at a cheaper price. Because of the premium and time decay, I am very
specific about the options I buy. For example, I won’t buy out-of-the-money options, as they are all premium and a sucker’s game. Therefore, I want to look at
options that are trading in the money (“in the money” means that the option’s strike price is below the current market price of the stock for call options, and that the
strike price is above the current market price of the stock for put options), if not more, in order to buy an option where the premium constitutes less than 30 percent
of the overall purchase price. In early 2005, the premium of options was generally low, so I could usually buy options just one strike in the money to meet this
criterion. In 1999 and 2000, however, option premiums had been at extremes, and I often had to go 5 to 10 strikes in the money to buy options that met my criteria. I
remember when QCOM was at $250 before its infamous “run to a thousand” at the end of 1999. At-the-money call options were $45. In order to buy calls that were
only 30 percent premium, I had to go nearly 15 strikes in the money.
The option table represented in Figure 22.2 shows different strike prices and expiration months for GOOG. At the time this was created, in early November 2004,
GOOG was trading at $191.67. If I am interested in buying a call on this stock, I’ll start looking at the near-month contracts that are in the money. Because GOOG is a
higher-priced, volatile stock, the option premiums are going to be high—the higher the volatility, the higher the premium. In this case, I look at the November 180 calls,
which are two strikes in the money. The premium on these is still excessive, and I need to go down one more strike price, to the November 175 calls, to meet my
criterion of the premium being less than 30 percent of the overall purchase price. The amateur option trader in this case is going to buy the November 220 calls because
they are so “cheap” at $2.55. Never mind that they will expire worthless. For puts, I first look at the November 200 puts, but they are too expensive. I look at the
210s, and they are close, but the 220s are better with respect to the amount of premium I want to pay. Remember, all I’m trying to do is buy (or short) the actual
stock at a cheaper price. This means that I don’t want a lot of premium. Looking at the next month out in December, these same strike prices jump up excessively in
price, so I want to stay with the near-month contracts and wait until expiration to roll over into December if I have to. I’ll explain more about how to figure out
premium shortly. (As I discussed in Chapter 5, an easy way to do this is just to buy an option with a delta of 0.70 or higher.)

436

Figure 22.2
In contrast to GOOG, IBM is a more stable stock, and the premiums here aren’t that high. With the stock trading at $91.20, I first look at the November 90 calls,
437

but they have too much premium (see Figure 22.3). The 85s fit the bill nicely. On the put side, the first strike in the money, the 95s, works fine. Note that I could even
go out to the next month, the December 95s, and pay only a little extra in premium. I like to focus on the near-month contract in order to reduce premium. However, if
the option is set to expire in less than two weeks, then I will go ahead and buy the next month out, though I may have to go even deeper in the money. Following are a
few more notes of interest on options contracts:

• One option contract equals 100 shares of stock.
• If you buy 10 GOOG November 190 calls at $12, that will cost $12,000.
• To buy an equivalent 1,000 shares of the stock at $190 would cost $190,000.
• If GOOG rallies by 10 points, these options will move about 6 points. This depends on how far in the money they are. The further they are in the money, the
more they will move “dollar for dollar” with the underlying stock.

438

Figure 22.3

439

• If you sell the 10 GOOG calls at $18 ($18,000), you will pocket $6,000.
• The maximum loss on this trade is the option’s cost, $12,000.
By contrast to this last bullet point, if a trader bought 1,000 shares of GOOG at $190 and it gapped down 30 points on an earnings report, the trader would be out
$30,000. Options do limit risk if they are purchased correctly. Now that we’ve reviewed SSFs and stock options, let’s get down to the play itself.

Trading Rules for Buy Fades (Sells Are Reversed)
This is a fade play that focuses on swing positions that last a few days to a few weeks. I am looking to sell strength and buy weakness.
1. For these plays, I am utilizing a daily chart. Because these plays are meant to last a few days to a few weeks, I’m not interested in what is happening on a 5- or 15minute chart. I want to be able to step back and look at a slightly bigger picture without all the noise found in intraday charts.
2. The only indicators I place on the daily chart are an 8- and a 21-period exponential moving average (EM A).
3. For longs, I want to see the 8-period EM A trading above the 21-period EM A. Once this upward cross happens, then I can start looking for a setup to occur.
4. The specific setup I’m looking for, once the 8-period EM A has crossed above the 21-period EM A, is a pullback to the 8-period EM A.
5. The initial stop is the 21-period EM A or 4 percent of the stock price, whichever is greater. Typically the initial stop turns out to be this 4 percent level. Note that
this 4 percent level is based on the price of the stock, not my equity level. That is, I’m not risking 4 percent of my equity on one trade; I’m risking 4 percent of the
price of the stock. I could have 10 stocks going at one time.
6. Once I’m up 4 percent on the position (I call this my watermark level), I will move up my stop to the 21-period EM A. I will then use this 21-period EM A as a
trailing stop until my target or trailing stop is hit.
7. M y target is an 8 percent move in the price of the stock from my entry price. Although I focus mostly on stocks when I’m using this play, it can also be used on the
stock index futures. However, the percentages will be different. On a daily chart, instead of an 8 percent target, I just use a 1 percent target and a 0.5 percent stop
to start. If the mini-sized Dow is at 10,604, then my target is 106 points, and my initial stop is 53 points or the 21-period EM A, whichever is greater. On a 60minute chart, I cut this in half, using a target of ½ of 1 percent and a stop of ¼ of 1 percent or the 21-period EM A, whichever is greater. To get these, I just
multiply the price of the index by 0.005 for the target and by 0.0025 for the stop. A sample play of this nature is discussed in Chapter 23.
8. The easiest way to figure out all these levels is to quickly set up an Excel spreadsheet with the formulas already in place (see Figure 22.3).
9. One way to slightly increase the odds of success on long setups is to trade only stocks where the 8-period EM A is higher than the 21-period EM A on the weekly
charts. This condition can last on a weekly chart for months and even years. If this setup exists on the weekly charts, then it’s just a matter of waiting for an entry
on the daily chart as per this setup. This process is discussed in more detail in Chapter 23.
Figure 22.4 is a snapshot of the exact Excel spreadsheet I use to calculate my key stop and target levels. All I do is enter my entry price in the highlighted box. If I’m
long on the stock, then I use the “long” box, and vice versa. Once the price is in, the Excel spreadsheet calculates all the levels for me automatically. The formulas are
very simple. For example, the target is calculated by taking the entry price and multiplying it by 0.08 (8 percent). The initial stop is calculated by taking the entry
price, multiplying it by 0.04 (4 percent), and subtracting it from the entry. The 4 percent watermark level is calculated by taking the entry price, multiplying it by 0.04
(4 percent), and adding it to the entry price. I used to do all this manually, and it was a real buzz killer.

Figure 22.4

440

EBAY (eBay, Inc.)—August 19, 2004
1. On August 10, 2004, EBAY crosses above its 8-period EM A (see Figure 22.5). However, since the 8-period EM A is still trading below the 21-period EM A, I am
not interested in setting up a buy order just yet. I need to wait for the 8-period EM A to cross up through the 21-period EM A before I set up my first buy order.
Note: on all these charts, the 8-period EM A is the skinny moving average line, and the 21-period EM A is the thicker moving average line.

Figure 22.5

2. On August 19, the 8-period EM A crosses up above the 21-period EM A. I’m now ready to start bidding for a long, and my entry point will be a pull-back to the 8period EM A. The next day I am filled at 79.28 when the market pulls back to the 8-period EM A. Now that I’m in the trade, I need to check where to place my
stop. The 21-period EM A is at 79.08, which is not very far below my entry level. A 4 percent stop would be placed at 76.11. Since the 4 percent stop is greater,
this is the stop I will use to start out with. M y target is 8 percent up from my entry, which is 85.62. Remember, once I’m up 4 percent in the position, I will
move my stop up to the 21-period EM A. The initial stop and target for this play are highlighted on the chart with the horizontal lines.
3. On August 25, EBAY pushes higher and hits my target, and I’m out for just over $6 per share ($6.34). Now that I’m out, it’s time to start looking for the next
pullback to the 8-period EM A. A trader could also have followed this same play using single-stock futures or in-the-money call options. I will review those
possibilities for this play in a moment.
4. On September 9, 10 trading days later, EBAY pulls back to its 8-period EM A, and I am filled at 87.95. I do a quick calculation, and I see that my target is going to
be 95.78 and my stop is 84.43. I set my parameters and let my orders babysit my position.
5. Four trading days later my target is hit, and I’m out of the trade.
6. On September 17, the market pulls back to the 8-period EM A once again. I take the trade, and I get in at 91.74 and set my parameters. This would be a stop of
88.07 and a target of 99.08. At the time I did this chart, I was still in the trade, so it was “active.”
I’d like to take a moment to examine the first EBAY play detailed in Figure 22.5 more closely. This play could also have been executed using single-stock futures or
in-the-money call options. It is useful to compare these trades to the actual stock trade to get an idea of how this setup could have been followed on these various
trading instruments. This will also give a trader an idea of the risk/reward parameters for each scenario. Although it’s the exact same play across all three instruments,
the amount risked versus the amount gained is different for each of the three scenarios. Let’s take a look:
• Buy 1,000 shares of EBAY stock at $79.28. Total cost is $79,280.
• Buy 10 EBAY1C September single-stock futures (SSF) contracts at $79.28. Total cost is $15,856 (20 percent of $79,280).
441
