
186

ORDER PLACEMENT: Executing the Plan

learn that the floor would not accept the order due to a change in market
conditions, or it may have been rejected as a bad order and not reported
back at all. Then, when the broker calls the client, the broker finds out the
client has left for the day or is out of reach, thinking they were in a position
when they were not.
Never assume. Always ask questions when placing any order that might
be a little different and check in with your broker from time to time when
you are working a special order.

SUMMARY
Order entry procedures can be as important as determining and analyzing
the market direction itself. Imagine being right in predicting the market
move but not being able to participate because you were not filled on your
order. Worse yet, maybe you entered a stop order to enter a position using
a breakout method instead of a stop limit order and the resulting slippage
caused a loss instead of a potential profit. The combinations for errors are
too great to mention.
Although online order entry is becoming increasingly popular, novice
or new investors in the futures market should consider the benefits of having a licensed, full-service broker accepting their orders. For one, they usually are familiar with the investor’s account, different trading philosophies
and strategies, and the trading terms and phrases taught in different trading
courses. For another, full-service brokers can give investment advice, and
they usually have experience to help catch common mistakes that could cost
an inexperienced investor thousands of dollars. In fact, they can be a fine
mentor in the initial stages of a trading career.
I would also recommend interviewing brokers. Think of a broker as an
employee. If you think about it, they really are working for you! Ask questions about how long they have been in the industry, what would make them
want to help you, and how they would help. Ask if they provide specialty
services such as faxing or e-mailing charts or preparing special market reports. You may want to find out if they offer a hotline recording or an online
voice-activated chat room for market analysis. Most important, tell them
what you need and what you want them to provide for you. Most experienced
full-service brokers accept discount clients even though they may be experienced and proficient traders on their own. Brokers will be there for you
and may be able to respond quickly to answer any questions or concerns you
may have. Even the great Tiger Woods has a coach. Why wouldn’t you want
one on your side?
If you want to place your own orders, that’s fine. Many traders do. Just
remember that unlicensed phone clerks are generally prohibited from giv-

Summary

187

ing clients investment advice and special services. They usually do not have
the experience that a broker has, and they may not have passed the Series
Three exam. Registered brokers are licensed by the National Futures Association and are regulated by the government. They even submit themselves
to taking ethics exams and attending refresher courses and seminars. Clerks
generally just take your order, even if they realize you are making an error.
Online order entry can be a valuable tool. However, it is not foolproof,
especially if your local Internet service provider is busy or down or you have
other connectivity problems. Placing orders online as an inexperienced
trader may not be the answer. If you are comfortable with it, great. Just make
sure you have a backup plan and accessibility to an experienced broker
who will work for you.
Know the rules of the game, and use the tools you have to do the job
right. Weigh the benefits of using an experienced broker versus a discount
order clerk or placing orders from an online platform by yourself. Also remember to be organized, write down your activity, and listen to what your
broker repeats back to you with your order ticket number. Or, if you are
trading online, read what you are entering and be careful not to doubleclick when entering your orders. These seem like simple steps, but they require discipline, commitment, and a strong arm. I say that because to write
a trade log requires lifting that 400-pound pencil or pen. Get in the habit of
taking an inventory of your performance, whether it is good or bad. That way,
you can try to replicate what went right and learn from what went wrong.

CHAPTER 11

The Mental
Game
Inside the Trader

Nothing can stop the man with the right mental
attitude from achieving his goal; nothing on earth
can help the man with the wrong mental attitude.
—Thomas Jefferson

o succeed as a trader, you have to get your conscious and subconscience mind working for you. You must have a winning attitude,
which can be achieved by surrounding yourself with positive events
and introducing yourself to self-motivating or positive attitude tapes or
books. This chapter is devoted to helping you identify problem thinking and
develop an optimistic way of thinking. I not only want to help teach you
methods that may improve your awareness of solid discipline and confidence, but also to help you conquer your fears by presenting examples of
how traders can correct or monitor themselves when times get tough.
In my experience, successful traders seem to possess the uncanny ability to correctly anticipate the needs and trends of the marketplace. Some
call such ability an inherent feel for the market. Even better, they have the
ability to act swiftly and execute a trading plan. I believe that these are talents that you develop and are not born with. Successful traders were, are,
and always will be students of the markets. They are achievers who continuously study, in perceptive detail, people’s actions, the processes of events,
and the products in the markets they trade. When they place a trade, it is an
educated decision, not merely a guess, and they know it. That knowledge
gives them the confidence to execute and act on trading decisions.
Confidence or thoroughly believing in yourself may come naturally
or from the secure feeling you had when growing up. It may have been

T

189

190

THE MENTAL GAME: Inside the Trader

developed from achieving success from previous experiences or in being
successful in some other aspects of your life. Other ways to gain confidence
in yourself might have come from overcoming an obstacle or having a successful experience in conquering some adversity in life. You consciously
know that you have achieved or overcome challenges and can succeed due
to a past experience. Building confidence in yourself and in your trading
skills is extremely important in stimulating an optimistic winning attitude.
The other common feature that successful traders seem to have is they
are not afraid to be wrong. They realize that anticipating a market move will
always include an element of risk. They act, not react, to market conditions.
This means they place orders before the market moves rather than wait
until after the market reacts to a situation or event. In my experience, those
who hesitate or wait or are not prepared seem to have the most trouble capturing the element of success when it comes to trading futures.
This chapter really describes the common emotional weaknesses for
most unsuccessful traders. I illustrate how this negative mental attitude develops and offer methods that can help solve the problem if you experience
losses and are a victim of these symptoms. Think of this as the problemsolving chapter. At first it might seem like negative thinking, but if you don’t
examine your troubles and face your fears head on, you will not be able to
become an effective problem solver.

WHO ARE YOU?
The first step to improving your trading results requires the ability to examine your actions and do a thorough, honest self-evaluation. Let’s call it
taking an inventory of your actions and how you react emotionally to a situation because, after all, you are the most important part of the trading equation. When I interviewed Mark Douglas, author of The Disciplined Trader
and Trading in the Zone, on my radio program, he offered the idea that
every outcome of a trade decision based on a technical chart pattern is a
random act. It is not a 100 percent guarantee that a chart pattern that resembles a bull flag will extend higher every single time. The problem is not the
chart or the market but the actor, Douglas contended.
In my career as a broker, I have found one popular phrase that often
leads investors down the road to the poorhouse, either from actual monetary
losses or from missed opportunities. I heard it from all different types of
people. It did not matter what gender they were or what part of the country
they were from. The fact is a lot of people used it. The phrase was:
“I’ll think about it.”

Who Are You?

191

A trader needs to take action rather than wait and see and then react to
the market. As a trader, you need to be quick. A sudden brain spasm spawned
by fear, doubt, or greed will most likely not bring consistently good results.
Hesitation is a trader’s enemy. That is the message in the guideline, “Plan
your trade, and then trade your plan.”
Let me give you a few examples of when “I’ll think about it” happens.
An investor identifies a trade opportunity and looks to buy near a significant support level if prices decline to the planned entry area. The trader establishes a risk factor based on a monetary loss or on a technical violation
of a support level. Things are pretty good so far, as it seems the trader has
done the necessary homework. Now comes the time to place the trade. Ah,
“I’ll think about it” pops into mind, and the trade is never entered. What happened? A lack of confidence in analytical ability, self-doubt that the trade
will work, or fear that the trader’s pride will be hurt if the trade prediction
does not work? Maybe the trader is afraid of losing money or if the trade is
a loser, a humiliating experience.
So the trader decides to wait a day or two to just watch the market. You
know that if the trade had worked out as planned, the four famous words
“I’ll think about it” would be forgotten. What fearful traders do think and
say is, “I should have done that” or “I knew that was going to be a winner”
or, better yet, “ Boy, I don’t know what got into me. That would have been a
great trade.”
Remember the “plan your trade, trade your plan” axiom? Even if a trade
does not work out, isn’t it better to take a risk and fail than to never take a
risk at all? After all, not every trade will be a winner. That is why you are—
or should be—using risk capital when trading. Hopefully, applying the P3T
signal method of trade setups may help give you the confidence you need.
Another great example of “I’ll think about it” is when a trader has a long
position in the market and has a small or respectable profit built in the trade.
The market condition may be changing. For example, supply or demand factors or an upcoming fundamental event such as a government report may
cause the upward momentum of the price advance to stop. The trader is
looking for even more money out of the trade. Maybe the trader is breaking
even or has a small profit. Deep down, the trader knows the trade is not
working and the position should be exited. Then “I’ll think about it” enters
the picture.
This is where I have seen traders and clients turn large, small, or no profits into substantial losses. Sometimes this business is not about the risks we
take for each trade that needs to be managed as much as it is what we do
with the profits we have in a trade. A profit is only a profit when you exit a
position. Until a position is offset, it is only a paper profit. Emotions such
as greed or complacency can be disastrous. They can keep you in a trade
longer than the market invited you to hang around.

192

THE MENTAL GAME: Inside the Trader

If you took a poll of investors, floor traders, brokers, and retail customers and asked them, “What does it take to be a successful trader?” what
do you think the answer would be? Timing. Pure and simple, timing. Timing
your trade entries and exits. So do your homework, plan your trade, and execute that plan by entering your orders. If the trade does not work out, examine what the results were so you can learn from the experience.
Here’s a trading thought to share with you: “It’s okay to lose your shirt
in this business, just don’t lose your pants because that is where your wallet
is.” In other words, it is okay to lose, but don’t lose everything because then
you have no equity to come back with. Losses need to be minimized and examined. Study what went wrong and use your findings as experience for the
next trade.
As Jesse Livermore and other famous traders have observed, you are
out of the game if your stake is gone. Don’t lose it all in one shot. That is
where money management techniques can prove to be vital for your survival
in this game. That applies to both losers and winners. Profits need to be
taken. If you believe in managing risks, you need to manage profits, too, because the markets giveth and they definitely taketh away.

GETTING IN TOUCH WITH REALITY
One question that new investors ask me a lot is, “Why do I do better at
paper trading than I do when I trade with real money?” The answer is easy.
Fear, doubt, complacency, greed, anxiety, excitement, and false pride can
all interfere with rational and intellectual thoughts. When dealing with real
money, you are faced with the realization that you and your money can actually be separated.
It is a sad feeling to lose a bunch of Ben Franklins quickly. (It’s more
like depressing!) When you are paper trading, you know that your winnings
are fictitious so you let them ride. However, when it comes to real dollar
trading and you have a $2,000 or $3,000 winner in a short period of time, it
is extremely hard not to look at your account balance and then call your
broker or get online and say, “Get me out!” So when you get out and a week
or so later the same position turns into what could have been a $20,000 or
$30,000 winner, I don’t know how a human being cannot say, “I should have
stayed in!”
Try not to get into the buyer’s remorse syndrome. That’s when you buy
a specific product and are still price shopping six months later to make absolutely sure that you got the best deal in town. That is another situation
that creates negative emotions and you need to guard against it. Most traders
know the saying, “Any profit is a good profit, no matter how small.” It is

Getting in Touch with Reality

193

hard not to look back, but you always have to think positive and be grateful that you picked the right market and did make some money. You should
also feel confident and comfortable knowing that your system, method, or
skills may allow you the opportunity to do it again. Hindsight trading is
easy; being a mature, professional, and optimistic trader is hard.
Fear can cause paralysis and lead to inaction. “When in doubt, get out!”
These are five famous words to remember. Do not vacillate or contemplate
a decision to get out of a position in the market. Just do it! When the markets are acting differently than what you would expect or when the information you are analyzing and the trading signals you are getting are confusing,
it is important to reevaluate your trade or position.
For you golfers, maybe it’s like losing your swing one day after being
able to hit like Ben Hogan the day before. It is confusing and frustrating because you know you can hit the ball correctly. You just did it yesterday. So
you take some practice swings to try to get your motion or swing back. As
a trader, if you are not sure about the price behavior or the way the market
is acting, then simply get out of your position. Take a look at the market
from a distance on the sidelines. Some investors like to watch and wait; others will hope things change. The better or more experienced trader will simply get out. Sometimes this simple approach will save you from losses and
give you a better time to reenter the market.
Maybe you can identify with problems such as “Greed and the undisciplined trader” or “I’m-scared-so-I’ll-think-about-it trader.” I associate greed
with the trader or investor who desperately wants to trade to make a quick
buck. This type of trader personality profile is certain to realize failure when
trading. Such traders have no discipline, acting on any rumor, story, or socalled hot tip. They are checking research web sites and jumping from one
source to another to search for the winning trade. There is a common denominator with this type of investor: They constantly do the same thing
over and over and over again, generally resulting in losses.
There is an old definition for insanity: repeating the same actions and expecting a different outcome each time. I’m not talking about the casual trader
who asks his broker, “What’s new today?” I am referring to the investor who
has traded at different firms and jumps around and loses each time.
Even worse are those investors who do not even follow their own advice or research. In the brokerage business we call them screen “watchers”—
those who stare at a computer and analyze the market without putting their
thoughts and analysis into action. They always have an opinion and think of
themselves as experts. These kinds of traders may be brilliant market analyzers but lack the emotional or financial resources to carry out their
thoughts and put them into action to achieve the desired results, a winning
trade. Life is too short to fall into that trap. There are better ways to spend

194

THE MENTAL GAME: Inside the Trader

your time and achieve nothing in return for your efforts. Trading requires
hard work, effort, and time. If I am investing my time in a project or a job, I
want to get paid for it.

GETTING DOWN TO BUSINESS
Trading should be considered a business. Treat it as such. Here is a suggestion: Work with one market and become a specialist in that market. Once
you have achieved that, then move to another product until you have maybe
10 or more markets that you are comfortable trading.
Here is another suggestion: Start a trading worksheet. You can do
this by hand or by computer. Figure 11.1 shows how I set up a daily worksheet. As the age of computers has evolved, many different software programs have been developed. If you want to start a worksheet by
computer, getting started is easy. All you need is the raw data. To get the
information, you may use several sources. One is the newspaper, another
is the brokerage firm’s web site, another is subscribing to a quote service
that provides analytical software. But remember the saying, “You get
what you pay for.” Software can be inexpensive or even free. Other software vendors can be very expensive. Most trading firms will place on
their web sites needed information such as charts and price quotes as
well as technical studies. Some will provide market commentaries or even
information such as daily, weekly, and monthly support and resistance numbers to their clients. I do it and continue to offer it to clients
free of charge.
What you really want to accomplish is gathering information for a daily
worksheet and taking the time to fill it out. This practice forces you to make
a quick study of the market and get into the habit of a daily routine. Consider
it like a daily investment diary. All you have to do is fill in the blanks. You can
make up your own field requirements, or you can use the ones shown in Figure 11.1 A daily worksheet will not guarantee that you will have profitable
trades, but it will get you to do your homework and get you into a disciplined
trading preparation sequence.
Fill in the data. Form an opinion based on technical information. Outline a trade. Establish a risk factor. Determine a profit objective. Make a
reasonable trade based on specific facts and tangible data. You do not have
to base your trade on emotions or a feeling. If you lose, then at least it was
a calculated loss. If the trade turns out to be a winner, it is a very satisfying
feeling of accomplishment, not to mention putting a profit into your trading
account. Either winning or losing, keeping a worksheet helps you track the
process and allows you to review the results any time.

195

Getting Down to Business

TRADE WORKSHEET

Trade Date

06/19/01

Commodity

Bonds 30 year

Margin

2,025 initial

Tick value

31.25

Yesterday high

10112 ⁄32

Yesterday low

10027⁄32

Yesterday close

10102 ⁄32

Last week’s high

10201⁄32

Last week’s low

10004 ⁄32

Last week’s close

10103⁄32

Five-day trend direction

down

Stochastic reading (daily)

%K = 66 %D = 75

Relative strength index

53

3-day moving average

1012 ⁄32

9-day moving average

10031⁄32

18-day moving average

10019 ⁄32

Pivot point

1013⁄32

Buy/sell: Buy at 10018⁄32

Support 1

10026 ⁄32

Stop loss: Sell at 10008⁄32
stop

Resistance 1

10111⁄32

Profit objective: Sell at
10110⁄32

Support 2

10018 ⁄32

Results: Winner! High of
day was 10110⁄32

Resistance 2

10120⁄32

Contingencies: Once one
side is filled, cancel other

Notes: Market has been down for five days; technicals are showing an oversold market condition. Look to
buy near Support 2 since the primary support is projected to be lower than the previous day’s low (10027). Risk ten points 10 × 31.25 = 312.50 plus commissions. Profit objective: Look to sell near 101-10
(near today’s price from Resistance 1 and below yesterday’s high of 101-12). If filled at 101-18, a $500
profit is generated at 101-02 and $750 profit at 101-10.
Trade followup: Once filled on the buy side at 101-18, watch market to move stop. Move stop up to
break even if bonds trade up to 100-28.

FIGURE 11.1

Sample daily trading worksheet.

196

THE MENTAL GAME: Inside the Trader

On successful trading days it will be good to recap your successes so
that they can be repeated. Of course, on bad days recapping can allow you
to focus on what went wrong so you can improve and stop repeating the
same mistakes over and over again.

A DOSE OF REALITY
When you fill out your worksheet and study the markets you select, make
sure you have a realistic grasp of what you can accomplish with the resources you have. One of the major sources of strain for you may be the
amount of capital you have to trade. Overreaching or taking on more than
you or your account can handle can be a major cause of discouragement
and defeatism, the opposite of the attributes you want to develop to be a
successful trader.
Be realistic about the amount of total capital you have to trade compared with the margin requirements you need. Study the markets you are
familiar with and can realistically afford. If your trading account is only
$10,000 or less, studying or charting the Nasdaq 100 index futures with an
initial margin requirement of close to $20,000 would not be considered a realistic approach and would most likely be a waste of your time.
Here is a guideline for what you might be able to trade. Assume your
starting balance is, say, $10,000 and you want to trade five contracts of a
commodity where the initial margin is $2,000. For each full position, you
are using $10,000 of margin money ($2,000 × 5 = $10,000). That’s 100 percent
of your investment capital for one trade. If the market moves against you
only a small amount, it could wipe out most or all of your account.
Some money managers suggest using only 50 percent of your investment capital in any one trade and then risking 20 percent of your initial
capital in that trade. With this formula you would be using $5,000 in margin on a $10,000 account, risking $2,000 on your first trade. That is more
realistic than thinking you can trade five contracts. Throwing the dice
and putting all your capital in one trade idea is a crapshoot and sounds
like a long shot. This is not to say it can’t be done, but you need to be able
to accept the consequences if you lose your entire trading account in that
one trade.
Use only risk capital to trade. Specifically, that means only money you
can afford to lose. Then accept the fact that you will lose on some trades,
maybe all of your money or even more than was in your account. If you
don’t realize this, then you might be trading scared money, and fear of losing will keep you from placing well thought out trades or, worse, cause you
to hesitate and get in the market late after the move is over.
