This approach works well when only one item is analyzed against a
benchmark at a time. The numerical values of the raw RS line cannot be
used and have no real meaning. It is the slope of the line on the chart that
gives the clues. The numerical readings of one security against a benchmark
cannot be compared with the numerical readings of another security against
the same benchmark. See the examples in the next two graphs. Figure 2.11
shows the RS line of the European utilities sector against the STOXX 600
index. This RS line is clearly trending down from high values near 1.70 to low

63

Oct

Nov
2007

FIGURE 2.10

Dec

Jan

Feb

Mar

S&P Energy Index

Apr

May

Jun
Jul
2008

1

1

Aug

2

Sep

2

Oct

Nov

S&P Energy Index with RS Line and RS-MACD against S&P 500 Index

Dec

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr
2009

May

Jun

Jul

−0.02

−0.01

0.00

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.34

0.36

0.38

0.40

0.42

0.44

0.46

0.48

0.50

700
650
600
550
500
450
400
350
300

64
FIGURE 2.11

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
European Utilities Sector with RS Line against STOXX 600 Index

values around 1.10. Figure 2.12 shows the RS line of the European Travel &
Leisure sector against the STOXX 600 index. This RS line is clearly trending
up but has much lower numerical values, from lows near 0.40 up to levels
around 0.50.
Given this situation, the resulting values for the RS-MACD line and its
trigger-line will therefore have no real meaning, either.
FIGURE 2.12

European Travel & Leisure Sector with RS Line against STOXX 600 Index

Everything Is Relative Strength Is Everything

65

The JdK RS-Ratio and JdK RS-Momentum

In order to be able to compare all elements in a universe and rank them based
on their numerical readings—that is, high values are good and low values
are bad—we need something else. What we are looking for is a uniform
measure of relative strength that can be used across all the elements in a
universe against the benchmark for that universe, but also to measure the
relative strength of one element against another element. My search for such
a measure resulted in the development of the (proprietary) JdK RS-Ratio.∗
This indicator measures the relative strength of all elements in a universe in
such a way that the numerical results are all comparable. Not only are the
values of the JdK RS-Ratio telling whether an element of the universe is doing
better than the benchmark, they are also telling if an element is doing better
or worse than another element.
The JdK RS-Ratio can therefore be used to rank a universe based on
relative strength and answer the question, “What are the ﬁve best sectors,
stocks, and so forth?” (see Table 2.2).
Table 2.2 shows an example of the STOXX universe ranked on the value
of the JdK RS-Ratio indicator. The differences are clearly visible. There is
only one problem with this table: it is a table—and technicians do not like
tables. We like to see graphs! The snapshot of values that is printed in the table
deﬁnitely gives valuable information regarding the current relative status of all
elements in the universe. But how does that value compare to its own history?
How did that element get to its JdK RS-Ratio value and the accompanying
position in the table? In what direction is the JdK RS-Ratio value heading, up
or down? To answer these questions, we need the graphical history of the JdK
RS-Ratio. Figure 2.13 shows the JdK RS-Ratio line of the European Retail
sector versus the STOXX index.
When we plot the JdK RS-Ratio below the price graph, it gives a pretty
good indication of the relative strength of the security being analyzed against
its benchmark. The visual inspection of that line is as straightforward as the
interpretation of the raw relative strength line; a rising JdK RS-Ratio is good,
that is, the stock is “outperforming,” and a declining JdK RS-Ratio is bad,
that is, the stock is “underperforming.” Despite the fact that we can use the
JdK RS-Ratio as a uniform measure of relative strength by interpreting high
values as strong and low values as weak, and that we can plot the indicator on
a regular price chart in order to get an indication of the relative position of
that element, it’s still not painting a complete picture of the market.
∗

The JdK RS-Ratio indicator is available on the Bloomberg terminal.

66

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
TABLE 2.2

European Sectors Ranked by JdK RS-Ratio Value

Index Name

JdK RS-Ratio

STXE 600 Au&Pt € Pr

112.03

STXE 600 BsRs € Pr

107.95

STXE 600 Chem € Pr

105.62

STXE 600 Ig&S € Pr

104.00

STXE 600 FnSv € Pr

103.09

STXE 600 Cn&Mt € Pr

102.67

STXE 600 Tr&Ls € Pr

102.45

STXE 600 Oil&G € Pr

102.18

STXE 600 Pr&Ho € Pr

101.78

STXE 600 Tech € Pr

100.80

STXE 600 ReEs € Pr

100.05

STXE 600 Fd&Bv € Pr

100.02

STXE 600 Mda € Pr

99.40

STXE 600 Ins € Pr

98.14

STXE 600 Tel € Pr

98.13

STXE 600 HeCr € Pr

97.74

STXE 600 Rtl € Pr

97.51

STXE 600 Util € Pr

97.47

STXE 600 Bnk € Pr

92.66

The problem that surfaces here is that one “high value” may not be the
same as another “high value.” This is better explained using Figure 2.13.
Toward the end of 2008 (see label 1), the JdK RS-Ratio line is moving around
108, which is a relatively high value. A couple of months later, in April 2009
(see label 2), the JdK RS-Ratio line is again moving around 108, at the same
relatively high value. But this time the line is clearly moving down as opposed
to up, with acceleration on the ﬁrst occasion. Obviously, the ﬁrst situation is
preferred over the second one.
A similar situation occurs at low(er) levels. In September 2009 (see label 3)
the JdK RS-Ratio line is moving around 96, which is a relatively low level.
In December (see label 4) the line is once again around 96, which is still a

Everything Is Relative Strength Is Everything
FIGURE 2.13

67

Europe Retail Sector with JdK RS-Ratio Line versus STOXX Index

low level, but now the line has started to move up again and could be more
interesting.
What we need here is an objective way to determine whether the JdK
RS-Ratio line is moving up or down. In order to achieve this, we borrow the
technique of using a trigger-line, as it is used in the construction of the MACD
indicator. So a 9-period trigger-line (moving average) is drawn through the
values of the JdK RS-Ratio line. When the JdK RS-Ratio line is above its
trigger-line, the trend of the JdK RS-Ratio line is up. When the JdK RS-Ratio
line is moving below its trigger-line, the trend is considered to be down. Such
an example is shown in Figure 2.14.
The graph once again shows the European retail sector with the JdK
RS-Ratio line, but now also the trigger-line has also been added. The use of
this trigger-line helps to determine when the trend of the JdK RS-Ratio line
has changed from up to down (see label 1) and the other way around from
down to up (see label 2).
When the JdK RS-Ratio line is moving above the 100-level and crosses
below its trigger-line, the momentum of the JdK RS-Ratio line starts to
deteriorate and decline. This deterioration of momentum can be the prelude
to the JdK RS-Ratio line eventually crossing below the 100-level. This is a
deﬁnite signal that relative strength has turned negative.
Similarly, when the JdK RS-Ratio line is moving below the zero line
and crosses above its trigger-line, that is the moment when the momentum

68
FIGURE 2.14

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
Europe Retail Sector with JdK RS-Ratio Line versus STOXX Index and

Trigger-Line

of the JdK RS-Ratio line is starting to improve. If the improvement of this
momentum continues, the JdK RS-Ratio line will eventually cross above the
100-line, signaling positive relative strength for the instrument at hand.
The graph in Figure 2.14 is an excellent example of the fact that a measure
of relative strength can move up while prices are moving down, and can move
down while prices are moving up. In the last quarter of 2008, when equity
markets worldwide were going through serious declines, the JdK RS-Ratio line
of the European retail sector started to move up, indicating an outperformance
of this sector. At that time, the European retail sector index also fell in price,
but far less than the broader benchmark against which its relative strength is
measured. Similarly, when equity markets in general started to move up again
in March 2009, the JdK RS-Ratio line crossed below its trigger-line, indicating
a weakening of the positive relative strength, and ﬁnally the JdK RS-Ratio
dropped below the 100-level, which deﬁnitely signals underperformance. All
this happened while the index itself showed rising prices, but they did not
rise rapidly enough. Other sectors were doing much better than retail during
that period.
In fact what the trigger-line helps to measure is the momentum of the JdK
RS-Ratio line. Once again, in order to be able to use a measure of momentum
across a universe, it needs to be reworked into a uniform indicator: this
became the JdK RS-Momentum indicator. This uniform measure of relative

Everything Is Relative Strength Is Everything

69

FIGURE 2.15

European Retail Sector with JdK RS-Ratio and JdK RS-Momentum Lines
versus STOXX Index

momentum can be used to further compare elements in a universe against a
benchmark and against each other.
An example of the JdK RS-Ratio line and the JdK RS-Momentum line
together in one graph is shown in Figure 2.15. This graph again shows
the European retail sector, but this time in combination with the JdK RSRatio line (solid) and the JdK RS-Momentum line (dotted) plotted in one
graph below the price chart. By plotting the two uniformed measures on one
chart, the interaction between JdK RS-Ratio and -Momentum becomes clear.
JdK RS-Ratio is considered to be the most important and most inﬂuential
numerical measure. However, it is clear in the chart that JdK RS-Momentum
is leading the JdK RS-Ratio and thus serves as an early warning signal. When
JdK RS-Momentum drops below the 100-level, the JdK RS-Ratio has formed
a peak and has started to move down. When JdK RS-Momentum crosses
above the 100-level, the JdK RS-Ratio line has formed a low and has started
to move up.
By using the indicators and the graphs described above you get a structured
approach to analyzing the relative position (attractiveness) of the elements in a
universe vis-à-vis a benchmark. This “universe” can be any group of securities
or indices that are comparable. It can be a group of sector-indices against a
broad index like the 10 S&P 500 economic sectors (GICS level I) against
the S&P 500 index or the 19 STOXX sector indices against the STOXX

70

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

600 index. Or it can be all members (individual equities) of a sector index,
for example, banks, against the appropriate sector index (the banking sector
index, in this case).
Be careful when the universe contains, for example, both equity and
interest-rate-related instruments. Make sure that all elements are on the same
footing; usually the best thing to do is to use ﬁxed income (total return)
indices in order to compare them against equities.
In my European Sector Report, I used the STOXX 600 universe and
presented the charts of all 19 sector indices with their relative strength against
the STOXX 600 index, with comments on their relative attractiveness and
expectations or the relative trends going forward. In the comments I highlighted some interesting equities that were showing strong relative pictures
against their sector index. In this way I wanted to present a top-down approach for fund managers. First I identiﬁed the sectors that were expected
to outperform the general index, and then I selected individual equities that
were expected to outperform their sector index. The selection of individual
equities was also done on sectors that, as a whole, were showing a downtrend
against the broader market. The rationale behind that is that a professional
fund manager who oversees a portfolio of European stocks is very unlikely
to have, for example, no banking stocks whatsoever in his portfolio. He may
have an underweighting of banks against the weight of banking stocks in the
broader benchmark, but will rarely have none. So there is still a need for
some guidance toward which banking stocks to hold, even if the sector is
underperforming.
After putting together the report on a monthly basis, which is fun, the hard
work started: calling the fund managers and trying to get my message across
and hopefully pick up some trades. This was desperately needed to ﬁnance
the fun! This was the moment when the question posed at the beginning of
the chapter used to pop up: “What are your ﬁve best picks?” Now I was able
to answer that question and even back it up with some numbers!
This routine continued for a number of months with reasonable success,
both in terms of results of the recommendations as well as sales success. At
some stage I was given an intern on the desk, an econometrics student who
was going to write his thesis on the use of technical analysis in investment
analysis. Among other things, one of the studies he conducted was to evaluate
the results of the recommendation that had been published in the European
Sector Report for the four years it had been published at that time. The
recommendations that were used in that report were “outperform,” “underperform,” and “neutral.” After evaluating all the recommendations from the
four years’ worth of reports, he found that the recommendations produced a

Everything Is Relative Strength Is Everything

71

“signiﬁcant outperformance compared to the benchmark.” A good start, but
not good enough as it covered only four years of monthly data, that is, 48
observations. As the data for the indices used in the report (STOXX family)
went back to 1987 and the “rules” to get to the recommendations were fairly
clear, the next study he did was to take the data set starting in 1987 and run
the rules to get the recommendations and evaluate the hypothetical results
again. Once again, the outcome of the test was that the results showed a
signiﬁcant outperformance compared to the benchmark. To me it was proof
that the approach was valid and that we were actually adding value to the
investment process for clients.
With that whole dataset and all the results (albeit, hypothetical results),
some more tests were used to validate the approach. One of these tests was to
look at all the recommendations (1987–2003 = 16 × 12 = 192 months ×
18 sectors = 3,456) and see what the excess return compared to the benchmark was three months after the recommendation had been issued. The
result of that test was that both the outperformance and the underperformance recommendations, on average, generated an excess return. But what
was very interesting to see was that the average excess return of the underperform recommendations was signiﬁcantly higher than the excess return of the
outperform recommendations.
Now, this observation puts the question, “What are your ﬁve best picks?”
in a whole different light. Basically, it is the wrong question. The right question
to ask is “Which ﬁve stocks, sectors, and so forth, should I avoid?” As a matter
of fact, the rationale behind this is probably very recognizable for many of
us. If we look back at the end of a year, we will always recognize a number
of positions about which we can say “If we had not had those . . .” If we are
able to avoid the bleeders, the results (i.e., outperformance) will more or less
follow automatically.
So we moved from raw relative strength to two measures of relative
strength that make all elements in a universe comparable. On the one hand,
there is the JdK RS-Ratio that measures the relative strength of the security against its benchmark, and on the other hand, there is the JdK RSMomentum, which measures the direction and the rate of change of the
RS-Ratio line. This basically tells us if relative strength is getting stronger or
weaker and whether it is turning up or down. We also found that identifying
the underperformers in a universe is more important than ﬁnding the outperformers. The only thing missing was a good way to get this information
to clients in a simple and understandable way.
With this knowledge I changed the layout of the report somewhat to also
include the underperformers in a universe both on a sector level as well as

72

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

on individual equities. I kept the graph of the broad market index (STOXX
600) followed by graphs of each individual sector with a pane showing JdK
RS-Ratio and JdK RS-Momentum of the sector against the broad market
index. But instead of highlighting some interesting individual names in a
written comment, I ranked the whole universe based on the JdK RS-Ratio
and added a table for each sector showing the best (i.e., strongest) ﬁve stocks
of that sector, but more importantly the table also showed the worst (i.e.,
weakest) ﬁve stocks of that sector in an attempt to (also) draw attention to
the weaker sectors or stocks of a universe!
Once again, this proved to be an improvement of the format as it answered
a lot of questions beforehand that clients were going to pose. The problem
that persisted was that either the analyst who was going to give ideas to
the portfolio manager, or the portfolio manager himself, still had to browse
through all the individual elements of a universe to determine which sectors
or stocks inside a sector were going to be good candidates to overweight or
underweight. The desire to better visualize all these relationships and present
them to clients in an easy-to-understand way was very much there, but the
method for how to go about this was missing.
I experimented with many different chart formats and tables. With hindsight I can now say that most technicians are so accustomed to the classical
way of charting prices, with time on the horizontal (x-) axis and prices and/or
the values of indicators on the vertical (y-) axis, that it is difﬁcult to alter that
routine.
I must have had a very bright moment when pulling up a very basic x,y
scatter plot and starting to ﬁll it with the JdK RS-Ratio as the x-value and JdK
RS-Momentum as the y-value. The ﬁrst time I did this, I was working with
the 19 STOXX sectors in the European universe. Filling the plot with the
x,y values for these 19 sectors gave me a picture like the one in Figure 2.16,
which became a very revealing picture.
But what are we looking at? The best way to describe this and build the
picture is to start with a schematic overview of what is going on in the scatter
diagram as shown in Figure 2.17.
On the horizontal axis the JdK RS-Ratio is plotted, while the JdK RSMomentum values are plotted on the vertical axis. That is done for all elements
in the universe. Both axes are crossing at the 100-level, which is the midpoint
of the chart. As all elements are scaled against a benchmark, this benchmark
becomes the anchor point of the chart at the 100,100 crossing. The interpretation for both measures is that values above 100 are good and values below
100 are bad. The higher the value, the stronger it is, and the lower the value,
the weaker it is.

73

Everything Is Relative Strength Is Everything
FIGURE 2.16

Scatter Plot with 19 STOXX Sectors

103
TECH

STOXX 600 EUROPE €

INSU

102

JdK RS-Momentum

BANK
OILG
CONS

101
UTIL

FISV

MEDA
STOXX 600 EU

100

IGSV

HTHC
TRLS

TELE
FBEV
REAL
PHHG

99

BRES

RETL

98

CHEM
AUTO
2/18/2011

97
94

96

98

100

102

104

106

108

110

JdK RS-Ratio

The top-right quadrant is where we will ﬁnd the elements that have
a strong relative strength, that is, high JdK RS-Ratio values, and where that
relative strength is still rising further. So this is the area where you will ﬁnd the
elements that you want to be overweight or long in a portfolio. Before the JdK
RS-Ratio values start to decline and eventually cross below the 100-level, ﬁrst
JdK RS-Momentum will start to level off and then begin to decline. When
that happens the element drops into the bottom-right quadrant. These are
the elements in which the relative strength is still positive—JdK RS-Ratio at
levels above 100—but momentum is declining. If relative strength continues
to weaken and momentum continues to accelerate on the downside, the
element will eventually be pushed into the lower-left quadrant. These are the
elements that are showing weak relative strength, that is, JdK RS-Ratio levels
below 100 and the negative momentum continues to push them further down
on the JdK RS-Ratio axis. These are the elements you want to be underweight
or short in a portfolio.
Just as all good things come to an end, also all bad things will eventually come to an end. At some stage the acceleration of the downward JdK
RS-Momentum will level off and turn back up again. This is the moment
at which an element will be pushed from the lower-left quadrant into the
top-left quadrant. At that stage the JdK RS-Ratio line is still in negative territory but moving up already. When that improvement continues the element

74

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

FIGURE 2.17

Schematic Overview of Rotation inside the Scatter Plot

JdK RS-Momentum

4

1

– / +

+ / +

Eventually also this weak RS will
come to an end. This starts with
an improvement of the relative
momentum, which will push an
element into the top-left
quadrant.

Elements in the top-right
quadrant have positive relative
strength and positive relative
momentum, which means that
the RS is still getting stronger.

When relative momentum
continues to weaken it will
eventually push the element into
the bottom-left quadrant; this
means negative RS, which is still
getting weaker.

Before relative strength becomes
negative, relative momentum
starts to level off and weaken
first. When this happens an
element moves into the bottomright quadrant.

– / –

+ / –

3

2
JdK RS-Ratio

will be pushed into the top-right quadrant again, and rotation has come
full circle.
The ﬁrst time I saw this rotation in action was what Germans would call
an Aha erlebnis for me. Until then, I had often heard traders talking about
sector-rotation but no one had ever been able to show me that sectors were
actually rotating around a center/benchmark. With this tool I was now able to
show people that markets actually do rotate, and that they do so in a clockwise
fashion.
These pictures eventually became the Relative Rotation Graphs (RRGs)
that I have been using in my research reports for institutional clients (available
through our web sites) in various developing formats since 2005 and that have
