
328 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
MC sampling distribution. This entire process is repeated many times
(>500) with different random pairings each time. The sampling distribution is generated from this large number of values.
Note that there is no need to reposition each rule's return distribution
to be centered over zero as is done with WRC because it assumes that all
rules have an expected return of zero. In contrast, the MC sampling distribution's mean is the expected return of a useless rule in a data-mining
venture. If, after randomly assigning rule values to market returns, the
sampling distribution is situated at a value greater than zero, so be it. pvalues can be computed directly from the MC generated sampling distribution, just as they would be with a sampling distribution generated by
alternative methods. The p-value is the area in the right tail of the distribution that lies at or beyond the back-tested rule's mean return.
A limitation of the MC method compared to WRC is that it cannot be
used to generate confidence intervals because it does not test a hypothesis about the rule's mean return. MC's null hypothesis is simply that all
rules tested have output values that are randomly correlated with future
market behavior.
To recap, the steps by which the MC permutation method generates
the sampling distribution for a data miner are:
1. Obtain the daily rule output states for all N rules examined during the
data-mining venture.
2. Each rule's output values are randomly paired with a scrambled version of the actual future market price changes. Note that it is important the same pairings be used for all rules. Thus, if a rule's output
value for day 7 is paired with the market return for day 15, this same
pairing must be done for all competing rules. This is done to preserve
correlation structure that may be present in the rules, which is one of
the five factors impacting the data-mining bias.
3. Determine the mean rate of return for each rule.
4. Out of these N rules, select the highest mean return. This value becomes the first value for the sampling distribution of the mean for the
best mean among N useless rules.
5. Repeat steps 2, 3, and 4, M times (where M = 500 or some large
number).
6. Form the sampling distribution from the M values obtained in steps 2
through 5.
7. The p-value for a back-tested rules can be determined by determining
the fraction of the values obtained by step 6 that are equal to or
greater than its mean return.

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Cold of Objective TA

329

Potential Flaws in Initial WRC and MCP Methods. Both WRC
and MC test the null hypothesis that all rules in the data-mined universe
are useless. The rule miner hopes to reject this hypothesis in favor of
the alternative hypothesis: that not all the rules examined are useless.
As pointed out earlier, the meaning of the term useless depends on the
randomization method used. In the context of WRC, a useless rule has
an expected return equal to zero. In the context of the MC, useless
refers to a rule whose output values are randomly paired with the market's future change.
As was discussed in Chapter 5, a hypothesis test can err in two ways.
A type-I error occurs when the null hypothesis is true (all rules tested really are useless) is rejected in error. This occurs when a rule that is in fact
useless managed to earning a high mean return and a low p-value by luck.
This is the data miner's fool's gold.
A type-II error occurs when the null hypothesis is in fact false and
should be rejected, but the rule's performance is too low to do so. That is
to say, the rule really does have predictive power, but its virtue remains
undetected because it experienced bad luck during the back test. The data
miner winds up leaving real TA gold in the ground.
The ability of a hypothesis test to avoid making a type-II error is
referred to as the test's power, not to be confused with a rule's predictive power. Here, we are speaking of the power of a statistical test to
detect a false Ho' So a hypothesis test is characterized by two measures
of goodness: its significance (probability of making a type-I error) and
its power (probability of avoiding a type-II error). It is with respect to
the issue of power that initial versions of WRC and MCP are open to
criticism.
As pointed out by economist Peter Hansen,45 WRC and, by extension,
the MCP would both suffer a loss of power (increased likelihood of making a type-II error) when the data-mined universe contains rules that are
worse than the benchmark. This refers to a situation in which one or more
rules are actually worse than useless-they have expected returns that
are less than zero. This could occur, for example, if one were to reverse
the output value of a rule that has an expected return that is truly greater
than zero. Because approximately half of the rules tested in Part Two of
this book are obtained in this fashion (i.e., inverse rules), the research
presented in Part Two of this book is vulnerable to the problem discussed
by Hansen.
To evaluate Hansen's criticism, the power of both WRC and MCP was
evaluated by Dr. Timothy Masters, on an ATR universe that contained
rules that were both better than and worse than the benchmark. In other
words, the evaluation simulated exactly the case that troubles Hansen.
These tests showed that his concerns are justified for a situation in which

330 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
a rule with negative expected returns has an extremely large variance in
returns. This can drastically reduce the power of both WRC and MCP.
However, in cases that one is more likely to encounter in TA rule data mining, both methods are reasonably resistant to this problem. Therefore,
when there is one or more superior rules in the universe of examined
rules, both WRC and the MCP method have a reasonable chance of detectingthem.
Recent Enhancement to WRC and ~lCP. Despite the reasonable
power of the initial versions of WRC and MCP methods, a recent paper by
Romano and Wolfl 6 recommends a modification that enhances the power
of WRC and that also appears to enhance the power of MCP. Thus the Romano and Wolf enhancement reduces the probability of a Type-II error.
This modification was introduced to the versions of WRC and MC used in
Part Two's case study. However, at this time, there is no commercial version of WRC with this enhancement. The MCP version with the enhancement is being placed in the public domain and codes for it will be made
available on a web site, www.evidencebasedta.com.

Theories of
Nonrandom
Price Motion

t the risk of stating the obvious, if market fluctuations were completely random, TA would be pointless. TA is a justifiable endeavor
if and only if price movements are nonrandom to some degree
some portion of the time. This chapter offers several theories explaining
why episodes of nonrandom price movements ought to occur in financial
market prices.
Although the occurrence of nonrandom price motion is necessary
to justify TA, this alone is not sufficient to justify any specific TA
method. Each method must demonstrate, by objective evidence, its
ability to capture some part of the nonrandom price motion. Part Two
will evaluate a large number of TA rules with respect to their ability to
do just that.

A

THE IMPORTANCE OF THEORY
Several new theories from the field of behavioral finance explain why
price movements are nonrandom to some degree and therefore potentially predictable. Thus, these novel theories take a position that is contrary to the efficient markets hypothesis (EMH), a cornerstone of finance
theory for over 40 years. EMH contends that price changes in financial
markets are random and, therefore, unpredictable. Therefore, these new
theories hold out hope for TA.

33.

332 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
The reader may wonder why theoretical support for nonrandornness
is even necessary. If a TA method has a profitable back test, isn't that all
that should be needed? It could be asserted that a significantly profitable
back test not only establishes that markets are nonrandom, it also establishes that the method is able to exploit some portion of the market's nonrandomness.
This view misses the importance of theoretical support. Even when
all statistical precautions have been taken, a profitable back test that is
not supported by sound theory is an isolated result and possibly still a
lucky one. A successful back test always provokes the question: Will the
rule continue to work in the future? Theory can be helpful here because a
back test that is consistent with sound theory is less likely to be a statistical fluke. When a back test has theoretical foundation, it is no longer an
isolated fact, but part of a larger cohesive picture in which theory explains
fact and fact confirms theory.
For example, the profitability of technical trend-following systems in
commodity futures can be explained as compensation (i.e., a risk premium) for providing a valuable service to commercial hedgers, that of risk
transference. In other words, economic theory predicts that futures markets should manifest enough profitable trends to motivate trend followers
to accept the price risks hedgers wish to shed. I This is discussed later in
this chapter.

SCIEN'flFIC l'HEORIES
In everyday speech, a theory is a speculative conjecture about why something is the way it is. As explained in Chapter 3, a scientific theory is something different. First, it offers a succinct explanation for a broad range of
prior observations. Second, and most importantly, it makes specific predictions that are later confirmed by new observations.
Kepler's laws of planetary motion 2 concisely explained a large
number of prior astronomical observations and made specific predictions that were subsequently confirmed by additional observations.
However, as good as Kepler's laws were, Newton's theory of gravitation
was better because it was broader in scope. It not only explained why
Kepler's laws worked but explained a far wider variety of phenomena.
Theories of nonrandom price motion need not predict with the accuracy of physical theories. However, to be useful, they must not only succinctly describe a wide variety of previously observed market behavior,
but must also make testable predictions confirmed by subsequent
observations.

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

333

WHAT IS WRONG WIl'I. POPUlAR 1)\ THEORY?
Many TA texts offer no explanation about why their proposed methods
work. The statement of John Magee, author of one of TA:s seminal works3
is typical. He said, "We can never hope to know why the market behaves
as it does, we can only aspire to understand how. History obviously has
repetitive tendencies and that's good enough."
Some TA texts do offer explanations, but these are typically ad-hoc rationales that generate no testable predictions. According to author John
Murphy, the cornerstone premise of TA is "anything that can possibly affect the price-fundamentally, politically, psychologically, or otherwiseis actually reflected in the price of that market."4 One would be hard
pressed to extract testable predictions from such a vague statement.
Actually, this statement, which purports to explain why TA works,
contains a logical contradiction. For, if it were true that price did reflect
(i.e., discount) all possible information, it would imply that price was devoid of any predictive information. To understand why, assume a hypothetical price pattern has just occurred in stock XYZ, which is currently at
$50, and based on the pattern a move to $60 is implied. Then, by definition, when the pattern occurs its predictive implication has yet to be reflected in prices. However, if the premise that price reflects all information
were true, the price would already be at the level predicted by the pattern,
thus negating the pattern's forecasting ability.
This logical contradiction is even more apparent when it is pointed
out that EMH, a school of thought that rejects the efficacy of TA, rests on
the very same premise; "prices fully reflect all available information."5
Technical analysis cannot be based on the same premise as its mortal enemy. This contradiction is an example of cloudy uncritical thinking that is
all too common in the popular version of TA.
Fortunately for TA, its cornerstone premise that price reflects all information appears to be contradicted by fact. One example is the socalled underreaction effect, which has been postulated by behavioral
finance. It says that, because prices sometimes fail to respond to new information as rapidly as EMH theorists contend, a systematic price movement, or trend, toward a price level that does reflect the new information
occurs. The failure of prices to respond rapidly is caused by a several cognitive errors that afflict investors, such as the conservatism bias and the
anchoring effect. These are discussed later in this chapter.
Another popular justification of TA is based on pop psychology. By
pop psychology, I mean principles of human behavior that seem plausible
but lack scientific support. According to noted economist and authority
in the field of behavioral finance, Robert Shiller, "In considering lessons
from psychology, it must be noted that the many popular accounts of the

334 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
psychology of investing are simply not credible. Investors are said to be
euphoric or frenzied during booms or panic-stricken during market
crashes. In both booms and crashes, investors are descried as blindly following the herd like so many sheep, with no minds of their own."6 The
fact is, people are more rational than these pop-psychology theories suggest. "During the most significant financial events, most people are preoccupied with other personal matters, not with the financial markets at all.
So it is hard to imagine that the market as a whole reflects the emotions
described by these psychological theories."? We will need to look beyond
the platitudes of popular texts for TA's justification. Fortunately, theories
developed in the field of behavioral finance and elsewhere are beginning
to offer the theoretical support TA needs.

THE ENEMl"S POSITION: EFFIl:IENT MAR.KETS

AND RANDOM WALKS
Before discussing theories that explain why nonrandom price movements
should exist, we need to consider the enemy's position, the EMH. Recently, some have argued that EMH does not necessarily imply that prices
follow unpredictable random walks,8 and that efficient markets and price
predictability can coexist. However, the pioneers of EMH asserted that
random walks were a necessary consequence of efficient markets. This
section states their case and examines its weaknesses.

What Is an Efficient Market?
An efficient market is a market that cannot be beaten. In such a market,

no fundamental or technical analysis strategy, formula, or system can earn
a risk-adjusted rate of return that beats the market defined by a benchmark index. If the market is indeed efficient, the risk-adjusted return
earned by buying and holding the market index is the best one can hope
for. This is so because prices in an efficient market properly reflect all
known and knowable information. Therefore, the current price provides
the best estimate of each security's value.
According to EMH, markets achieve a state of efficient pricing because of the vigorous efforts of numerous rational investors attempting to
maximize their wealth. In their pursuit of true value, these investors are
constantly updating their beliefs with the latest information in a probabilistically correct mannerf! so as to project each security's future cash
flows. Although no single investor is all knowing, collectively they know
as much as can possibly be known. This knowledge motivates investors to

335

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

buy and sell in such a way that prices settle at the equilibrium or rational
price level.
In such a world, prices change only when new information arrives.
When it does, prices change almost instantly to a new rational price that
properly reflects the news. Thus, prices do not gradually trend from one
rational price level to the next, giving the trend analyst a chance to get on
board. Not at all. In the world posited by EMH, prices trace a step function
as they move almost instantly from one rational level to the next. If the
news is favorable, prices rise, and if it's unfavorable, prices fall. Because it
is not predictable whether the news will be favorable or unfavorable (it
wouldn't be news if it was), price changes will be unpredictable as well.
This is illustrated in Figure 7.1.
The Consequences of Market Efficiency:
Good and Bad

Market efficiency has good and bad in1plications. They are good for the
economy as a whole but bad-very bad-for TA. They are good for the
economy because rational prices send vital signals of asset values that, in
tum, encourage the efficient allocation of scarce resources, such as capital and labor. This fosters economic growth. 10
However, prices in an efficient market are unpredictable rendering all
forms of TA useless. According to Paul Sanmelson, financial market prices

Price
Negative News Event

:- R~tio-n~l:
, Price ,-1
1

Positive News E\ent

FIGURE 7.1

Efficient market's response to positive and negative news.

Time

336 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
follow a random walk because of the actions of many intelligent/rational
investors. In seeking to maximize wealth, they buy undervalued assets
pushing their prices higher and sell overvalued assets pushing prices
lower. 11 "Taken to its logical extreme, it means that a blindfolded monkey
selecting stocks by throwing darts at a newspaper's financial pages could
do just as well as one carefully selected by the experts." 12
"EMH rules out the possibility of trading systems, based on available
information, that have expected profits or returns in excess of equilibrium
expected profit or return."13 "In plain English, an average investorwhether an individual, pension fund, or a mutual fund---cannot hope to
consistently beat the market, and the vast resources that such investors
dedicate to analyzing, picking and trading securities are wasted."14 Although, under EMH, it is still possible to generate positive returns from an
investment strategy, when those returns are adjusted for risk, they will not
be superior to the return of buying and holding the market index portfolio.
The efficient markets hypothesis also declares that when there is no
news entering the market, prices tend to oscillate in a random and unbiased fashion above and below the rational price level. See Figure 7.2. Because this level is itself subject to uncertainty, no technical or
fundamental indicator can reliably indicate when prices are above or below it. This means, for example, that in an efficient market stocks with a
low price to book ratio, a well known fundamental indicator, are no more
likely to appreciate than stocks with a high price to book ratio. This is a
cold world for anyone looking for an edge.

Price

-------.

: Rational I

Price

r I

Time
FIGURE 7.2

Efficient market hypothesis (random and unbiased pricing errors).

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

337

False Notions of Market Efficiency

There are a number of commonly held but false notions about market efficiency. First is the idea that efficiency requires the market price to be
equal to rational value at all times. In fact, market efficiency simply requires that price deviates from rational value in an unbiased fashion.
Therefore, positive deviations from rational value are just as likely as
negative deviations, and at any point in time there is a roughly equal
chance that the asset's price will be above its rational value as below it.
Moreover, these deviations are random. Thus the time series of pricing
errors in an efficient market is a random variable whose probability distribution is centered at the rational price and is approximately symmetrical about it.
A second false notion about market efficiency is that it implies that
no one can beat the market. Actually, in any given time period, about 50
percent of all investors will outperform the benchmark index, while the
remaining 50 percent underperform. The notion that no single investor
or money manager can beat the market over the long term is equally
false. Given enough players, a small number are likely to have lengthy
streaks of market beating returns even if their strategies are totally without merit. Nassim Taleb l5 shows that even if we assume money managers are no better than a blind monkey throwing darts l6 (probability of
beating the market = 0.5) and the universe of managers is large enough,
say 10,000, after five years there is likely to be about 312 firms who have
beaten the market five years in a row. These lucky folks are the ones
who will send salesmen calling. The other 9,682 are less likely to knock
on your door.

The Evidence in Favor of EMU
As previously discussed, a scientific hypothesis plays a dual role: explanation and prediction. Its veracity is tested by comparing its predictions
with new observations. As discussed in Chapter 3, predictions are meaningful only if they are specific enough to offer the possibility of empirical
falsification. If new observations do contradict a hypothesis's predictions, the hypothesis is either reformulated and tested anew or thrown
out. However, what should be inferred when observations and predictions agree?
On this issue there is debate. Philosophers in the camp of David Hume
contend that no amount of confirmatory evidence is ever sufficient to
prove a theory, but in the practical world of science, confirmation does
add strength to a hypothesis. If test after test yields observations that are
consistent with its predictions, that means something to most scientists.

338 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
So EMH advocates have put forward a roster of supporting evidence.
Their evidence comes in two flavors because EMH comes in two testable
flavors: semistrong and weak. 17 The semistrong form asserts it is impossible to beat the market with public information. Because this includes all
fundamental and technical data, the semistrong form predicts that neither
fundamental nor technical analysis can beat the market. This informal
prediction is not sufficiently specific to be testable, but it is in agreement
with the observation that people have great difficulty profiting consistently from market fluctuations-and a lot try.
The semistrong form also makes several specific predictions that are
testable. One is that a security's price will react quickly and accurately to
any news that bears on its value. The proper response of an efficient market to news is illustrated in Figure 7.3.
This prediction implies prices should neither overreact nor underreact to news. This is testable in the following way. Imagine for a moment
that prices did not behave efficiently and did systematically over- or underreact to new information. If this were the case, it would imply that
price movements would be predictable. To see why, consider what would
happen if a stock overreacted to news either by going up too much in response to good news or down too much in response to bad. Because EMH
says prices must stay close to rational values, overshooting rational value
would necessarily lead to a corrective movement back toward rational
value. This correction would not be random meandering but rather a pur-
