
85/396

needs, given its talent for turning cod into
PhDs. At the dawn of the twenty-first century, Icelanders were still waiting for some
task more suited to their filigreed minds to
turn up inside their economy so they might
do it.
Enter investment banking.
FOR THE FIFTH time in as many days I note a

slight tension at any table where Icelandic
men and Icelandic women are both present.
The male exhibits the global male tendency
not to talk to the females—or, rather, not to
include them in the conversation—unless
there is some obvious sexual motive. But
that’s not the problem, exactly. Watching
Icelandic men and women together is like
watching toddlers. They don’t play together
but in parallel; they overlap even less organically than men and women in other developed countries, which is really saying
something. It isn’t that the women are oppressed, exactly. On paper, by historical

86/396

global standards, they have it about as good
as women anywhere: good public health
care, high participation in the workforce,
equal rights. What Icelandic women appear
to lack—at least to a tourist who has watched
them for all of ten days—is a genuine connection to Icelandic men. The Independence
Party is mostly male; the Social Democrats,
mostly female. (On February 1, 2009, when
the reviled Geir Haarde finally stepped aside,
he was replaced by Johanna Sigurdardottir, a
Social Democrat, and Iceland got not just a
female prime minister but the modern
world’s first openly gay head of state—she is
married to another woman.) Everyone
knows everyone else, but when I ask
Icelanders for leads, the men always refer me
to other men, and the women to other women. It was a man, for instance, who suggested I speak to Stefan Alfsson.
wearing genuine
rather than designer stubble, Alfsson still
LEAN AND HUNGRY-LOOKING,

87/396

looks more like a trawler captain than a financier. He went to sea at sixteen and, in the
off-season, to school to study fishing. He was
made captain of an Icelandic fishing trawler
at the shockingly young age of twenty-three
and was regarded, I learned from other men,
as something of a fishing prodigy—which is
to say he had a gift for catching his quota of
cod and haddock in the least amount of time.
And yet, in January 2005, at thirty, he up
and quit fishing to join the currency-trading
department of Landsbanki. He speculated in
the financial markets for nearly two years,
until the great bloodbath of October 2008,
when he was sacked, along with every other
Icelander who called himself a “trader.” His
job, he says, was to sell people, mainly his
fellow fishermen, on what he took to be a
can’t-miss speculation: borrow yen at 3 percent, use them to buy Icelandic kronur, and
then invest those kronur at 16 percent. “I
think it is easier to take someone in the

88/396

fishing industry and teach him about currency trading,” he says, “than to take
someone from the banking industry and
teach them how to fish.”
He then explained why fishing wasn’t as
simple as I thought. It’s risky, for a start, especially as practiced by the Icelandic male.
“You don’t want to have some sissy boys on
your crew,” he says, especially as Icelandic
captains are famously manic in their fishing
styles. “I had a crew of Russians once,” he
says, “and it wasn’t that they were lazy, but
the Russians are always at the same pace.”
When a storm struck, the Russians would
stop fishing, because it was too dangerous.
“The Icelanders would fish in all conditions,”
says Stefan, “fish until it is impossible to fish.
They like to take the risks. If you go overboard, the probabilities are not in your favor.
I’m thirty-three, and I already have two
friends who have died at sea.”

89/396

It took years of training for him to become
a captain, and even then it happened only by
a stroke of luck. When he was twenty-three
and a first mate, the captain of his fishing
boat quit. The boat owner went looking for a
replacement and found an older fellow, retired, who was something of an Icelandic
fishing legend, the wonderfully named
Snorri Snorrasson. “I took two trips with this
guy,” Stefan says. “I have never in my life
slept so little, because I was so eager to learn.
I slept two or three hours a night because I
was sitting beside him, talking to him. I gave
him all the respect in the world—it’s difficult
to describe all he taught me. The reach of the
trawler. The most efficient angle of the net.
How do you act on the sea. If you have a bad
day, what do you do? If you’re fishing at this
depth, what do you do? If it’s not working,
do you move in depth or space? In the end
it’s just so much feel. In this time I learned

90/396

infinitely more than I learned in school. Because how do you learn to fish in school?”
This marvelous training was as fresh in his
mind as if he’d received it yesterday, and the
thought of it makes his eyes mist.
“You spent seven years learning every little
nuance of the fishing trade before you were
granted the gift of learning from this great
captain?” I ask.
“Yes.”
“And even then you had to sit at the feet of
this great master for many months before
you felt as if you knew what you were
doing?”
“Yes.”
“Then why did you think you could become
a banker and speculate in financial markets
without a day of training?”
“That’s a very good question,” he says. He
thinks for a minute. “For the first time this
evening I lack a word.” As I often think I

91/396

know exactly what I am doing even when I
don’t, I find myself sympathetic.
“What, exactly, was your job?” I ask, to let
him off the hook, catch and release being the
current humane policy in Iceland.
“I started as a . . .”—now he begins to
laugh—“an adviser to companies on currency
risk hedging. But given my aggressive nature
I went more and more into plain speculative
trading.” Many of his clients were other fishermen, and fishing companies, and they, like
him, had learned that if you don’t take risks
you don’t catch the fish. “The clients were
only interested in ‘hedging’ if it meant making money,” he says, and begins to laugh
hysterically.
“Did you even like banking?” I ask.
“I never had any respect for bankers,” he
says, still gasping for breath. “To this day one
of my favorite phrases is: never trust a
banker.”

92/396

IN RETROSPECT, THERE are some obvious ques-

tions an Icelander living through the past
five years might have asked himself. For example: Why should Iceland suddenly be so
seemingly essential to global finance? Or:
Why do giant countries that invented modern banking suddenly need Icelandic banks
to stand between their depositors and their
borrowers—to decide who gets capital and
who does not? And: If Icelanders have this
incredible natural gift for finance, how did
they keep it so well hidden for 1,100 years?
At the very least, in a place where everyone
knows everyone else or his sister, you might
have thought that the moment Stefan Alfsson walked into Landsbanki ten people
would have said, “Stefan, you’re a fisherman!” But they didn’t. To a shocking degree,
they still don’t. “If I went back to banking,”
says the Icelandic cod fisherman, now wearing an entirely straight face, “I would be a
private-banking guy.”

93/396

BACK IN 2001, as the Internet boom turned into

a bust, MIT’s Quarterly Journal of Economics published an intriguing paper called
“Boys Will Be Boys: Gender, Overconfidence,
and Common Stock Investment.” The authors, Brad Barber and Terrance Odean,
gained access to the trading activity in over
35,000 households, and used it to compare
the habits of men and women. What they
found, in a nutshell, is that men not only
trade more often than women but do so from
a false faith in their own financial judgment.
Single men traded less sensibly than married
men, and married men traded less sensibly
than single women: the less the female presence, the less rational the approach to trading in the markets.
One of the distinctive traits about Iceland’s
disaster, and Wall Street’s, is how little women had to do with it. Women worked in the
banks, but not in the risk-taking jobs. As far
as I can tell, during Iceland’s boom, there

94/396

was just one woman in a senior position inside an Icelandic bank. Her name is Kristin
Pétursdóttir, and by 2005 she had risen to
become deputy CEO for Kaupthing in London. “The financial culture is very maledominated,” she says. “The culture is quite
extreme. It is a pool of sharks. Women just
despise the culture.” Pétursdóttir still enjoyed finance. She just didn’t like the way
Icelandic men did it, and so, in 2006, she
quit her job. “People said I was crazy,” she
says, but she wanted to create a financial services business run entirely by women. To
bring, as she puts it, “more feminine values
to the world of finance.”
Today her firm is, among other things, one
of the very few profitable financial businesses left in Iceland. After the stock exchange collapsed, the money flooded in. A
few days before we met, for instance, she
heard banging on the front door early one
morning and opened it to discover a little old

95/396

man. “I’m so fed up with this whole system,”
he said. “I just want some women to take
care of my money.”
It was with that in mind that I walked, on
my last afternoon in Iceland, into the Saga
Museum. Its goal is to glorify the Sagas, the
great twelfth- and thirteenth-century
Icelandic prose epics, but the effect of its lifesize dioramas is more like that of modern
reality TV. Not statues carved from silicone
but actual ancient Icelanders, or actors posing as ancient Icelanders, as shrieks and
bloodcurdling screams issue from the PA
system: a Catholic bishop named Jón Arason
having his head chopped off; a heretic
named Sister Katrin being burned at the
stake; a battle scene in which a blooddrenched Viking plunges his sword toward
the heart of a prone enemy. The goal was
verisimilitude, and to achieve it no expense
was spared. Passing one tableau of blood and
guts and moving on to the next, I caught

96/396

myself glancing over my shoulder to make
sure some Viking wasn’t following me with a
battle-ax. The effect was so disorienting that
when I reached the end and found a Japanese woman immobile and reading on a
bench, I had to poke her on the shoulder to
make sure she was real.
This is the past Icelanders supposedly
cherish: a history of conflict and heroism. Of
seeing who is willing to bump into whom
with the most force. There may be plenty of
women in it, but it is chiefly a history of men.
When you borrow a lot of money to create a
false prosperity, you import the future into
the present. It isn’t the actual future so much
as some grotesque silicone version of it.
Leverage buys you a glimpse of a prosperity
you haven’t really earned. The striking thing
about the future the Icelandic male briefly
imported was how much it resembled the
past that he celebrates. I’m betting now
they’ve seen their false future the Icelandic

97/396

female will have a great deal more to say
about the actual one.

II
AND THEY
INVENTED MATH

After an hour on a plane, two in a taxi, three
on a decrepit ferry, and then four more on
buses driven madly along the tops of sheer
cliffs by Greeks on cell phones, I rolled up to
the front door of the vast and remote monastery. The spit of land poking into the Aegean
Sea felt like the end of the earth, and just as
silent. It was late afternoon, and the monks
were either praying or napping, but one remained on duty at the guard booth to greet
visitors. He guided me along with seven

99/396

Greek pilgrims to an ancient dormitory,
beautifully restored, where two more solicitous monks offered ouzo, pastries, and keys
to cells. I sensed something missing, and
then realized: no one had asked for a credit
card. The monastery was not merely efficient
but free. One of the monks then said the next
event would be the church service: Vespers.
The next event, it will emerge, will almost always be a church service. There were thirtyseven different chapels inside the monastery’s walls; finding the service is going to be
like finding Waldo, I thought.
“Which church?” I asked the monk.
“Just follow the monks after they rise,” he
said. Then he looked me up and down more
closely. He wore an impossibly long and wild
black beard, long black robes, a monk’s cap,
and prayer beads. I wore white running
shoes, light khakis, and a mauve Brooks
Brothers shirt and carried a plastic laundry
bag that said EAGLES PALACE HOTEL in giant

100/396

letters on the side. “Why have you come?” he
asked.
That was a good question. Not for church; I
was there for money. The tsunami of cheap
credit that rolled across the planet between
2002 and 2007 has just now created a new
opportunity for travel: financial-disaster
tourism. The credit wasn’t just money, it was
temptation. It offered entire societies the
chance to reveal aspects of their characters
they could not normally afford to indulge.
Entire countries were told, “The lights are
out, you can do whatever you want to do and
no one will ever know.” What they wanted to
do with money in the dark varied. Americans
wanted to own homes far larger than they
could afford, and to allow the strong to exploit the weak. Icelanders wanted to stop
fishing and become investment bankers, and
to allow their alpha males to reveal a theretofore suppressed megalomania. The Germans
wanted to be even more German; the Irish

101/396

wanted to stop being Irish. All these different
societies were touched by the same event,
but each responded to it in its own peculiar
way. No response was as peculiar as the
Greeks’, however: anyone who had spent
even a few days talking to people in charge of
the place could see that. But to see just how
peculiar it was, you had to come to this
monastery.
I had my reasons for being here. But I was
pretty sure that if I told the monk what they
were, he’d throw me out. And so I lied. “They
say this is the holiest place on earth,” I said.
I’d arrived in Athens just a few days earlier,
exactly one week before the next planned riot, and a few days after German politicians
suggested that the Greek government, to pay
off its debts, should sell its islands and perhaps throw some ancient ruins into the bargain. Greece’s new socialist prime minister,
George Papandreou, had felt compelled to
deny that he was actually thinking of selling

102/396

any islands. Moody’s, the rating agency, had
just lowered Greece’s credit rating to the
level that turned all Greek government
bonds into junk—and so no longer eligible to
be owned by many of the investors who
owned them. The resulting dumping of
Greek bonds onto the market was, in the
short term, no big deal, because the International Monetary Fund and the European
Central Bank had between them agreed to
lend Greece—a nation of about eleven million people, or two million fewer than Greater Los Angeles—up to $145 billion. In the
short term Greece had been removed from
the free financial markets and become a
ward of other states.
That was the good news. The long-term
picture was far bleaker. In addition to its
roughly $400 billion (and growing) of outstanding government debt, the Greek number crunchers had just figured out that their
government owed another $800 billion or

103/396

more in pensions. Add it all up and you got
about $1.2 trillion, or more than a quartermillion dollars for every working Greek.
Against $1.2 trillion in debts, a $145 billion
bailout was clearly more of a gesture than a
solution. And those were just the official
numbers; the truth is surely worse. “Our
people went in and couldn’t believe what
they found,” a senior IMF official told me,
not long after he’d returned from the IMF’s
first Greek mission. “The way they were
keeping track of their finances—they knew
how much they had agreed to spend, but no
one was keeping track of what he had actually spent. It wasn’t even what you would call
an emerging economy. It was a third world
country.”
As it turned out, what the Greeks wanted to
do, once the lights went out and they were
alone in the dark with a pile of borrowed
money, was turn their government into a
piñata stuffed with fantastic sums and give

104/396

as many citizens as possible a whack at it. In
just the past twelve years the wage bill of the
Greek public sector has doubled, in real
terms—and that number doesn’t take into
account the bribes collected by public officials. The average government job pays almost three times the average private-sector
job. The national railroad has annual revenues of 100 million euros against an annual
wage bill of 400 million, plus 300 million
euros in other expenses. The average state
railroad employee earns 65,000 euros a year.
Twenty years ago a successful businessman
turned minister of finance named Stefanos
Manos pointed out that it would be cheaper
to put all Greece’s rail passengers into taxicabs: it’s still true. “We have a railroad company which is bankrupt beyond comprehension,” Manos put it to me. “And yet there
isn’t a single private company in Greece with
that kind of average pay.” The Greek publicschool system is the site of breathtaking

105/396

inefficiency: one of the lowest-ranked systems in Europe, it nonetheless employs four
times as many teachers per pupil as the
highest-ranked, Finland’s. Greeks who send
their children to public schools simply assume that they will need to hire private tutors to make sure they actually learn
something. There are three governmentowned defense companies: together they
have billions of euros in debts, and mounting
losses. The retirement age for Greek jobs
classified as “arduous” is as early as fifty-five
for men and fifty for women. As this is also
the moment when the state begins to shovel
out generous pensions, more than six hundred Greek professions somehow managed
to get themselves classified as arduous:
hairdressers, radio announcers, waiters, musicians, and on and on and on. The Greek
public health-care system spends far more
on supplies than the European average—and
it is not uncommon, several Greeks tell me,

106/396

to see nurses and doctors leaving the job
with their arms filled with paper towels and
diapers and whatever else they can plunder
from the supply closets.
Where waste ends and theft begins almost
doesn’t matter; the one masks and thus enables the other. It’s simply assumed, for instance, that anyone who is working for the
government is meant to be bribed. People
who go to public health clinics assume they
will need to bribe doctors to actually take
care of them. Government ministers who
have spent their lives in public service
emerge from office able to afford multimillion-dollar mansions and two or three
country homes.
Oddly enough, the financiers in Greece remain more or less beyond reproach. They
never ceased to be anything but sleepy old
commercial bankers. Virtually alone among
Europe’s bankers, they did not buy U.S.
subprime-backed
bonds,
or
leverage

107/396

themselves to the hilt, or pay themselves
huge sums of money. The biggest problem
the banks had was that they had lent roughly
30 billion euros to the Greek government—where it was stolen or squandered. In
Greece the banks didn’t sink the country.
The country sank the banks.
THE MORNING AFTER I landed I walked over to

see the Greek minister of finance, George Papaconstantinou, whose job it is to sort out
this fantastic mess. Athens somehow manages to be bright white and grubby at the
same time. The most beautiful freshly
painted neoclassical homes are defaced with
new graffiti. Ancient ruins are everywhere, of
course, but seem to have little to do with
anything else. It’s Los Angeles with a past.
At the dark and narrow entrance to the
Ministry of Finance a small crowd of security
guards screen you as you enter—then don’t
bother to check and see why you set off the
metal
detector.
In
the
minister’s

108/396

antechamber six women, all on their feet, arrange his schedule. They seem frantic and
harried and overworked . . . and yet he still
runs late. The place generally seems as if
even its better days weren’t so great. The furniture is worn, the floor linoleum. The most
striking thing about it is how many people it
employs. Minister Papaconstantinou (“It’s
okay to just call me George”) attended NYU
and the London School of Economics in the
1980s, then spent ten years working in Paris
for the OECD (Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development). He’s open,
friendly, fresh-faced, and clean-shaven, and
like many people at the top of the new Greek
government, he comes across less as Greek
than as Anglo—indeed, almost American.
When Papaconstantinou arrived here, in
October 2009, the Greek government had estimated its 2009 budget deficit at 3.7 percent. Two weeks later that number was revised upward, to 12.5 percent, and actually

109/396

turned out to be nearly 14 percent. He was
the man whose job it had been to figure out
and explain to the world why. “The second
day on the job I had to call a meeting to look
at the budget,” he says. “I gathered everyone
from the general accounting office, and we
started, like, this discovery process.” Each
day they discovered some incredible omission. A pension debt of a billion dollars every
year somehow remained off the government’s books, where everyone pretended it
did not exist, even though the government
paid it; the hole in the pension plan for the
self-employed was not the 300 million euros
they had assumed but 1.1 billion euros; and
so on. “At the end of each day I would say,
‘Okay, guys, is this all?’ And they would say,
‘Yeah.’ The next morning there would be this
little hand rising in the back of the room:
‘Actually, Minister, there’s this other onehundred-to-two-hundred-million-euro gap.’”

110/396

This went on for a week. Among other
things turned up were a great number of offthe-books phony job-creation programs.
“The Ministry of Agriculture had created an
off-the-books unit employing 270 people to
digitize the photographs of Greek public
lands,” the finance minister tells me. “The
trouble was that none of the 270 people had
any experience with digital photography. The
actual professions of these people were, like,
hairdressers.”
By the final day of discovery, after the last
little hand had gone up in the back of the
room, a projected deficit of roughly 7 billion
euros was actually more than 30 billion. The
natural question—How is this possible?—is
easily answered: until that moment, no one
had bothered to count it all up. “We had no
Congressional Budget Office,” explains the
finance minister. “There was no independent
statistical service.” The party in power

111/396
