
directors and their friends, and all the winners in the room, applauded vehemently. The
Duke of Portland spoke in a similar strain, and expressed his great wonder why anybody
should be dissatisfied: of course, he was a winner by his speculations, and in a condition
similar to that of the fat alderman in Joe Miller's Jests, who, whenever he had eaten a
good dinner, folded his hands upon his paunch, and expressed his doubts whether there
could be a hungry man in the world.
Several resolutions were passed at this meeting, but they had no effect upon the public.
Upon the very same evening the stock fell to six hundred and forty, and on the morrow to
five hundred and forty. Day after day it continued to fall, until it was as low as four
hundred. In a letter dated September 13th, from Mr. Broderick, M.P. to Lord Chancellor
Middleton, and published in Coxo's Walpole, the former says,--"Various are the
conjectures why the South Sea directors have suffered the cloud to break so early. I made
no doubt but they would do so when they found it to their advantage. They have stretched
credit so far beyond what it would bear, that specie proves insufficient to support it. Their
most considerable men have drawn out, securing themselves by the losses of the deluded,
thoughtless numbers, whose understandings have been overruled by avarice and the hope
of making mountains out of mole-hills. Thousands of families will be reduced to beggary.
The consternation is inexpressible-- the rage beyond description, and the case altogether
so desperate that I do not see any plan or scheme so much as thought of for averting the
blow, so that I cannot pretend to guess what is next to be done." Ten days afterwards, the
stock still falling, he writes,--" The Company have yet come to no determination, for they
are in such a wood that they know not which way to turn. By several gentlemen lately
come to town, I perceive the very name of a South-Sea-man grows abominable in every
country. A great many goldsmiths are already run off, and more will daily. I question
whether one-third, nay, one-fourth, of them can stand it. From the very beginning, I
founded my judgment of the whole affair upon the unquestionable maxim, that ten
millions (which is more than our running cash) could not circulate two hundred millions,
beyond which our paper credit extended. That, therefore, whenever that should become
doubtful, be the cause what it would, our noble state machine must inevitably fall to the
ground."
On the 12th of September, at the earnest solicitation of Mr. Secretary Craggs, several
conferences were held between the directors of the South Sea and the directors of the
Bank. A report which was circulated, that the latter had agreed to circulate six millions of
the South Sea Company's bonds, caused the stock to rise to six hundred and seventy; but
in the afternoon, as soon as the report was known to be groundless, the stock fell again to
five hundred and eighty; the next day to five hundred and seventy, and so gradually to
four hundred. [Gay (the poet), in that disastrous year, had a present from young Craggs of
some South Sea stock, and once supposed himself to be master of twenty thousand
pounds. His friends persuaded him to sell his share, but he dreamed of dignity and
splendour, and could not bear to obstruct his own fortune. He was then importuned to sell
as much as would purchase a hundred a year for life, "which," says Fenton, "will make
you sure of a clean shirt and a shoulder of mutton every day." This counsel was rejected;
the profit and principal were lost, and Gay sunk under the calamity so low that his life
became in danger.--Johnson's Lives of the Poets.]

The ministry were seriously alarmed at the aspect of affairs. The directors could not
appear in the streets without being insulted; dangerous riots were every moment
apprehended. Despatches were sent off to the King at Hanover, praying his immediate
return. Mr. Walpole, who was staying at his country-seat, was sent for, that he might
employ his known influence with the directors of the Bank of England to induce them to
accept the proposal made by the South Sea Company for circulating a number of their
bonds.
The Bank was very unwilling to mix itself up with the affairs of the Company; it dreaded
being involved in calamities which it could not relieve, and received all overtures with
visible reluctance. But the universal voice of the nation called upon it to come to the
rescue. Every person of note in commercial politics was called in to advise in the
emergency. A rough draft of a contract drawn up by Mr. Walpole was ultimately adopted
as the basis of further negotiations, and the public alarm abated a little.
On the following day, the 20th of September, a general court of the South Sea Company
was held at Merchant Tailors' Hall, in which resolutions were carried, empowering the
directors to agree with the Bank of England, or any other persons, to circulate the
Company's bonds, or make any other agreement with the Bank which they should think
proper. One of the speakers, a Mr. Pulteney, said it was most surprising to see the
extraordinary panic which had seized upon the people. Men were running to and fro in
alarm and terror, their imaginations filled with some great calamity, the form and
dimensions of which nobody knew.
"Black it stood as night-- Fierce as ten furies--terrible as hell."
At a general court of the Bank of England held two days afterwards, the governor
informed them of the several meetings that had been held on the affairs of the South Sea
Company, adding that the directors had not yet thought fit to come to any decision upon
the matter. A resolution was then proposed, and carried without a dissentient voice,
empowering the directors to agree with those of the South Sea to circulate their bonds, to
what sum, and upon what terms, and for what time, they might think proper.
Thus both parties were at liberty to act as they might judge best for the public interest.
Books were opened at the Bank for a subscription of three millions for the support of
public credit, on the usual terms of 15 pounds per cent. deposit, per cent. premium, and 5
pounds. per cent. interest. So great was the concourse of people in the early part of the
morning, all eagerly bringing their money, that it was thought the subscription would be
filled that day; but before noon, the tide turned. In spite of all that could be done to
prevent it, the South Sea Company's stock fell rapidly. Their bonds were in such
discredit, that a run commenced upon the most eminent goldsmiths and bankers, some of
whom having lent out great sums upon South Sea stock were obliged to shut up their
shops and abscond. The Sword-blade Company, who had hitherto been the chief cashiers
of the South Sea Company, stopped payment. This being looked upon as but the

beginning of evil, occasioned a great run upon the Bank, who were now obliged to pay
out money much faster than they had received it upon the subscription in the morning.
The day succeeding was a holiday (the 29th of September), and the Bank had a little
breathing time. They bore up against the storm; but their former rivals, the South Sea
Company, were wrecked upon it. Their stock fell to one hundred and fifty, and gradually,
after various fluctuations, to one hundred and thirty-five.
The Bank, finding they were not able to restore public confidence, and stem the tide of
ruin, without running the risk of being swept away with those they intended to save,
declined to carry out the agreement into which they had partially entered. They were
under no obligation whatever to continue; for the so called Bank contract was nothing
more than the rough draught of an agreement, in which blanks had been left for several
important particulars, and which contained no penalty for their secession. "And thus," to
use the words of the Parliamentary History, "were seen, in the space of eight months, the
rise, progress, and fall of that mighty fabric, which, being wound up by mysterious
springs to a wonderful height, had fixed the eyes and expectations of all Europe, but
whose foundation, being fraud, illusion, credulity, and infatuation, fell to the ground as
soon as the artful management of its directors was discovered."
In the hey-day of its blood, during the progress of this dangerous delusion, the manners
of the nation became sensibly corrupted. The Parliamentary inquiry, set on foot to
discover the delinquents, disclosed scenes of infamy, disgraceful alike to the morals of
the offenders and the intellects of the people among whom they had arisen. It is a deeply
interesting study to investigate all the evils that were the result. Nations, like individuals,
cannot become desperate gamblers with impunity. Punishment is sure to overtake them
sooner or later. A celebrated writer [Smollett.] is quite wrong, when he says, "that such
an era as this is the most unfavourable for a historian; that no reader of sentiment and
imagination can be entertained or interested by a detail of transactions such as these,
which admit of no warmth, no colouring, no embellishment; a detail of which only serves
to exhibit an inanimate picture of tasteless vice and mean degeneracy." On the contrary,
and Smollett might have discovered it, if he had been in the humour--the subject is
capable of inspiring as much interest as even a novelist can desire. Is there no warmth in
the despair of a plundered people?--no life and animation in the picture which might be
drawn of the woes of hundreds of impoverished and ruined families? of the wealthy of
yesterday become the beggars of to-day? of the powerful and influential changed into
exiles and outcasts, and the voice of self-reproach and imprecation resounding from
every corner of the land? Is it a dull or uninstructive picture to see a whole people
shaking suddenly off the trammels of reason, and running wild after a golden vision,
refusing obstinately to believe that it is not real, till, like a deluded hind running after an
ignis fatuus, they are plunged into a quagmire ? But in this false spirit has history too
often been written. The intrigues of unworthy courtiers to gain the favour of still more
unworthy kings; or the records of murderous battles and sieges have been dilated on, and
told over and over again, with all the eloquence of style and all the charms of fancy;
while the circumstances which have most deeply affected the morals and welfare of the
people, have been passed over with but slight notice as dry and dull, and capable of
neither warmth nor colouring.

During the progress of this famous bubble, England presented a singular spectacle. The
public mind was in a state of unwholesome fermentation. Men were no longer satisfied
with the slow but sure profits of cautious industry. The hope of boundless wealth for the
morrow made them heedless and extravagant for to-day. A luxury, till then unheard-of,
was introduced, bringing in its train a corresponding laxity of morals. The overbearing
insolence of ignorant men, who had arisen to sudden wealth by successful gambling,
made men of true gentility of mind and manners, blush that gold should have power to
raise the unworthy in the scale of society. The haughtiness of some of these "cyphering
cits," as they were termed by Sir Richard Steele, was remembered against them in the day
of their adversity. In the Parliamentary inquiry, many of the directors suffered more for
their insolence than for their peculation. One of them, who, in the full-blown pride of an
ignorant rich man, had said that he would feed his horse upon gold, was reduced almost
to bread and water for himself; every haughty look, every overbearing speech, was set
down, and repaid them a hundredfold in poverty and humiliation.
The state of matters all over the country was so alarming, that George I shortened his
intended stay in Hanover, and returned in all haste to England. He arrived on the 11th of
November, and Parliament was summoned to meet on the 8th of December. In the mean
time, public meetings were held in every considerable town of the empire, at which
petitions were adopted, praying the vengeance of the Legislature upon the South Sea
directors, who, by their fraudulent practices, had brought the nation to the brink of ruin.
Nobody seemed to imagine that the nation itself was as culpable as the South Sea
Company. Nobody blamed the credulity and avarice of the people,--the degrading lust of
gain, which had swallowed up every nobler quality in the national character, or the
infatuation which had made the multitude run their heads with such frantic eagerness into
the net held out for them by scheming projectors. These things were never mentioned.
The people were a simple, honest, hard-working people, ruined by a gang of robbers, who
were to be hanged, drawn, and quartered without mercy.
This was the almost unanimous feeling of the country. The two Houses of Parliament
were not more reasonable. Before the guilt of the South Sea directors was known,
punishment was the only cry. The King, in his speech from the throne, expressed his hope
that they would remember that all their prudence, temper, and resolution were necessary
to find out and apply the proper remedy for their misfortunes. In the debate on the answer
to the address, several speakers indulged in the most violent invectives against the
directors of the South Sea project. The Lord Molesworth was particularly vehement. "It
had been said by some, that there was no law to punish the directors of the South Sea
Company, who were justly looked upon as the authors of the present misfortunes of the
state. In his opinion they ought, upon this occasion, to follow the example of the ancient
Romans, who, having no law against parricide, because their legislators supposed no son
could be so unnaturally wicked as to embrue his hands in his father's blood, made a law
to punish this heinous crime as soon as it was committed. They adjudged the guilty
wretch to be sown in a sack, and thrown alive into the Tyber. He looked upon the
contrivers and executors of the villanous South Sea scheme as the parricides of their
country, and should be satisfied to see them tied in like manner in sacks, and thrown into

the Thames." Other members spoke with as much want of temper and discretion. Mr.
Walpole was more moderate. He recommended that their first care should be to restore
public credit. "If the city of London were on fire, all wise men would aid in extinguishing
the flames, and preventing the spread of the conflagration before they inquired after the
incendiaries. Public credit had received a dangerous wound, and lay bleeding, and they
ought to apply a speedy remedy to it. It was time enough to punish the assassin
afterwards." On the 9th of December an address, in answer to his Majesty's speech, was
agreed upon, after an amendment, which was carried without a division, that words
should be added expressive of the determination of the House not only to seek a remedy
for the national distresses, but to punish the authors of them.
The inquiry proceeded rapidly. The directors were ordered to lay before the House a full
account of all their proceedings. Resolutions were passed to the effect that the calamity
was mainly owing to the vile arts of stockjobbers, and that nothing could tend more to the
re-establishment of public credit than a law to prevent this infamous practice. Mr.
Walpole then rose, and said, that "as he had previously hinted, he had spent some time
upon a scheme for restoring public credit, but that, the execution of it depending upon a
position which had been laid down as fundamental, he thought it proper, before he
opened out his scheme, to be informed whether he might rely upon that foundation. It
was, whether the subscription of public debts and encumbrances, money subscriptions,
and other contracts, made with the South Sea Company should remain in the present
state?" This question occasioned an animated debate. It was finally agreed, by a majority
of 259 against 117, that all these contracts should remain in their present state, unless
altered for the relief of the proprietors by a general court of the South Sea Company, or
set aside by due course of law. On the following day Mr. Walpole laid before a
committee of the whole House his scheme for the restoration of public credit, which was,
in substance, to ingraft nine millions of South Sea stock into the Bank of England, and
the same sum into the East India Company, upon certain conditions. The plan was
favourably received by the House. After some few objections, it was ordered that
proposals should be received from the two great corporations. They were both unwilling
to lend their aid, and the plan met with a warm but fruitless opposition at the general
courts summoned for the purpose of deliberating upon it. They, however, ultimately
agreed upon the terms on which they would consent to circulate the South Sea bonds, and
their report, being presented to the committee, a bill was brought in, under the
superintendence of Mr. Walpole, and safely carried through both Houses of Parliament.
A bill was at the same time brought in, for restraining the South Sea directors, governor,
sub-governor, treasurer, cashier, and clerks from leaving the kingdom for a twelvemonth,
and for discovering their estates and effects, and preventing them from transporting or
alienating the same. All the most influential members of the House supported the bill.
Mr. Shippen, seeing Mr. Secretary Craggs in his place, and believing the injurious
rumours that were afloat of that minister's conduct in the South Sea business, determined
to touch him to the quick. He said, he was glad to see a British House of Commons
resuming its pristine vigour and spirit, and acting with so much unanimity for the public
good. It was necessary to secure the persons and estates of the South Sea directors and
their officers; "but," he added, looking fixedly at Mr. Craggs as he spoke, "there were

other men in high station, whom, in time, he would not be afraid to name, who were no
less guilty than the directors." Mr. Craggs arose in great wrath, and said, that if the
innuendo were directed against him, he was ready to give satisfaction to any man who
questioned him, either in the House or out of it. Loud cries of order immediately arose on
every side. In the midst of the uproar Lord Molesworth got up, and expressed his wonder
at the boldness of Mr. Craggs in challenging the whole House of Commons. He, Lord
Molesworth, though somewhat old, past sixty, would answer Mr. Craggs whatever he had
to say in the House, and he trusted there were plenty of young men beside him, who
would not be afraid to look Mr. Craggs in the face, out of the House. The cries of order
again resounded from every side; the members arose simultaneously; everybody seemed
to be vociferating at once. The Speaker in vain called order. The confusion lasted several
minutes, during which Lord Molesworth and Mr. Craggs were almost the only members
who kept their seats. At last the call for Mr. Craggs became so violent that he thought
proper to submit to the universal feeling of the House, and explain his unparliamentary
expression. He said, that by giving satisfaction to the impugners of his conduct in that
House, he did not mean that he would fight, but that he would explain his conduct. Here
the matter ended, and the House proceeded to debate in what manner they should conduct
their inquiry into the affairs of the South Sea Company, whether in a grand or a select
committee. Ultimately, a Secret Committee of thirteen was appointed, with power to send
for persons, papers, and records.
The Lords were as zealous and as hasty as the Commons. The Bishop of Rochester said
the scheme had been like a pestilence. The Duke of Wharton said the House ought to
show no respect of persons; that, for his part, he would give up the dearest friend he had,
if he had been engaged in the project. The nation had been plundered in a most shameful
and flagrant manner, and he would go as far as anybody in the punishment of the
offenders. Lord Stanhope said, that every farthing possessed by the criminals, whether
directors or not directors, ought to be confiscated, to make good the public losses.
During all this time the public excitement was extreme. We learn, front Coxe's Walpole,
that the very name of a South Sea director was thought to be synonymous. with every
species of fraud and villany. Petitions from counties, cities, and boroughs, in all parts of
the kingdom, were presented, crying for the justice due to an injured nation and the
punishment of the villanous peculators. Those moderate men, who would not go to
extreme lengths, even in the punishment of the guilty, were accused of being
accomplices, were exposed to repeated insults and virulent invectives, and devoted, both
in anonymous letters and public writings, to the speedy vengeance of an injured people.
The accusations against Mr. Aislabie, Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Mr. Craggs,
another member of the ministry, were so loud, that the House of Lords resolved to
proceed at once into the investigation concerning them. It was ordered, on the 21st of
January, that all brokers concerned in the South Sea scheme should lay before the House
an account of the stock or subscriptions bought or sold by them for any of the officers of
the Treasury or Exchequer, or in trust for any of them, since Michaelmas 1719. When this
account was delivered, it appeared that large quantities of stock had been transferred to
the use of Mr. Aislabie. Five of the South Sea directors, ineluding Mr. Edward Gibbon,
the grandfather of the celebrated historian, were ordered into the custody of the black rod.

Upon a motion made by Earl Stanhope, it was unanimously resolved, that the taking in or
giving credit for stock without a valuable consideration actually paid or sufficiently
secured; or the purchasing stock by any director or agent of the South Sea Company, for
the use or benefit of any member of the administration, or any member of either House of
Parliament, during such time as the South Sea Bill was yet pending in Parliament, was a
notorious and dangerous corruption. Another resolution was passed a few days
afterwards, to the effect that several of the directors and officers of the Company having,
in a clandestine manner, sold their own stock to the Company, had been guilty of a
notorious fraud and breach of trust, and had thereby mainly caused the unhappy turn of
affairs that had so much affected public credit. Mr. Aislabie resigned his office as
Chancellor of the Exchequer, and absented himself from Parliament until the formal
inquiry into his individual guilt was brought under the consideration of the Legislature.
In the mean time, Knight, the treasurer of the Company, and who was intrusted with all
the dangerous secrets of the dishonest directors, packed up his books and documents, and
made his escape from the country. He embarked in disguise, in a small boat on the river,
and proceeding to a vessel hired for the purpose, was safely conveyed to Calais. The
Committee of Secrecy informed the House of the circumstance, when it was resolved
unanimously that two addresses should be presented to the King; the first praying that he
would issue a proclamation, offering a reward for the apprehension of Knight; and the
second, that he would give immediate orders to stop the ports, and to take effectual care
of the coasts, to prevent the said Knight, or any other officers of the South Sea Company,
from escaping out of the kingdom. The ink was hardly dry upon these addresses before
they were carried to the King by Mr. Methuen, deputed by the House for that purpose.
The same evening a royal proclamation was issued, offering a reward of two thousand
pounds for the apprehension of Knight. The Commons ordered the doors of the House to
be locked, and the keys to be placed upon the table. General Ross, one of the members of
the Committee of Secrecy, acquainted them that they had already discovered a train of
the deepest villany and fraud that Hell had ever contrived to ruin a nation, which in due
time they would lay before the House. In the mean time, in order to a further discovery,
the Committee thought it highly necessary to secure the persons of some of the directors
and principal South Sea officers, and to seize their papers. A motion to this effect having
been made, was carried unanimously. Sir Robert Chaplin, Sir Theodore Janssen, Mr.
Sawbridge, and Mr. F. Eyles, members of the House, and directors of the South Sea
Company, were summoned to appear in their places, and answer for their corrupt
practices. Sir Theodore Janssen and Mr. Sawbridge answered to their names, and
endeavoured to exculpate themselves. The House heard them patiently, and then ordered
them to withdraw. A motion was then made, and carried nemine contradicente, that they
had been guilty of a notorious breach of trust--had occasioned much loss to great
numbers of his Majesty's subjects, and had highly prejudiced the public credit. It was
then ordered that, for their offence, they should be expelled the House, and taken into the
custody of the sergeant-at-arms. Sir Robert Chaplin and Mr. Eyles, attending in their
places four days afterwards, were also expelled the House. It was resolved at the same
time to address the King, to give directions to his ministers at foreign courts to make
application for Knight, that he might be delivered up to the English authorities, in ease he
