
Henry has influenced many traders. One of his former
employees presented observations in his new firm’s marketing
materials:
• The time frame of the trading system is long term in nature,
with the majority of profitable trades lasting longer than six
weeks and some lasting for several months.
• The system is neutral in markets until a signal to take a
position is generated.
• It is not uncommon for markets to stay neutral for months at a
time, waiting for prices to reach a level that warrants a long or
short position.
• The system incorporates predefined levels of initial trade risk.
If a new trade turns quickly unprofitable, the risk control
parameters in place for every trade will force a liquidation
when the preset stop-loss level is reached. In such situations, a
trade can last for as little as one day.
This same former employee participated in a conference
seminar while working at John W. Henry and Co. The conference
was sparsely attended, and as happens when someone speaks to a
small audience, the conversation became more informal and more
revealing of the early years working with Henry:
“We are very well aware of the trends that have taken place
in the last 20 years and we are just curious to see are we in
a period in this century that trend following seems to work?
Have we lucked out that we happen to be in this industry
during trends for the last decade or two? We went back to
the 1800s and looked at interest rates, currency
fluctuations, and grain prices to see if there was as much
volatility in an era that most people don’t know much about
as there has been this decade. Much to our relief and maybe
also surprise, we found out that there were just as many
trends, currencies, interest rates, and grain prices back in
the 1800s as there has been exhibited this last decade.
Once again, we saw the trends were relatively random,
unpredictable, and just further supported our philosophy of

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

being fully diversified, and don’t alter your system to work
in any specific time period.”
“Hours and hours were spent in the depths of the university
library archives. They gave us Xerox burns on our hands, I
think, photo copying grain prices, and interest rate data—
not only in the U.S., but also around the world. We looked
at overseas interest rates back to that time period. A lot of
it is a little bit sketchy, but it was enough to give us the fact
that things really jumped around back then as they do
now.”42
It reminded me of the scene in the Wizard of Oz when Toto
pulls back the curtain to reveal how the wizard really works his
magic. It was clear that there were no secret formulas or hidden
strategies with Henry. There were no short cuts. This was slow,
painstaking trench warfare in the bowels of a research library,
armed only with a photocopying machine to memorialize price
histories for their analysis.
Years later, I was inspired to do my own price research. My
objective was not to use price data at that time in a trading system
but to see instead how little markets had changed. One of the best
places to research historical market data in newspapers and
magazines from over 100 years ago is the U.S. National Agricultural
Library. Don’t be misled by the word “Agricultural.” You can review
the stacks at this library and spend hours pouring over magazines
from the 1800s. Like Henry’s firm, I discovered that markets were
indeed basically the same then as now.

John W. Henr y on the Record
I had the chance to hear Henry speak in person at an FIA
Research Division Dinner held in New York City years back. This
was only months after the Barings Bank debacle. During the Q&A,
Henry revealed some of the qualities shared by all successful trend
followers. This excerpt from the post-dinner Q&A shows Henry at
his best, full of grace and good humor. He refused to waste time
discussing fundamentals and offered a genuine appreciation of the
nature of change:
Moderator: The question that always comes up for
technicians is, “Do you believe the markets have changed?”

53

54

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Henry: It always comes up whenever there are losses,
especially prolonged losses. I heard it, in fact, when I
started my career 14 years ago. They were worrying, “Is
there too much money going into trend following?” You
laugh, but I can show you evidence in writing of this. My
feeling is that markets are always changing. But if you
have a basic philosophy that’s sound, you’re going to be
able to take advantage of those changes to greater or lesser degrees. It is the same with using good, sound business
principles—the changing world is not going to materially
hurt you if your principles are designed to adapt. So the
markets HAVE changed. But that’s to be expected and it’s
good.
Everything flows.
Heraclitus

Female Voice: John, you’re noted for your discipline. How
did you create that, and how do you maintain that?
Henry: Well, you create discipline by having a strategy you
really believe in. If you really believe in your strategy, that
brings about discipline. If you don’t believe in it, in other
words, if you haven’t done your homework properly, and
haven’t made assumptions that you can really live with
when you’re faced with difficult periods, then it won’t
work. It really doesn’t take much discipline, if you have a
tremendous confidence in what you’re doing.
Male Voice: I’d like to know if your systems are completely
black box.
Henry: We don’t use any black boxes. I know people refer
to technical trend following as “black box,” but what you
have is really a certain philosophy of trading. Our
philosophy is that there is an inherent return in trend
following. I know CTAs that have been around a lot longer
than I have, who have been trading trends: Bill Dunn,
Millburn, and others who have done rather well over the
last 20 to 30 years. I don’t think it’s luck year after year
after year.
Successful trend followers are often described as simply
profiting from their “good luck” when in fact, it is not luck but
discipline that enables them to win absolute returns.

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

55

What this transcript cannot recreate on the page is the
audience’s reaction. I remember looking around at all the Henry
fans jammed into that Wall Street hotel suite and thinking,
“Everyone in this room is far more interested in viewing Henry as a
personality—a rock star—instead of figuring out what he does to
make money.” Henry is one of the best traders for the last 25 years.
But shouldn’t the goal be to try and find similar success in whatever
walk of life you pursue rather than only applaud Henry’s?

Change Is Overrated
Often more vocal than other trend followers over the years,
Henry has been publicly forthright about trend following for years.
For instance, his presentation in Geneva, Switzerland could have
been a semester course in trend following for anyone open to the
message:
“We began trading our first program, in 1981 and this was
after quite a bit of research into the practical aspects of a
basic philosophy of what drives markets. The world was
frighteningly different in those days than it is today when I
was designing what turned out to be a trend following
system. That approach—a mechanical and mathematical
system—has not really changed at all. Yet the system
continues to be successful today, even though there has
been virtually no change to it over the last 18 years.”44
I can’t help but notice that the “we haven’t changed our
system” chorus is sung not only by Dunn, but by Henry and
numerous other trend followers as well. And how does this timeless
system work? Here is an example of a winning trend for Henry (see
Chart 2.6):
“We took a position around March or April 1998 in the
South African rand, short (which would be this particular
chart; this is the dollar going up against the rand). You can
see it takes time for these things and if you’re patient, you
can have huge profits, especially if you don’t set a profit
objective.”45

When people are in doubt,
they tend to look to others
to confirm their behavior.
Some people would
rather adopt others’
opinions rather than form
their own.
Jon C. Sundt
President
Altegris Investments
1st Quarter 2004 Commentary

56

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

SOUTH AFRICAN RAND NEAREST FUTURES—Daily Chart

0.2200
0.2100
0.2000
0.1900
0.1800
0.1700
0.1600
0.1500
0.1400
0.1300

4
18
APR-98 MAY

1

15 29
JUN

13 27
JUL

10 24
AUG

7

21
SEP

5

19
OCT

2

16 30
NOV

0.1200
14 28
DEC JAN-99

CHART 2.6: Henry’s South African Rand Trade, 1998 Source: Barchart.com

I always know what’s
happening on the court. I
see a situation occur, and
I respond.
Larry Bird

Moreover, just like Dunn, Henry did well in a historical
Japanese yen trade (see Chart 2.7).
Henry concluded: “You can see that in this enormous move,
when the dollar/yen went from 100 to 80 in that particular month
we were up 11% just in the Japanese yen that quarter.”46

Fade the Fed
Regular overreaction to Federal Reserve announcements is part
of Wall Street life. Some so-called pros take the Federal Reserve’s
words and act on them even if there is no real way to know what
any of it even means at that moment. And does it make logical
sense to worry about what the Fed is going to do if there is no clear
way to decipher where they might go to begin with? The Fed, to the
best of my knowledge, has never offered any statement you could
rely on that would dictate, “Buy 1000 share of GOOG today.”

57

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

JAPANESE YEN NEAREST FUTURES—Weekly Chart

1.35
1.30
1.25
1.20
1.15
1.10
1.05
1
0.95
0.90

A

M J J

A
94

S

O N D J

F M A

M J

J
95

A S

O N D J

CHART 2.7: Henry’s Japanese Yen Trade, 1994–1996 Source: Barchart.com

Henry’s trend following system is predicated on price action,
not Bernanke’s words. Henry is ready for a change in price at all
times. The moving lips of a Fed’s head have no impact if a trading
style has been developed from the ground up to respond to change:
“I know that when the Fed first raises interest rates after
months of lowering them, you do not see them the next day
lowering interest rates. And they don’t raise rates and then
a few days later or a few weeks later lower them. They raise,
raise, raise, raise…[PAUSE]…raise, raise, raise. And then
once they lower, they don’t raise, lower, raise, lower, raise,
lower. Rather they lower, lower, lower, lower. There are
trends that tend to exist, whether they are capital flows or
interest rates…if you have enough discipline, or if you only
trade a few markets, you don’t need a computer to trade
this way.”47
Henry knows human minds can create anxiety by conjuring up
terrifying future market scenarios, so he relies on his system to
keep him focused in the present on what he can actually control—
his system.

F M A
96

M J

0.85

58

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Key Points
• Henry’s first managed fund was staked with $16,000 in 1981.
He now owns the Boston Red Sox baseball team.
• Henry has a four-point investment philosophy: long-term trend
identification, highly disciplined investment process, risk
management, and global diversification.
• Henry understands change. This understanding gives him a
distinct advantage.

Ed Seykota
Win or lose, everybody
gets what they want out
of the market. Some
people seem to like to
lose, so they win by losing
money.
Ed Seykota48

After you enter the world of markets and investing, you will
eventually run across the book Market Wizards by Jack Schwager.
Of all the trader interviews in Market Wizards, the most
memorable is the one with Ed Seykota. While some may perceive
Seykota’s manner as extremely direct, most will agree Seykota is
unique in the way he thinks. One profound and now famous
statement of his is, “Everybody gets what they want out of the
market.” This was a response to a question about trading, but I feel
certain that Seykota would say it also applies to life.
Although almost completely unknown to both traders and
laymen alike, Seykota’s achievements rank him as one of the best
trend followers (and traders) of our time. I first met Seykota at a
small beachside cafe. I had received an invitation from Seykota to
get together to discuss the outreach possibilities of the Internet.
During our first meeting, he asked me what I thought Richard
Dennis was looking for when he hired his student traders the
Turtles (Seykota knew I had a website called TurtleTrader.com). My
reply was to say I thought Dennis was looking for students who
could think in terms of odds. Seykota’s response was to ask me if
my reply was my own thinking or something I was told by someone
else. This was my first indoctrination to Seykota’s “direct nature.”

Fortune tellers live in the
future. So do people who
want to put things off. So
do fundamentalists.
Ed Seykota49

The following story passed along from an associate is “pure
Seykota”:
“I attended a day-long seminar in February 1995 in
Toronto, Canada where Seykota was one of the guest
speakers. The WHOLE audience peppered Seykota with

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

questions like: Do you like gold, where do you think the
Canadian $ is headed, how do you know when there is a
top, how do you know when the trend is up etc.? To each
of these, he replied: ‘I like gold—it’s shiny, pretty—makes
nice jewelry’ or ‘I have no idea where the Canadian dollar
is headed or the trend is up when price is moving up, etc.’
His replies were simple, straight-forward answers to the
questions asked of him. Later, I learned through the event
organizer that a large majority of the audience (who paid
good money, presumably to learn the ‘secrets’ of trading
from a market wizard) were not impressed. Many felt they
had wasted their time and money listening to Seykota.
Seykota’s message couldn’t be clearer to anyone who cared
to listen. The answers were found in the very questions
each person asked. Don’t ask, ‘How do you know the trend
is moving up?’ Instead, ask, ‘What is going to tell me the
trend is up?’ Not, ‘What do you think of gold?’ Instead, ask,
‘Am I correctly trading gold?’ Seykota’s answers effectively
placed everyone in front of a huge mirror, reflecting their
trading self back at them. If you don’t even know the
question to ask about trading, much less the answers, get
out of the business and spend your life doing something you
enjoy.”50
How would you have reacted to Seykota’s speech? Walk out or
be curious? Think about it.

Performance Second to None
What are Seykota’s performance numbers? “Seykota earned,
after fees, nearly 60 percent on average each year from 1990 to
2000 managing proprietary money in his managed futures
program.”51
But Seykota is different than Harding, Henry, and Dunn. He
literally has been a one-man shop his entire career. There is no
fancy office or other employees. He does not hold himself out as a
money manager and he is extremely selective of his clients. He
doesn’t really care whether people have money that they want him
to trade or not. I’ve had the chance to review his monthly
performance data for the decade of the 1990s. The month-bymonth numbers are eye popping. Seykota takes big risks, and he
gets big rewards.

59

Pyramiding instructions
appear on dollar bills.
Add smaller and smaller
amounts on the way up.
Keep your eye open at
the top.
Ed Seykota52

60

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

About Ed Seykota
Seykota was born in 1946. He earned his Bachelor of Science
from MIT in 1969 and by 1972 had embarked on the trading career
he pursues to this day—investing for his own account and the
accounts of a few select others. He was self-taught, but influenced
in his career by Amos Hostetter and Richard Donchian.
Early in his career, Seykota was hired by a major broker. He
conceived and developed the first commercial computerized
trading system for client money in the futures markets. According
to Jack Schwager’s Market Wizards, he increased one client’s
account from $5,000 to $15,000,000 in just 12 years.
For the past few years, Seykota has worked from a home office
in Incline Village, Nevada. His trading is largely confined to the few
minutes it takes to run his internally written computer program,
which generates trading signals for the next day. He also mentors
traders through his Web site and his Trading Tribe, a widespread
community of like-minded traders. He has served as a teacher and
mentor to some great traders, including Michael Marcus and David
Druz. Seykota’s Trading Tribe is discussed further in Chapter 6,
“Human Behavior.”

The Seykota “Secret”
Seykota’s style is direct. He enjoys debunking market ignorance
with terse, Zen-like statements that force the listener to look
inward:
“The biggest secret about success is that there isn’t any big
secret about it, or if there is, then it’s a secret from me, too.
The idea of searching for some secret for trading success
misses the point.”53
That self-deprecating response emphasizes process over
outcome, but don’t be misled by his modesty, because he gets
impatient with hypocrisy and mindlessness. He is a fearless trader
and does not suffer fools gladly. Yet when he remembers his first
trade, I saw how he uncovered the passion for what he does:
“The first trade I remember, I was about five years old in
Portland, OR. My father gave me a gold-colored medallion,
a sales promotion trinket. I traded it to a neighbor kid for

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

five magnifying lenses. I felt as though I had participated in
a rite of passage. Later, when I was 13, my father showed
me how to buy stocks. He explained that I should buy when
the price broke out of the top of a box and to sell when it
broke out of the bottom. And that’s how I got started.”54
On how he first started trading:
“I saw a letter published by Richard Donchian, which
implied that a purely mechanical trend following system
could beat the markets. This too seemed impossible to me.
So I wrote computer programs (on punch cards in those
days) to test the theories. Amazingly, his [Donchian]
theories tested true. To this day, I’m not sure I understand
why or whether I really need to. Anyhow, studying the
markets, and backing up my opinions with money, was so
fascinating compared to my other career opportunities at
the time, that I began trading full time for a living.”55
Trading was in his blood at a young age and at age 23, he went
out on his own with about a half-dozen accounts in the
$10,000–25,000 range.56
Seykota had found an alternative to a Wall Street career built
only on commissions. From the beginning, he worked for incentive
fees alone. If he made money for his clients, he got paid. If he did
not make money, he did not get paid. Does your broker, mutual
fund manager, or hedge fund work like that?

Amos Hostetter: “Never Mind the Cheese”
As a new trader, Seykota passed through Commodities Corp, a
trader training ground then based in Princeton, New Jersey. One of
his mentors was Amos Hostetter. Hostetter made phenomenal
amounts of money trading. (He died early in an auto accident, but
his son is a billionaire today.) When a market’s supply-and-demand
prospects looked promising, Hostetter would put up one-third of his
ultimate position. If he lost 25 percent of that stake, he’d get out.
“Never mind the cheese,” he’d crack, “let me out of the trap.” But
when the market swung his way, he’d add another third, taking a
final position when prices climbed half as high as he thought they’d
go. Hostetter’s strategies were so successful that they were computerized so other traders could learn to duplicate his success.57

61

62

If a gambler places bets
on the input symbol to a
communication channel
and bets his money in the
same proportion each
time a particular symbol
is received, his capital
will grow (or shrink)
exponentially. If the
odds are consistent with
the probabilities of
occurrence of the
transmitted symbols
(i.e., equal to their
reciprocals), the
maximum value of this
exponential rate of
growth will be equal to
the rate of transmission
of information. If the odds
are not fair, i.e., not
consistent with the
transmitted symbol
probabilities but
consistent with some
other set of probabilities,
the maximum
exponential rate of
growth will be larger
than it would have been
with no channel by an
amount equal to the rate
of transmission of
information.
J. L. Kelly, Jr60

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

His “get-out-of-the-trap” strategies influenced many top traders
of the last 30 years. Who else passed through Commodities Corporation? Traders with names like Paul Tudor Jones, Bruce Kovner,
Louis Bacon, and Michael Marcus paid their dues at Commodities
Corporation. Interestingly, in the mid-1990s, long after the majority
of the trend followers had moved on to their own firms, I visited
Commodities Corporation’s offices. Midway through our tour, we
bumped into a stressed-out energy trader. After a few minutes of
conversation, we began to chat about his trading style, which was
based on fundamentals. Throughout our entire conversation, he
was glued to the monitor. When I brought up trend following, he
assured me that it did not work. I was surprised that a trader
working for a famous firm, known for training brilliant trend
followers, was completely blinded to even the possibility that trend
following worked. I realized then that even the people closest to
trend following did not necessarily have an appreciation for it.

Jay Forrester: System Dynamics
Along with Hostetter, Jay Forrester, a professor of Seykota’s at
MIT, was a strong influence on the then young Seykota:
“One of my mentors, Jay Forrester, was a stickler for clear
writing, a sign of clear thinking.”58
Forrester taught Seykota about System Dynamics. “It is a
method for studying the world around us. Unlike other scientists,
who study the world by breaking it up into smaller and smaller
pieces, system dynamicists look at things as a whole. The central
concept to system dynamics is understanding how all the objects in
a system interact with one another. A system can be anything from
a steam engine, to a bank account, to a basketball team. The objects
and people in a system interact through “feedback” loops, where a
change in one variable affects other variables over time, which in
turn affects the original variable, and so on. An example of this is
money in a bank account. Money in the bank earns interest, which
increases the size of the account. Now that the account is larger, it
earns even more interest, which adds more money to the account.
This goes on and on. What system dynamics attempts to do is
understand the basic structure of a system, and thus understand
the behavior it can produce. Many of these systems and problems
that are analyzed can be built as models on a computer. System
