
CHAPTER 4

PREPARING YOURSELF ADEQUATELY BEFORE JUMPING INTO THE MARKET

47

you detailed insight into the price action of the stock. For day traders knowing exactly who has an interest in a stock can be extremely useful.

TOOLS
SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRONIC TRADING
Although it is possible to deal in the FOREX through a dial-up connection,
it is recommended that you have a fast digital subscriber line (DSL) or
cable setup, especially if the platform you will be using requires continuous
reception and update of data feed. If you are a long-term trader who checks
the charts only occasionally and who operates mostly with pending limit or
stop orders, this will not be a high priority, but a scalper, for example, will
need a stable Internet flow and a fairly huge bandwidth, which will allow a
fast connection to and from the broker’s server. The computer itself doesn’t
have to possess the ultimate high-tech gadgets, but it should be in optimal
condition and properly maintained periodically.
A second alternative connection should be considered in case the main
one fails. It is good practice to have more than one avenue with which to
access your open positions in the eventuality of an Internet failure or even
a power outage, especially if your broker doesn’t offer phone access.
Mobile access is a good option, although not every company offers that
possibility yet. You could combine your DSL connection with a dial-up,
wireless, cable, or mobile backup. Having a power generator or uninterruptible power supplies (UPS) is a must if you live in an area where there
are frequent electricity outages.
Finally, all the usual safety requirements concerning protection of your
data, such as virus protection, anti–key loggers, firewalls, etc., should be set
up before installing the software and logging on to your real-money account.

USING MULTIPLE MONITORS
Is it really necessary to use more than one monitor to become a successful
trader? This will depend on your own trading style and other professional
needs.
Having multiple monitors (at least two) seems to be a must in today’s
busy computer world, where multitasking is pretty much a common practice—one screen for the main program with which you are working and
another one for miscellaneous activities such as chatting, watching videos,
listening to music, or accomplishing any other task you need or desire to
perform simultaneously.

48

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

In FOREX trading, having multiple monitors can be very useful in that
you can watch several currency pairs at the same time or maybe just several
time frames of the same currency pair without having to minimize the
charts so that they all fit on the screens, watch the news, follow up your
favorite trading group seminar or live trading conference, or simply use
your other programs and Web browser. However, you should carefully
decide whether multiple monitors really represent a positive addition or if,
instead, the avalanche of available information is a distraction that hinders
your ability to focus completely on what you intend to do.
The use of multiple trading terminals, for a very active trader, can justify the acquisition of an additional screen, especially when the trading
platform on which you place your trades is different from your charting
application. Having two or even three monitors allows you to see the charts
in a more comfortable way with less eye strain. But how many is too many?
Professional traders usually recommend focusing on one or at best two
currency pairs. It is really useful to you to be permanently scanning each
and every market available in the expectation of the perfect setup? Most
often one of the reasons some traders need more monitors is because the
charts the use are overcrowded with too many indicators, so they have to
watch them full screen to see all the details. Does a bigger size make the
charts more readable, though? Before you run to the store and buy an additional screen for your equipment, you really should determine if all the
indicators that you intend to use are absolutely essential to your strategy
and trading style. Do you manage several accounts at the same time?
I use a laptop just about everywhere I go; at home, it is the only thing
I use. I actually place trades and follow numerous currency pairs from my
laptop. In addition, I have paid subscribers to my FOREX alert service,
and I both monitor multiple currency pairs and delivery timely trade alerts
from my laptop. So you don’t need a lot of monitors or equipment to trade
the FOREX. However, on the other side, at my office, my FOREX strategist and FOREX traders use lots of screens. In fact, I think one of them has
at least 12 or more screens just for himself. This is a little overboard, if you
ask me, but whatever works, I say. I do like using a multiple-monitor system when I am at the office because it allows me to see a lot of things
going on at one time, but it is not a requirement to be successful in the
FOREX market.

THE APPROPRIATE TRADING ENVIRONMENT
FOREX is a business, and it should be treated as such when you are choosing the location from which you will be opening and monitoring your

CHAPTER 4

PREPARING YOURSELF ADEQUATELY BEFORE JUMPING INTO THE MARKET

49

positions. Although working from home may be more comfortable and
allow more freedom, it also makes it a little more difficult to separate
normal family activities from your business, and this could lead to unfortunate interruptions that could damage your trading results.
Your home office should be laid out carefully and professionally
because you probably will spend several hours a day in it. Thus the furniture and layout have to be practical and, above all, comfortable. Take the
time to build your perfect workspace; it will have a direct and positive
influence on your overall mood and attitude at the moment you decide to
step into the FOREX market.

WHO TRADES THE FOREX?
The market nowadays has changed from what it was in earlier years, with
technological development and the ability to conduct transactions overseas
with more ease; other financial/nonfinancial institutions are able to participate in the FOREX market as well as individual investors and traders.
More than 80 percent of the FOREX market’s overall daily activity
comes from speculation, where transactions occur in a wide range from
commercial banks to individual traders. The main players that take part in
the FOREX market are central banks, individual banks, commercial companies, individual investors, brokers, and traders who jointly interact in the
FOREX market to profit from price fluctuations in exchange rates of currencies by means of buying and selling currency pairs as a speculative
activity. Another reason to enter the FOREX market is to hedge other
investments, such as the trading of goods and services. Finally, a few
traders look to profit on the overnight rollover amounts that are generated
by differences in each currency’s interest rates.
Commercial banks perform large transactions daily for their own benefit and also act as intermediaries for their customers. Central banks participate as controllers of the money supply of the respective country, with
the aim to help the economy achieve its goals. For example, central banks
can operate in the markets to restore the price stability of the exchange rate,
protect certain price levels, or when specific economic goals need to be
achieved, such as the control of inflation or growth.
Some of the most important central banks are the U.S. central bank (the
Federal Reserve, the Fed), the Bank of Japan, the Bank of England, the
Bank of Canada, the Swiss National Bank, the European Central Bank, and
the Reserve Bank of Australia.

50

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Commercial companies can participate in the FOREX market for speculation; to address the need to exchange foreign currencies in their export,
import, and touristic activities; and also to be able to hedge their exposure
if the home currency is seen as depreciating, avoiding in this way the
effects that price fluctuations could have on company stability.
Specific types of commercial companies are represented by investment
funds or hedge funds, which include all kinds of retirement, arbitrage, and
mutual funds, as well as international investments. These firms hedge and
protect one investment with another and have been entering more and more
into the FOREX scene.
Brokers are intermediaries who allow buyers and sellers of foreign
currency to interact. They obtain their profits through the spread between
the bid and ask prices. As discussed earlier, there are two types of brokers:
market makers and ECNs.
Finally, traders can be individuals or small groups that perform speculative and investment operations for their own account or as money managers
for third persons.

WHAT KIND OF TRADER AM I?
Before starting to put your own real money at risk, it is a good idea to
observe yourself and your usual living conditions, as well as your personality, and try several different trading techniques to see which of them will
suit you the most. Do you have a lot of free time to dedicate to your trades,
or instead, do you already have a busy schedule, maybe a full-time job or
career studies? How much risk capital, which you do not need for a living,
can you afford to set apart for your FOREX activities? Ask yourself: Am I
a patient or impatient person? Can I perform under stress, or do I have a
short attention span?
Another area to consider is your trading strategy itself. Are you more
inclined toward fundamentals and economics? Or, on the contrary, is technical analysis more appealing to your mind structure? Would you prefer to
use a mechanical system or a discretionary approach?
With all this in mind, you can develop a preliminary idea that will allow
you to start by choosing a few strategies among the hundreds of systems
that already exist and testing the waters on a practice account, comparing
the different time frames and how you feel in each and every circumstance,
besides checking the system’s own performance and results. Maybe then
you will want to develop a system of your own with the skills that you have
acquired through observation of the markets from several points of view.

CHAPTER 4

PREPARING YOURSELF ADEQUATELY BEFORE JUMPING INTO THE MARKET

51

TRADING TECHNIQUES
Trading techniques can be divided in two general groups: long term and
short term. Below I will provide a summary of some of the advantages and
disadvantages of those two basic groups before I give a more detailed
description of each of the components they include.
In long-term trading, traders base their analysis on end-of-day data and
look to hold trades for a few weeks or even up to many months. They usually follow the trend. The advantages of long-term trading are that there is
no need to watch the markets intraday and that traders perform much fewer
transactions, thus lowering any commission costs. In addition, there is no
need for using fancy equipment or software because the time spent analyzing and watching the markets is very short.
However, long-term traders will need to set much larger stops and will
experience large equity swings. Thus they will need to be well capitalized
and prepared for this eventuality. Trades are very few, and exceptional
trades are fewer. Much patience is needed to wait for a trend to develop to
its full potential. Losing months can be frequent.
In short-term trading traders will depend on the analysis of intraday
data and aim to hold their positions for a few days or up to one or two
weeks. Short-term traders usually perform swing trading. A shorter-term
trading approach is referred to as day trading, where trader try to take small
profits from intraday swings, exiting all positions before or at the daily
market close. The advantages of short-term trading are that there are much
more opportunities for trades, thus also less chance of experience losing
months, and that traders do not have to rely on one or two trades a year to
make money. With day trading in particular, since positions are closed
daily, there is absolutely no overnight risk.
On the negative side, the cost of their transactions will be higher in shortterm trading (traders will be paying more spread). Swing traders also incur in
overnight risk. Day traders have to confront more difficulties psychologically
because of the frequency of trading and having to monitor the markets constantly. The need to exit positions at the end of the day will limit their profits.

SCALPING
The main idea behind the scalping strategy in FOREX trading is to take
very small profits very quickly from very small movements of price, such
as 2 to 10 pips. The trades normally are entered and exited within minutes
or even seconds. Small profits add up because the number of daily trades
can be very high, ranging from 20 to 100 trades on average.

52

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Scalping is considered to be a risky trading style. However, this will
depend on which times of the day and which types of markets are used.
Although it is possible to scalp successfully in trending conditions, the best
trading times are when the market is ranging inside consolidation patterns.
Most of the time, this is so; thus there are plenty of times to choose from to
implement this strategy. High volatility or news releases are not recommended because of a higher risk involved.
The strategy has to be very well determined in advance, as for any trading system, especially in terms of risk management. A fast reaction and
decision time is paramount, getting out of bad trades as soon as possible
with low pip losses. Since the trader will be taking many more trades
throughout the session, it is better to take profits as they present themselves, small pips here and there, not aiming for more because the strategy
is to sum up the overall quantity of trades. Scalping is usually performed on
very short time frames; thus the average range available is also very small,
and one shouldn’t expect more than 5 to 10 pips on average.

INTRADAY TRADING
Intraday or day trading is a technique that requires all positions to be closed
at the end of each day. The number of trades is much lower than in scalping, and although very short time frames can be used to pinpoint better
entries, trades are usually analyzed and performed over short- and mediumterm time frames, such as 1-hour or 30-minute charts, with 5 or 15 minutes
for entries. Traders can use a variety of technical analysis tools and wait for
the appropriate signal or opportunity to open a position. If there is no good
opportunity, they can stay on the sidelines and wait for a better chance the
next day.

POSITION TRADING
The position- trading technique is a strategy in which you increase your
position size incrementally as the trade evolves, maintaining the same initial level of risk. It is also called averaging into a position; the trader adds
a new position of the same size and in the same direction every time the risk
of the previous one can be covered.
For example, you could buy 0.1 lot of EUR/USD at 1.2550 and set the
stop loss at 1.2500. Your risk would be of $50. When the price goes up,
you buy a second mini lot at 1.2600 with a stop loss at 1.2550, setting the
stop of the first position at breakeven (1.2550). You now will have two
mini lots while maintaining your overall risk at $50. If the price keeps on
rising, you can buy a third 0.1 position at 1.2650, setting the stop loss at

CHAPTER 4

PREPARING YOURSELF ADEQUATELY BEFORE JUMPING INTO THE MARKET

53

1.2600, and trail the stop of the first two positions equally to 1.2600.
Should you be stopped out, all three mini lot trade are now at breakeven!
Should the price continue rising, you can buy a fourth mini lot at 1.2700,
setting all the stops for the positions at 1.2650, which will protect your
profits. You then buy a fifth mini lot at 1.2750, setting all the stops as previously, and your protected profit amounts to $250 ($150 ⫹ $100 ⫹ $50,
with the fourth mini lot at breakeven and $50 risk on the last position). In
this way, you can limit your risk and exposure, which will remain the same
in the whole process, and can accumulate great benefits. This style of trading allows you to stay in the trend and is ideal to use in longer time frames
such as daily or weekly charts.
Another option that can be used is to convert a profitable day-trading
position into a long-term sequential trade as soon as enough positive points
are covered. You can go on adding to the position in the same way explained
earlier and reap the profits later on with minimal risk.
Position trading should be attempted with small position sizes and no
more than 1 or 2 percent capital risk. The advantage of this trading style is
that you do not need to monitor the market all day, only check from time to
time to adjust the stops and protect the profits already made. This strategy
is much less stressful, and you can earn more profit with very small potential losses.

SWING TRADING
Price fluctuations in large moves are also called swings. The price goes up
for a while, and then it goes back down. Swing trading is the strategy
employed by traders who ride those swings and obtain profits from them.
Swing trades usually are kept open for a few days, as long as the swing
or trend is continuing. As soon as the price seems to be reaching a top or a
bottom, the trader will enter short or long the market to profit from the
expected move.
Markets usually range most of the time around 70 to 80 percent of
the market activity being done sideways. However, those are “trends
within trends” because each side of a sideways move is a small trend in
itself and can yield many profits because the time frames used are higher
than in scalping. A swing trade usually can give around 100 or more pips
per trade.
This strategy is somewhat risky, though, because picking tops
and bottoms is not so simple to do. Sometimes, what is seen as a reversal
is only a small retracement, and the price continues rising or falling a
short time after, which will cause huge losses if it is not estimated

54

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

carefully. The accuracy in determining if the market has reached a peak or
a trough will benefit the trader’s use of several technical analysis tools
and in evaluating the ranges that the market usually develops in the time
frame used.
A solution to this is to ride the middle of the swing, without trying to
enter at the very top or bottom. The swing will start going in one direction
and then will retrace a little, and this is the best moment for an entry.

NEWS TRADING: STRADDLE
A straddle is the action of placing both a buy and a sell pending stop order
above and below the current price. No direction is expected, and the trader
prepares for the eventuality of a move either way. Straddles are used commonly in news trading and are implemented before the outcome of a news
release kicks in. All the usual elements of trading are set up in the straddle,
such as stop losses and target prices. OCO orders, where available, can be
used so that whenever one of the trades gets triggered, the other one is automatically canceled.
This technique can be used on breakout expectations and in various
other ways, such as, for example, based on the cross of either side of a particular moving average. Straddling involves some maintenance because
orders that haven’t been triggered yet need to be updated periodically as
prices and conditions evolve. Besides, it is important not to leave active
pending orders behind that are not needed any more. This is a mechanical
approach that doesn’t need a great deal of analysis; the market will move
either way, and the trade will be managed accordingly when triggered.
Orders are placed in the same way and at the same time by the rules of the
chosen system, and the trader will only have to wait until any of the options
gets effectively on the market.
Straddle trading is very useful during undecided market conditions,
after long periods of consolidation, and of course, before fundamental
announcements. It is often used to trade the news because of the difficulty of predicting such a move and also because entering in a highly
volatile market sometimes can be totally impossible, whereas a stop order
usually should be filled at the price chosen. However, straddles also are
very risky because both sides could be stopped out in a big swing reaction, so the stops and targets have to be planned very carefully and set at
precise levels.
Straddle-based trading systems can be very appealing to traders who
don’t have much time to spend at their computers.

CHAPTER 4

PREPARING YOURSELF ADEQUATELY BEFORE JUMPING INTO THE MARKET

55

THE TRADER’S LEVELS OF ASCENSION
In the process of becoming a professional FOREX trader, there are five levels through which it has been proved that practically everyone will have to
evolve. Sometimes you might think that you have reached a higher level,
just to find yourself again at level one or two. I like to use the following as
a way to help determine where you are at a certain point in your evolution
as trader. Assume that you are on your way to my office building to work
with me as a professional currency trader. When you get to the lobby, you
find out that all the professional traders in my office are on the fifth floor.
The problem is that there is only one way to get to the fifth floor, and that
is to work your way up. Obviously, you have made your mind up that trading currency is something you want to do, and you have committed to by
investing in this book. So you decide to take the journey and start off on the
first floor.

FIRST FLOOR:YOU DON’T KNOW THAT YOU DON’T KNOW
What is the first thought that attracts people to FOREX trading? The magic
promise of making money fast and easy and being able to live a life of luxury. Maybe it is only the desire to quit a boring and demanding full-time job
or to earn a little more in order to pay off all one’s debts and thereafter retire
in a more comfortable financial situation.
Prices go up, and then they go down. It seems easy. Besides, there are
a lot of success stories, real or not so real, of millionaires who got their fortunes through currency speculation. All the glamour and hype built around
the financial world are amazing!
Then you open your first account, probably test the waters a little on a
demo account, but what you really want is real money. Practice accounts
are most often left aside and seen as boring and useless for your immediate
purposes. You don’t even bother to understand what all those “technical
indicators” on the trading platform are for. You just need to know where to
click for buying and selling—that’s all.
So there you are, clicking away on your path to total financial freedom!
You take trade after trade, risk after risk. You probably don’t even use a stop
loss! You become overconfident and start risking greater amounts of money
to accelerate its multiplication. So simple it is! The price goes up, you buy;
the price goes down, you sell. What could go wrong? If you fail to plan,
then you have planned to fail. With this attitude and mind-set, you will
guarantee yourself failure, not just in trading the FOREX but also in life.
The good news is that all you need is a little knowledge, and with that
