
FEEDBACK LOOPS
Price movements in stocks occur mainly due to supply and demand imbalances between buyers and
sellers, and it helps to oversimplify market participants as such. As in physics, once an object is set in
motion, it is easier to keep the object moving than it is to stop and reverse the object. In life, we are
aware of two distinct cycles or feedback loops that we call virtuous cycles (or circles) to describe a
string of good events that lead to other good outcomes or alternatively vicious cycles (or circles) that
are a string of bad events that lead to further negative outcomes. These feedback loops also occur in
the stock market. One of the best sources to learn more about feedback loops in the stock market is
from Robert Shiller's discussion in his book Irrational Exuberance regarding the buying frenzy that
took stocks to unfathomable highs via positive feedback loops, particularly technology stocks, in the
run-up to the 2000 peak.

Positive Feedback Loops
Positive feedback loops refer to one event leading to a similar outcome, and then those outcomes lead
to similar events that produce the same outcome. Keep in mind that, despite the term ‘positive,’ the
outcome and perpetual motion might not necessarily be considered positive or good: it depends on
your perspective and current position. The term “positive” refers to perpetual motion, rather than in
the context of anything good or bad.
In the stock market, a positive feedback loop is characterized by sustained price movement in one
direction, usually as one side of the market dominates the other, such that higher prices lead to
increasingly higher prices just as lower prices lead to increasingly lower prices. Market participants
react to new prices and then react again to newer prices, and then react in the same way to even
newer prices in a perpetual loop that propels price movement in a sustained direction.

In a breakout expansion price move to the upside, the positive feedback loop may begin initially
with a price breakout above an upper resistance line at which time both new buyers push the price
higher beyond the breakout level which in turn causes those who hold short positions to buy back to
cover their positions at a loss, particularly if they placed a stop just above the resistance line. Once
price has broken above the resistance price, it may lead buyers who did not participate in the initial
breakout to buy price once they feel safe that the stock is indeed breaking above the resistance level
and will not lead to a bull trap. As new buyers push prices higher, old short sellers cover additional
short-sold positions, convinced as well that price is truly breaking above resistance. Their buying to
cover their short position at a loss further drives the price higher. Perhaps the price breakout triggers
alerts or shows up on other traders’ scans, which causes more bulls to step in and buy the stock,
which now is caught in a positive feedback loop and thus breakout impulse move to the upside. The
higher prices cause more short sellers, who remain stubbornly short despite price moving beyond
their initial stop-loss price, to cover, thus driving the price even higher. A positive feedback loop in
price will continue until sidelined bulls cease buying price (no more buyers), bulls currently in a
position begin taking profits perhaps at an upside price target (old buyers become new sellers), or
those who remain short have bought back all of their borrowed shares at a loss (old bears cease
buying to cover).
Though this example shows a positive feedback loop to the upside, the situation occurs in reverse
when a breakout impulse move sends price lower in a positive feedback loop where bears are
shorting to profit from future declines in price, which leads bulls to sell their shares at a loss, which
then triggers more bears to short the down-move in progress, which in turn triggers more bulls (old
buyers) to liquidate their shares as price travels steadily lower.
In simplistic terms, think of a positive feedback loop to the upside as bulls buying willingly along
with bears buying to cover positions unwillingly, often at a loss. A positive feedback loop to the
downside is thus characterized by bears short-selling willingly and bulls selling shares (liquidating)
unwillingly, usually at a loss. Another way to think of a positive feedback loop might be to state that
higher prices lead to higher prices, which then lead to higher prices; or to the downside, lower prices
lead to lower prices, which then lead to lower prices. Understanding positive feedback loops helps
you to understand why price can move in a lengthy trend range expansion move over time, especially
when breaking free of a lengthy, established sideways trading range.

Negative Feedback Loops
It is very important that you distinguish between directional bias in a positive and negative feedback
loop. A negative feedback loop does not mean that price is heading lower in a breakout move.
Instead, negative feedback loops describe what happens during a price consolidation or contraction
phase. We can restate the price alternation principle in terms of feedback loops. Instead of saying
price alternates between periods of range expansion and contraction, we can declare that price moves
between periods of negative and positive feedback loops.
During a range contraction phase, price boundaries are clearly defined between the upper
resistance line, lower support line, and the value area or midpoint price. This gives both bulls and
bears—buyers and sellers—a clear reference for what to expect and how to position when price
comes into one of these price reference levels. As such, a price rise into a known resistance area
does not lead to short sellers covering, as a higher price would do during a positive feedback loop.

Bears generally do not panic as price rallies into an overhead resistance level, but only when price
breaks unexpectedly above that reference level. Instead, the higher prices attract new short sellers in
combination with old buyers who purchased shares at lower prices taking profits at the upper price
resistance level. As such, the higher prices attract sellers, which then lead to lower prices. As price
then falls to the lower support line, old short sellers cover their positions at a profit and new bulls
buy stock in anticipation of a bounce higher off support. Thus, lower prices lead to higher prices.
This is the best way to conceptualize a negative feedback loop: higher prices bring out sellers,
which drives price lower, which brings out buyers, which drives price higher. Or to further simplify
the definition, we can say higher prices lead to lower prices, and lower prices lead to higher prices
—usually during the context of a trading range or consolidation environment. Contrast this with a
positive feedback loop where higher prices lead to higher prices and vice versa during a price
expansion phase.

FEEDBACK LOOPS
Feedback loops refer to cycles of events that create perpetual motion as buyers and sellers interact with each other via
developments on the price charts.
Positive Feedback Loop: Higher prices lead to higher prices which lead steadily to higher prices in a range
breakout mode to the upside. Bulls purchase shares willingly and the higher prices cause bears to buy-back shares to
cover positions unwillingly. Similarly, lower prices lead to lower prices, which lead steadily to lower prices in a range
breakout mode to the downside. Bears sell shares short willingly and the lower prices cause bulls to sell shares
unwillingly.
Negative Feedback Loop: Higher prices lead to lower prices which lead to higher prices in the context of a
trading range or consolidation phase. A price rally into resistance causes bears to sell shares short willingly for an
expected future profit as buyers sell shares willingly, taking profits into resistance. As price then falls to a lower
level, short-sellers buy-back shares willingly at a profit and bulls buy shares willingly in anticipation of a future rally
off support.

Figure 3.5 shows Apple Inc. (AAPL) through two cycles of negative and positive feedback on its
daily chart throughout 2008 and 2009.
FIGURE 3.5 Positive and Negative Feedback in Apple Inc. during 2008 and 2009 Daily chart

Though Apple is a volatile stock, it is not immune from the price alternation principle. Figure 3.5
shows us two instances of range expansion in a positive feedback loop, along with two phases of
range contraction in a negative feedback loop in the one-year period from mid-2008 to mid-2009.
Beginning in mid-2008, we see that buyers and sellers have established a declining value area
along with a declining upper resistance and lower support lines. Price moved between these
boundaries until sellers ejected the price lower starting with a breakout in September 2008 at the
$150.00-per-share level. This range breakout and price impulse to the downside perpetuated a
positive feedback loop as short sellers sold shares to profit from the down move and buyers sold
stocks to limit losses as price plunged to the downside. Buyers who failed to limit their losses
experienced larger losses, which intensified the selling pressure for those holding shares as price
continued its range expansion play to the downside.
However, price cannot remain in a range expansion phase forever. Eventually price will stabilize
as the lower prices entice new buyers to purchase shares in an attempt to ‘catch a falling knife’ or buy
as close to the lows as possible. In fundamental analysis terms, eventually price will fall so far
beneath fair value that long-term investors will begin a campaign of accumulation as the stock trades
beneath their assessment of long-term fair value of what a share of Apple should be worth, taking into
consideration all company valuation statistics.
Price entered a bottoming process that stretched from October 2008 to the range breakout in March
2009. This bottoming process revealed a new fair value price at the $90.00-per-share level, with a
lower support line stabilizing horizontally at the $85.00-per-share level and an upper resistance line
stabilizing but declining at the $100.00-per-share level. Buyers and sellers pushed price between
these boundaries in a negative feedback loop, where higher prices encouraged selling above $90.00
and lower prices under $90.00 encouraged buying.
This range consolidation or contraction phase ended with the price breakout in late March 2009,
which put shares of Apple again on a positive feedback loop, this time to the upside as buyers were
rushing to purchase shares as price trended higher and short sellers were forced to cover any

remaining short positions in the stock to limit mounting losses. Price formed a very short-term range
consolidation for the month of June 2009 with a fair value price at $140.00, but buyers continued to
push price higher in a continuation of the positive feedback loop and range expansion phase that
began in March 2009.

The Case of Sears Holdings (SHLD)
Like Apple in Figure 3.5, shares of Sears Holdings (SHLD) exemplified the concept of the Price Alternation Principle with
a similar transition from the range phases as buyers and sellers interacted. Instead of showing the full chart, we will focus
on how price transitioned through these phases and what trading opportunities a savvy trader or investor could have
employed with a firm knowledge of this principle.

FIGURE 3.6 Range Contraction and Expansion in Sears Holdings through 2005

Figure 3.6 shows us the first phase of the price movement in Sears Holdings on its daily chart for the majority of 2005.
Remember that price in a negative feedback or rangebound environment does not have to take the form of a horizontal
rectangle; instead, the fair value and upper/lower reference boundaries can be rising or falling. Observe the three
components of a trading range when assessing whether the market is in a negative or positive feedback phase: fair-value
median line, upper resistance line, and lower support line. If you can draw parallel or converging trendlines with price highs
and lows, then you are likely correctly observing a range consolidation or negative feedback loop occurring in price.
With the exception of two sudden breaks in early June 2005, buyers and sellers kept price contained within the respective
rising boundaries as shown from May to July 2005. We expect price to remain within these trendlines, and thus generate
trading opportunities for short-term traders, until we see a clean breakout from the established boundaries, which would
signal the start of a new breakout or range expansion phase in price. Alternately, traders who wish to take on longer-term
positions can avoid trading within a negative feedback environment and wait to establish a position when price breaks
through the boundaries and embarks on a range expansion phase.
Price broke the rising lower support trendline and prior swing low at the $150.00-per-share level in early August 2005,
signaling a possible short-sale position (or a put purchase for those who prefer trading options on high-priced stocks) with
an entry under $150.00 per share. A trader would likely place a stop-loss order near the $155.00 level, which would protect
from a larger loss in the event that the breakout was a bear trap. We will discuss the specifics of trade execution, stop-loss
placement, and trade management in Chapter 8.
Holding short, a trader could target the prior price support line at the $135.00-per-share level, perhaps expecting a potential

bounce higher from that prior price zone. Price did bounce higher for one week, then collapsed back under $135.00,
initiating a new confirmation that the positive feedback loop was dominant. Remember, supply and demand imbalances
affect price movements, and our goal through using the chart is to assess the dynamics of the relationship between buyers
and sellers. In this case, buyers had an opportunity to support price at $135.00, but their failure to do so was an immediate
signal that bears were still dominant and that traders who bought at the $135.00 level were now forced to sell their shares
at a loss, further exacerbating the positive feedback loop of selling pressure to the downside. Remember, positive feedback
loops are characterized by bears short selling willingly and bulls selling to limit losses unwillingly.
Despite the fear and emotions of bulls caught in a downside range expansion phase, price cannot fall to zero unless the
company declares bankruptcy or is delisted from an exchange. Barring those two possibilities, the positive feedback loop
eventually will break and a new phase of range consolidation or compression will occur. You cannot anticipate where a
new trading range will form in advance, but once you see price test a price level two times, you can assume that a trading
range is likely forming.
In this case, price tested the $125.00-per-share level three times in the October 2005 period while simultaneously testing the
$115.00-per-share level three times also during the same period. It is thus safe to assume that buyers and sellers have
established a fair value region between $115.00 and $125.00, with the specific fair-value price being $120.00 that creates
an upper resistance reference line at $125.00 and a lower support reference line at $115.00. Position traders—those
wishing to play for large targets over time—may consider exiting their short-sale positions established near the $150.00
breakout at the lower support zone of $115.00, perhaps in October or November 2005. These same traders would remain
sidelined (not in a position) while buyers and sellers held price between the $125.00 and $115.00 trendlines as a negative
feedback loop developed in price. Each time price rallied to $125.00, buyers sold to lock in profits and bears were
encouraged to put on a short-sale position to target the lower support line at $115.00. As price traded back down to the
$115.00 level, bears were encouraged to cover (buy) their short-sale positions at a profit as bulls were encouraged to buy
shares at an established lower support line. This is the hallmark of a negative feedback or range consolidation environment
in price.
Price remained within this boundary for the remainder of 2005 and into early 2006. The boundary lines were firmly
established with short-term traders playing positions within the $115.00 to $125.00 trading range and position traders waiting
patiently for either an upside break to buy or a downside break to short for another range expansion play or positive
feedback loop to develop.

Psychology and Trading Ranges
It's best to wait for a confirmed breakout of the trading range rather than trying to guess which direction price will break.
This is because if you choose incorrectly, you will be trapped in a potentially violent range expansion phase and lose much
more than your stop-loss price. There is also an unrecognized danger to trading within an established range. Once you are
certain that price is trading within the boundaries of an established range, you will often achieve a very high win-rate
percentage of successful trades if you buy at the lower support line and then sell at the upper resistance line and then sell
short at the upper resistance line and buy back to cover your short at the lower support line. A range contraction phase
cannot last forever, just as a range expansion phase cannot last forever. When—yes, when, not if—price breaks out of the
trading range, you will immediately incur a losing position because your trade was in expectation of the trading range
continuing instead of price breaking out of the range, and thus your stop will be outside the boundaries of the trading range.
Here is a good example of where psychology trumps probability if you are not careful. A trader who has just experienced
six winning trades in a row might doubt the breakout, and thus ignore taking a stop loss when the strategy calls for a stop to
be taken. As price continues to move in breakout mode, overconfidence causes the trader to hold short from a position
made at the upper resistance line.
If this is a true range breakout, one of two outcomes are likely to happen: first, price is likely to rise rapidly and suddenly as
buyers put on new breakout positions and those holding short—not trapped by their emotions—rush to cover their short
positions at a small and quantified loss. Second, price is likely to gap significantly higher, leaving all short sellers trapped in a
position where price gapped through their predetermined stop-loss price, and now might suffer the classic “deer in the
headlights” syndrome of panic where they wonder if they should sell now and accept a larger loss than expected, or
continue holding short in anticipation of price falling back to fill the gap. Neither situation is good for the trader who remains
trapped.
Your ability to understand this situation and the Price Alternation Principle in general will make the difference in your ability
to take the proper steps if trapped on the wrong side of a range expansion move. Price continues to expand when traders
who are trapped on the wrong side of a range breakout move cannot take the emotional pain or rapidly increasing financial
losses of price in a positive feedback loop. As more losing traders succumb to this pain and exit their positions with larger
losses than they expected, these same traders continue to push price in the direction of the range breakout, which therefore

increases the pain of the other traders caught in the wrong direction who stubbornly are still holding on to their positions.
Let us now return to our example of the price movement in Sears Holdings to assess what happened next in price. Figure
3.7 gives us the answer.

FIGURE 3.7 Range Breakout Move in 2006 for Sears Holdings

On the Ides of March, March 15, 2006, Sears Holdings broke sharply upward through its upper resistance line at $126.00
per share, triggering the start of a range breakout expansion phase in price that would later take price back to the $165.00
level seen almost a full year later. Let's envision this move through the thoughts of two separate traders: one who
understood the Price Alternation Principle and one who did not.

Two Trader Perspectives
Our first trader understood the range alternation principle and had been waiting eagerly for a price breakout one way or the
other to put on a breakout swing or position trade. The first chance came on the initial break on March 15th, though taking a
position right as price breaks out is an aggressive entry tactic. Aggressive traders seek to enter a position as soon as
possible, while conservative tactics encourage waiting for confirmation before making an entry. Price formed a strong buy
candle that closed at $132.00, which was a stellar $15.00 move up, including the gap, from the prior close on March 14th of
$117.00. Conservative-style traders looking for more confirmation can wait for two bars to close outside the breakout level,
which occurred the next day on March 16th as price rallied more than $7.00 to close at $139.50. A trader could have
looked to enter a position on the next trading session if not already committed long for a breakout play.
A conservative trader, combining the Price Alternation and Momentum principles, could have waited to put on a position
when price retraced downward slightly. While this strategy is successful, a powerful breakout from a range consolidation
zone may not produce a perfect retracement for you to enter, particularly if the market enters a sharp positive feedback
loop where higher highs lead to higher highs without retracements. It will be up to you as you develop your techniques to
determine when to enter a breakout position, though we will discuss trade entries in Chapter 8.
Whether our trader entered immediately on the breakout, two closes after the breakout, or on the retracement back to
$130.00 in the weeks after the breakout, our trader was committed long to play for a potential range breakout expansion
phase, or positive feedback loop in price. The trader was greatly rewarded, as price moved back to the $160.00 level with
two minor retracements, which provided good entries in the context of an upward trending market (see Chapter 1 on trend
continuity). The trader would continue holding long in a position trade until he was convinced a potential trend reversal or
second consolidation phase was forming, which is not shown on the chart.
Our second trader did not fully understand the Price Alternation Principle, but saw a market that had clearly established
boundaries and began to trade both short and long within the confines of the trading range. This trader had racked up quick,
easy profits and was ready to position into the seventh profitable trade in a row. The trader entered this on March 9 as
