more leveraged money funds sold US dollars or Euro and bought zloty on the back of this move.
For a time, “real money” asset managers did the same, increasing their currency exposure as
a result of their buying of Polish bonds. There was no incentive to hedge that currency risk.
Indeed, there appeared to be every incentive not to hedge — the high cost, the appreciating
trend in the zloty and the desire to keep the carry of the original investment (which hedging
would reduce or even eliminate).
6.2.3 Phase III: Fundamental Deterioration — The Local Currency Becomes Volatile
Theory
Fundamental investors and speculators do not necessarily sit easily together. They have different investment aims and parameters, the ﬁrst looking for regular investment capital gain or
income over time, the latter looking frequently for short, quick moves. Granted, this is a gross
exaggeration and generalization, but it gives at least something of a ﬂavour for the different
dynamics at work between the two investor types. The longer the trend continues the more
speculative it becomes in a number of ways. In the ﬁrst case more and more speculators join
the trend, sure of easy money to be had. Equally, however, the longer this trend appreciation
goes on, the more damage it does to the external balance and thus the more speculative it
becomes in the sense of not being fundamentally justiﬁable. Real exchange rate appreciation
must lead to external balance deterioration. Indeed, fundamental market participants, such as
asset managers and corporations, increasingly reduce their currency risk for the very reason
that there are such fundamental concerns. The ability of speculative inﬂows to offset fundamental outﬂows from the currency is increasingly reduced. Because of this increasing tension
between fundamental and speculative ﬂows, option implied volatility picks up in the face of
increasingly choppy and volatile price action.
Practice
From March through mid-June 2001, the Polish zloty continued to appreciate, albeit in an
increasingly erratic and volatile manner. Frequent sell offs would be followed by sharp rallies.
Asset managers became increasingly aware of the degree of slowdown in the Polish economy.
While this should conversely be good news for ﬁxed income investors as it caused inﬂationary
pressures to decline further, it was a source of increasing concern for equity investors. The
market’s overall appetite for risk remained relatively high, helped in large part by continued
monetary easing by the Federal Reserve. Further, the National Bank of Poland was also cutting
interest rates, albeit cautiously in the face of clear evidence of abating price pressures. However,

130

Currency Strategy

both the pace and extent of zloty strength were a cause of concern to investors, and it seems
also to the Polish government. Ahead of elections in September (in which it was subsequently
routed by the opposition SLD party), the AWS-led government was increasingly desperate to
boost the ﬂagging economy, whether by interest rate cuts, ﬁscal expansion or a weaker zloty.
Markets feared a change in exchange rate policy, either by the existing government or more
likely by the opposition, which looked increasingly likely to win the election and in the end did
indeed do so. Around June, given the gains seen by then in both Polish bonds and the currency,
a combination of market concerns over fundamental deterioration in the economy, notably in
the trade balance, and over the prospect of a likely SLD election victory in September triggered
increasing interest by investors, particularly offshore investors, to take proﬁt on those gains.
6.2.4 Phase IV: Speculative Flow Reverses — The Local Currency Collapses
Theory
The tension between speculative inﬂows and fundamental outﬂows continues to increase,
causing violent price swings, until such point as those inﬂows are not sufﬁcient to offset the
rising tide of outﬂows. Like an inventory overhang that seems to appear out of nowhere in
the wake of over-investment, the result is a supply–demand imbalance in the exchange rate.
Demand collapses in order to restore equilibrium. In this case, that means a sharp reversal
of speculative inﬂows, which are by nature more easily and more quickly reversed than their
fundamental counterparts. Markets overshoot on both the upside and the downside, which
means that the correction in the exchange rate to offset over-appreciation is likely to exceed
what fundamentals suggest is required. Eventually it manages to stabilize again, starting off
a new round of appreciation as fundamental inﬂows are attracted anew. The sharp correction
in the exchange rate should help restore lost trade competitveness. Just as real exchange
rate appreciation must lead to external balance deterioration, so the cure for the latter is real
exchange rate depreciation. This can happen either through nominal exchange rate depreciation
or through a sharp fall in inﬂation. The easiest and most efﬁcient way for this to happen is
through the former. Once that correction or nominal depreciation happens however, the external
balance should respond positively.
Practice
At the June 27 FOMC meeting, the Federal Reserve cut interest rates by 25 basis points as
expected. Notably, risk appetite indicators did not improve in the wake of this, the ﬁrst time
all year that Fed monetary easing had failed to boost risk appetite. In hindsight, this should
have proved a major warning signal, and not just for the Polish zloty but for global ﬁnancial
markets as a whole. A week later, the tremors of the earthquake to come were starting to be
felt. On the Thursday, the dollar–zloty exchange rate was already heading higher, boosted by
proﬁt-taksing on long zloty positions by asset managers and by a lack of fresh demand for
zloty from this quarter. Having bottomed out at around 3.92, dollar–zloty broke back above the
4 level to retest 4.10. Come Friday morning, dollar–zloty broke above 4.20, then 4.25 and then
it broke above 4.30. Speculative money that had been long zloty, both against the US dollar
and the Euro, either decided to close out their long zloty positions or were stopped out of them.
Despite fundamental outﬂows, there were still asset managers who had substantial positions in
Polish bonds and most of these were unhedged from a currency perspective. The spike higher
@Team-FLY

Model Analysis

131

in Euro–zloty and dollar–zloty forced these to currency hedge their bond positions, in the process greatly accelerating the move. Dollar–zloty leapt forward, screaming through 4.40, 4.45,
4.50, only peaking out at around 4.55. In the ﬁrst six months of 2001, the zloty appreciated by
around 10% against its old basket value, only to lose that and more in two days in July. From
a peak of around +15.5% against its basket, the zloty fell to as low as +2.5% before ﬁnally
managing to stabilize. The fall provided a major competitiveness boost to Polish exporters,
who quickly took advantage of the opportunity to hedge forward by selling US dollars and
Euro against the zloty at such elevated levels. In this way, fundamental buyers returned to both
the zloty and to the Polish asset markets, in the form of corporations on the one hand and
investors on the other. The cycle began again. Over the next six months, the zloty appreciated from +2.5% to over +14% before again correcting, this time to around +6.8% before
stabilizing.
Thus, where we have the CEMC model for pegged or ﬁxed exchange rates, the speculative
cycle model can be used for ﬂoating exchange rates. Readers will of course note that these two
models have been used in the context of emerging markets. The dynamics of the developed
currency markets are slightly different in so much as they are much more liquid and therefore
the transmission from portfolio ﬂows to currency strength is less immediate. Equally, very few
developed market currencies are pegged — indeed one could argue that the very act of moving
from a pegged to a ﬂoating currency is itself one necessary aspect of progression from emerging
to developed country status. Thus, while the CEMC is not of much use for developed market
exchange rates in this context, the speculative cycle model can be used for both emerging and
developed exchange rates.
One should note however that the time period over which speculative cycles last in the
developed exchange rate markets can be signiﬁcantly longer — years rather than months —
than is the case in the emerging markets. This is so because developed exchange rate markets
are substantially more liquid, but more importantly because the size of capital ﬂows has such a
disproportionately larger impact on the real economy of emerging markets than is the case with
developed economies. Capital ﬂows that can have only a lasting impact on the real economy
of a developed market after a substantial period of time are so large by comparison with the
size of an emerging market economy that they have a much more signiﬁcant impact.
If we look at what happens within the developed exchange rates, the speculative cycle of
exchange rates also has major relevance, with the proviso that it takes place over a much
longer period of time. The starting place for developed market exchange rates is of course
the US dollar. If we examine the performance of the US dollar from 1991 to 2001, we can
indeed see the speculative cycle of exchange rates at work. Roughly speaking, from 1991 to
1995, the US dollar was in a clear downtrend. Initially, this was due to fundamental concerns,
both of valuation and of growth prospects. The Gulf War in 1990–1991 gave way to a deep
if brief recession in 1991–1992. From 1993, this was exacerbated by the market’s increasing
view that the new Clinton administration had a deliberate policy of devaluing the US dollar
in order to boost US export competitiveness and reduce the US trade and current account
deﬁcits, particularly against Japan. While US ofﬁcials now say that this was never the case,
at the time US ofﬁcials made repeated statements that could easily have been interpreted as
such, suggesting the US wanted a weaker currency. Fundamental investors increasingly sold
their US assets during 1991–1993, and during 1993–1995 this process increased despite US
economic recovery on the view that the US was deliberately devaluing the dollar. Eventually, as
these things tend to do, this fundamental selling attracted the attention of the speculators, who
also started to sell en masse. The speculative pressure grew and grew, causing the US dollar

132

Currency Strategy

to fall in value against all of its major currency counterparts, such as the Japanese yen and
the German Deutschmark. This increasingly happened as the fundamentals of the US were
starting to improve, helped in large part by the dollar depreciation that had reduced that US
trade deﬁcit by making US exports more competitive. Fundamental investors started to get
back into US assets, however the speculators, attracted even more by irresponsible US ofﬁcial
comments on the currency, were still selling. Eventually, the patience of the US authorities
snapped and the Federal Reserve intervened on several occasions in 1995 to stem the tide of
speculative selling. The current Undersecretary of the US Treasury Peter Fisher was at the
time the head of open market operations at the New York Fed and therefore responsible for
the Fed’s intervention in the foreign exchange markets. Fisher explained the Fed’s aim not so
much as to defend a speciﬁc currency level or to of necessity stop a currency from weakening,
but rather to intervene in order to recreate a sense of two-way risk in the markets.2 The Fed
uses a number of market pricing indicators to tell whether or not two-way risk — the risk that
a currency can go up or down — exists and most if not all of these were at the time suggesting
that the market viewed all the US dollar risk as being to the downside. The Fed’s intervention,
carried out in conjunction with the Bank of Japan and also with monetary policy change by
the BoJ, helped cause a sea-change in market sentiment. The US thus achieved what they were
looking for, two-way risk in the dollar. In the wake of this, the fundamental buyers increased
signiﬁcantly in number and the speculators reversed and also started buying.
Thus, the speculative cycle worked, albeit with somewhat of a delay due to the view that
the US was deliberately trying to devalue its own currency. From 1995, the US dollar thus
has been on a trend of appreciation, more than reversing the weakness seen in 1991–1995.
Readers will of course be aware that the speculative cycle works both ways, when a currency
is appreciating and also when it is depreciating. Thus, the US dollar strength that we have seen
since 1995 has indeed caused fundamental deterioration. If the speculative cycle holds up, the
speculative buying will be overwhelmed by the fundamental selling by asset managers and the
US dollar will reverse sharply lower. The warning sign for that to come will be when we see a
sharp spike in options volatility without any major moves in the spot market, reﬂecting major
ﬂow disturbance in the market as the fundamental selling pressure intensiﬁes.
In recent years, the economic community has developed a very large number of exchange
rate models for analysing currency crises, and it is certainly not for here to repeat a list of
them. That said, they can be classiﬁed into three broad categories of currency crisis model.
First-generation crisis models focus on the “shadow price” of the exchange rate; that is the
exchange rate value that would prevail if all the foreign exchange reserves were sold. These
models generally view as doomed a central bank’s efforts to defend a currency peg using
reserves if the shadow price exchange rate is in a long-term uptrend. It is assumed that rational
speculators will immediately eliminate a central bank’s foreign exchange reserves as soon as
the shadow price exceeds the peg level. A key feature of ﬁrst-generation currency crisis models
is that they generally see currency crises as being due to poor government economic policy;
that there was a degree of blame involved, that poor government policy caused the currency
crisis.
Unlike with the ﬁrst-generation model, second-generation crisis models do not see a currency crisis as being due to poor government economic policy, but instead due to the currency
peg being at an uncompetitive level. The main inspiration for second-generation crisis models
2
As explained by Peter Fisher at the quarterly meetings at the New York Federal Reserve to discuss foreign exchange activity,
1995.

Model Analysis

133

was the ERM crises of 1992–1993. In 1992, the UK was not willing to take the economic
pain required to keep their peg of 2.7778 against the Deutschmark. In August 1993, most of
continental Europe was forced to abandon their 2.25% bands. However, instead of allowing
their currencies to ﬂoat freely, they widened the 2.25% band to 15%, a compromise solution
between a full ﬂotation and a pegged exchange rate. In the cases of the UK and of continental
Europe, the de-pegging of the exchange rate did not cause the much anticipated economic
recession. Indeed, the cost of defending the peg was very high interest rates, thus hurting the
economy. With the currency pegs gone, there was no longer any need for such high interest
rates. Thus, the de-pegging of the exchange rate was on the one hand due to the government’s
unwillingness to take the economic pain needed to defend the peg, but on the other hand that
pain was due to an uncompetitive exchange rate peg level. For the UK in particular, the depegging of sterling, which came to be known as “Black Wednesday”, was the best thing that had
happened to the UK economy for several years. Interest rates are lowered and exchange rates
stabilize at a much more competitive and appropriate level when currency pegs are broken,
according to second-generation models.
Third-generation currency crisis models, which developed in the wake of the Asian currency crisis, involved “moral hazard”, that is the idea that private sector investment in a speciﬁc
country will result if a sufﬁcient number of investors anticipate that country will be bailed out
by multinational organizations such as the IMF. Inward investment and external debt rise in
parallel as a country continues to be bailed out until such time as the situation is untenable.
The currency is one main expression of that situation’s collapse.
With the ﬁrst-generation currency crisis model, the focus is on blaming poor government
economic policy, particularly poor ﬁscal policy. With the second-generation model, the issue
of blame is less clear and the focus is more on an uncompetitive exchange rate rather than poor
government economic policy. For its part, the third-generation model focuses not on the reason
for the currency crisis but the result, or more speciﬁcally the massive real economic shock that
came from “moral hazard” investment caused by the combination of currency devaluation
and external debt. Put simply, second-generation models can be “good”, but third-generation
models are unequivocally “bad”.

6.3 SUMMARY
In Chapter 5, we looked at how the type of exchange rate regime can affect currency market
considerations. Here, in Chapter 6, we have tried to extrapolate this, looking at currency models
for ﬁxed and ﬂoating exchange rate regimes. While the aim of both chapters has been to show
the practical aspects of these themes, the methodology has largely been theoretical rather than
practical, that is the focus for the most part has been on the theory of how exchange rate
regimes affect economic behaviour and equally the theory of how currency crises develop.
In the next three chapters however, we take an entirely different line, focusing on practice
rather than theory, looking at how the practitioners themselves can use currency analysis and
strategy to conduct their business. We start this process by off by looking at how multinational
corporations might seek to manage their currency risk.

Part Three
The Real World of the Currency
Market Practitioner

@Team-FLY

7
Managing Currency Risk I — The
Corporation: Advanced Approaches to
Corporate Treasury FX Strategy
The management of currency risk by corporations has come a long way in the last three decades.
Before the break-up of Bretton Woods currency risk was not a major consideration for corporate
executives, nor did it have to be. Exchange rates were allowed to ﬂuctuate, but only within
reasonably tight bands, while the US dollar itself was pegged to that most solid of commodities,
gold. The responsibility for managing currency risk, or rather maintaining currency stability,
was largely that of governments. Needless to say, that burden, that responsibility has now
passed from the public to the private sector.
This chapter deals with the corporate world, how a corporation is affected by and how
corporate Treasury deals with the issue of currency or exchange rate risk. More speciﬁcally,
this chapter will look at:

r Currency risk — deﬁning and managing currency risk
r Core principles for managing currency risk
r Corporate Treasury strategy and currency risk
r The issue of hedging — management reluctance and internal hedging
r Advanced tools for hedging
r Hedging using a corporate risk optimizer
r Advanced approaches to hedging transactional and balance sheet currency risk
r Hedging emerging market currency risk
r Benchmarks for currency risk management
r Setting budget rates
r Corporations and predicting exchange rates
r VaR and beyond
r Treasury strategy in the overall context of the corporation

In short, there is a lot to cover. This chapter is aimed ﬁrst and foremost at corporate Finance
Directors, Treasurers and their teams. In addition, it attempts to give corporate executives
outside of the Treasury a greater understanding of the complexity and difﬁculty entailed and
the effort required in managing a corporation’s exchange rate or currency risk. As we shall see
later in the chapter, many leading multinationals have set up oversight or risk committees to
oversee the Treasury strategy in managing currency and interest rate risk. This is an important
counter-balance for the corporation as a whole, but of course it requires that the committee
itself is as up-to-date with the latest risk management ideas and techniques as are the Treasury
personnel themselves.
The way the corporation has dealt with currency risk has changed substantially over time.
Corporations, many of which were reluctant to touch anything but the most vanilla of hedging
structures, have now greatly increased the sophistication of their currency risk management

138

Currency Strategy

and hedging strategies, particularly over the last decade. In this regard, two developments have
helped greatly — the centralizing of Treasury operations, particularly within large multinationals, and the focus put on hiring speciﬁcally experienced and qualiﬁed personnel to manage
the day-to-day operations of risk management.
Before going on I would point out that perhaps to some reading this, it may seem strange
and slightly out of touch to be examining advanced approaches to the management of currency
risk at a time when the number of currencies worldwide seems to be rapidly diminishing. The
creation of the Euro-zone has eliminated a large number of western European currencies, with
the prospect that many countries within eastern Europe will enter it from 2004–5 onwards,
giving up their own currencies in the process. In the Americas, the creation of the North
American Free Trade Area has created a de facto US dollar bloc. Though some may not like
to see it that way, that is surely the reality and on the whole it has been a positive development.
As yet, the talk that there may be a uniﬁcation of the US and Canadian dollars is just that, talk,
but who knows for the future? There is no such talk about uniﬁcation with the Mexican peso,
as it is doubtful whether any Mexican administration that suggested any such would survive.
That said, there is little question that the economic impact of NAFTA appears to have added
greatly to the stability of the Mexican peso, rendering the question redundant for now. In Asia,
there are occasional mutterings that there could be a single currency, either in Asia as a whole
(i.e. the Japanese yen) or more speciﬁcally within the ASEAN region of countries. On the
ﬁrst, any prospect of a pan-Asian currency seems far off, not least because a number of Asian
countries, notably China, would not accept the dominant role that any such currency would
automatically give Japan. In addition, given Japan’s slow economic descent in the 1990s, it is
questionable whether anyone in their right mind would want to unify their currencies with the
yen and thus by doing so import deﬂation. The more speciﬁc idea of an ASEAN currency is
a greater possibility, at least in relative terms, though it has not yet been raised to any serious
extent. Moreover, the idea of the Asian Free Trade Area (AFTA) has yet to see fruition. It
would probably be best to focus on that ﬁrst, before considering a single currency area.
There is no question however that the number of national currencies is on a downtrend.
This may cause some to assume that the need for currency risk management should similarly
be on a downtrend. In fact, quite the opposite is the case. The desire of corporate executives
“just to be able to get on with the company’s underlying business” is a natural one, but it will
be some time — if ever — before they will be able to ignore currency risk. There may be a
single currency in the Euro-zone, but there is not worldwide — whatever we think of the role
of the US dollar — and there is unlikely to be any time soon. Even in the brave new world
of the Euro-zone, where currency risk should in theory be a thing of the past, it remains an
important consideration. To use John Donne, just as no man is an island, the same is true for the
corporation. Within the Euro-zone, currency translation and therefore direct currency risk has
been eliminated. However, corporations are still exposed to competitive threats from exchange
rate movements between the Euro-zone and the rest of the world. A single currency area such
as the Euro-zone can eliminate only one form of currency risk, that is the direct kind. However,
it cannot eliminate indirect currency risk for the very reason that the Euro-zone is but one area,
albeit an important one, within the global economy. National currencies still have to be dealt
with and that is unlikely to change near term.
