
Chapter 8: Following Market Indicators
Don’t try to psych out the trader on the other side. You won’t face the same
traders each time you trade, and more likely than not, the trader you’re facing
is a machine. Worry about yourself instead.

Betting on the buy side
Every market participant has his or her own set of reasons and rationales
for placing an order today. In general, though, although many reasons to sell
exist — to pay taxes, generate cash for college tuition, or meet a pension obligation, among many others — there’s only one reason to buy: You think the
security is going up in price.
For that reason alone, traders often pay more attention to what is happening
to buy orders than to sell orders. To get a sense of who is projecting a profit,
traders look at the number of buy orders coming in, how large they are, and
at what price. I cover volume and price indicators in more detail later in the
chapter.
Because there are so many good reasons to sell but only one good reason to
buy, the market can take a long time to recognize bearish (pessimistic) sentiment indicators. Even if you see that prices should start to go down in the
near future, you have to consider that the market today can be very different
from what you see coming up. And as a day trader, you only have today.

Avoiding the projection trap
If you took a peek at some of the technical analysis charts in Chapter 7,
you may have noticed that you can see what you want to see in some price
charts. And if you thought a little about fundamental analysis, you may have
seen that interpreting information the way you want to is just as easy. Instead
of looking objectively at what the market is telling them, some traders see
what they want to see. That’s one reason why knowing your system and using
your limits are so important. Information in Chapters 2 and 16 can help you
with both.
The best traders are able to figure out the psychology of the market almost
by instinct. They can’t necessarily explain what they do — which makes it
hard for those trying to learn from them. But they can tell you this much: If
you can rationally determine why the person on the other side of the trade is
trading, you can be in a better position to make money and avoid the big mistakes brought on by hope, fear, and greed.

139

140 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
Taking the Temperature of the Market
For decades, most traders were rooted on the floors of the exchanges. They
had a good sense of the mood of the market because they could pick up the
mood of the people in the pits with them. They often knew their fellow traders well enough to know how good they were or the needs of the people they
were working for. It made for a clubby atmosphere, despite all the shouting
and arm waving. It wasn’t the most efficient way to trade big volume, but it
allowed traders to read the minds of those around them.
Now, almost all trading is electronic, without the paper and the jackets and
the excitement. Professional traders, who work for brokerage firms or fund
companies, trade electronically, but along long tables (known as trading
desks) where they sit next to colleagues trading similar securities. Even
though everyone is trading off a screen, they share a mood and thus a sense
of what’s happening out there. Some day traders can replicate this camaraderie by working for a proprietary trading firm, but most traders work alone at
home, with nothing but the information on their screens to tell them what’s
happening in the market.
Fortunately, ways do exist to figure out what’s happening, even when you’re
just looking at the screen. They include paying attention to price, volume,
and volatility indicators, and you’re in the right place to find out more about
them.
Some traders rely on Internet chat rooms to help them measure market sentiment. Doing so can be risky. Some chat rooms have smart people who are
willing to share their perspectives on the market, but many are dominated by
novice traders who have no good information to share or by people who are
trying to manipulate the market in their favor. Check out a chat room carefully
before participating.

Pinpointing with price indicators
In an efficient market, all information about a security is included in its price.
If the price is high and going up, then the fundamentals are doing well. If the
price is low and going lower, then something’s not good. And everything in
between means something else.
The change in a security’s price gives you a first cut of information. Price
changes can be analyzed in other ways to help you know when to buy or
when to sell.

Chapter 8: Following Market Indicators
Momentum
Momentum, which is also discussed in Chapter 7, is the rate at which a security’s price is increasing (or decreasing). If momentum is strong and positive,
then the security shows both higher highs and higher lows. People want to
buy the security for whatever reason, and the price reflects that. Likewise,
momentum can be strong and negative. Negative momentum is marked with
lower highs and lower lows. No one seems interested in buying, and that
keeps dragging the price down.
The exact amount of momentum that a security has can be measured with
indicators known as momentum oscillators. A classic momentum oscillator
starts with the moving average, which is the average of the closing prices
for a past time period, say the last ten trading days. Then the change in each
day’s moving average is plotted below the price line. When the oscillator is
positive, traders say that the security is overbought; when it’s negative, they
say that the security is oversold. Figure 8-1 shows a momentum oscillator
plotted below a price line.

Figure 8-1:
A momentum
oscillator
indicates
(no surprise here)
momentum.

If a momentum oscillator shows that a security is overbought (the line is
above the center line), too many people own it relative to the remaining
demand in the market, and some of them will start selling. Remember, some
of these people have perfectly good reasons for selling that may have nothing

141

142 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
to do with the underlying fundamentals of the security, but they are going to
sell anyway, and that brings the price down. Traders who see that a security
is overbought want to sell in advance of those people.
If a momentum oscillator shows that a security is oversold (the line is below
the center line), the security is probably too cheap. Everyone who wanted to
get out has gotten out, and now it may be a bargain. When the buyers who
see the profit opportunity jump in, the price goes up.
The trend is your friend . . . until the end. Although great reasons exist to
follow price trends, remember that they all end, so you still need to pay attention to your money management and your stops, no matter how strong a trend
seems to be.
Given that most trends end — or at least zig and zag along the way — some
traders look for securities that fit what they call the 1-2-3-4 criterion. If a security
goes up in price for three consecutive days, then it’s likely to go down on the
fourth day. Likewise, if a security has fallen in price for three days in a row, it’s
likely to be up on day four. Be sure to run some simulations (see Chapter 16)
to see whether this strategy works for a market that interests you.

Trading on the tick
A tick is an upward or downward price change. For some securities, such
as futures contracts, the tick size is defined as part of the contract. For
others, such as stocks, a tick can be anywhere from a penny to infinity
(at least in theory).
You can also calculate the tick indicator for the market as a whole. (In fact,
most quotation systems calculate the market tick for you.) The tick for the
market is the total number of securities in that market that traded up on the
last trade minus the number that traded down on the last trade. If the tick is a
positive number, that’s good: The market as a whole has a lot of buying interest. Although any given security may not do as well, a positive tick shows
that most people in the market have a positive perspective right now.
By contrast, a negative tick shows that most people in the market are watching prices fall. Sure, some prices are going up, but unhappy people outnumber happy ones (assuming that most people are trading on the long side,
meaning that they make money when prices go up, not down). This shows
that the sentiment is negative in the market right now.

Tracking the trin
Trin is short for trading indicator, and it’s another measure of market sentiment based on how many prices have gone up relative to how many have
gone down. Most quotation systems pull up the trin for a given market, but
you can also calculate it on your own. The math looks like this:

Chapter 8: Following Market Indicators
advances
declaines
advance volume
declaine volume
The numerator is based on the tick: the number of securities that went up
divided by (not less) the number that went down. The denominator includes
the volume: the number of shares or contracts that traded for those securities that went up divided by the number of securities traded for those that
went down in price. This solution tells you just how strongly buyers supported the securities that were going up and just how much selling pressure
faced those securities that went down.
A trin of less than 1.00 usually means that a lot of buyers are taking securities
up in price, and that’s positive. A trin above 1.00 indicates that the sellers
are acting more strongly, which means a lot of negative sentiment is in the
market.

Volume
The trin indicator looks at price in conjunction with volume. Volume tells
you how much trading is taking place in the market. How excited are people
about the current price? Do they see this as a great opportunity to buy or to
sell? Are they selling fast, to get out now, or are they taking a more leisurely
approach to the market these days? This information is carried in the volume
of the trading, and it’s an important adjunct to the information you see in the
prices. Volume tells you whether enough support exists to maintain price
trends or whether price trends are likely to change soon.

Force index
The force index gives you a sense of the strength of a trend. It starts with
information from prices, namely that if the closing price today is higher than
the closing price yesterday, that’s positive for the security. Conversely, if
today’s closing price is lower than yesterday’s, then the force is generally
negative. Then that price information is combined with volume information.
The more volume that goes with that price change, the stronger that positive
or negative force.
Although many quotation systems calculate force for you, you can do it
yourself, too. For each trading day, run this calculation:
Force index = volume × (today’s moving average –
yesterday’s moving average)
In other words, the force index simply scales the moving average
momentum oscillator (discussed in the earlier section “Pinpointing with

143

144 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
price indicators”) for the amount of volume that accompanies that price
change. That way, the trader has a sense of just how overbought or oversold
the security is on any particular day.

On-balance volume
The on-balance volume is a running total of the amount of trading in a security. To calculate the on-balance volume, first look at today’s closing price
relative to yesterday’s and then do one of the following:
✓ If today’s close is higher than yesterday’s: Add today’s volume to
yesterday’s on-balance volume.
✓ If today’s closing price is less than yesterday’s: Subtract today’s
volume from yesterday’s total.
✓ If today’s close is the same as yesterday’s: Don’t do anything! Today’s
balance is the same as yesterday’s.
Many traders track on-balance volume over time, and here’s why: A change in
volume signals a change in demand. The change in demand may not show up
in price right away if enough buyers exist to absorb volume from sellers. But
if still more buyers are out there, then the price is going to go up. Hence, the
volume from even small day-to-day increases in price need to be added up
over time. If the volume keeps going up, then at some point, prices are going
to have to go up to meet the demand.
On the downside, the volume from small price declines add up over time, too.
Over time, this volume may show that very little pent-up interest exists,
indicating that prices could languish for some time.
Many traders look to on-balance volume to gauge the behavior of so-called
smart money, such as pension funds, hedge funds, and mutual fund companies. Unlike individual investors, these big institutional accounts tend to trade
on fundamentals rather than emotion. They generally start buying a security
at the point where the dumb money is tired of owning it, so their early buying
may show big volume with little price change. But as the institutions keep
buying, the price has to go up to get the smarter individuals and the early
institutions to part with their shares.

Open interest
Open interest has a different meaning in the stock market than in the options
and futures markets, but in both cases, it gives traders useful information
about demand:
✓ In the stock market, open interest is the number of buy orders submitted before the market opens. When the open interest is high, people are
ready to add shares to their positions or initiate new positions, which
means that the stock is likely to go up in price on the demand.

Chapter 8: Following Market Indicators
✓ In the options and futures markets, open interest is the number of contracts at the end of every day that have not been exercised, closed out,
or allowed to expire.
Day traders don’t have open interest, because by definition, day traders close
out at the end of every day. But some traders keep open interest, either because
they think that their position has the ability to increase in profitability or
because they’re hedging another transaction and need to keep that options or
futures position in place. If open interest in a contract is increasing, new money
is coming into the market, and prices are likely to continue to go up. This is
especially true if volume is increasing at about the same rate as open interest.
On the other hand, if open interest is falling, people are closing out their positions because they no longer see a profit potential, and prices are likely to fall.

Volatility, crisis, and opportunity
The volatility of a security is a measure of how much that security tends to go
up or down in a given time period. The more volatile the security, the more
the price fluctuates. Most day traders prefer volatile securities, because they
create more opportunities to make a profit in a short amount of time. But
volatility can make gauging market sentiment tougher. If a security is volatile,
the mood can change quickly. What looked like a profit opportunity at the
market open may be gone by lunchtime — and back again before the close.

Average true range
The average true range is a measure of volatility that’s commonly used in
commodity markets, but some stock traders use it, too. It’s a measure of how
much volatility occurred each day. When averaged over time, this measure
shows how much volatility takes place during the period in question. The
higher the average true range is, the more volatile a security is.
Many quotation systems calculate the average true range automatically, but
if you want to do it yourself, start with finding each day’s true range, which is
the greatest of
✓ The current high less the current low
✓ The absolute value of the current high less the previous close
✓ The absolute value of the current low less the previous close
Calculate those three numbers and then average the highest of them with the
true range for the past 14 days.
Each day’s true range number shows you just how much the security swung
between the high and the low or how much the high or the low that day
varied from the previous day’s close.

145

146 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
Beta
Beta is the covariance (that is, the statistical measure of how much two
variables move together) of a stock relative to the rest of the market. The
number comes from the capital assets pricing model, which is an equation
used in academic circles to model the performance of securities. Traders
don’t use the capital assets pricing model, but they often talk about beta to
evaluate the volatility of stocks and options.
What does beta mean?
✓ A beta of 1.00 means that the security is moving at a faster rate than the
market. You would buy high betas if you think the market is going up but
not if the market is going down.
✓ A beta of less than 1.00 means that the security is moving more slowly
than the market — a good thing if you want less risk than the market.
✓ A beta of exactly 1.00 means that the security is moving at the same rate
as the market.
✓ A negative beta means that the security is moving in the opposite direction of the market. The easiest way to get a negative beta security is to
short (borrow and then sell) a positive beta security.

The VIX
VIX is short for the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index.
Calculating VIX is complex enough to border on being proprietary, but it’s
available on many quotation systems and on the exchange’s website, www.
cboe.com/micro/vix/introduction.aspx.
The VIX is based on the implied volatility of options on stocks included in
the S&P 500 Index. The greater the volatility, the more uncertainty investors
have; the more options that show great volatility, the more widespread is the
concern about prospects for the financial markets. In fact, the VIX is often
called the fear index and is used to gauge the amount of negative sentiment
investors have. The greater the VIX, the more bearish the outlook for the
market in general. The more bearish the outlook, the more likely the market
is to be volatile. And volatility is the day trader’s best friend.
Traders can use the VIX to help them value options on the market indexes.
(For that matter, traders who want to take a position on market volatility can
use options and futures contracts on the VIX, including a mini-sized future,
offered by the Chicago Board Options Exchange.) The VIX can also be used to
help confirm bullish or bearish sentiment that shows up in other market signals, such as the tick or the on-balance volume measures described earlier.
The CBOE also calculates a VIX number on a handful of common stocks, if
you are trading those issues or the options on them.

Chapter 8: Following Market Indicators
In addition to the VIX, the exchange also tracks the VXN (volatility on the
NASDAQ 100 Index) and the VXD (volatility on the Dow Jones Industrial
Average).

Volatility ratio
The volatility ratio tells traders what the implied volatility of a security is relative to the recent historical volatility. This ratio shows whether the security
is expected to be more or less volatile right now than it has been in the past,
and it’s widely used in option markets. The first calculation required is the
implied volatility, which is backed out using the Black-Scholes model, an academic model for valuing options. When you plug in to the model certain variables — time until expiration, interest rates, dividends, stock price, and strike
price — the implied volatility is the volatility number that then generates the
current option price. (You don’t have to perform these calculations yourself
because most quotation systems generate implied volatility for you.)
After you have the implied volatility, you can compare it to the historical
volatility of the option, which tells you just how much the price changed over
the last 20 or 90 days. If the implied volatility is greater than the statistical
volatility, the market may be overestimating the uncertainty in the prices,
and the options may be overvalued. If the implied volatility is much less than
the statistical volatility, the market may be underestimating uncertainty, so
the options may be undervalued.

Measuring Money Flows
Money flows tell you how much money is going into or out of a market. They
are another set of indicators telling you where the market sentiment is
right now and where it may be going soon. Money-flow indicators combine
features of price and volume indicators to help traders gauge the market.
Although amounts spent to buy and sell have to match — otherwise, the
market wouldn’t exist — the enthusiasm of the buyers and the anxiousness
of the sellers show up in the volume traded and the direction of the price
change. Just how hard was it for the buyers to get the sellers to part with
their positions? And how hard will it be to get them to part with their positions tomorrow? That’s the information contained in money-flow indicators.
The most basic money-flow indicator is the change in closing price multiplied
by the number of shares traded. If the closing price was higher than the closing price yesterday, then the number is positive; if the closing price today
was lower than the price yesterday, then the number is negative. Other indicators out there use midpoint values and don’t go negative; instead, the numbers range from higher to lower. Whether positive or negative, a high money
flow indicates strong buying activity, and that indicates that a positive price
trend is likely to continue.

147

148 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
Accumulation/distribution index
In trading terms, accumulation is controlled buying, and distribution is controlled selling. This kind of buying and selling doesn’t lead to big changes in
securities prices, usually because the action was planned. No one accumulates or distributes a security in a state of panic.
But even if the buying and selling activity isn’t driven by madcap rushes in
and out of positions, it’s still important to know whether, on balance, the
buyers or the sellers have the slight predominance in the market, because
that may affect the direction of prices in the near future. For example, if a
security has been in an upward trend but more and more down days occur
with increasing volume, the sellers are starting to dominate the trading, and
the price trend is likely to go down.
To determine the accumulation/distribution index, you use this equation:

(
)
(close − low) − high − close
accumulation
= (
)
distribution
high − low × period � s volume
Some traders look at accumulation/distribution from day to day, whereas
others prefer to look at it for a week or even a month’s worth of trading. One
way isn’t inherently better than the other; it depends on what you trade and
how you trade it.
