
Rinse Jobs
The rinse job denotes a sudden dislocation during a rangebound phase in
which price thrusts above or below support-resistance and then reverses,
closing back within the boundaries of the sideways pattern. These buying
or selling spikes shake out stop losses and trigger all sorts of contrary
entry signals. Rinse jobs can unfold in many ways, but two manifestations
are most common in our modern diabolical markets:
• Bull or bear trap. The instrument gaps out of a 15-minute or
60-minute range at the opening bell, draws in breakout or breakdown traders, and then reverses hard, filling the gap.
• Stop-gunning exercise. The instrument grinds sideways for a few
hours, attracting the continuation trade. Price suddenly jumps out
of the quiet range, thrusts a few ticks, and then reverses hard.

250

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

Trapping behavior is most common in the latter phases of established trends, in which one side is controlling the tape. As a rule, complacency runs high in long uptrends, setting up abnormally low put/call
readings. Flip over this tendency in long downtrends when chronic fear
yields equally high put/call readings. Both scenarios present ideal conditions for gaps against the prevailing trend that shake out weak hands
and reestablish a balance between positive and negative sentiment. In
most cases, these gaps fill quickly and the trend resumes until the next
imbalance yields another trap.
Traps are also set when one side of the market gets overcrowded
because a large-scale news shock is so bullish or bearish that traders
overreact and chase one strategy too aggressively. The capture of Saddam
Hussein in 2003 and the London bombing in 2005 both yielded this type
of extreme reaction, with massive gaps that filled immediately, trapping
bulls after the first event and bears after the second event. These contrary
dynamics play out all the time, to a lesser degree, after economic or
earnings releases that shock the prevailing wisdom.
In Figure 10.9, the Nasdaq-100 Trust (previously the Powershares
QQQ Trust) closes at the high tick (1) on May 4 and pulls back the following
day. It closes just under the high and breaks out on May 6 in a healthy gap.
Sellers enter the market immediately, knocking the fund back under the
two-day high (2) in a rinse job that yields a vertical selloff. The decline
breaks the low of the prior day (3) and then recovers strongly, closing
about 35 cents under the opening high. The trust gaps above the prior
day’s recovery high (4) the next morning and sells off (5) in yet another
rinse job. This decline also breaks the low of the prior day (6). Price tests
the multiday low (7) in the next session and closes strongly. A third rinse
job erupts the following morning, with a down gap (8) that undercuts the
multiday low and then zooms higher, trapping early short sellers.
Overnight rinse jobs, especially on the major indices, get most of
our attention, but midday events are also common, especially in dull or
sideways markets. These rinse jobs take on two distinct scenarios.
• A morning trend reverses and pulls into a common support or
resistance level. Pullback traders jump in, and price cuts sharply
through that level, shaking out those orders. The instrument then
reverses and reestablishes the early trend.
• A trading range, lasting days or weeks, is broken suddenly by a
vertical rally or selloff triggering a variety of entry and exit signals.
Price takes in these orders and then reverses, closing the session
back within the daily or weekly range.

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

F I G U R E

251

10.9

Three Nasdaq-100 Trust rinse jobs.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

The first scenario tracks the Joy Global example referenced earlier in
this chapter. This manifestation has great predictive value when it occurs
on the index futures because intraday equity positions are likely to reverse
in lockstep behavior. In addition, these small patterns yield instant trade
setups because we can place stops just outside the buying or selling spike
and capture a low-risk entry into the morning trend. Once positioned,
price should “snap back” through support-resistance by the close of the
next 15-minute bar. If it holds the new high or low any longer than that,
the countertrend can attract momentum players and yield a secondary
spike that cuts through the stop loss.

PART FIVE

252

F I G U R E

Controlling Exposure

10.10

Rinse jobs often unfold when price tests a rangebound high or low. Cavium Networks sets up a trading range
(1, 2) between 16 and 17.50. The stock sells off toward range support on July 7 and closes (3) near 16.30. It
breaks down in the first hour of the following session, dropping 50 cents and then shooting higher (4), closing
above 16 in a daily-scale bull hammer reversal. Price continues higher for the next three sessions and then
breaks out strongly (5).

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

You might not locate second scenario events until they show up in
your end-of-day research. You can find these patterns with the 7-Bells
Finger Finder scan, outlined in The Master Swing Trader, because they’ll
often print daily-scale hammer or doji candlesticks. This rinse job generates ideal conditions for the instrument to trend sharply out of the
opposite side of the trading range because the event cleans out one side
of the supply-demand equation, setting up an imbalance between buyers
and sellers. It then takes just a little pressure in that direction to have a

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

253

magnified effect on price movement. No, it isn’t a pleasant experience if
you’re caught holding the bag during these rinse job reversals, but it does
mark a great opportunity if you’re coming off the sidelines. Just keep in
mind that the market dynamics triggered by these events are time sensitive. Realistically, the buy-sell imbalance will persist for just three to five
sessions before new money comes in and equalizes the equation.
Rinse jobs can evolve over a few days, rather than showing perfect
alignment with a single intraday session. In a classic example, a stock sells
off for several days, finally reaching a major support level, like the 50-day
EMA. It breaks down in the following session and closes poorly. Price then
pops back above support and traps late sellers, or hovers just under the
moving average for up to a week and then shoots higher, having the same
effect over a longer time period. In both cases, rinse job mechanics have
worked perfectly to shake out weak hands and set up a notable reversal.

Event Risk
Traders can study the price patterns and read all the latest news but still
get burned by event risk, so we need to incorporate this negative influence
into our performance expectations. What exactly is event risk? It refers to
unexpected developments that adversely impact our positions. It’s a chaos
factor that can be stock specific, like a major downgrade, or a worldwide
shock like Hurricane Katrina or September 11. Stock specific event risk
usually arrives through one of three potent sources:
• Financial institutions shock expectations with upgrades, downgrades, and changed price targets.
• Companies hit the newswires with preannouncements, warnings,
secondary offerings, and executive departures.
• Governments impact confidence with FDA approvals and
rejections, SEC investigations and rules, and congressional
mandates.
A few years ago, only tier one brokers had a significant effect on shortterm price action, but that’s no longer the case as the smallest boutique
firm can now trigger a rally or selloff, if the timing is right, because
hedge funds will jump on and pile into all opportunistic targets. The
greatest downgrade threat comes after a stock gets stretched to the upside

254

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

because traders are nervous nellies, with paranoia increasing exponentially with each uptick. Meanwhile, salivating short sellers look at the
downgrade as a perfect opportunity to trap complacent buyers and turn
the stock around.
Biotechs attract additional layers of event risk. The Food and Drug
Administration approves and rejects drug applications all the time. While
major announcements are telegraphed in advance, most decisions come
with no warning at all. Drug regulators also release a variety of secondary
judgments regarding use, marketing claims, and warning labels. All of
these news items have the power to turn a quiet morning into a living
nightmare. Of course, direct release of research data into the premarket
session will have a similar effect on the tape. Fortunately, the companies
control information flow on these studies and do their best to contain
event risk. After all, it’s tough to get funding when your drugs or research
don’t help sick people.
Traders must incorporate event risk into their assumptions about
profitability. For starters, expect to get caught in nasty surprises at least
three to four times per year, losing a substantial amount of money each
time it happens. Integrate those generous loss numbers into your annual
performance expectations. Accepting event risk in advance reduces shock
value when it happens and lets you mitigate its considerable impact to
your bottom line. Whatever you do, don’t panic and dump your affected
positions at the worst possible prices. Instead, have a clearly outlined
escape plan ready to go, and exercise it with emotional detachment.
Shock events triggered in the premarket hours give observant
traders a clearly defined edge, using the strategies outlined earlier in this
chapter. These might be sufficient to ease the pain, but there are other mitigation techniques available when an early exit isn’t an option. Start with
an examination of the affected stock’s premarket range, assuming that big
players have already defined support and resistance levels. Then wait for
a counterreaction after the market opens, and dump your position into
this swing, if possible. Does this technique work all of the time? No, but
you’ll see a variation on this theme quite often because legions of weakhanded players come pouring into the market in reaction to news shocks.
This overcrowding activity triggers a short-term imbalance, targeting
these folks for pain.
Event risk warns traders and investors that our pockets can get picked
at any time. It also exposes the dividing line between position management
and pure chaos. Like card players, we’re vulnerable to the luck of the draw

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

255

even though we’re managing our hands with great skill. Curiously, event
shock often signals the opening round of a drawdown phase that can
last for weeks. This might occur because the loss triggers negative psychological characteristics that undermine performance beyond the initial
event. So, if you’re feeling emotionally “spent” after event risk beats you
up, the right response is to walk away before doing further damage.
A wise man once said, we should change those things that can be
changed but accept those things that cannot. This ancient advice goes
a long way toward minimizing our exposure to event risk. It tells us to
accept the nature of risk and to take protective measures to avoid getting
clobbered by the unexpected. Not surprisingly, most shock losses come
after we ignore a number of warning signs. Regrettably, we can spend
hours flipping through charts but pay no attention at all to multiple red
flags after pulling the trigger.
In many cases, there are no warnings, but the stock gets clobbered
anyway. Our comfort lies in knowing it didn’t happen because of poor
trading skills or ineffective trade management. All we can do when stuck
in this whirlwind is to initiate our fire drill, lick our wounds, and make the
next trade the best one we’ve ever had.

The Chopping Block
Making money is easy in easy markets, but can you keep it when everything stops trending and just chops sideways for weeks or months? Unfortunately, the majority of folks that make money in hot markets lose every
dime as soon as the tape goes ice cold. This is just a fact of life. On the other
hand, the survivalist trader heeds the warning signs of a dead market and
takes steps to preserve equity until the low-hanging fruit shows up once
again. We all know how good it feels when the green ink grows greener,
but big dollar signs trigger bouts of amnesia throughout the trading community. In particular, traders believe their growing equity curve is a
function of their brilliance or savvy, as opposed to the real reason they
made money—they got lucky riding the trend wave.
This popular illusion is commonly referred to as bull market genius.
Long-sided momentum markets foster this delusional mindset and cultivate it to the point where its many disciples are set up for the perfect
storm of failure. Reality comes as a complete shock to these individuals

256

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

because they weren’t playing a legitimate hand in the first place. Fortunately, there’s no need to panic if this sounds like you because lousy
markets also generate ideal conditions for trading brilliance. In other
words, the market’s laziest lemmings have an opportunity to discover
career-sustaining strategies instead of crashing to earth when the majority
gets the wind sucked out of their sails.
It’s an absolute certainty that momentum markets will die out
and force you to address major flaws that have hurt you in the past.
It’s just as certain the uptrend or downtrend that made you a fortune
will give way to months of conflicted action that test your resilience,
profitability, and sanity. So stop wasting your time and start working on
the significant changes needed to make money in all types of markets.
Start this transformation by ditching the gunslinger attitude as soon as
choppy action takes control of the tape. In reality, you’re just a guy or
gal who finally stopped losing money because the market was giving
away a few decent gifts. Now you need to avoid the failure cycle you’ve
suffered every other time you turned a profit. This is hard work that will
demand your deep humility and an absolute focus on market conditions.
It’s also time for you to shut up, shift gears, and become a humble student
once again, listening intently to the new lessons the market is trying to
teach you.
Choppy periods rob profits through overtrading, formfitting, and
generalized boredom. The most valuable skill that traders can exercise
during these shakeouts is to sit on their hands and do nothing. Of course,
that’s easier said than done because our peculiar species is hardwired
toward action rather than inaction. Crowd dynamics shift violently when
the chopping block is alive and well, with the public withdrawing from
the market and leaving behind a barren landscape that pits professional
against professional. At-home traders have an especially tough time
making money when these goliaths are butting heads because support
and resistance levels become points of ambush rather than opportunities
to buy or sell. Action-reaction-resolution dynamics go awry as well during
these unpleasant periods. In better times, a financial instrument will break
out to a high or low, pull back to test support or resistance, and then
surge through the high or low, confirming the trend. However, when the
chopping block is active, the initial break (action) proceeds as normal, but
the test (reaction) devolves into a chaotic mess that shakes out momentum
and pullback positions. The third phase (resolution) finally arrives, confirming a breakout or triggering a failure, but it doesn’t matter any more
because there’s no one left standing to make any money.

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

257

Take precautions as soon as you recognize the onset of a chopping
block. Reduce holding period and avoid overnight positions because
reversals can trigger on a daily basis. This is called red bar–green bar
syndrome, which is self-explanatory. It’s funny, because day traders get
soundly criticized in the financial media but still practice one of the most
effective strategies in a choppy market. Of course, many of us don’t have
the time or disposition to trade in this manner, but we can still use a day
trader’s frenetic mindset to our advantage. Above all else, keep an itchy
finger on the exit button, and don’t wait for an invitation to get out of a
losing trade.
Another way to deal with choppy markets is to find low-priced
stocks that have avoided the maelstrom. Cheap stocks are risky but often
trade better than blue chips during these periods because retail players
dominate the price action. This crowd also has less to hide than a typical
hedge fund or institution, so trends are often more reliable. However,
when playing small stocks in a choppy market, avoid the best-known
names and go with issues that are under the radar because they’ll attract
less unwelcome attention. In turn, this filtering should yield more consistent price behavior.
Almost every gap gets filled and reversed in the chopping block, so
use this common tendency to your advantage, following the gap regimen
outlined at the end of this chapter. If you’re the type of trader who gets a
tummy ache when looking at a gap right after the open, sit on your hands,
take a deep breath, and let other traders take the bait first. Then, if the price
action follows your expectations, go ahead and get your feet wet. Conversely, gaps holding their prices and surging into trends are major signals
that a chopping block environment is giving way to a better market.
Conflict and indifference characterize choppy markets, forcing
traders to outwit each other with contrary strategies and time frames.
These perverse tactics include fading breakouts, reversing overnight
momentum, and defying common wisdom on things like gaps and
trendlines. Simply stated, the chopping block will drive you crazy if
you think technical analysis is gospel because a major goal during these
periods is to hurt traders who bury their noses too deeply in the patterns
and indicators. Ironically, the traps and whipsaws prove the value of
technical analysis rather than undermining it, because they admonish us
to forget common definitions when we look at the charts and just trade
contested levels in whatever way screws the majority.
There are just a limited number of ways to profit in the tortuous
chopping block. First, trade at the edges of the block, after endless games

PART FIVE

258

Controlling Exposure

shake out everyone else. Second, play the fading game as well as your
competition. Take a giant step back, review the examples in this book,
and learn to see traps before they’re set. If you look closely enough, you’ll
notice how the tape draws pretty pictures through sentiment and price
action. Then, just like a military strategist, scan the landscape for the most
advantageous ambush points, and spring your trap as soon as the majority
believes the illusion and jumps into the market.
Does this contrary thinking sound like a lot of work just to make
a few bucks? Well, yes and no. While it requires a different skill set than
typical bull or bear market genius, it’s the only way to survive and prosper
when playing in the big leagues.

The Real World: Riding the Tiger
The market gaps up at the open and breaks out. You’re sitting on the
sidelines and want to get into the action but don’t know where or when
to buy.
It’s the morning of July 20. You’ve been watching Dow Chemical grind
sideways at resistance near 17 for several days. Figure 10.11 illustrates
the stock as it gets a tier one upgrade in the premarket session and then
shoots higher, opening at 17.25. You settle back and wait for the first
hour range to set up with four 15-minute price bars. The buy signal then
triggers when price exceeds the range high. If you were contemplating
a short sale after a gap down, the sell signal would trigger on a selloff
through the range low. The early range, in either direction, often needs
to complete a testing phase before it yields to higher or lower prices. As
a general rule, look for the instrument to reverse the first time it tries to
exceed a high or low but then succeed on the subsequent try. This frequently carves out a tiny cup and handle or inverse cup and handle on
the intraday chart.
You draw a line at the prior day’s close. This marks out the “gap fill”
line that will come into play if the early range breaks in the direction of
the gap. Then, as soon as possible, you draw two lines that mark out the
range high and low. The line nearest the gap fill becomes the “reverse
break line.” The other line becomes the “breakout trigger” line.
The first hour range is a general guideline that needs custom fitting
to the individual trading plan, market being traded, and daily collaring

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

F I G U R E

259

10.11

Dow Chemical gap analysis.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used
with permission.

strategy. This is often a matter of trial and error. More aggressive traders
can shift in close and use three or four 5-minute bars to establish the
early range rather than waiting the full hour. More defensive players may
skip the intraday arena entirely and look for a breakout or breakdown
from the two- to four-day range after the gap print. Even the first hour
strategy requires flexibility and a little common sense. For example, it
might take 45 minutes or two hours for price to establish a range that
can be used for your trading signals. Also, consider the high noise levels
on 15-minute charts. A breakout that extends just a tick or two can be
easily reversed, so the exact entry price is a judgment call until the
intraday trend finally gets established.

260

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

Next, you look at relative location. Does the opening bar push price
into, or through, longer-term support or resistance? An up gap might
force a stock above several resistance levels and plant it firmly on top of
new support, or it can push it straight into an impenetrable barrier from
which the path of least resistance is straight down. On the first and
second Dow Chemical gaps, the stock has broken out above resistance
and will trigger a long-side entry signal as soon as price rallies above the
first hour range, or breakout trigger line.
What happens if price goes the other way? The support line in a gap
up and resistance line in gap down are also known as reverse break
lines. Violation of the reverse break is likely to trigger price acceleration
toward the gap fill line, which marks the unchanged level from the prior
session. Consider why this price thrust makes perfect sense. Everyone
who enters a position in the direction of the gap is losing money if price
violates the reverse break line. In turn, stop losses start to trigger a
domino effect that expands price against those positions.
The gap fill line marks support in an up gap and resistance in a down
gap. As a result, the odds favor a reversal back in the direction of the
opening trend as soon as price touches this line. Paradoxically, this is an
unfavorable spot for traders to enter new positions because the reverse
break line should now resist price from reentering the early range. In
fact, it’s common for a financial instrument to bounce like a pinball from
the gap fill line to the reverse break line and back through the gap fill line,
triggering a failure signal because it predicts a significant reversal.
The flip side of this reversal is a failure of a failure signal in which
price pushes back across the reverse break line, setting up a retest of
the high after an up gap or low after a down gap. The resiliency needed
to cross the reverse break line and retest those levels issues a generally reliable signal to take positions in the direction of the gap. These
signal dynamics are easily understood. In an uptrend, the positive action
exposes buying power that often precedes a rally to a new intraday high.
It’s a great trade because the risk, once the buying signal is taken, can
be well managed with a stop loss just below the reverse break line.
Getting back to the initial Dow Chemical breakout in Figure 10.11,
price sets up a first hour range and then grinds sideways through the
rest of the session, never triggering a buy or sell signal. The buy signal
actually comes at the start of the next session (1), when it gaps higher
for the second day in a row. In turn, this sets up a fresh iteration of gap
dynamics. The stock wobbles sideways for an hour in a range between
18.20 and 18.58. You add to the position when price breaks out of the
