
 I encourage you to read more books and find online or in-person courses on day trading. New traders often search for the best traders on the Internet. They think that learning from the most experienced traders is the best way to learn. On the contrary, I think new traders should look for the best “teacher”. There is a difference. Sometimes the best trader has no personality, or poor people skills, while a consistently profitable, but not one of the top 10 traders, can emerge as a premier lecturer, communicator, and mentor. New traders need to find the best teacher. You don’t need to learn from the best traders to become the best trader. Think about who some of the best professional sports coaches are. Often they were not superstar players. They knew the sport, but their passion was for teaching and developing players. The skills needed to become a great trader are different from those required to be an effective trading coach. Being a star trader requires superior pattern recognition and discipline. On the other hand, effective trading coaches are often obsessed with finding better ways to teach, are patient, and communicate clearly and effectively in a simple and easy-to-understand language. They can explain their methodology coherently. Often great traders lack the monetary incentive to create the best training program. 

 Trading in a Simulator 

 You should never start your day trading career with real money. Sign up with one of the brokers that provides you with simulated accounts with real market data. Some brokers give you access to delayed market data, but don’t use those. You need to make decisions real time. Most of the simulated data software is a paid service, so you need to save some money for that software. Many trading rooms and trading educators offer simulator accounts. DAS Trader offers the best simulated accounts for $120 per month (at the time of writing). Check out their website ( www.dastrader.com ) or contact them at support@dastrader.com for more information. This completes my unpaid and unsolicited advertisement for them! 

 If you use it for six months, and trade only with simulated money, it will cost you just $720. This is the cost of a proper education. If you are seriously considering day trading as a career, it’s a small expenditure compared to the cost of an education for a new profession. For example, imagine that you want to go to school to get an MBA - it will easily cost you over $50,000. Likewise, many other diploma or post-graduation programs cost significantly more than the education required for day trading. 

 Once you have a simulated account, you will need to develop your strategy. Try the strategies that I have discussed in this book, and master one or two of them that fit with your personality, available time, and trading platform. There is no best strategy among them, just like there is no best automobile in the market. There might, however, be a best car for you. The VWAP, Support or Resistance, and the Opening Range Breakout Strategies are the easiest and my favorites. You need to only master a few of them to always be profitable in the market. Keep your strategy simple. When you have a solid strategy that you’ve mastered, make sure there is no emotion attached to it. Keep practicing it, and then start practicing a second strategy, and learn to incrementally add size in those strategies. 

 Practice with the amounts of money that you will be trading in real life. It is easy to buy a position worth $100,000 in a simulated account and watch it lose half of its value in a matter of seconds. But could you tolerate this loss in a real account? No. You will probably become an emotional trader and make a decision quickly, usually resulting in a major loss. Always trade in the simulator with the size and position that you will be using in the real account. Otherwise, there is no point in trading in a simulated account. Move to a real account only after at least three months of training with a simulated account and then, start small, with real money. Trade small while you’re learning or when you are feeling stressed. If you wish, you can always have a chat with me in our chatroom and receive some advice and guidance. 

 New traders often try to skip steps in the process, lose their money, and then give up their day trading career forever and tell themselves that it is impossible to make money by day trading. Remember, baby steps. Success in day trading is one foot forward and then the next. Master one topic, and then and only then move on to the next. 

 Most traders struggle when they first begin, and many do not have sufficient time in the morning to practice in real time. Those who can give trading more time when they start have a better chance to succeed. How long does it take to be a consistently profitable trader? I don’t think anyone can become a consistently profitable trader in less than three or four months. After four months of paper trading, you need at least another three months of trading in small share size to master your emotions and practice self-discipline and defensive money management while trading with real money. After six months, you may become a seasoned trader. Eight months is probably better than six months, and twelve months is perhaps better than both. Are you patient enough for this learning curve? Do you really want this career? Then you should be patient enough. Do you have this much time to learn the day trading profession? 

 It always amuses me when I see books or online courses and websites that offer trading education that will make a person money starting on day one! I wonder who would believe such advertisements. 

 You must define a sensible process oriented goal for yourself, such as: I want to learn how to day trade. I do not want to make a living out of it for now . Do not set an absolute income for yourself in day trading, not at least for the first two years. This is very important. Many traders think of inspiring goals such as making a million dollars or being able to trade for a living from a beach house in the Caribbean. These goals may be motivating, and they definitely have their place, but they distract you from focusing on what you need to do today and tomorrow to become better. What you as a new trader can control is the process of trading: how to make and execute sound trading decisions. Your daily goal should be to trade well, not to make money. The normal uncertainty of the market will result in some days or weeks being in the red. 

 Often new traders email and ask me how they can become full-time traders while they are working at a different job from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. New York time. I really don’t have any answer for that. They probably cannot become a full-time trader if they cannot trade in a simulator real time between 9:30 and 11:30 a.m. New York time. You do not need to have the whole day available for trading, but you at least need the first two hours of market Open. If you insist, I would say the first one hour of the market Open (9:30 to 10:30 a.m. New York time) is the absolute minimum time you should be available for trading and practice, in addition to any time you need for preparation before the market opens at 9:30 a.m. New York time. Sometimes I am done with trading and hit my daily goal by 9:45 a.m., but sometimes I need to watch the market longer to find trading opportunities. Do you have this flexibility in your work-life schedule? 

 When I started day trading, I was unemployed. Then I had to find a job to pay the bills because I was losing my savings on day trading. I am lucky I live in Vancouver (in the Pacific time zone) because I could trade and practice between 6:30 and 8:30 a.m. and then be at work for 9 a.m. Pacific time. If you don’t have this luxury, maybe swing trading is better for you. But making a living out of swing trading is more difficult. The best swing traders can expect an annual return of 20% on their account size. Day traders, on the other hand, look to profit between 0.5-1% of their account size daily. The currency market (Forex) is open 24 hours/5 days per week, and perhaps you could consider trading currencies and commodities if you do not have sufficient free time to practice day trading or swing trading. This book though is not a useful guide for swing trading or for the Forex market. They are both different from day trading in so many ways. 

 You must always be continuing your education and reflecting upon your trading strategy. Never stop learning about the stock market. The market is a dynamic environment and it’s constantly changing. Day trading is different than it was ten years ago, and it will be different in another ten years. So keep reading and discussing your progress and performance with your mentors and other traders. Always think ahead and maintain a progressive and winning attitude. 

 Learn as much as you can, but keep a degree of healthy skepticism about everything, including this book. Ask questions, and do not accept experts at their word. Consistently profitable traders constantly evaluate their trading system. They make adjustments every month, every day, and even intraday. Every day is new. It is about developing trading skills, discipline, and controlling emotions, and then making adjustments continually. That is How to Day Trade for a Living . 

 Consistently profitable traders try to learn the process of trading and make good and fundamentally correct trades without thinking about the money. This is, of course, the opposite of amateurs, who are obsessed with making money every single day. Such thinking is your worst enemy. I am not trying to make money as a trader. My focus is on “doing the right thing”. All I am looking for is excellent risk/reward opportunities. And then I trade them. Being good at trading requires mastering the process of trading and the fundamentals of a good trade. Money is just the by-product of executing fundamentally solid trades. 

 As a new trader, you will be constantly looking at your profit and loss (P&L). P&L is the most emotionally distracting column in my trading platform. Plus $250, negative $475, plus $1,100. I tend to make irrational decisions by looking at it. I used to panic and sell my position when my P&L became negative although my trade was still valid according to my plan. Or, quite often, I became greedy and sold my winning position too early while my profit target had yet to be reached according to my plan. I did myself a favor and I hid my P&L column. I trade based on technical levels and the plan I make. I don’t look at how much I am up or down in real time. 

 I’ll note again, your P&L is not important when you first begin trading with real money, especially when you trade in smaller share sizes. On most trading platforms, there is an option to hide your real time P&L. If yours doesn’t have it, then go old school and use some dark masking tape. I say this seriously. I encourage you to go and find some masking tape and slap it on your screen. Your goal is to develop trading skills and not to make money. You have to focus on getting better every single day, one trade after another. That is How to Day Trade for a Living . Push your comfort zone to find greater success. 

 Preparation 

 John Wooden (or as some call him, the Wizard of Westwood), the famous American basketball player and coach, once said, “By failing to prepare, you are preparing to fail.” Indeed. 

 There are two aspects to the preparation process for day traders: 

 1) the preparation necessary before the market opens (usually the night before or between 8 and 9:30 a.m. New York time), and 

 2) the specific trading information you must obtain before you can make a trade. 

 Wake up on time and get behind your PC early. 

 Review your scanners and shortlist your choices of stocks for the day. Review www.finviz.com or www.briefing.com and read about the fundamental catalysts that caused the stock to gap up or down. Compile information such as daily volume, intraday range, and short interest. Review daily charts and identify important levels of support or resistance. I do not make a trade unless I know the average volume, Average True Range, important technical levels, short interest, and fresh news for the Stocks in Play. 

 Shortlist your watchlist down to two or three stocks. During earnings season, there are many Stocks in Play to choose from. Each day, traders shouldn’t choose more than two or three of these stocks to focus on. You can make considerably more money trading one or two stocks well instead of watching and trading many stocks poorly. 

 The earlier you start your morning the more time you will have to go through the news and find the best Stocks in Play. Sometimes in those extra minutes you find the stock of the day that you wouldn’t have if you had spent less time researching. Moreover, you have extra time to ask members of your community about their choices of stocks and obtain their feedback. Most professional traders do not arrive later than 7:30 a.m. New York time. Certainly experienced traders with a strong community and powerful scanners can stroll in later, but 9 a.m. is the latest that most serious traders arrive. Prepare physically. Drink enough water to hydrate during the morning stretch and do not become over caffeinated. 

 Being present in the pre-market is important. Every once in a while there will be an opportunity during pre-market trading to make quick money on a breaking news story. In addition, valuable information can be obtained by watching how stocks are being traded in the pre-market. Monitor the ranges of the stocks that are on your watchlist, identify intraday support or resistance levels, and confirm how much volume is being traded. 

 Often new traders will think that trading strategies can be reduced to a few rules that they must follow to be profitable: always do this or always do that. Wrong. Trading isn't about “always” at all; it is about each single trade, and each situation. Every trade is a new puzzle that you must solve. There is no universal answer to all of the puzzles in the market. Therefore, you need to make a plan for each trade as early as when you are doing your pre-market scanning. Before making a trade, you must create a plan for your trades or a series of “ if-then ” statements. Develop some plans as to when you might take a position in one of your stocks on your watchlist. If you see the x scenario, then you will buy at this price. Continue creating “if-then” scenarios for each outcome. 

 For an example, let’s take a look at Figures 9.1 and 9.2. Imagine you plan to trade DICK’S Sporting Goods, Inc. (ticker: DKS) on March 7, 2017. The stock had gapped down because of disappointing earnings reports and was being traded at around $50.50 at the pre-market. You think it might be a Stock in Play. 

 Figure 9.1 - My watchlist at 6 a.m. (9 a.m. New York time) on March 7, 2017 - DKS is on my watchlist. 

 Consider the different ways the stocks you have picked might trade and develop a series of if-then scenarios such as I’ve marked on Figure 9.2 below: 

 Figure 9.2 - Pre-market 5-minute chart of DKS on March 7, 2017 with my if-then statements noted. Market will open at 9:30 a.m. New York time. 

 If the price cannot push higher than VWAP in the first fifteen minutes of the market Open, then I will go short until the previous day close of $48.10. 

 If the price does sell off to the previous day close of $48.10, then I will go long and ride the reversal to the VWAP. 

 If the price pushes over VWAP with high volume, then I will go long and ride the momentum to sell at the next resistance level of $53.25. 

 If the price breaks over the daily level of $53.25, then I will go long again until the daily level of $55.50 (which is not shown on the above Figure 9.2). 

 On the other hand, if the price goes to $53.25, and that level acts as a strong resistance, then I will go short with the stock until it goes back down to VWAP. 

 You can write down your statements at the beginning of your trading career to make sure you stick to them, but after a few months of simulated trading you will learn how to quickly develop and review these statements in your mind. That is one of the most important outcomes of trading in a simulator: to practice and master if-then scenarios for your strategies and to process that information quickly. That is why three to six months of live simulated trading is essential as you begin your day trading career. As intraday traders, we develop theories daily. 

 In case you are wondering about DKS in the above example, it actually opened weak (below VWAP) and it was a good short trade toward the previous day close of $48.10 as you can see in Figure 9.3 below. I then caught a smaller bounce from the previous day close to the VWAP with a long position. 

 Figure 9.3 - 5-minute chart on March 7, 2017 and my profit for that day (I also traded MEET, MOMO and MYL but they are not shown here and are not relevant to this example). 

 Hard Work 

 Hard work in day trading is different from what you might originally assume. A trader should not work 120 hours a week like investment bankers or corporate lawyers or other highly paid professionals do because, for us day traders, there are no end of the year bonuses. More than anything else, day trading is perhaps most similar to being a professional athlete because it is judged by one’s daily performance. Having said that, day traders should work hard, consistently and productively, each and every day. Watching your trading screens intently and gathering important market information is how we define hard work in day trading. You must ask the following questions constantly and at a rapid pace for several hours every day: 

 Who is in control of the price: the buyers or the sellers? 
 What technical levels are most important? 
 Is this stock stronger or weaker than the market? 
 Where is most of the volume being traded? At the VWAP? Or the first five minutes? Or near moving averages? 
 How much volume at a price causes the stock to move up or down? 
 What is the bid-ask spread? Is it tradeable? 
 How quickly does the stock move? Is it being traded smoothly or is it choppy, jumping up and down with every trade? 
 Is the stock trading in a particular pattern on a 5-minute chart? How is the stock being traded on a 1-minute chart? 

 These are some of the questions that I ask myself and then answer before trading a stock. All of this information should be gathered before you make any trade. This is what we mean by hard work. As you can see, day trading is an intense intellectual pursuit which requires hard work. Remember Rule 2? 

 In addition, showing up every day to trade matters, either in your real account or in a simulator. If you search for support and resistance levels every day, including before the market opens, it will positively impact your trading in the long term. Turning off the PC early because a few trades went against you should be saved for special occasions when you really must clear your head. Professionals often mentally recover after a few bad losses by switching to a simulator. I always encourage new traders in the simulator to continue trading until the Close and to find good opportunities to practice, especially since traders in the simulator are not under the same emotional stress as traders trading their own real money are. Of course, that does not mean that new traders should practice overtrading. Even when practicing in a simulator, with no commission and no real P&L, you should only trade sound strategies with excellent risk/reward opportunities. 

 I am often asked: “When you were in your first months of trading, did you ever feel like you couldn’t do it?” The answer is YES, many times. I still, at least once a month, get really frustrated after a few bad losses and consider quitting day trading. Many times in my trading career I have wanted to quit and at times I have actually believed the myth that day trading is impossible. But I did not quit. I really desired to be a successful trader. I wanted the lifestyle and the freedom that comes with it. I paid the price for my mistakes, I focused on my education, and I eventually survived the very difficult learning curve of trading. 

 Patience 

 To become a consistently profitable trader, not only must you prepare properly and work hard, but you must also have patience. 

 Most successful trades are easy when you look at them after the fact, but finding them in real time is difficult and requires patience and hard work. 

 Watch, watch, and watch some more. If you are watching a stock, and it is not offering excellent risk/reward opportunities, then move on. Look at other stocks on your watchlist, and watch them intently. Consistently profitable traders spend trading days searching and watching for excellent risk/reward opportunities. 

 Successful traders are patient. They understand that they will not and should not be in every move. You should wait for opportunities with which you feel comfortable and confident. Professional traders realize that it is not enough to buy a strong stock, or sell short a weak one. Entry price is extremely important. You have to open your positions at a price that offers the best risk/reward opportunity. Do not trade a strong stock that has moved away from a good risk/reward entry. That is called chasing the stock . 

 For example, if a stock is trading near a support and then breaks out downward, and you see a short selling opportunity but miss it, well, that is your first mistake. But if, out of frustration, you sell short that same stock well below that level, you have chased it. Now you have made a bigger mistake. Chasing stocks is a deadly unforgivable sin in day trading. Missing the opportunity will not lose you any money (just an opportunity cost), but chasing the stock will. Do not let one mistake cause you to lose money with another one. 
