
 This lawyer was a natural heavy, a great Hogarthian ball of pink flesh with jowls that rippled over his white starched shirt. The potted biography said that his name was John Warden and that he had grown up in Evansville, Indiana, graduated from the Harvard Law School, and been for twelve years a partner at a fancy New York City corporate law firm, Sullivan & Cromwell. Through it all he’d somehow preserved an accent that would have made a hillbilly blush. He was proud of it, too. He’d lean into his microphone in the well of the U.S. district courtroom and boom out his questions in the Voice of God, causing the fifty spectators in the back of the room to jolt upright on their hard wooden pews. He was a hick, or pretending to be a hick, probably out of some old-fashioned belief that hicks, even make-believe hicks, are more appealing to juries than $1,000-an-hour New York lawyers, which is what he actually was. 

 In any case, his voice had the dull rolling groan of thunder from a bolt of lightning that has struck nothing, far away. And it hadn’t taken him long to prove that high technology sounded far less impressive when discussed by a fat hick. He went on about “Web sahts” and “Netscayup” and “the Innernet” and “mode-ums,” and with every syllable he made the whole of the modern condition sound a little bit ridiculous. When he mentioned AOL, it sounded like a yodel. AOOOLLLLL! The witness he addressed as Mis-ter Barksday-ulll . 

 Before he ever heard of Jim Clark, or of Netscape, or of this mess of a trial into which Clark, with a flick of his left wrist, had thrust him, Jim Barksdale had made a reputation for himself as a manager at Federal Express and McCaw Cellular. He’d grown up in Mississippi and retained just enough of the piney woods patter to offer a passing imitation of a good ol’ boy. All that was left of his linguistic origins was the just-below-upper crust southerner’s habit of transforming soft consonants into hard ones. (He said “ma-toor” instead of “machoor.”) Clearly he’d arrived at a point where he himself did not comprehend hickspeak. When Warden thrust a document into his hand and asked him to “read the first sayntance” of one of Gary Reback’s memos aloud to the courtroom, Barksdale replied, “The first sentence ?” “Just read the sayntance, Mister Barksdayul,” the lawyer boomed back at him, rudely. Everyone with the possible exception of Barksdale viewed the fat hick’s rudeness as a ploy to get under Barksdale’s skin. 

 For nearly five full days the two men argued violently about subjects neither fully understood. Neither had a software engineers’s grasp of Internet browser technology. But Barksdale was nothing if not shrewd. He soon figured out that he knew more than Warden, or for that matter any of the lawyers, and used his superior understanding to embarrass his tormentors—subtly, of course. For instance, Warden asked Barksdale whether before the critical meeting between Netscape and Microsoft on June 21, 1995, he knew that Microsoft intended to include “all the functions of a browser” in its operating system—thus implying that the meeting could hardly have been the shock Barksdale now claimed it was. “A browser or the functions of a browser?” asked Barksdale, cleverly. This threw Warden, who stammered a bit. For five days he wore the expression of a C student who has been asked to explain to the whole class the difference between an algorithm and a logarithm. He was a triple agent in his own soul: a big-city lawyer who thought he had adopted strategically the surface mannerisms of a stupid hick but who was, for the purposes of this trial, a stupid hick. 

 “A browser is a separate, stand-alone product,” said Barksdale, pressing his advantage. “It’s a thing . It walks like a duck, quacks like a duck, it’s a duck!” 

 “It is?” hollered Warden, recovering. “Show me one! Whey’s the duck ?” “One” was two syllables. Wuh-uhn. 

 “Right here!” shouted Barksdale, pointing over the sleek dark wooden bar of the witness box to one of the U.S. District Court’s computers, which looked nothing like a duck. 

 End of discussion. Having proved nothing, Warden then proceeded to establish, beyond a shadow of a doubt, that the people who worked for Netscape (“Netscayup”) had funny names. He proved his point by pronouncing them. A Netscape salesman named Ram Shriram (pronounced “Rom Shree-Rom”) he called Ram Sha-ram (rhymes with Sha-ZAM!). He referred to Mitchell Baker, a Netscape lawyer, as Mister Mitchell Baker. “That’s Missus Mitchell Baker,” said Barksdale. “Some of these nayums,” said Warden, “you just can’t tell. Could go either way.” By the time he was confronted with a Netscape employee named Alan Louie, the Microsoft lawyer knew better than to assume anything about these people from Northern California. “It is Mister Alan Loueeee?” he boomed. Barksdale nodded. “And I assume it is Lou-eeeee ?” His tone said, “These Netscayup people got the girls with the boys names and the boys with the girls names. What the hayl kind a ennaprise you runnin’ anyway?” 

 Soon came the time for the Microsoft lawyer to question the letter Jim Clark had told Gary Reback to write to the Justice Department, immediately after the critical meeting between Microsoft and Netscape on June 21, 1995. Brandishing the letter, Warden asked Barksdale to concede that it omitted any mention of Microsoft’s alleged offer to divide the market for browsers. (The idea was that if Microsoft had indeed made such a blatantly illegal suggestion, Netscape’s lawyer would have at least mentioned it in his complaint to the DOJ.) 

 “Mr. Barksday-ul,” said Warden, “does the letter say anything about a proposal to divide markets?” 

 Barksdale replied that he hadn’t read Reback’s letter, which was now before him. Warden asked him to look it over. “You want me to read this?” asked Barksdale, incredulously, holding up the letter like a turd. 

 “Yes,” said Warden. 

 Once earlier Barksdale had waved his hand over some documents placed before him and declared, “These things are totally useless.” Now he snorted, “A four -page single-spaced letter?” 

 “I was able to read through it fairly quickly,” said Warden, plaintively. 

 “Well, you’re a much smarter man than I am,” said Barksdale, his voice dripping with condescension. The journalists in the bleacher seats exploded in laughter. Rich businessmen were honestly incapable of treating lawyers with anything but disdain. 

 “No,” boomed Warden, in a desperate bid to recover whatever advantage there was in being the only fat hick in the room. “You’re a much smarter man, Mr. Barksday-ul. That’s why you’re worth wu-uhn hunnerd million dollars, and the bank owns my howwwwwse.” 

 At this point the judge peered down from the bench and said, sharply, “Are you through, Mr. Warden?” 

 He was. Barksdale wasn’t. He’d been asked to recall the late stages of negotiations between Microsoft and Netscape, after Netscape had concluded that Microsoft never would divulge the critical code Netscape needed to make its browser compatible with Windows 95. He’d be damned if he wasn’t going to recall it. He gazed out over the courtroom. It was, of course, filled with lawyers. “By now it had gotten down to the lawyers,” Barksdale sighed, “and when that happens, you might as well forget about it.” 

 Again, the journalists exploded in laughter. There it was again, plain as day. Oh, the disdain! Oh, the contempt! And if the disdain could be expressed just like that to some of the most highly paid lawyers in the land, what did it say about all those other lawyers rowed up along the conference tables in the well of the courtroom, who spent all their day tapping keyboards and whispering secrets. What about all those bright young things who had sacrificed the best years of their lives to the Harvard Law School and who now lived for the merest word of approval from the fat hick? Who did Jim Barksdale, Serious American Executive, think these whisperers of secrets and tappers of laptops were? Serfs! 

 As the disorder in the court subsided, Barksdale smiled and leaned over to the judge, like a man about to tell a joke in a duck blind. “I mean that in an appropriate way, Your Honor.” His Honor blushed. What could he say? He was a lawyer. And this man was worth $100 million. 

 The only man who could peer down upon Barksdale with the same Olympian disdain as Barksdale peered down upon lawyers wasn’t present to do so. But he made a dramatic appearance. Clark didn’t come in person; he spent the early days of the Microsoft trial rushing to ready his boat to cross the Atlantic Ocean. But his image appeared on the giant screen in the courtroom, and he answered a few questions in a tone that suggested that people who worked as lawyers for Microsoft could not begin to understand the new new thing. “You obviously aren’t a businessman,” he said sarcastically at one point. Bidnessman . The law changes everything it touches, however, and it now did so in a way for which Clark was ill prepared, by probing his past. The American legal system opened up the cardboard boxes beside the old tuba in Clark’s guest bedroom and went digging for damning evidence. 

 Up until then Microsoft’s defense was not much more than a gloriously indiscriminate, flailing attack on Netscape. It consisted of four arguments. (1) Microsoft never bullied Netscape, especially not in the critical June 21, 1995, meeting between the two companies that had inspired Jim Clark to call the Department of Justice in the first place. (2) Even if Microsoft did bully Netscape in that meeting, the meeting was “a setup” to frame Microsoft for an antitrust suit. (3) Microsoft could not possibly be held responsible for Netscape’s failure, because Netscape hadn’t failed; it was still a market leader and a powerful innovator in Internet browser technology. (4) Netscape had failed badly, but through its own ineptitude. As evidence of this last point Microsoft’s lawyer introduced a new book by two Harvard Business School professors, called Competing on Internet Time . The professors argued that Netscape courted disaster from the start, by taunting Microsoft. “Mooning the Giant” was what the business school professors had called this tactic. Clark had mooned the giant, first by referring to Microsoft in public as “the Death Star” and then by permitting his twenty-two-year-old associate, Marc Andreessen, to brag to journalists that Netscape would put Microsoft out of business. 

 Barksdale adopted a self-deprecating tone. Whenever the Microsoft lawyers set out to argue how successful Netscape remained, Jim Barksdale tried to maintain pretty much the opposite. And so the spectators witnessed the odd spectacle of two companies, both keenly aware that they were in a line of work where the perception of success led to success and the perception of failure to failure, bad-mouthing themselves. The rhetoric of the courtroom was very nearly the opposite of the rhetoric of the business world. The trick for Microsoft was to persuade the judge that it didn’t have a monopoly without also persuading the stock market. The trick for Netscape was to avoid seeming pathetic. 

 And then Jim Clark entered the courtroom. A man who cared more about his past would have covered his tracks. Some part of his mind would have been devoted to viewing his actions as they would be viewed by history. But that wasn’t the way he was built. Clark was inventing his life as he went along. Pushing forward in this manner, he left a mess behind him for others to clean up. The mess was often inspired, but it was still a mess. And out of the mess the lawyers for Microsoft plucked a single e-mail. It had been sent by Clark to the Microsoft executives Dan Rosen and Brad Silverberg on December 29, 1994, at three in the morning. “I’d like to convince you to reconsider,” it began. It ran on for a full page, but the gist of it could be boiled down to a single passage: 

 We want to make this company a success, but not at Microsoft’s expense. We’d like to work with you. Working together could be in your self-interest as well as ours. Depending on your interest level, you might take an equity position in Netscape, with the ability to expand that position later…. Given the worry that exists regarding Microsoft’s dominance of practically everything, we might be a good indirect way to get into the Internet business. 

 He concluded, “No one in my organization knows about this message.” 

 Projected onto the big screen, Clark’s e-mail had different effects on different people. Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson wore what was becoming his usual expression of profound bemusement. An e-mail sent at three in the morning was just further evidence that these technology billionaires were a bit…touched. The judge had his own idea of work, which was that it ended punctually at five in the afternoon. You wouldn’t be catching him hunched over any little rectangular screen at three in the morning, trying to figure out how to make a billion dollars. His court was in session for two hours and fifteen minutes each morning and the same each afternoon. Four and a half hours a day, four days a week. Fridays were holidays. So were lots of other days, chosen seemingly at random by the judge. The very idea of someone’s writing an e-mail at three in the morning on December 29, which was, after all, still part of Christmas vacation, struck him as preposterous. 

 The lawyers for the Department of Justice were glum. They were doing their best to persuade the judge that Microsoft had muscled Netscape around. If Clark had invited Microsoft into his business back in December 1994, how could the DOJ now claim that Microsoft had forced its charms upon Netscape in June 1995? The DOJ’s lawyers were still angry at Clark. He hadn’t told them about his overture to Microsoft; the department’s lawyers had learned about it only when the e-mail was produced by Microsoft in pretrial evidence. 

 Finally, there was Barksdale’s reaction to Clark’s astonishing e-mail, which amounted to an offer to serve as a kind of Trojan horse for Microsoft’s invasion of the Internet. Clark had talked Barksdale into leaving his job with AT&T. Barksdale had agreed to run Netscape on the condition that he have complete control. Clark and John Doerr had both agreed not to meddle. And now this! Clark’s e-mail inviting Microsoft to sit in on his business was written five days before Barksdale reported for work. And the only reason Barksdale knew about it now was that the Department of Justice lawyers had warned him it was coming before he took the stand. 

 Forewarned, Barksdale sought to maintain that Clark’s e-mail had been written in “a moment of weakness.” The Microsoft lawyer, of course, hoped to persuade the judge that the e-mail was not the act of a man fighting his demons at three in the morning but a deliberate corporate policy. He wanted to force Barksdale to concede that he and Clark were part of a unified team and that, therefore, Barksdale must have known of the e-mail. Once he had Barksdale under oath, he offered him a terrible choice. Barksdale could agree that he, like Jim Clark, had been happy to invite Microsoft into Netscape’s business, and thus torpedo the government’s entire case. Or he could seem like a fool who was not privy to the intimate affairs of his own company. 

 “Mr. Barksdale,” the Microsoft lawyer boomed. Barksday-ul . Barksdale looked up. 

 “Is Mr. Clark a highly secretive man?” asked the lawyer. 

 “He can be very secretive, yes sir,” replied Barksdale. 

 “Mr. Clark has had a very successful business career, has he not?” asked the lawyer. 

 “Yes, he has,” replied Barksdale. 

 “And does he enjoy a public reputation for veracity?” asked the lawyer. 

 “I couldn’t comment on that,” replied Barksdale. “I don’t know.” 

 “Do you regard him as a truthful man?” It took him so long to ask the question that a swarm of mosquitos could have hatched in his mouth. “Truthful” emerged from his fat throat as tru-u-u-uth…fullll . “Man” became mayan . Even “Clark” became two syllables. Clar-ark . 

 Nevertheless, Barksdale needed time to think. Had it been a movie instead of real life, he would have flashed back to the preceding three years. Right from the moment he left the secure womb of Serious American Business and entered ClarkWorld, Barksdale’s life had become a constant struggle to preserve his dignity. At dinner parties Barksdale told a funny story about his first trip down to Silicon Valley, when he and his wife met up with a realtor Clark had put him on to, with the assurance that she was the best in the business. 

 Clark’s real estate agent turned out to be one of those loud, garrulous people who, as they drive, insist on making eye contact with the passengers in the back seat. “You want to see Scott Cook’s house?” she hollered over her shoulder to a terrified Mr. and Mrs. Jim Barksdale. Scott Cook was the chairman of Intuit, the financial software company. “Is it for sale?” asked Barksdale. “No,” said the woman. “Then I don’t want to see it,” said Barksdale. Clark’s realtor ignored him and squealed through this enormous bronze gate and into Scott Cook’s driveway. Out of the house shot Mrs. Scott Cook to investigate this intrusion. Clark’s realtor had panicked, backed up and tried to make a quick getaway but ended up rolling back into Mrs. Cook’s newly planted garden. There she became stuck in the mud. Wheels spun, plants flew. Mrs. Cook was livid. She looked at Barksdale as if he were some kind of criminal. They had to call a fire truck and a tow truck to extract him, his wife, and Clark’s realtor from the garden. The episode lasted an hour. 

 At the time it appeared to be a freak incident. In retrospect, it was the keynote for Barksdale’s career in ClarkWorld. Clark had treated him as gently as Clark was capable of treating any captain, but that was still more roughly than Barksdale had ever been treated. The IPO had been an excellent case in point. Barksdale had wanted Netscape to remain a private company. He liked the old-fashioned method of waiting until a company was profitable before taking on public shareholders. But just a few months after Barksdale joined the company Clark showed up for a board meeting with Frank Quattrone and Larry Sonsini in tow. Quattrone and Sonsini were, respectively, the leading investment banker and the leading lawyer in Silicon Valley. During the meeting Clark, who was of course eager to get the money to pay for his boat, turned to them and asked what they thought about taking Netscape public. Lawyers and investment bankers make their fortunes when companies go public. Both men joined Clark in pushing Barksdale to do the deed. All so that Jim Clark could pay for his boat! 

 You might have thought Clark would have been well satisfied to get his money. You might have thought he’d move on. Not a bit! Clark was forever hounding Barksdale to follow Yahoo and Excite into the portal business. “Portal,” like “browser,” was another coinage of the Internet. On the heels of Netscape several people at once had the bright idea of creating a sort of doorway, or portal, into the new virtual world. The browser enabled the user to travel around the Internet, but how would he know where to go? The information on the Internet cried out to be organized, and the portal companies responded to the cry. Clark kept telling Barksdale that the future was not in selling browser but in attracting the masses to Netscape’s own rather lackluster portal. Worse, he was right! On technical matters Barksdale was at the mercy of Marc Andreessen, the young man who had first shown Clark an Internet browser and helped him create Netscape. Andreessen had stayed on as Netscape’s technical authority, but he had threatened to quit half a dozen times, and threatened to sell all his Netscape shares more often than that. Imagine what the financial press would have done with that! As it was, Andreessen had unloaded a quarter of his stake near the low, at sixteen dollars a share. Jim Barksdale, Serious American Executive, was no longer a leader of men. He was a baby-sitter. 

 On top of it all there was this trial. It might as well have been Clark’s doing. Once it became inevitable that Netscape would be the centerpiece of the DOJ’s complaint against Microsoft, Barksdale took charge of the matter, of course. That was his job—to lend order and reason to other people’s anarchies. But the whole reason Clark had called Gary Reback, and had him write the letter to the Justice Department, was his fear that Barksdale would never have done anything. And he was probably right. 

 As Barksdale sat unhappily in the witness box he considered the question. Did he regard Jim Clark as a truthful man? Already he had sworn that he had never seen Clark’s e-mail. This might be strictly true—after all, Barksdale hadn’t figured out how to read his own e-mail—but his profession of ignorance did not begin to capture the spirit of that moment. The DOJ had shown Netscape’s counsel Roberta Katz a copy of Clark’s e-mail, and Katz had helped Barksdale prepare for his cross-examination. They both knew that he would be shown Clark’s e-mail, and asked to explain it. Barksdale’s show of ignorance was for effect: if he didn’t know about it, then it must not be terribly important. But the truth was he was shocked. He’d been hired to confer a certain dignity on Clark’s new enterprise, and the e-mail stripped him of that. The e-mail made him seem like the hired help, who had been told only as much as he needed to know. 
