
 The best magic act attracted many of the best engineers. In the Valley it often did. The Valley had given engineers a place where they could make their living outside the enormous gray corporations that expected them to conform. It tended to attract the technologists who valued their freedom and wanted to live out on the edge. In any case, for a certain kind of engineer the chance to play with hot new technology offset the career risk of doing so. Clark gave them that chance. 

 In the early 1980s the labs that housed the world’s finest technical talent—those of Hewlett-Packard, Bell Labs, Xerox PARC, Stanford, MIT—surrendered some of their best minds to Clark’s new company. They came from all over, but they came for the same simple reason: they saw the possibilities in Jim Clark’s silicon chip. Not all engineers were so adventuresome as Clark. Some of them probably wanted to linger back East and be given multiple-choice personality tests until they retired to Sarasota or St. Petersburg. But a lot of the smart ones were looking for the chance to show just what they could do. Greg Chesson, a young engineer at Bell Labs, recalls visiting Clark’s Stanford lab in 1981 and seeing the Geometry Engine in action. He watched a computer-generated image of Snoopy flying his doghouse across Clark’s computer screen—a sight that just a few years later would seem unremarkable. In 1981 it was a kind of miracle. Chesson knew instantly he was looking into the future. “There was no question in my mind,” he says. “I just said, ‘All right, here is where I work now.’” 

 Before long, Jim Clark’s new company exerted a gravitational force on the technical mind. When you ask people who dealt with Silicon Graphics, or who worked for Silicon Graphics, or who bought machines from Silicon Graphics, or who simply observed Silicon Graphics from afar, they all say the same thing about it: “It was the smartest group of engineers I’ve ever seen in one place.” Tom Jermoluk recalls his first encounter with the company. This was ten years before Jermoluk became, at Jim Clark’s behest, the CEO of @Home Networks. In 1986 Jermoluk was an impressionable thirty-one-year-old engineer at Hewlett-Packard. Someone at Silicon Graphics called him up and said he should come over, just to have a look around. He met Clark. Within minutes they were off on an argument about the potential for computer-generated images. It lasted the afternoon. “I just joined literally on the spot: ‘Okay I’m in,’” says Jermoluk. “Jim was building the coolest stuff. You wanted to be around just to see what was going to happen next.” 

 What was going to happen next, just about everyone thought, was that Silicon Graphics would become a big company. And it did. Clark had invented the technology, bet his career on it, and been right. He had attracted the most talented engineers in Silicon Valley to his company, and they in turn created the most talented computers. But as a group, Clark began to complain, they had precious little to show for it. The lion’s share of the equity and the power had been taken by others. Financiers and managers owned huge chunks of Silicon Graphics and had seized control of the board of directors, while Clark’s engineers owned tiny slivers and watched the decision making from afar. Sure, they were doing much better for themselves than they would have done back East. But they did not do as well as people who had had no hand in creating the technology. 

 It didn’t take long for Clark to become deeply irritated by the rules of American capitalism. In his opinion, the game was rigged so that the people who really mattered got the shaft. He believed in his bones that the people who mattered most were the brilliant engineers: the chefs who cooked up the new recipes. (Clark was a New Growth Theorist long before anyone in Silicon Valley heard of New Growth Theory.) This opinion was hardly surprising; he was one of them. What he did with his opinion, however, was astonishing. He forced it down Silicon Valley’s throat. He left it to the Valley to take care of the rest of the world. 

 Of course, if the creator of the concept and the engineers who executed the concept were not getting what they deserved, someone else was getting more than he deserved. The first person Clark fingered was the man who lent him the money to build his new machine. When he set about to create his first company, Clark had no experience of the venture capitalists who back new enterprises. He wound up selling a 40 percent stake in Silicon Graphics to a man named Glenn Mueller at the prestigious Mayfield Fund for $800,000. Initially Clark kept a 15 percent stake for himself—which implied that he, his invention, and his ability to attract engineers were worth $300,000. He liked the deal when he made it; it took him about six months to change his mind. His original stake in his own business soon became a lot smaller; and he became irritated. His backers were about to discover what that meant. 

 Building new hardware costs a lot of money, much more than Clark realized. He and his engineers ran through their initial $800,000 of venture capital in less than a year, and were forced to return to the venture capitalists, hat in hand. Mueller and others put up another $17 million in exchange for another piece of the company. By the end of 1984 Clark’s engineers had run through the $17 million and needed even more money, and so had to sell even more of their stakes in the business. As a result, before they’d made their first dollar, Clark and his engineers were largely squeezed out of their own enterprise. “I wouldn’t be surprised if, of all the hugely successful companies in Silicon Valley, Silicon Graphics made the fewest millionaires out of the engineers who founded it,” says Greg Chesson. The Mayfield Fund ended up making about $400 million on its investment. 

 Clark took this and almost everything else that happened at Silicon Graphics personally. At each step of the way it became clearer that SGI would be a huge success; yet at each step of the way Clark found himself more at the mercy of his financiers, who had nothing at risk but their money. Six months after Silicon Graphics received its first infusion of capital, Clark decided somehow that he had sold too cheap. Glenn Mueller had cut a sweet deal for himself. Mueller was supposed to be a nice guy—everyone said so. The Mueller family threw the Christmas party each year that most everyone who was anyone in Silicon Valley wanted to attend. Clark had trusted him. He’d never do that again with a venture capitalist. And he never forgave Mueller for exploiting his ignorance. At board meetings Mueller often found himself subjected to Clark’s fury. “Jim’s face would get red and he’d start shouting that Glenn had cheated him and his engineers,” recalls Dick Kramlich, a Silicon Valley venture capitalist who joined the board of Silicon Graphics in 1984. “Glenn would just sit there and take it.” 

 Actually, the venture capitalists were just the first item on Clark’s list of what needed fixing in American capitalism. One day in late 1984, just as Silicon Graphics was preparing to ship its first machines, Glenn Mueller called a meeting in his office. It had taken two years from the founding of the company to its first product. The new computers were not easy to sell, at least not at first. SGI delivered far more computer than most people could handle. A cheap one cost seventy thousand dollars. The founding engineer Mark Grossman recalls “endless meetings and debates about how to squeeze what we had into a smaller box. Basically we couldn’t figure out how to make it cheap.” But even a cheap one was complicated to use, even for someone who knew his way around a computer. People with modest programming skills in front of a Silicon Graphics work station sometimes felt a bit like a man in a Lamborghini on a two-lane road. 

 The result was a struggle between the engineers, who built ever niftier computers, and the managers, who had been brought in to market them. The managers wanted the engineers to make their products simpler to use. The engineers, like their leader, thought their managers were all idiots. “They were promising stuff we couldn’t deliver,” says the engineer Tom Davis, “and they didn’t understand what we had. Of course, fifteen more years of experience showed me that this is the normal situation.” At the time, however, the engineers were outraged. The managers would tell them to do one thing, the engineers would do the opposite, and, no matter how it turned out, the engineers thought they were right until someone proved them wrong. “It was like an especially contentious academic community,” recalls Tom Jermoluk. “You were encouraged to shred each other’s stuff. And everyone had an opinion about everything.” 

 Glenn Mueller’s meeting was an attempt to sort out the problem and to transform Jim Clark’s company into a stable, well-adjusted, lasting institution. At the meeting were Clark, Vern Anderson, the CEO Mueller had told Clark he needed to have in order for the Mayfield Fund to supply him venture capital, a few other senior executives, and the venture capitalists bankrolling the enterprise. Dick Kramlich of New Enterprise Associates was the newest of these. It was Kramlich’s first encounter with Clark’s corporate culture, and it was the most contentious he’d ever seen. “People were yelling and screaming at each other, over the most petty things—not even business things,” he recalls. “I waited until it was five o’clock, and then I got out. I told them that I really didn’t want to go through any more of this and to call me when they’d worked out their emotional problems.” 

 After the meeting Vern Anderson stepped down as CEO. This should have surprised no one: after Mueller had told him that, to obtain venture capital, he needed a CEO, Clark had literally walked outside, found Anderson on the street in Palo Alto, and asked him if he wanted the job. (“I bargained for a temperamental handful,” says Anderson.) Clark never had any serious ambition to manage the company himself; even then he knew he’d be poorly suited for the job. He couldn’t stand the small steps, the details, the tedium. He thought they should bring in some person to handle the details while he made sure that his beloved engineers kept on building the machine of the future. He didn’t fully appreciate just how much power he had to relinquish for the detail person to do his job well. Soon enough, he found out. Mueller found another man to run the company. His name was Ed McCracken, a highly regarded vice president at Hewlett-Packard. When Mueller told Clark about McCracken, and explained that Clark would have to give up the illusion that he still controlled Silicon Graphics, Clark broke down and cried. “Jim always had a sense that we weren’t doing things right,” said Anderson. “He knew in his heart that we needed someone like Ed.” 

 With the understanding that he would enjoy complete control, Ed McCracken left his safe comfortable job at Hewlett-Packard and took a risky one at Silicon Graphics. He and Clark taken together were proof of the limits of physiognomy. To look at them, they could have been brothers—tall and blond with wire-rimmed spectacles perched on surprisingly delicate features. To watch them in action, you would think they came from different planets. Hewlett-Packard was the closet thing in the Valley to an enormous gray corporation, and Ed McCracken was the Valley’s version of the Organization Man. He had mastered the unnaturally sincere tone of voice of the Professional Man. When he wished to indicate seriousness, he dropped his chin down into his throat. When he took you aside to have a word, he looked and sounded as if he was giving a speech to an audience of a thousand people. To stress his points, which were rarely pointed or stressful, he’d press his thumb against his index finger as if he had just caught a fly by its wing. He wore suits. He hated strife. He loved consensus, or at any rate the idea of it. 

 For many of the founding engineers it was the first experience with a Serious American Executive, and with the vaguely phony emotional postures that seem to be, for whatever reason, necessary for the success of the leader of a large organization. “He came off as being awkward and manipulative,” says Mark Grossman. “There was no idle chitchat.” “He had a weird way of using silence in conversation,” says Kurt Akeley. “Ed was one of those people who likes to design questionnaires for others to fill out,” a third engineer says. McCracken liked to deal with people indirectly, through intermediaries. As yet another of the engineers who left Stanford with Clark to found Silicon Graphics puts it, “Ed had this phrase for all our problems. He said we were ‘highly oppositional.’” It was that phrase—“highly oppositional”—that stuck in people’s minds. 

 In late 1984 McCracken took over the company from Clark, who stayed on as chairman, whatever that meant. He looked at the books and discovered that the company had only seven million dollars left, and was running through money at the rate of two million a month, which meant it had exactly three and a half more months to run. He cast one long look at the contentious engineers and their warring opinions. He decided that Jim Clark’s corporate culture needed more than a chief executive officer. It needed a therapist. 

 McCracken hired a corporate psychologist. The psychologist together with forty Silicon Graphics employees, including the senior engineers and their leader, Jim Clark, retreated for three days to a resort not far outside of the Valley. There they submitted to a battery of psychological tests designed to make them better Organization Men. 

 Before the retreat Clark and his engineers were required to find two people to fill out psychological evaluations on their behalf, and mail them to the corporate psychologist, confidentially. Once they’d gathered together at the resort, the engineers filled out two more forms. The first was designed to classify them into one of four psychological types. These types probably said more about psychology as filtered through the American business mind than about the engineers. At any rate, the tests broke the world down into introverts and extroverts, then into right-brained versions and left-brained versions. The four types were given the following names: 

 introvert + right brained = “supportive” 

 introvert + left brained = “analytical” 

 extrovert + right brained = “promoter” 

 extrovert + left brained = “controller” 

 Depending on the degree to which you possessed these qualities, you were classified as a “strong” or “weak” version of your type. Ed McCracken was a “weak analytical.” Jim Clark was a “strong controller.” (As Clark recalls it, “The psychologist determined that everyone else on the executive committee was passive aggressive and I was just aggressive.”) The engineers Clark had hired all scored pretty much the same as he did. Of the thirty engineers who took the test, only two registered as “supportives” and two more were “analyticals.” The rest were “controllers.” 

 The second test required Clark’s engineers to answer 250 questions designed to further parse their psyches. The results were laid out on a pie chart with twelve slices. Again, each slice of pie represented a different personality type. The psychologist had odd little names for these, too: “humanistic,” “optimistic,” “vague,” and so on. When the chart was completely filled in, eleven of the categories remained empty. The names of all the engineers were crammed into a single sliver of pie. “Highly oppositional,” it was labeled. (That is when it occurred to the engineers where their new CEO got his lingo.) 

 Afterward each engineer was required to explain his psychological profile. That is where tempers finally flared: the charge that they were “highly oppositional” actually pleased a lot of Clark’s engineers. To this day it pleases them. For instance, Tom Davis, one of the seven founding engineers who had followed Clark out of Stanford, says, “Their definition of oppositional was basically someone who stuck to his guns. That’s clearly a bad trait if you stick to your guns when you’re clearly wrong, but at the time it was probably the best group of engineers I’d ever seen assembled, and everyone knew that they were almost always right. From my point of view, they had exactly the right qualities to produce great products—they were almost always right, and if you disagreed, you had a big argument to change their minds. But if you were right, after some struggle they almost always would. If somebody insists that 2 + 2 = 5, I’ll never back down, no matter how bad it makes them feel. I think that the shrink thought that you should. In nonengineering areas where things are a lot fuzzier, giving in more often is clearly a reasonable thing to do.” 

 The psychologist ran the subsequent three-day drill like an AA meeting. He asked each of Clark’s engineers to stand up, explain how he scored on his test, and tell everyone else how he planned to change. The second test, which the shrink kept calling “the instrument,” had reduced each engineer’s personality to a three-dimensional “shape,” which turned out to be a piece of paper with warts and divots and ridges. One of the company’s founders grabbed his shape and led off. He rose and said that he had spent his whole life getting himself to the point where he could tell someone he was an idiot and that he had no intention of changing that now. Did anyone want to fight about it? The other engineers cheered. Another engineer said that he had figured out how the questions related to the profile, and he wanted to take the test again so he could get a perfect score. The shrink insisted that there was no such thing as a perfect score. “He went on and on and on how there is no right answer,” says Rocky Rhodes. “How this was just for us to get to know each other better. That there were no bad people and no bad shapes. That there was nothing judgmental about it. It was just a shape. You sat in front of the group on a little chair and held up your shape. One by one. Then Greg Chesson walks up and the shrink almost gasps. He says, ‘Wow! that’s perfect!’” 

 One way of viewing Silicon Graphics in the mid-1980s is as an answer to a pair of questions. The first question was: If an extraordinarily willful human being with great technical aptitude is permitted to create a large business organization, how will that organization behave? By 1984 everyone understood that it would behave like Jim Clark, which is to say that it would behave as no big, successful American company had ever behaved. It would be a loose collection of argumentative, brilliant, bullheaded engineers who might or might not make money but almost certainly would build something wonderful. 

 The second question was: How would such a place ever grow old? The answer was: painfully. 

 After the retreat Ed McCracken quickly set about making his company less like Jim Clark. This is just how it always went with one of these new Silicon Valley hardware companies: once it showed promise, it ditched its visionary founder, who everyone deep down thought was a psycho anyway, and became a sane, ordinary place. With the support of Glenn Mueller and the other venture capitalists on the board of directors, McCracken brought in layer upon layer of people more like him: indirect, managerial, diplomatic, politically minded. These people could never build the machines of the future, but they could sell the machines of the present. And they did this very well. For the next six years Silicon Graphics was perhaps the most successful company in Silicon Valley. The stock rose from three dollars a share to more than thirty dollars a share. The company grew from two hundred employees to more than six thousand. The annual revenues swelled from a few million to billions. Therapy aside, the company remained the most desirable place to work if you were a certain kind of computer cowboy who wanted to live on the edge of the technology. The technology Clark and his brilliant engineers had invented turned out to be just what the world hungered for. 

 At the same time McCracken dealt Clark out of his own business. From McCracken’s point of view Clark was just wildly disruptive. He’d wander around the company stirring up all manner of trouble and cause all the engineers to become even more highly oppositional than they were on their own. Senior engineers turned up in his office and told him that the chairman (Clark) had persuaded them they’d be better off quitting Silicon Graphics and starting their own businesses, and McCracken would have to spend hours talking them into staying. But he found outlets for his own frustration. When McCracken joined the company in 1985, Glenn Mueller had assured both him and Clark that they would be paid the same amounts each year. In late 1989 McCracken called Mueller, who now chaired the executive compensation committee, to complain about this rule. Mueller phoned the other members of the committee and changed the policy. The next year McCracken was paid hundreds of thousands of dollars more than Clark. Not long after that Clark ceased to be granted stock options in his company. He was the only member of the executive committee so treated. 

 Given what happened later, it is easy to feel sorry for Ed McCracken. At the time it was harder. Having established himself as the captain of the ship, he was doing what captains of industry have done since they were invented. He was transforming himself into an Important Person. He chaired conferences of the future of American industry. He hobnobbed with U.S. senators and testified before Congress. He encouraged the 1992 Clinton campaign to use Silicon Graphics as a backdrop for an important speech by Clinton on economic policy—only to find, too late, that Clark had decorated the halls that Clinton strode along with the Fortune magazine cover that featured Clark. Once Clinton was elected president, McCracken became a regular at White House dinners. Such highfalutin behavior might not sit well with Clark’s engineers, who accused him of not paying attention to the business, but it had a purpose: it created an air of permanence not merely about Ed McCracken but also about Silicon Graphics. McCracken was trying to build something enduring. 
