
[130]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING


Your index fund should not be your manager’s
cash cow. It should be your own cash cow.

Some years ago, a Wells Fargo representative was
asked how the firm could justify such high charges. The
answer: “You don’t understand. It’s our cash cow.” (That
is, it regularly generates lots of profits for the manager.)
By carefully selecting the lowest cost index funds for your
portfolio, you can be sure that the fund is not the manager’s cash cow, but your own.
Given my preference for the all-market index fund, I
almost hesitate to tell you that, since that lonely first S&P
Index was formed in 1975, a staggering total of another
578 more index funds of all sizes and shapes are now in
operation. Investors face a mind-boggling set of confusing choices—large cap, mid-cap, small-cap, industry sectors, international, single country, and so on. To make it
more confusing, indexing works like a charm in every one
of these areas. A well-administered index fund is inevitably destined to surpass the returns earned by the
other investors in the market segment tracked by its
index. Even though we never have complete information
about the precise returns earned by investors as a group
in each segment, given the relentless rules of humble
arithmetic, it must work that way.

PROFIT FROM THE MAJESTY OF SIMPLICITY

[131]

Standard & Poor’s Corporation now compares index
returns with actual returns achieved by active managers
in many U.S. market segments, and the results are unmistakable. Over the past five years alone, the S&P
500 Index has outpaced 67 percent of large-cap general equity funds, while the S&P Mid-Cap 400 Index
has outperformed 84 percent of mid-cap funds, and the
S&P Small-Cap 600 Index has outperformed 79 percent of all small-cap funds. Remarkable but unsurprising. While these comparisons, sorted by number of
funds rather than by fund assets, have the flaws noted
earlier, the message could hardly be clearer: indexing
is the winning strategy.
Interestingly, Standard & Poor’s tries to take survivor
bias into account in its calculations. During the past five
years alone, an astonishing 28 percent of all general equity funds have gone out of business. That’s one more
warning about relying on actively managed mutual funds
as long-term investments.

In inefficient markets, the most successful
managers may achieve unusually large returns.
But common sense tells us that for each big
success, there must also be a big failure.

[132]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

While it is alleged that indexing doesn’t work in markets that are less-efficient than the large stocks in the
S&P 500, the impressive performance of the small- and
mid-cap indexes suggest that it works perfectly well. As it
must. For, whether markets are efficient or inefficient, as
a group all investors in that segment earn the return of
that segment. In inefficient markets, the most successful
managers may achieve unusually large returns. But never
forget that, as a group, all investors in any discrete segment of the stock market must be, and are, average.
Common sense tells us that for each big success, there
must also be a big failure. But after all those deductions
of even larger management fees that funds incur in less
efficient markets, and the damaging impact of their even
larger turnover costs, the aggregate lag is even wider. So
even in inefficient market segments, index funds, with
their tiny costs, win again.
International funds are also subject to the same allegation that it is easier for managers to win in (supposedly)
less-efficient markets. But also to no avail. S&P reports that
the international index (world markets, less U.S. stocks)
outpaced 80 percent of actively managed international equity funds over the past five years. Similarly, the S&P
Emerging Markets Index outpaced 88 percent of emerging
market funds. With indexing so successful in both more efficient and less efficient markets alike, and in U.S. markets

PROFIT FROM THE MAJESTY OF SIMPLICITY

[133]

and global markets, I’m not sure what additional data are
required to close the case in favor of index funds.
But while investing in particular market sectors is
done most efficiently through index funds, betting on the
winning sectors is exactly that: betting. But betting is a
loser’s game. Why? Largely because emotions are almost
certain to have a powerful negative impact on the returns
that investors achieve. Whatever returns each sector may
earn, the investors in those very sectors will likely, if not
certainly, fall well behind them. For there is abundant evidence that the most popular sector funds of the day are
those that have recently enjoyed the most spectacular recent performance. As a result, after-the-fact popularity is
a recipe for unsuccessful investing.

Indexing stock market sectors, a strong idea.
Betting on stock market sectors, a weak reality.

For example, when Vanguard created the industry’s first
Growth Index Fund and Value Index Fund in 1992, the former was designed for younger investors who focused on
wealth accumulation, were seeking tax-efficiency, and were
willing to assume larger risks. The latter was designed for
older investors who focused on wealth preservation, were
seeking higher income, and were happy to reduce their

[134]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

risks. Alas, while the original idea was strong, the ensuing
reality was weak. What followed their introduction was a
classic example of performance chasing.
During the 1993 to 1997 period, the stock market
was relatively placid, and value stocks and growth stocks
delivered similar returns. Then in the new economy bubble, growth stocks took off, earning a cumulative return
by 2000 that left value stocks in the dust (1992 to March
2000: Growth Index total return, 364 percent; Value
Index total return, 229 percent). Après moi le deluge! Reversion to the mean took hold, and growth stocks plummeted through 2002.
Investor interest in the two fund styles was well balanced
during the early years. But in the bubble that followed, investors poured $11 billion into the soaring Growth Index
Fund, nearly four times the $3 billion invested in the sedate
Value Index Fund. Then, in the aftermath, investors
switched their loyalty, with net redemptions of $850 million
in the Growth Index Fund during 2001 to 2006 and net purchases approaching $2 billion in the Value Index Fund.
Since 1993, the two funds have achieved substantial
positive returns on the standard time-weighted basis—9.1
percent per year for Growth and 11.2 percent for Value.
With their counterproductive timing and selection, however, investors in these index funds have not come even close
to matching those returns. The average dollar-weighted

PROFIT FROM THE MAJESTY OF SIMPLICITY

[135]

return earned by investors in the Growth Index Fund was a
pathetic 0.9 percent per year. While investors in the Value
Index Fund did better, their return of 7.6 percent still
lagged the return on the Value Index Fund by 3.6 percentage points per year.
Since 1993, the cumulative return of the Growth
Index has been 224 percent, versus 320 percent for the
Value Index, based on the traditional calculation of fund
performance. The Growth Index Fund investor, meanwhile, earned but 13 percent, and the Value Index Fund
investor earned about 170 percent. Despite my best intentions when they were formed, Vanguard’s Growth
Fund and Value Index Funds proved to be a paradigm for
the ways that investors fool themselves, relinquishing perfectly acceptable long-term returns in their search to find
the Holy Grail of extra returns in the short run.
So look before you leap in trying to pick which market sector to bet on. It may not be as exciting, but owning
the classic stock market index fund is the ultimate strategy. It holds the mathematical certainty that marks it as
the gold standard in investing, for try as they might, the
alchemists of active management cannot turn their own
lead, copper, or iron into gold. Just avoid complexity, rely
on simplicity, take costs out of the equation and trust the
arithmetic.

[136]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

Don’t Take My Word for It
You may think that I am too pessimistic in calculating the odds that only 2 percent of all equity mutual
portfolios will outperform the stock market over 50
years. If so, consider the odds calculated by
Michael J. Mauboussin, chief market strategist at
Legg Mason, adjunct professor at Columbia Business School, and author of the best-selling More
than You Know. While my 2 percent estimate would
mean that 1 portfolio in 50 would outperform the
stock market over 50 years, Mauboussin calculates
the odds of a fund outperforming for 15 years consecutively at 1 in 223,000, and at 1 in 31 million
over 21 years. Either way, the odds of outpacing an
all-market index fund are, well, terrible.
Now listen to Warren Buffett’s widely esteemed partner Charlie Munger, who eloquently
states the case for shunning the foolish complexity of investing and opting for simplicity: “At
large charitable foundations in recent years there
has been a drift toward more complexity. In some
endowment funds, there are not few but many investment counselors, chosen by an additional
layer of consultants who are hired to decide which
investment counselors are best, help in allocating
(continued)

PROFIT FROM THE MAJESTY OF SIMPLICITY

funds to various categories, insure that claimed investment styles are scrupulously followed . . . [plus]
a third layer of the security analysts employed by investment banks. There is one thing sure about all
this complexity, the total cost of all the investment
management, plus the frictional costs of fairly often
getting in and out of many large investment positions, can easily reach 3 percent of foundation net
worth per annum. All the equity investors, in total,
will surely bear a performance disadvantage per
annum equal to the total croupiers’ costs they have
jointly elected to bear. . . . And it is unescapable that
exactly half of the investors will get a result below the
median result after the croupier’s take, a median result that may well be somewhere between unexciting
and lousy. The wiser choice is to dispense with the
consultants and reduce the investment turnover, by
changing to indexed investment in equities.” (Once
again, shades of the Gotrocks family.)

[137]

Ch

er Th i rt e

en

apt

Bond Funds and
Money Market Funds


Where Those Relentless Rules
Are Even More Po werful

SO FAR, MY DISCUSSION of the index fund (and its handmaiden, low investment costs) has related to the stock
market and to equity mutual funds. But the relentless
rules of humble arithmetic with which I’ve regaled you
also apply—arguably even more forcefully—to bond funds
and money market funds.
Perhaps it’s obvious why this is so. While a seemingly
infinite number of factors influence the stock market and
each individual stock that is traded there, a single factor

BOND FUNDS AND MONEY MARKET FUNDS

[139]

influences the bond market and the money market (and
for that matter, each individual fixed-income security) far
more than any other: the prevailing level of interest rates.
Managers of fixed-income funds can’t do much, if anything, to influence rates. If they don’t like the rates established in that market, calling the Treasury Department or
the Federal Reserve, or otherwise trying to change the
supply-and-demand equation, is unlikely to bear fruit.
So let’s be clear: In the long run, virtually 100 percent
of the return on any bond fund or money market fund is
accounted for by the net interest income it generates for
its shareholders. The only way for a manager to add an increment to that return is to make interest rate bets—for
example, by selling bonds when he expects rates to go up
(and prices down), and then buying bonds when the reverse is expected to happen. If you think that picking
stocks and timing their purchase is hard, just imagine how
hard it is to execute these same strategies successfully in
the incredibly efficient precincts of the bond market.
Thus, managers of fixed income funds almost inevitably deliver a gross return that parallels the baseline
constituted by the interest rate environment. Yes, a few
managers might do better—even do better for a long
time—by being extra smart, or extra lucky, or by taking
extra risk. Yet even the best bond and money market managers can add only a few fractions of one percent per year

[140]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

to your long-term returns, albeit only by risking a comparable shortfall. What’s more, even if they achieve these
margins, they rarely overcome the fees, sales loads, and
expenses involved in acquiring their services.
While these costs make the task of adding returns far
more difficult, overly confident bond fund managers may
be tempted to take just a little extra risk by extending maturities of the bonds in the portfolio. (Long-dated bonds—
say, 30 years—are much more volatile than short-term
bonds—say, two years—but usually provide higher yields.)
They are also tempted to reduce the investment quality of
the portfolio, holding less in U.S. Treasury bonds (rated
AAA) or in investment-grade corporate bonds (rated
BBB or better), and holding more in below-investmentgrade bonds (BB or lower), or even some so-called junk
bonds, rated below CC or even unrated.
Since stocks represent the residual ownership (or equity)
of corporations, the word safety is not usually associated
with them. Unlike bonds, stocks can’t default. Bonds, on
the other hand, represent debt. If the payments of interest
that corporations and governments promise to make every
six months are threatened, their ratings will be downgraded
and the market value of their bonds reduced. And if they finally fail to make the promised payments, they enter bankruptcy proceedings. Where bonds are concerned, Brandeis’s
warning becomes particularly meaningful: “Remember, O

BOND FUNDS AND MONEY MARKET FUNDS

[141]

stranger, arithmetic is the first of the sciences and the
mother of safety.”
There are too many types of bond funds to try your patience by examining all of them. So this chapter presents the
three basic maturity levels that have become the industry
standard, one in each of the three major bond segments—
taxable (corporate and government) bonds, tax-exempt municipal bonds, and U.S. Treasury issues. The discussion
begins with intermediate-term taxable bond funds; then
turns to long-term tax-exempt bond funds; and finally evaluates funds investing in short-term U.S. Treasury notes.

Among intermediate-term taxable
bond funds, the low-cost index fund
is truly a superior performer.

As you’ll see, the low-cost intermediate-term bond
index fund is a truly superior performer* (Exhibit 13.1).
(A finding that indexing wins should no longer surprise
you.) With a 10-year return averaging 6.8 percent annually, it comes within a whisker of outpacing the (costadjusted) return of the comparable Lehman 5–10 Year
* I apologize, sort of, for using Vanguard funds for the examples of market
indexes. But there are few other bond funds in these categories that implement index or index-like strategies, and literally none with lower costs for
individual investors.

[142]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

EXHIBIT 13.1 Intermediate-Term Taxable Bond Funds:
Returns and Costs, 1996 –2006

Annual
Return

Final
Value (Initial
Investment
of $10,000)

Expense
Ratio

Vanguard IT Bond Index Fund

6.79%

$19,289

0.18%

Lehman 5–10 Year Gov/Corp.
Index a

6.90

19,488

0.20a

Average fund b

5.50

17,081

1.00

a
b

Assumed annual expense ratio deducted.
Includes both corporate and government funds.

Government/Corporate Bond Index. What is more, the
index fund’s annual return of 6.8 percent was almost 25
percent higher than the 5.5 percent return of its average
peer. While the actively managed bond funds as a group
earned a lower gross return than either the index fund or
the index, relative cost proved to be the principal differentiator in net return.
As a group, the portfolios of the actively managed
bond funds include about 25 percent corporate and 75 percent U.S. government bonds (largely bonds of government
agencies), whereas the bond index and the bond index fund
include about 50 percent in corporates and 50 percent in
governments. While the bond index fund carried slightly
more volatility risk (with an annualized standard deviation

BOND FUNDS AND MONEY MARKET FUNDS

[143]

of 5 percent versus 3.7 percent for the active managers),
both figures represent an extremely low risk level.
And so the message echoes. Among intermediate-term
taxable bond funds, in terms of maximizing your return and
minimizing your risk, the low-cost index fund is truly a superior performer. The Vanguard Intermediate-Term Bond
Index Fund, for example, has an expense ratio of 0.18 percent, less than one-fifth of the 1.0 percent expense ratio of
its average peer. In addition, its return benefits from the
absence of sales loads. Always avoid bond funds with sales
loads. (A typical 5 percent load would obliterate your entire yield for the first year.) With a cumulative final value
of an initial investment of $10,000 growing to $19,289 in
the index fund, versus just $17,081 for its average rival, the
index strategy is a winning strategy, outpacing an amazing
550 of its 570 peers over the past decade.

Among long-term tax-exempt bond funds,
once again, indexing wins.

Now let’s consider long-term maturities, with a
focus on tax-exempt municipal bond funds. Because of
complexities in the construction of municipal bond indexes, there are no pure index funds in this category.
But the results of the major index in the field (the

[144]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

Lehman Brothers Tax-Exempt 10-Year Maturity Index)
confirm the power of indexing in surpassing the returns
provided by the average active bond manager (Exhibit
13.2). Since the index provided a gross return of 5.93
percent, a comparable index fund, after assumed costs
of 0.20 percent, would have provided a 5.73 percent net
annual return.
By way of comparison, the Vanguard Long-Term
Tax-Exempt Bond Fund—whose expense ratio of 0.15
percent is actually slightly below these assumed costs for
the index fund—provided a net return of 5.85 percent, a
bit higher than the assumed return of the bond index
fund. Like the index fund, this bond fund is broadly diversified, holds a high-quality portfolio (87 percent rated
EXHIBIT 13.2 Long-Term Municipal Bond Funds:
Returns and Costs, 1996 –2006

Annual
Return

Final
Value (Initial
Investment
of $10,000)

Expense
Ratio

Vanguard Long-Term Municipal Bond Fund

5.85%

$17,657

0.15%

Lehman 10-Year Municipal
Index*

5.73

17,458

0.20*

Average fund

5.01

16,306

1.03

* Assumed expense ratio deducted.

BOND FUNDS AND MONEY MARKET FUNDS

[145]

A or better, even higher than its actively managed peers),
and minimizes turnover.
Once again, low costs lead to higher returns. The 5.73
percent annual return of the hypothetical municipal bond
index fund was roughly 15 percent more than the 5.0 percent earned by the average long-term municipal fund, even
though the actively managed funds were assuming higher
risks—15 percent in lower-rated bonds versus 4 percent for
the index and 13 percent for the Vanguard fund.
Over the past decade, $10,000 initially invested in the
Vanguard Long-Term Municipal Bond Fund grew to
$17,657, versus $16,306 for its average rival. With lowcosts, broad diversification, and no serious attempt to
outguess the market in long-term tax-exempt bond funds,
once again indexing wins. Its close proxy, the Vanguard
Long-Term Municipal Bond Fund, ranked first among its
194 peers.

Among short-term Treasury funds,
the lowest cost option wins again.

Our sweep of the bond fund arena concludes with an
examination of short-term funds investing in U.S. Treasury obligations (Exhibit 13.3). There are few surprises
here. The net return earned by the index itself (5.06 percent per year, adjusted for an assumed expense ratio of

[146]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

EXHIBIT 13.3 Short-Term Treasury Bond Funds:
Returns and Costs, 1996 –2006

Annual
Return

Final
Value (Initial
Investment
of $10,000)

Expense
Ratio

Vanguard Short-Term Bond
Index

5.06%

$16,382

0.16%

Lehman 1–5 Government Fund

5.06

16,382

0.20*

Average fund

4.54

15,588

0.92

* Assumed expense ratio deducted.

0.20 percent) outpaces the average fund. Again, while the
Vanguard Short-Term Government Bond Fund is not,
technically speaking, an index fund, it tracks the index return with remarkable precision, turning in a net average
annual return of 5.06 percent over the past decade. The
lowest cost options win again, outpacing 97 of the 122
short-term government funds. (Treasurys being Treasurys, investment quality is virtually uniform. Both the
Vanguard index fund and the index itself hold 100 percent
of their portfolios in short-term U.S. Treasury notes, and
the active funds hold 99 percent.)
With its towering 0.92 percent average expense ratio,
the average short-term bond fund has a lot to overcome. It
doesn’t succeed—it can’t succeed—in overcoming that handicap, even by assuming somewhat more volatility risk than
the government index and the Vanguard, both of which

BOND FUNDS AND MONEY MARKET FUNDS

[147]

funds displayed slightly less volatility than their active peers.
(Again, many of these actively managed funds carry sales
charges, averaging 3 percent, which are incorporated into
the returns shown in Exhibit 13.3.)
The tracking of its benchmark, its quality parity, and
its extremely low expenses mark the Vanguard ShortTerm Treasury Bond Fund as the functional equivalent of
the Lehman 1–5 Year Government Bond Index. While
there are no bond funds that track this index, the Vanguard fund is the virtual equivalent of an index fund. Both
provided cumulative gains on an initial investment of
$10,000 of an identical $16,382 over the past decade,
compared with $15,588 for the average short-term Treasury fund.

Among money market funds—surprise!
—low cost wins again.

Money market funds can be thought of as very
short-term bond funds with uniformly high credit quality. Federal regulations limit money market funds to
high-grade commercial and bank paper, and as a practical matter limit maturities to a very short term (about
60 days), to maintain a stable asset value of $1.00 per
share. (Unlike bank savings accounts, money market
