Old Crop/New Crop Spread
The old crop/new crop spread is one of the most well-known spread trades
around. It takes advantage of the difference between the diminishing crop
that has been sitting in storage all year long and the upcoming new harvest
projection. This old crop/new crop spread affects all of the grains to some
degree or another, as well as any product that must be planted and harvested. The most common old crop/new crop commodities are soybeans,
com, and wheat. These are all grains that can be kept in storage for long
periods. As the year progresses, supplies crisscross the world fulfilling cereal, material, and feed needs. This dwindling of "old" supplies intersects
with the new year's harvest, creating spread trading opportunities.
A surplus of grains leading into the new year can depress the price of
both the current stocks and the upcoming harvests.
A dwindling supply of grains drives the prices up on the current grain
stores and increases the value of the new harvest grains. Throughout the
year the USDA releases reports on crop plantings and storage levels. The
information that they release directly affects how the old crop/new crop
spread is bought and sold.
One of the most popular grain spread trades is the old crop/new crop
spread for soybeans. The majority of the United States' soybeans are
planted between May and June. These same crops are harvested approximately six months later between October and November. This cycle leads
to a sales cycle that runs year round, beginning in September, right before
the new harvest, and ending in August, right after the new plantings.
South America is on a slightly different old crop/new crop spread.
Their planting season operates between April and May, with their harvest

Everything in Its Season

147

occurring in September-October months. In fact, their cycle is different
enough that the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) created a futures contract
focused solely for the soybeans grown in Brazil.
Depending on which soybean cycle you wish to trade, the United
States' JulylNovember or MaylNovember old crop/new crop spread trade
or South America's ApriVSeptember or MaylNovember, the spread trade is
based on the fundamental activity of the underlying commodities as well
as the technical signals in the charts that can indicate whether or not the
front month should be sold or bought.
The old crop/new crop is also called an intracommodity or intermarket spread. Since we are operating with the same commodity but in different months it is a lot easier to track, compared to the substitute good
spread known as an intercommodity spread. In later chapters we look at
a few intercommodity spreads based on specific commodities and their
byproducts. The important concept to remember when it comes to the old
crop/new crop spread is that the sum is more important than the parts.
Since the typical soybean intracommodity trade is long the spread,
we are looking for the July contract to increase in value faster than the
November contract. Therefore on a JulylNovember spread we are looking
for the prices to increase in value in relation to one another, a narrowing of the spread. Let's say that the difference between JulylNovember is
equal to plus 20 cents. This means that the July contract is 20 cents greater
than the November contract. As long as the difference between the July
and November contracts is plus 20 cents or more, the long spread is intact.
This is known as a 20 cent premium.
The success of the old crop/new crop spread, a seasonal trade, depends on one of three occurrences: The July contract's price must continue moving up while the November contract stays the same, or the July
contract's price can move up while the November contract's price moves
down, or the July contract's price can move up while the November contract's price moves down simultaneously. With so many possibilities it is
no wonder that this old crop/new crop interrelationship can have a significant impact on position traders who attempt to roll over an existing
position trade.
If for any reason the July contract's value dips below the November
contract's value, it is known as a discount. The onset of a discount type
of spread scenario can be the beginning of a widening of the spread. For
traders who are long the spread this can be disastrous. As the spread
widens, the July contract drops in value and the November contract increases in value. A long spread trader begins to lose money on both sides
of the spread trade. This is the chief danger of any type of spread trading,
but with the old crop/new crop spread trade it can quickly become apparent that the spread is not working. Any failure to jump ship immediately

148

BASIC STRATEGIES

from a long spread or to convert a spread position from a long spread to a
short spread can quickly lead to insurmountable losses.

Interest Rate Yield Curve
The interest rate yield curve is a staple of all investing, quite similar to the
old crop/new crop spread in the grains. The concept is simple to trade.
The interest rate yields for bond and note products, with the equivalent
rating but different maturity dates, should be at different levels. The rule of
thumb is that the longer the money is lent out the more interest should be
paid; this is commonly referred to as the "normal yield curve." This normal
yield curve is designed to ensure that the 30 year U.S. Treasury Bond has a
greater yield than the 5- and lO-year Treasury Notes because there is more
risk associated with the length of time.
The interest rate yield curve has a direct impact on how mortgage rates
are set, bank lending practices, and credit cards. The interest rate yield
curve also has a predictive component. A normal yield curve is indicative
of a solid economy and positive growth. Any change in the yield curve away
from normal can portend a significant adjustment in the economy.
The Federal Reserve's policies for the U.S. economy and the U.S.
government's desire for either a weak or strong currency also playa significant role in what interest yields are being offered to the public. In the
blink of an eye interest rates can move from a normal yield to an inverted
yield; this is when near-term notes command higher interest rates than
long-term bonds. The inverted yield can indicate whether a country's economy is faced with the potential of a recession.
A flat market occurs when short-term interest rates and long-term interest rates match up in value. A flat market can be worse than a normal or
inverted yield solely because of the level of uncertainty that it represents.
Either interest rates can cooperate and become normal or there may be
a sudden drop in value with long-term interest rates forcing an inverted
market on the public.
In order to effectively trade the yield curve most traders have one of
two choices. They can actually purchase and sell the associated short-term
notes and long-term bonds or they can trade in the futures markets. If
the yield curve is traded in the futures market then the issues associated
with leveraged trading will also have an impact on how a retail trader approaches this spread opportunity.

Backwardation
Of all of the different types of spread trading this is the most straightforward. When it comes to the pricing of futures contracts the futures price is

Everything in Its Season

149

expected to be greater than the underlying asset. Earlier futures contracts
are also less expensive than later futures contracts. This is known as contango. This is a normal byproduct of the carrying charges associated with
futures contracts. The longer a commodity or futures contract is held the
more expensive it becomes.
When supply tightens or demand increases significantly the spot price
or the earlier futures contracts increase in value compared to furtherout futures contracts. This price change overrides the normal carrying
charges and puts the market into a state known as backwardation. There
are two spread opportunities that can be initiated when backwardation
occurs.
Both opportunities can be executed but there is an issue of timing involved. The window of opportunity is small. If you miss when a market
moves from backwardation to contango and back again, it will be more
difficult to take advantage of these opportunities.
The first spread opportunity requires that you catch a market moving into backwardation immediately. Your charting software should be
programmed to alert you automatically when the front month increases
value above further out months. Once the alert kicks in you can take
advantage of the narrowing of the gap by going long the front month
and selling the further out month; sound fanliliar-old crop/new crop
spread- anyone?
The second spread opportunity involves a market going back to contango from backwardation. Once the front month begins to decrease in
value, moving from a backwardation market to a regular contango market,
there is an opportunity to short the front month and buy the further out
month; a widening of the spread.
Unlike the old crop/new crop spread, backwardation is not limited to
the grains. It can occur at any time in any market. Therefore, it is necessary
to scour most, if not all of the tradable markets, in order to catch either
their transition from contango to backwardation or from backwardation to
contango. This is one of the simplest exploitable spreads around, but the
drawback is that it is labor intensive.
The basic rules of spread trading still apply, though. Make sure that the
difference between the front month in a backwardation is at a premium
if you are long the spread, and at a discount if you are short the spread.
Plus your profits still derive themselves from a difference in the contract
prices.

Price Convergence with Cash and Futures
Futures contracts have a set expiration date, on which the price of the
futures contract is meant to converge with the underlying asset or cash

150

BASIC STRATEGIE

position's price. This convergence ofthe cash price and the futures price i
known as the narrowing of the basis.
For those entities that use futures contracts to hedge their cash pc
sition this narrowing of the basis is essential. If a farmer grows soybean
he hopes that the cash price will continue upward while the short future
contract is simply a hedge, a protective position designed to lose moneJ
A soybean processor that wants to protect himself from prices moving ur
ward will buy a futures soybean contract, while still hoping that prices wil
drop. If the price moves up they will gain it back in the futures market; i
the price gets weaker they are ready to lose money in the long futures pc
sition so that they can make cheaper purchases in the cash market. Botl
types of hedgers really have nothing to lQse as the futures price gets close
to the cash value.
For retail traders this experience can be duplicated by playing th
convergence of the spot currency market with the futures currenc:
markets. For example, by following the 50-day MA you can determine th
currency market's trend or counter-trend. Once the trend is determine4
the spot market can operate as the primary position and the futures Cal
operate as the hedge, with the goal of holding on to the position until the:
reach the same price.
There is a drawback to playing a convergence spread, though. I1
2008 the Commodity Futures Trading Commission's Agricultural Commit
tee had an emergency meeting regarding the convergence of grain fu
tures and their cash counterparts. Apparently, for several years the effect
of carrying charges and speculation were so severe that even at expira
tion the futures grain prices were not matching up with the cash price~
This blatant discrepancy effectively ruined the cash grain market's abil
ity to instill confidence in the commodity exchange mechanism of priC4
discovery.
This problem, while currently concentrated in the grain markets, ma;
portend the future of all commodities exchanges around the world. A sig
nificant number of money managers have been putting investors into fu
tures contracts because of global inflation in the value of raw materials
This is a new phenomenon. Add to this new phenomenon the fact that;
number of new exchanges are starting up mirror commodity contracts i1
order to siphon off liquidity from major exchanges around the world an<
you have a recipe for price discovery disaster occurring.
The nwnber of hedgers out there is finite . All of the exchanges com
pete with each other for a limited number of hedgers looking to protec
themselves, while speculators flood contracts with cash as they look fo
new opportunities to profit from worldwide demands. There is little doub
that the convergence spread between futures and the cash market day!
are numbered.

Everything in Its Season

151

CONCLUSION
Spread trading is not perfect. On one hand, you have the opportunity to
profit. On the other, you could end up with one successful side that doesn't
really cover the losing side, or with two losing sides. Spread trades are
also difficult to unwind. While your margin is inexpensive when the spread
trade is on, if you try to unwind the spread you are immediately hit with
new margin requirements. Finally, many ofthe traditional seasonal spreads
are simply too well known to be as effective as they may have been years
ago. Still, with all of these imperfections spread trading makes for a more
than decent risk management strategy.
When done right spread trading allows a trader to take advantage of arbitrage opportunities. Those are the small discrepancies in price that speculators thrive on financially. Spread trading can reduce the most expensive
markets to reasonable margins. Plus, spread trading transcends exchanges
or trading vehicles. The spot price can be spread with the futures price. Different futures months can be spread against each other and options can be
spread in any number of ways. Spread trading is simply one of the most versatile ways to trade for a trader of any skill level. The majority of the problems with spread trades can be resolved quite easily. As long as a spread
trade is either backed up by another risk management strategy or there
are stop limits in place to protect a spread trade from going terribly wrong
there is no reason to fear this exciting risk management technique.

(; II \ .- 'I' ..: RIO

Gunning for
Premiums with
Cover ed Options

any of the risk management strategies that have been explored
throughout the book have involved some form of option. Whether
it be a strangle strategy, a synthetic futures, or an option as a stop
purchasing, options have played an integral role in helping to manage the
risk associated with a core futures or spot position. Depending on the market and type of option this can mean thousands of dollars tied up in option
premiums, with the realistic expectation that part or all of the premium
could be lost. This chapter is designed to help you change gears. For once
the option premium can actually come to you.
The premium generated from option selling is real money that can add
to any trader's bottom line. The difficulty comes in being able to decide
which option to sell and how to sell it in the same protected way that you
use for any of the other risk management strategies in the book. As we have
learned time and time again, options are inherently different from futures
and spot transactions. Successfully navigating those differences can help
any trader generate a consistent cash flow from option premiums.
It was difficult to make the decision to include a chapter on option
selling in a book primarily focused on futures , spot, and cash markets. Yet,
in the end no book that is designed to manage risk can truly discriminate
against one of the most touted limited risk trading strategies around, selling options. Major Commodity Trading Advisors (CTAs) have made a name
for themselves by solely selling options. Their strategies range from selling
options that are about to expire to devising option strategies that exploit
volatility or the lack thereof in stock indexes. Yet some flaws and misinformation accompany option selling. Many of these flaws can be overcome

M

153

154

BASIC STRATEGIES

with the proper approach, but unfortunately the misinformation has to be
attacked head-on.

PROBLEMS WITH SELLING OPTIONS
Option selling should be a straightforward endeavor. See an option you
want to sell, sell it, wait until expiration, and collect the premium. You
would think that it was as easy as pie, but for some reason it isn't. There are
margin requirements along with inherent flaws in the structure of options
that make the prospect of selling them dif!icult. Couple these problems
with the claims that 70 percent to 80 percent of options are worthless when
they expire and it's no wonder that the average trader who ventures into
selling options quickly finds himself in over his head.

Margin Requirements
While selling options should be a simple, if not easy, proposition, somehow
selling options does not live up to the hype. In fact, while promoters tout
the benefits of selling options and the easy money to be had, the truth is
a lot less glamorous. Selling options is actually considered just as risky, if
not more so, than buying options.
Technically the structure of an option does not favor option sellers.
Once an option is sold it exposes the seller to unlimited risk. At the same
time it only offers the option seller the meager profit that the premium has
to offer. This unlimited exposure has led clearing firms in the futures market to require that option sellers have enough capital to protect themselves
in case the market moves against them. Amounts may vary from clearing
firm to clearing firm, but as a standard rule they will require the same margin amount as if you had initiated a futures contract.
For example, if you sold an option on a full-size S&P 500 contract, you
would be able to collect $5,000 in premiums, but you would be required
to put up $22,000 in margin for the privilege. So, even though it is assumed
that selling options is superior to buying them, the simple fact that they can
be so cost prohibitive leads traders to avoid them.
What about the collected premium?
The $5,000 in premium is treated like any futures or options position.
Options are traded marked to market. If the volatility is on your side they
will increase in value, if the volatility is against you they will decrease in
value. The only time that the premium is actually considered yours by the
clearing firms is when the option has expired and the trader is no longer

Cunn ing for Premiums with Covered Options

155

exposed to unlimited risk. Until then the premium is not counted as part of
your overall count value.

Poor Returns
The requirement that traders put up margin when they sell options also
leads to what can be perceived as poor returns in comparison to the risk involved. If a trader has to expose $22,000 in margin in order to make $5,000,
knowing full well that he could lose the entire $22,000 and possibly more
if he's wrong, then it most likely is not the best possible bet to take. Add to
this the fact that, depending on when the option expires, the trader's capital can be tied up for months at a time, which can make option selling a
discouraging endeavor for small traders.
If you are a small trader and you only have a $5,000 account your opportunities to sell options decrease even more. You would be lucky if you
could comfortably sell an option worth $500, or 10 percent of your account
value. This $500 income would not change the average retail trader's life.
For an account of this size there may only be four or five successful opportunities every year. If you are lucky and have no losses you could net
$2,000 to $2,500 annually.
This definitely does not coincide with the one for two rule discussed
in previous chapters. In fact, it's inverted risk-risk two to gain one.
In addition, the possible annual returns look dismal, ranging from 40 to
50 percent, which is not what the average trader signs up for. This negative
feeling toward such returns may not be warranted, though. A return of 40
to 50 percent a year exceeds the historical returns of the S&P 500, while at
the same time beating out any bond, junk or otherwise. Even if the option
selling strategy works out twice a year, producing $1,000 in premium based
on this scenario, a 20 percent return would still exceed the stock market's
past returns.
It goes without saying that eTAs that trade an option selling strategy
benefit from a different financial scale than does the average retail trader.
Small profits for a eTA accumulated over time turn out to be great gains.
For a larger entity, 20 percent on $50 million yields a $10 million return.
This kind of profit would put a eTA among some the top traders in the
world.
The unglamorous nature of option selling leads retail traders to misunderstand the performance. There is no comparison between collecting
option premiums and aggressively catching moves in the market. One is a
passive action and the other is proactive. Therefore, selling options should
not be put in the same category as buying options or obtaining a cash or
spot position.

156

BASIC STRATEGIES

Percentage of Options that Expire Worthless
The perpetual myth is that 80 to 90 percent of options expire worthless. If
this is the case, selling options should be like shooting fish in a barrel. Yet
something is amiss. Not every trader, professional or retail, sells options.
In fact, option selling is considered a specialized field that only a few select
traders focus on. This simple fact gives a true glimpse into the nature of
selling options, their difficulty, and the reality of the number of contracts
that do actually expire worthless. In Chapter 14 we take a more advanced
approach to selling options and further break down the option expiration
myth.

COVERED OPTION TRADING
Selling options has problems-margin requirements, poor returns, and expiration issues-yet this can still be an effective way to generate income
and increase returns when done correctly. All of the problems are tied to
selling options by themselves, or naked. When an option is sold naked there
is no counter side to limit the unlimited risk that it has. The secret, like every other risk management strategy in this book, is to couple the selling
of an option with another strategy designed, intentionally or unintentionally, to protect the trader from any erratic moves. This is known as covered
option trading.
Without question selling options can have a positive affect on a trader's
account. It is a simple income-producing trading strategy that can powerboost any trader's returns. To make it a successful enterprise, a trader is
required to do two things-control his profit expectations and increase the
vigilance over his trading. Then it becomes a simple endeavor to implement
the strategies in this chapter.
Traditionally a covered option is the combination of an option and a
futures or cash position. The option is sold against the futures or cash position to generate income. Yet there are many different ways to cover an
option. Options can be staggered with multiple strike prices or they can be
tied to other risk management strategies such as Collars or Synthetic Options. However selling covered options is approached, it diminishes if not
eliminates many of the problems that selling naked options can have.
