
Litecoin’s network is often used as a testing ground for Bitcoin software
updates, given that Litecoin is nimbler than Bitcoin because it stores a fraction
of the monetary value. It has also been used as the basis for other cryptoassets.
At the start of 2017, litecoin was the fourth largest cryptoasset in terms of
network value.20

Ripple
Ripple is a cryptocurrency created in 2004 by Ryan Fugger, a web developer
from Vancouver, British Columbia. Work on the project actually began before
Satoshi and Bitcoin,21 when Fugger was searching for a way to allow communities to create a system of money out of chains of trust. For example, if Alice
trusts Bob, and Bob trusts Candace, and Candace trusts Dave, then Alice can
send money to Dave (whom she doesn’t know) by first transferring value to
Bob, who transfers that same value to Candace, who takes that value and deposits it in Dave’s account. Using this concept, payments can “ripple” through the
network via these chains of trust. Fugger called this concept RipplePay.com.
While Fugger’s RipplePay did grow to 4,000 users,22 it did not catch fire the
way bitcoin did. In August 2012, Fugger was approached by the notable financial innovators Chris Larsen and Jed McCaleb. Larsen had founded E-Loan—
one of the first companies to provide access to mortgage loans online—and
Prosper, a leader in the peer-to-peer lending space.23 McCaleb was the founder
of Mt. Gox, the biggest bitcoin and cryptocurrency exchange in the world at
that time.
Fugger announced the partnership: “I believe if anyone can develop the
Ripple concept on a global scale, they can. Their system is based on a Bitcoinstyle blockchain, much as we have discussed here over the last few years as an
interesting possibility, but with a novel miner-less consensus mechanism that
allows transactions to be confirmed near instantaneously.”
Interestingly, in November 2012, this statement from Fugger appeared on
Bitcoin’s dedicated communication channel, a Reddit-style site called bitcointalk, under the heading, “Is Ripple a Bitcoin Killer or Complementer? Founder
of Mt. Gox will launch Ripple.”24 This would not be the last time someone
asked if a new upstart would be a Bitcoin-killer.
Not long after, in the spring of 2013, it was announced that Larsen and
McCaleb’s company that developed the Ripple protocol, then called OpenCoin,
had secured funding from prestigious venture capitalists, including Andreessen
Horowitz.25 This was a notable development—a sign of approval of the viability

Burniske 01.indd 41

9/9/17 1:12 PM

42 CRYPTOASSETS

of cryptocurrency from one of the most revered venture capital firms in the
world. OpenCoin would later rebrand as Ripple Labs.
Ripple’s technology did several new things. It didn’t have miners. Instead
it utilized a consensus algorithm that relied on trusted subnetworks to keep a
broader decentralized network of validators in sync. That’s enough to confuse
any innovative investor. What’s important to recognize is that Ripple’s consensus algorithm relied on trust of some sort, which was vastly different from
Bitcoin’s proof-of-work design that assumed anyone could be a bad actor.
Ripple also used trusted gateways as endpoints for users, and these gateways could take deposits and redeem debts in all kinds of asset pairs, including
traditional fiat currency. This built off Fugger’s original chains of trust but on
a global multi-asset scale. Routing a transaction through Ripple’s network was
like sending a packet of information through the Internet, pinging amid connected servers.
If users didn’t want to rely on these gateways, Ripple also had its own native
cryptocurrency, called ripples, and commonly referred to as XRP. XRP could
be used to connect two endpoints in the Ripple network that didn’t have a
connection of trust.
But this is where the Ripple team ran into contentious territory, even if the
concept was born of good intentions. Since there was no mining process, there
was no means to distribute XRP. Instead, 100 billion units of XRP were created
and initially held by Ripple Labs (at that time, OpenCoin). While there was,
and still is, intent to distribute all this XRP to seed use, as of writing the majority of XRP is still under the control of Ripple Labs.
This has led to mistrust of the Ripple protocol from much of the cryptocurrency community. Vitalik Buterin, who would later go on to create Ethereum,
wrote in February 2013 for Bitcoin Magazine: “Because of the monetary distribution, OpenCoin may well face an uphill battle convincing the community
that they can be trusted.”26
Pricing services like CoinCap don’t list XRP’s total available supply as the
100 billion that Ripple lists27 but only include the ripple that has thus far been
distributed to the public, which is just north of 37 billion units.28 A word to the
wise for the innovative investor: with a new cryptocurrency, it’s always important to understand how it’s being distributed and to whom (we’ll discuss this
further in Chapter 12). If the core community feels the distribution is unfair,
that may forever plague the growth of the cryptocurrency.
Ripple has since pivoted away from being a transaction mechanism for the
common person and instead now “enables banks to send real-time interna-

Burniske 01.indd 42

9/9/17 1:12 PM

The Taxonomy of Cryptoassets

43

tional payments across networks.”29 This focus plays to Ripple’s strengths, as it
aims to be a speedy payment system that rethinks correspondent banking but
still requires some trust, for which banks are well suited.

Dogecoin
A somewhat comic cryptocurrency addition arrived on December 8, 2013
(less than two weeks after bitcoin hit a notable high of $1,242) in the form of
dogecoin.30 Dogecoin was launched as a riff off Doge the dog, which Wired
magazine had pegged as 2013’s meme31 of the year.32 Doge was a Shiba Inu dog
whose image with captions of an internal monologue went viral.
Dogecoin was initially floated as a joke. Jackson Palmer, who worked in
the marketing department of Adobe’s Sydney offices and was a cryptocurrency enthusiast, sent the tweet: “Investing in Dogecoin, pretty sure it’s the
next big thing.”33 After a positive reception to what was intended as a joke, he
bought the domain, Dogecoin.com. Jackson’s activity caught the attention of
Billy Markus, a Portland, Oregon-based developer who aspired to launch a
new cryptoasset. In Markus’s own words: “The first thing I said was, ‘This is so
funny.’ Then I said, ‘I should just make this coin.’”34
Markus used Litecoin’s code to derive Dogecoin, thereby making it one
more degree of separation removed from Bitcoin. If Litecoin was a child of
Bitcoin, then Dogecoin was a grandchild of Bitcoin. A notable variation was
that Dogecoin planned to issue a much larger amount of dogecoin than bitcoin
or even litecoin. The plan was to have 100 billion dogecoin in circulation after
1.5 years.35 That would equal nearly 5,000 times more coins than bitcoin when
it reaches its maximum supply.
Markus’s team later chose to issue roughly 5 billion coins each year, and this
created a vastly different supply schedule from those of the deflationary bitcoin
and litecoin. Dogecoin mostly gained traction amongst Internet tippers. The
supply schedule has kept the value of a single dogecoin to a fraction of a cent,
which is suited to its intended use case. As Palmer stated in an early interview:
It’s not taking itself as seriously, it’s not being used by people
worrying about whether they’ll become rich . . . It’s something to
share for thanks or kudos.36

Palmer’s marketing expertise was another feature that differentiated
Dogecoin from other cryptocurrencies at the time. The Dogecoin commu-

Burniske 01.indd 43

9/9/17 1:12 PM

44 CRYPTOASSETS

nity raised $50,000 via Dogecoin to send the Jamaican bobsled team to the
Olympics; raised another $55,000 via Dogecoin to sponsor a NASCAR driver
who raced with the Dogecoin logo at the Talladega Speedway; and raised
money to support clean water projects in Kenya via Doge4Water, making the
donation via a Twitter-based tip service.37
While Dogecoin may have been launched as a joke, its association with a
wildly popular Internet meme, its lighthearted origins, and its savvy focus on
slick marketing led to a quick rise, and its network value grew to $70 million
only seven weeks after launch.38 But that did not last long. As of March 2017,
its network value had dipped to slightly above $20 million.
This bizarre merger of a cryptoasset and pop culture is not surprising considering 2013 was the year that the price of bitcoin ranged from $13 in January
to over $1,000 in early December.39 The power and enthusiasm of Dogecoin’s
user community shouldn’t be dismissed, even if we encourage the innovative
investor to do ample due diligence on it as an investment. While Dogecoin had
its flaws, it continues to exist and has taught the cryptocurrency space valuable
lessons about gathering community support in an Internet era.
AURORACOIN: ICELAND’S NATIONAL CRYPTOCURRENCY?
Much like the anonymous Satoshi, Auroracoin’s creator also had a fictitious name: Baldur Friggjar Óðinsson. Baldur created Auroracoin based on
Litecoin’s code and decided to “air-drop” the cryptocurrency to Icelanders
with the intent of providing 50 percent of all auroracoin in existence to residents. The hope was that such a distribution would jump-start national use
of the cryptocurrency.
A key to Baldur’s plan was his access to the government’s national identification system, which led speculators to believe mistakenly that Auroracoin
was sponsored by the Icelandic government. In anticipation of the airdrop,
speculators bid Auroracoin’s network value over $1 billion.40
By the time the airdrop began on March 25, 2014, speculators had sobered
somewhat, and Auroracoin was hovering just over a $100 million network
value. By the end of the month, it would be below $20 million, as citizens
receiving Auroracoin moved to sell it on exchanges to turn a profit.41 Along
with the drop in price was a loss of confidence and enthusiasm for the new
cryptocurrency. Few, if any, retailers were willing to accept auroracoin, and
it was soon considered a “failed experiment.”42 Some also saw it as a scam

Burniske 01.indd 44

9/9/17 1:12 PM

The Taxonomy of Cryptoassets

45

perpetrated by its creator. To this day, auroracoin takes the cake as the cryptocurrency with the grandest plan for widespread usage throughout one country.
It continues to exist, with a handful of Icelandic developers working to
revive the concept and the technology. In 2016, ads began to appear throughout Iceland’s capital city of Reykjavik heralding the return of Auroracoin. As a
result, beers in Iceland were being purchased for auroracoin,43 and many other
retail establishments began to utilize the cryptocurrency. Then a scandal hit
and the prime minister was forced to resign because of his involvement with
the Panama Papers.44 This led to the growth in popularity of a political party
known as the Pirate Party, which had a favorable view on cryptocurrencies.45
Suddenly there was speculation46 that Iceland could revisit the potential for
Auroracoin and its role as a national cryptocurrency.47 As acceptance grows
and politics change, it will be interesting to watch what happens next for the
Icelandic cryptocurrency.
Auroracoin is a cautionary tale for both investors and developers. What
began as a seemingly powerful and compelling use case for a cryptoasset suffered from its inability to provide value to the audience it sought to impact.
Icelanders were given a cryptocurrency with little education and means to
use it. Unsurprisingly, the value of the asset collapsed and most considered
it dead. Nevertheless, cryptocurrencies rarely die entirely, and Auroracoin
may have interesting times ahead if its developer team can figure out a way
forward.

THE RACE FOR PRIVACY: DASH, MONERO, AND ZCASH
While Litecoin, Ripple, and Dogecoin all added elements to the mix of what it
meant to be a cryptocurrency, they did not provide the privacy that many early
Bitcoin advocates yearned for. It is a common misconception, even for Bitcoin,
that it is an anonymous payment network. Bitcoin transactions are pseudonymous, and since every transaction can be seen by any third party, there is a
wealth of information for anyone who would like to pinpoint who the participants are. Inarguably, someone who wants to use a currency for illegal activity
is better off using cash than bitcoin. With every transaction, bitcoin leaves an
indelible digital mark in Bitcoin’s blockchain.
Currently, three notable cryptocurrencies put privacy and anonymity first.
In order of launch, they are Dash, Monero, and Zcash. All three pursue this
value proposition differently. Monero is likely the most relevant to the inno-

Burniske 01.indd 45

9/9/17 1:12 PM

46 CRYPTOASSETS

vative investor, with a sustained record of operations, solid cryptography,
and a sound issuance model. While Dash has merits, it has contested origins.
Meanwhile, Zcash uses some of the most bleeding-edge cryptography in the
world, but it is one of the youngest cryptoassets in the book and suitable only
for the most experienced cryptoasset investors.

Monero and Its Predecessor, Bytecoin
Monero is a descendent of a lesser-known cryptocurrency called Bytecoin.
Bytecoin was crafted quite differently from Bitcoin, using technology known
as CryptoNote. Similar to Litecoin’s scrypt, CryptoNote’s block hashing algorithm aims to avoid the specialization and therefore centralization of the miners supporting the network by requiring an order of operations that favors
general purpose chips like the CPUs found in PCs.48 Beyond a focus on more
egalitarian proof-of-work, CryptoNote provided untraceable payments,
unlinkable transactions, and blockchain analysis resistance.49 Adam Back is
considered the inspiration for Satoshi’s proof-of-work algorithm and is president of Blockstream, one of the most important companies in the Bitcoin
space. In March 2014, he tweeted about CryptoNote, saying it was one of the
few ideas in the cryptocurrency space outside of Bitcoin that held a “defensible
rationale for existence.”50
Some may ask why Monero stole the show from Bytecoin. Bytecoin’s blockchain and the issuance of its currency, bytecoin, started on July 4, 2012, but it
did not become widely known until almost two years later when an announcement for it appeared on bitcointalk.org on March 12, 2014.51 People were
intrigued but confused about why the Bytecoin team had taken two years
to make it public. Some argued that it was because the developers wanted to
make sure the technology was soundly running before drawing more attention. Others argued that something more insidious was at play, called a
premine (pronounced “pre-mine”).
Bytecoin planned to issue 184.46 billion bytecoin via the mining process,
but by the time it was made publicly known, 150 billion bytecoin were already
in existence, more than 80 percent of the total supply.52 A classic premine,
Bytecoin had quietly released a large amount of the coins in a manner that
disadvantaged the broader community. Bitcoin and the permissionless blockchain movement was founded on principles of egalitarian transparency, so
premines are widely frowned upon. While they still occur, many are scams
that the innovative investor should be wary of. A key differentiator between

Burniske 01.indd 46

9/9/17 1:12 PM

The Taxonomy of Cryptoassets

47

a scam and good intent is the communication and rationale of the developer
team behind the issuance model.
On April 8, 2014, the bitcointalk.org user named “eizh,” who would later
become a Monero developer, made the comment, “I’m surprised someone
hasn’t started a clone for a fairer distribution and active development.”53 On
April 9, 2014, only a month after the public announcement of Bytecoin, an
involved user known as “thankful_for_today,” made a post to bitcointalk.org
titled “Bitmonero—a new coin based on CryptoNote technology—launched,”
with the intent to launch mining in nine days.54 BitMonero was quickly
renamed Monero and often referred to as XMR.
The most defining feature of Monero is its use of ring signatures, a cryptographic technology that had been evolving since 1991.55 Monero’s ring signatures are best explained in the context of Bitcoin. In Bitcoin, to create a transaction, a known individual signs off on the balance of bitcoin he or she is
trying to send. In Monero, a group of individuals signs off on a transaction
creating a ring signature, but only one in the group owns that monero. The
CryptoNote website puts it succinctly:
In the case of ring signatures, we have a group of individuals,
each with their own secret and public key. The statement proved
by ring signatures is that the signer of a given message is a member of the group. The main distinction with the ordinary digital
signature schemes is that the signer needs a single secret key,
but a verifier cannot establish the exact identity of the signer.
Therefore, if you encounter a ring signature with the public keys
of Alice, Bob and Carol, you can only claim that one of these
individuals was the signer but you will not be able to pinpoint
him or her.56

While many are suspicious of such privacy, it should be noted that it has
tremendous benefits for fungibility. Fungibility refers to the fact that any unit
of currency is as valuable as another unit of equal denomination. A danger for
bitcoin, especially for balances known to have been used for illegal activity, is
that if an exchange or other service blacklists that balance, then that balance
becomes illiquid and arguably less valuable than other balances of bitcoin.
While subtle, losing fungibility could be the demise of a digital and distributed
currency, hurting the value of all units, not just the ones used for illegal activity. Fortunately, this is one problem that Monero does not have to deal with.

Burniske 01.indd 47

9/9/17 1:12 PM

48 CRYPTOASSETS

Monero’s supply schedule is a hybrid of Litecoin and Dogecoin. For monero,
a new block is appended to its blockchain every 2 minutes, similar to Litecoin’s
2.5 minutes. Like Dogecoin, however, it will have a small degree of inflation for
its entire life beginning in May 2022, when 0.3 monero will be released every
minute, totaling 157,680 monero every year. At that time, there will be 18.1
million units of monero outstanding, so inflation in that first year will be only
0.87 percent.57 As we head further into the future, that inflation decreases as
the base of monero outstanding increases. Interestingly, in 2040 there will be
nearly equivalent units of bitcoin and monero outstanding, and in the period
of 2019 to 2027, Monero’s rate of supply inflation will be lower than Bitcoin’s,
but in all other periods the opposite is true.58
Expectedly, Monero’s ability to create privacy in transactions was a technological breakthrough that was recognized within the cryptoasset community
and the markets. By the end of 2016, Monero had the fifth largest network
value of any cryptocurrency and was the top performing digital currency in
2016, with a price increase over the year of 2,760 percent. This clearly demonstrates the level of interest in privacy protecting cryptocurrency. Some of that
interest, no doubt, comes from less than savory sources.

Dash
Another cryptocurrency targeting privacy and fungibility is Dash. It launched
its blockchain a few months before Monero, on January 19, 2014. Its lead
developer, Evan Duffield, created Dash by forking the Bitcoin protocol and
implementing a coin focused on privacy and speedy settlement of transactions. The Dash white paper that Duffield coauthored outlined his intent:
A crypto-currency based on Bitcoin, the work of Satoshi
Nakamoto, with various improvements such as a two-tier incentivized network, known as the Masternode network. Included are
other improvements such as Darksend, for increasing fungibility
and InstantX which allows instant transaction confirmation without a centralized authority.59

Dash, however, got off to a rocky start. Instead of a premine, it had what is
called an instamine, where 1.9 million coins were created in the first 24 hours.
Considering that three years later, in January 2017, there were just north of 7
million coins, this was a significant error that drastically benefited the com-

Burniske 01.indd 48

9/9/17 1:12 PM

The Taxonomy of Cryptoassets

49

puters that supported the Dash network in the first 24 hours, notably Duffield
himself.
Duffield reasonably pleaded best intentions, arguing that, “I was working a
very challenging day job while working on Dash in the first couple weeks. So I
was putting out fires every night, keeping tabs on Dash during the day (while
getting yelled at by my boss when he caught me a couple times).”60
From our perspective, if there is a major disruption or error in the launch
of a cryptocurrency that significantly skews its distribution, then that cryptocurrency should be relaunched. In fact, Duffield easily could have relaunched
Dash, especially considering the network was only days old when the instamine began to be widely talked about, but he chose not to. It wouldn’t have
been unusual to relaunch, given that other cryptocurrencies have done so via
the forking of original code. The creators of Monero, for example, specifically
chose not to continue building off Bytecoin because the premine distribution
had been perceived as unfair.

Zcash
The most interest in a cryptocurrency in 2016 was generated by a new crypto­
asset called Zcash. The Bitcoin and blockchain community has always been
excited by new developments in anonymity and privacy, but Zcash took that
excitement to a new level, which upon issuance drove the price through the
roof. Like bitcoin’s, zcash’s issuance model was ethical. However, when bitcoin
launched from zero units outstanding, next to no one knew about it. When
zcash launched from zero units outstanding, it seemed like the entire cryptouniverse knew about it, and everyone wanted some.
The scarcity in initial supply combined with the hype pushed the price of
zcash to astronomical levels. It quickly reached $1,000 per coin, which at the
time was even higher than the price of bitcoin. At one point on Poloniex, a
popular cryptoasset exchange, the price reached 1 zcash for 3,299 bitcoin, or
almost $2 million at the time.61 However, by the end of 2016, the hysteria had
dissipated and zcash was trading in a stable range of $45 to $50.
The Zcash team is led by Zooko Wilcox, whom we have mentioned prior as
an early employee at David Chaum’s DigiCash. Through his time at DigiCash
and longstanding involvement in cryptography and cryptoassets, Zooko has
become one of the most respected members in the community. A key innovation of Zcash is the use of a type of zero-knowledge proof, referred to as
zk-SNARKs, which allow transactions to be sent between parties without any
