
When it comes to discipline, scalpers must be absolutely ruthless in both taking profits and
losses. If you’re in it to make only a few pips on each trade, you can’t afford to lose much
more than a few pips on each trade. The overall strategy is obviously based on being right
more often than being wrong, but the key is not risking more than a few pips on each trade.
The essential motto is “Take the money and run” — repeated a few dozen times a day.
Jobbing the market requires an intuitive feel for the market. (Some practitioners refer to it as
rhythm trading.) Scalpers don’t worry about the fundamentals too much. If you were to ask a
scalper for her opinion of a particular currency pair, she would likely respond along the lines of
“It feels bid” or “It feels offered” (meaning, she senses an underlying buying or selling bias in the
market — but only at that moment). If you ask her again a few minutes later, she may respond in the

opposite direction.
Successful scalpers have absolutely no allegiance to any single position. They couldn’t care less if
the currency pair goes up or down. They’re strictly focused on the next few pips. Their position is
either working for them, or they’re out of it faster than you can blink an eye. All they need is
volatility and liquidity.

Adapting jobbing to online currency trading
Retail traders are typically faced with bid/offer spreads of between 1 and 4 pips. Although
this makes jobbing slightly more difficult, it doesn’t mean you can’t still engage in short-term
trading — it just means you’ll need to adjust the risk parameters of the style. Instead of
looking to make 1 to 2 pips on each trade, you need to aim for a pip gain at least as large as
the spread you’re dealing with in each currency pair. The other basic rules of taking only
minimal losses and not hanging on to a position for too long still apply.

Here are some other important guidelines to keep in mind when following a short-term
trading strategy:
Trade only the most liquid currency pairs, such as EUR/USD, USD/JPY, EUR/GBP,
EUR/JPY, and EUR/CHF. The most liquid pairs will have the tightest trading spreads
and will be subject to fewer sudden price jumps.
Trade only during times of peak liquidity and market interest. Consistent liquidity and
fluid market interest are essential to short-term trading strategies. Market liquidity is
deepest during the European session when Asian and North American trading centers
overlap with European time zones — about 2 a.m. to noon eastern time (ET). Trading in
other sessions can leave you with far fewer and less predictable short-term price
movements to take advantage of.
Focus your trading on only one pair at a time. If you’re aiming to capture second-bysecond or minute-by-minute price movements, you’ll need to fully concentrate on one pair
at a time. It’ll also improve your feel for the pair if that pair is all you’re watching.
Preset your default trade size so you don’t have to keep specifying it on each deal.
Look for a brokerage firm that offers click-and-deal trading so you’re not subject to
execution delays or re-quotes. (See Chapter 13 for more on broker executions.)
Adjust your risk and reward expectations to reflect the dealing spread of the
currency pair you’re trading. With 1- to 4-pip spreads on most major pairs, you
probably need to capture 3 to 10 pips per trade to offset losses if the market moves against
you.

Avoid trading around data releases. Carrying a short-term position into a data release
can be risky because prices may gap sharply after the release, blowing a short-term
strategy out of the water. Markets are also prone to quick price adjustments in the 15 to 30
minutes ahead of major data releases as nearby orders are triggered. This can lead to a
quick shift against your position that may not be resolved before the data comes out.

Keeping sight of the forest while you’re in the trees
Trading a short-term strategy online also requires individual traders to invest more time and effort
in analyzing the overall market, especially from the technical perspective.

If you pursue a short-term trading strategy online, where dealing spreads can equal profit
targets, you need to be right by a larger margin. To give yourself a better chance of capturing
slightly larger short-term moves, always know where you stand in longer charting
timeframes. By all means, use tick, one-minute, and five-minute charts to refine your trade
timing, entry, and exit. But be aware of the larger picture suggested by hourly, multihour, and
daily charts because they’re going to hold the keys to the larger directional movements.

Medium-term directional trading
If you thought short-term time frames were exceptionally brief, medium-term time frames aren’t
much longer. Medium-term positions are typically held for periods ranging anywhere from a few
hours to a day or two, but usually not much longer. Just as with short-term trading, the key
distinction for medium-term trading is not the length of time the position is open, but the amount of
pips you’re seeking/risking.
Where short-term trading looks to profit from the routine noise of minor price fluctuations, almost
without regard for the overall direction of the market, medium-term trading seeks to get the overall
direction right and profit from more significant currency rate moves. By the same token, mediumterm traders recognize that markets rarely move in one direction for too long, so they approach the
market with well-defined trade entry and exit strategies.
Almost as many currency speculators fall into the medium-term category (sometimes referred to as
momentum trading and swing trading) as fall into the short-term trading category. Medium-term
trading requires many of the same skills as short-term trading, especially when it comes to
entering/exiting positions, but it also demands a broader perspective, greater analytical effort, and
a lot more patience.

Capturing intraday price moves for maximum effect
The essence of medium-term trading is determining where a currency pair is likely to go over the

next several hours or days and constructing a trading strategy to exploit that view. Medium-term
traders typically pursue one of the following overall approaches, but there’s also plenty of room to
combine strategies:
Trading a view: Having a fundamental-based opinion on which way a currency pair is
likely to move. View trades are typically based on prevailing market themes, like interest
rate expectations or economic growth trends. View traders still need to be aware of
technical levels as part of an overall trading plan.
Trading the technicals: Basing your market outlook on chart patterns, trend lines, support
and resistance levels, and momentum studies. Technical traders typically spot a trade
opportunity on their charts, but they still need to be aware of fundamental events, because
they’re the catalysts for many breaks of technical levels.
Trading events and data: Basing positions on expected outcomes of events, like a central
bank rate decision or individual data reports. Event/data traders typically open positions
well in advance of events and close them when the outcome is known (also known as buy
the rumor/sell the fact, or vice versa).
Trading with the flow: Trading based on overall market direction (trend) or information
of major buying and selling (flows). To trade on flow information, look for a broker that
offers market flow commentary, like that found in FOREX.com’s Forex Insider
(www.forex.com/forex_research.html).

When is a trend not a trend?
When it’s a range. A trading range or a range-bound market is a market that remains confined
within a relatively narrow range of prices. In currency pairs, a short-term (over the next few
hours) trading range may be 20 to 50 pips wide, whereas a longer-term (over the next few days to
weeks) range can be 200 to 400 pips wide.
For all the hype that trends get in various market literature, the reality is that most markets trend no
more than a third of the time. The bulk of the time they’re bouncing around in ranges,
consolidating, and trading sideways.

If markets reflect all the currently known information that’s available, they’re going to
experience major trends or shifts only when truly new and unexpected information hits the
market. On a day-to-day basis, incoming economic data and events usually result in an
adjustment of prices only within a prevailing range, rather than a breakout, but that’s enough
for medium-term traders to take advantage of the opportunity.

Taking what you get from the market

Medium-term traders recognize that sizeable price movements and trends are more the exception
than the rule. So rather than selling and holding in the case of a downtrend, for example, they’re
looking to capitalize on the 50- to 150-point price declines that make up the overall downtrend.
The key here is that medium-term traders will take profit frequently and step back to reassess
market conditions before getting back in.

Although medium-term traders are normally looking to capture larger relative price
movements — say, 50 to 100 pips or more — they’re also quick to take smaller profits on the
basis of short-term price behavior. For instance, if a break of a technical resistance level
suggests a targeted price move of 80 pips higher to the next resistance level, the medium-term
trader is going to be more than happy capturing 70 to 80 percent of the expected price move.
They’re not going to hold on to the position looking for the exact price target to be hit. It goes
without saying that it’s better to catch 75 percent of something than 100 percent of nothing.

Long-term macroeconomic trading
Long-term trading in currencies is generally reserved for hedge funds and other institutional types
with deep pockets. Long-term trading in currencies can involve holding positions for weeks,
months, and potentially years at a time. Holding positions for that long necessarily involves being
exposed to significant short-term volatility that can quickly overwhelm margin trading accounts.

With proper risk management, individual margin traders can seek to capture longer-term
trends. The key is to hold a small enough position relative to your margin that you can
withstand volatility of as much as 5 percent or more. Mini accounts, which trade in lot sizes
of 10,000 currency units, are a good vehicle to take advantage of longer-term price trends.
For example, let’s say you’re of the view that the euro is going to weaken due to the high debt
levels of some of the member countries and the potential for a sovereign bond default. EUR/USD
is trading around 1.3500, for this example, and you think it’s heading to 1.1000 or even lower. But
if EUR/USD strengthens above 1.4500, you think the debt crisis will have been resolved and
you’d want to exit the trade. In this case you’re risking 1,000 pips to gain 2,500 pips. For a 10,000
EUR trade size, that works out to a risk of losing $1,000 (10,000 × 0.1000 [1,000 EUR pips] =
USD 1,000) or gaining $2,500 (10,000 × 0.2500 [2,500 EUR pips] = USD 2,500.)

Identifying the macro elements that lead to long-term trends
Long-term trading seeks to capitalize on major price trends, which are in turn the result of longterm macroeconomic factors. Before you embark on long-term speculation, you want to see how
some of the following macroeconomic chips stack up:

Interest rate cycles: Where are the two currencies’ relative interest rates, and where are
they likely to go in the coming months? Narrower interest-rate differentials will tend to
help the lower-yielding currency and hurt the higher-yielding currency; wider interest-rate
differentials will help the higher-yielding currency and hurt the lower-yielding one.
Economic growth cycles: What’s the outlook for relative growth over the next several
months? An economy that is in an expansionary phase of growth is likely to see higher
interest rates in the future, which would support that currency. An economy that is showing
signs of slowing may see interest rate expectations lowered, hurting the currency in the
process.
Currency policies: Are the currencies considered to be excessively overvalued or
undervalued by the major global trading powers? Is the G20 or national
government/central bank agitating for changes in a currency’s value?
Structural deficits or surpluses: Do the currencies have any major structural issues that
tend to see currencies weaken or strengthen, such as fiscal deficits/surpluses or trade
deficits/surpluses?

Trading around a core position
Just because you’re trading with a long-term view doesn’t mean you can’t take advantage of
significant price changes when they’re in your favor in the medium term. Trading around a core
position refers to taking profit on a portion of your overall position after favorable price changes.
You continue to hold a portion of your original position — the core position — and look to
reestablish the full position on subsequent market corrections. Remember: It never hurts to take
some money off the table when you’re winning.

Taking partial profit on a long-term position works best when the currency pair you’re
trading is reaching significant technical levels, such as multiday or multiweek highs. If the
trend of the currency pair you’re holding is displaying a channel on the charts, taking partial
profit near the top of the channel in an uptrend or near the channel bottom in a downtrend is
one way of judging when to take partial profit.
The risk with trading around a core position is that the trend may not correct after you’ve taken
partial profit, never giving you the chance to reestablish your desired full position. But you’re still
holding the core of your position, and because the market hasn’t corrected, it means your core
position is doing just fine.

Carry trade strategies
A carry trade happens when you buy a high-yielding currency and sell a relatively lower-yielding
currency. The strategy profits in two ways:

By being long the higher-yielding currency and short the lower-yielding currency, you
can earn the interest-rate differential between the two currencies, known as the
carry. If you have the opposite position — long the low-yielder and short the high-yielder
— the interest-rate differential is against you, and it is known as the cost of carry.
Spot prices appreciate in the direction of the interest-rate differential. Currency pairs
with significant interest-rate differentials tend to move in favor of the higher-yielding
currency as traders who are long the high yielder are rewarded, increasing buying interest,
and traders who are short the high yielder are penalized, reducing selling interest.
So let me get this straight, you may be thinking: All I have to do is buy the higher-yielding
currency/sell the lower-yielding currency, sit back, earn the carry, and watch the spot price move
higher? What’s the catch?

Right you are. There is a catch, and the catch is that downside spot price volatility can
quickly swamp any gains from the carry trade’s interest-rate differential. The risk can be
compounded by excessive market positioning in favor of the carry trade, meaning a carry
trade has become so popular that everyone gets in on it. When everyone who wants to buy has
bought, why should the price continue to move higher? Even more daunting, if the price
begins to reverse against the carry trade, it may trigger a panic exodus out of the trade,
accelerating the price plunge. Take a look at Figure 10-1 to get an idea of the trends that can
develop around carry trades as well as the sharp setbacks that can happen along the way.
Carry trades usually work best in low-volatility environments, meaning when financial markets
are relatively stable and investors are forced to chase yield. Keep in mind that carry trades need to
have a significant interest-rate differential between the two currencies (typically more than 2
percent) to make them attractive. And carry trades are definitely a long-term strategy, because
depending on when you get in, you may get caught in a downdraft that could take several days or
weeks to unwind before the trade becomes profitable again.

Figure 10-1:
AUD/JPY
trends higher
in line with
carry trade
fundamentals
(Australia’s
interest rates
are much
higher than
Japan’s), but
it meets sharp
setbacks
along the
way.

Source: www.eSignal.com

In the wake of the Great Financial Crisis of 2008–2009, major central banks slashed their
benchmark interest rates to zero or nearly zero, and many of them are still around that level as of
this writing. Near-zero interest rates have eliminated much of the appeal of carry trades in
currencies, and it looks to be several years until interest rates are normalized and attractive
differentials put carry trades back in vogue.

Trading on Auto-Pilot
Earlier in Chapter 3, I referred to algorithmic trading systems and indicated these were mainly the
tools of hedge funds and other institutional players. The rapid growth of the online Forex market
has spawned a diverse array of automated trading systems for individual traders, known as Expert
Advisors, or EAs for short. EAs represent yet another trading approach and one that can blend
many of those I outlined earlier.
EAs come in all shapes and sizes with varying complexity or number of rules. (EAs are also
known as rules-based trading systems, meaning whenever the systems’ rules are satisfied, a trade
signal is generated.) Some are fully automated (nondiscretionary), firing off trades whenever the
rules of the program are met by market movements. Others generate trade alerts and require a
manual confirmation by the user before executing a trade (discretionary). Some EAs can be bought
off the shelf in a ready-to-go, black-box format, meaning you’re using a trading model designed by
someone else that usually doesn’t allow for modifications. Other EAs come in a build-it-yourself

format, allowing you to select the rules you’d like to apply to your trading.

Potential inputs to drive an EA system
There are literally unlimited inputs that can be combined to form the set of rules that go into an
EA, but most of them are usually based on technical indicators or price developments. Here are
some of the more popular inputs:
Crossovers: These could be crossovers of anything from moving averages (like a 5
minute and 15 minute for a short-term EA, or 9 day and 21 day for a medium term EA) to
momentum oscillators (like stochastics or MACD, again of any timeframe).
New price highs or lows: Some trend-following models generate trade signals when new
highs or lows are made, usually based on the close of a defined time period, like a new
high on an hourly closing basis.
Time periods: Some EAs will function only during specified time periods, say during
peak liquidity hours in the London afternoon/NY morning. Still others will function only
around specified data releases, when a directional move may be more likely.
Daily or weekly closes: Longer-term systems may look for a daily close above/below a
daily moving average, Ichimoku lines, or some other technical approach.
Because many EAs are based on a combination of rules, there’s virtually a limitless number of
possibilities. Here’s an example of one possibility for the long side of a short-term EA: Buy
EUR/USD (specify amount) on a new high 5 minute close, if 5 minute MACD is positive, and
GBP/USD is also making new high 5 minute close, and 5 minute RSI is <80, and time is between
0600ET-1200ET, and day is between Tuesday and Thursday. The EA would also include
something similar for the sell side and also a set of rules for exiting the trade. Note these rules are
untested; I just wanted to give you an idea of how an EA might look.

Caveat emptor on models
EAs carry their own set of risks and limitations. Just as you wouldn’t put on a blind fold
and go for a Sunday drive, you shouldn’t expect an EA to deliver a smooth ride all the time.
EAs are all based on historical relationships between the various parameters, or rules. And
as the ultimate risk disclaimer goes, “past performance is no guarantee of future results.”

EAs rely on back-testing to evaluate their potential future trading results. Back-testing is a
process where a set of rules is applied to historical price data to see how the system would
have performed. The results are by definition hypothetical, and don’t reflect real-world

trading conditions (e.g., execution slippage, re-quoting, or price gaps, to mention just a few).
To be sure, there is much to commend historical relationships, and I certainly employ them in
my own mental models for forex trading. You need to be aware that they can break down, and
factor that into your trading plan.
One important result of using an EA is that if you go with a nondiscretionary system, you’re taking
emotion out of the picture, and that may improve your trading discipline, which I look at next.

Developing Trading Discipline
No matter which trading style you decide to pursue, you need an organized trading plan, or
you won’t get very far. The difference between making money and losing money in the forex
market can be as simple as trading with a plan or trading without one. A trading plan is an
organized approach to executing a trade strategy that you’ve developed based on your market
analysis and outlook.
Here are the key components of any trading plan:
Determining position size: How large a position will you take for each trade strategy?
Position size is half the equation for determining how much money is at stake in each
trade.
Deciding where to enter the position: Exactly where will you try to open the desired
position? What happens if your entry level is not reached?
Setting stop-loss and take-profit levels: Exactly where will you exit the position, both if
it’s a winning position (take profit) and if it’s a losing position (stop loss)? Stop-loss and
take-profit levels are the second half of the equation that determines how much money is at
stake in each trade.
That’s it — just three simple components. But it’s amazing how many traders, experienced and
beginner alike, open positions without ever having fully thought through exactly what their game
plan is. Of course, you need to consider numerous finer points when constructing a trading plan,
and I focus on them later in this chapter. But for now, I just want to drive home the point that
trading without an organized plan is like flying an airplane blindfolded — you may be able to get
off the ground, but how will you land?
And no matter how good your trading plan is, it won’t work if you don’t follow it. Sometimes
emotions bubble up and distract traders from their trade plans. Other times, an unexpected piece of
news or price movement causes traders to abandon their trade strategy in midstream, or midtrade,
as the case may be. Either way, when this happens, it’s the same as never having had a trade plan
in the first place.
