
10

Candles

never before available. After you explore with me the beauty and power
of the candle charts, you will never be able to go back to a bar chart.
This book will be a self-contained unit. I will not go over all the candle
patterns; that is done in my first book. However, I will sometimes make
referencesto the more obscureor rare patterns discussedin my first book.
This is for the benefit of those who are familiar with all the candle patterns. Do not worry if you have not heard of the pattern before; it will
not detract from the discussionof the chart.
Numerous charts and exhibits will quickly and clearly make evident
how candlescan enhanceyour trading, timing, and investing. As shown
throughout the book, candles can be merged with any other form of
technical analysis. Consequently, I have included charts that show how
to fully utilize the candles' power alone, or when joined with other technical tools.
Just as important as the recognition of candle patterns is an understanding of the relationship of the candle patterns to the overall technical
picture. Chapter 4 focuses on this vital, but often neglected, aspect. In
this chapter, I will addresshow trading with the candles must take into
account the risk and reward of a potential trade, the stop-out level, and
the overall trend. I will also address the value of adapting to changing
market conditions.
Before I discusstrading with candles, I want to clarify a few points.
In the futures market, selling short is as common as buying long. This is
not true in the stock markeU most equity traders look to buy. Consequently, throughout this book when I use the term "bearish" or "selling" when discussinga stock, you should not think of necessarilygoing
short. Instead, view it as an area to protect existing longs by such means
as selling covered calls, moving up protective stops, or offsetting all or
some longs.
But this book is about more than candles. In Part II I reveal the disparity index, the three-line break, renko charts, and kagi. These techniques, popular in Japan,are virtually unknown in the west and, unlike
candle charting, little has been written about these techniques, even in
Japan.
The disparity index comparesthe closeto a moving average.It is used
in the same manner as dual moving averages,but it has an interesting
wrinkle to it. The three-line break, kagi charts, and renko charts are
popular among Japanesetraders. They are excellent technical tools for
determining the trend of the market.
Whether you use the techniques discussedin this book individually
or in combination with one another, you will discover that they provide
dynamic advantagesfor those who make use of their tremendouJ potential.

11
Note to Reader: Many charts in this book, especially in Part II, were
drawn using technical analysis software from Metastock by EQUIS International (Salt Lake City, UT). A coupon for Metastock Software is
included at the end of the book.

CHAPTER2

THE BASICS
d\sdt.
"lnattentionis Fatal"

HISTORY OF THE CANDLE CHARTS
rF

I Hg fapanesewere the first to use technical analysisto trade one of the
world's first futures markets-rice futures. The Japanesestarted trading
in this market in the 1600s.Interestingly, the birth of the Japaneserice
futures market was a consequenceof the country's military history.
After a century of internal warfare among the daimyo ( Japanesefeudal lords), General Tokugawa Ieyasu, who ruled from Edo (the ancient
name of Tokyo), won the famous battle at Sekigaharain 1600.This was
the battle that helped unify fapan. Tokugawa thereafterbecameShogun
of all ]apan. After his victory over the daimyo, General Tokugawa cleverly required that all the feudal lords live in Edo with their families. When
the lords returned to their respective provinces, the entire family stayed
at Edo as hostage.The feudal lord's main sourceof income was rice that
was collectedas tax from the peasantswho worked their land. Sincethis
rice could not be transported from the daimyo's provinces all the way to
Edo, they set up warehousesin the port city of Osaka to store their rice.
Becauseall these powerful daimyo lived so closeto eachother in Edo,
they attempted to outdo one another in lavish dress,mansions,and other
"The Edoite
luxuries. This was reflectedby a popular saying at the time,
will not keep his earnings overnight." This showed that the daimyo in
Edo were seen as spendthrifts with an expensive lifestyle. To maintain
this lifestyle, the daimyo sold rice from their warehouse in Osaka; sometimes thev even sold rice from future harvests. The warehouse would

13

t4

Candles

issue receiptsfor this future rice. These were called empty rice contracts
("empty tice" since the rice was not in anyone's physical possession)
and they were sold in the secondarymarket. This was the beginning of
one of the world's first futures market.
Trading in rice futures engenderedmuch speculation,and it was from
this speculationthat Japanesetechnical analysiswas born. The most famous trader in the rice futures market was Homma. Homma traded in
the rice futures markets in the 1700s.He discoveredthat although there
was a link between the supply and demand of rice, the markets were
also strongly influenced by the emotions of the traders. Becauseof this,
there were times when the market perceived a harvest as different from
the actual. He reasonedthat studying the emotions of the market could
help in predicting prices. In other words, he understood that there was
a differencebetween the value and the price of rice. This differencebetween price and value is as valid today with stocks, bonds, and currencies, as it was with rice centuries ago.
In the material I had translated, candle charts are often called Sakata
charts in referenceto the port city of Sakata,where Homma lived. However, basedon my research,it is unlikely that Homma used candlecharts.
As will be seen later, when I discussthe evolution of the candle charts,
it was more likely that candle charts were developed in the early part of
the Meiji period in japan (in the late 1800s).
whether or not Homma invented charting is open to question. But
determining whether one person, in this caseHomma, createdcharts or
used them to trade is not too important. There is a tendency in the West
to be preoccupied with imposing authorship to one person. It is more
likely that the candle charts we know today and all the techniques associatedwith them tended to be a processof cumulative authorship by
severalpeople over many generations.Even if he did not invent candle
charts, Homma understood that the psychologicalaspect of the market
was critical to his trading success.And it appearsthat the earliestforms
of technical analysis in Japan dealt more with the psychology of the
market rather than charts.
In the book, The Fountainof GoId-The ThreeMonkeyRecordof Money,
purportedly written by Homma, the author states: " After 60 years of
working day and night I have gradually acquired a deep understanding
of the movements of the rice market." The book then goes on to say:
"when all are
bearish, there is cause for prices to rise. when everyone
is bullish there is causefor the price to fall." This phrase echos what is
now called contrarian opinion, a tool important to so many traders. yet,
The Fountainof Gold-The ThreeMonkey Recordof Money, was written in
1755.It is amazing that before America was a nation, the Japanesewere
trading with contrarian opinion! The title had me perplexed for some

The Basics

"three monkeys" in the
time. I did not understand the reference to the
title. Then in some of my translated material, it said something about
comparing successfultrading to being like the three monkeys we all knew
as children-see, hear, and speak no evil. Then it dawned on me; the
title of the book, The Fountainof Gold-The ThreeMonkeyRecordof Money,
"fountains of gold," they should
means that for traders to get to their
have the characteristicsof these three monkeys. Specifically:
L. "See no evil"-when yolJ seea bullish (bearish) trend, do not get
caught up in iU consider it an opportunity to sell (buy).
In the Fountain of Gold, it states that there is always a rotation of Yang
(bullishness) and Yin (bearishness). This means that within each bull
market, there is a bear market, and within a bear market, there is a bull
market. This view may explain why fapanesecandlestick techniquesplace
so much emphasis on reversal, rather than continuation, patterns.
2. "Hear no evil"-when
on it.

vou hearbullish or bearish news, don't trade

It may be safer to take a position after you determine how the market
reacts to a news item rather than initiating a trade when the news is
released. Bernard Baruch, the millionaire stock speculator and presiden"are not
tial advisor, stated that what is important in market fluctuations
the events themselves, but the human reactions to these events." Exhibit
2.L shows that how the market reactsto the news may be just as important as the news itself.
The Iraqi War started in the first few days of August 1990.Yet, Exhibit
2.L shows that gold stalled at$425.This $425levelwas gold's high earlier
in 1990. This failure to take out the prior high was in spite of the fact
that there was a Mideast War. Gold's failure to rally on suPPosedly
bullish news sent out volumes of information about the state of the market. To wit, be careful of a market that fails to rally on bullish news. Note
that after this failure at$425, gold lost its luster as prices returned to their
pre-Mideast crisis price near $360 within two months.
"whispering tactics."
Also be aware of what the Japaneserefer to as
This is what they call the spreading of false news to trick others in the
market. Try to keep out of rumor buffeted markets. Isaac Newton once
said, "I can calculate the motion of heavenly bodies but not the madness
of people." Why get involved with the madnessof people?
3. "Speak no evil"-don't
do in the market.

speakto others about what you are going to

15

16

Candles

EXHIBIT 2.1. Observing the Market's Reactionto FundamentalNews, GoldDecember 1990,Daily

Has the following happened to you? Basedon your analysis,you decide
to buy into a market. You tell someone else of this decision, but they say
something negative about that market. Becausethere is always a degree
of uncertainty, you get nervous and decide not to buy. Then, of course,
the market rallies.
If you have carefully studied the market, it is safer not to speak to
anyone about what you plan on doing unless you believethey have better
insight than you. Look only to the market to give you direction. In one
of my favorite passagesinThe Fountainof Gold, it says that ". . . to learn
about the market ask the market-only then can you become a di:testable
market demon." Isn't that a wonderful phrase? Wouldn't you love to
becomea detestable
marketdemon?The colorful languageused by the Japaneseis just one reason their technical techniquesare so exciting.
Let us turn our attention to Exhibit 2.2, which illustrates the path that
ultimately led to the candle charts.
Evolution of the Candle Charts
A. Stopping chart-Also referred to as a point, line, or star chart. This
was the earliest type of chart and was drawn by joining only closing

The Basics

17

(A)
StoppingCharts(close)

/,4.v J .f+
t
(B)
PoleCharts(High-Low)

:tr
(D)
AnchorChart(High-Low-Close-Open)

(c)
Bar Chart (High-Low-Close)

tf', fi
,f
(E)
CandleChart(High-Low-Close-Open)

+ { ' {+ t ".,iTt:l' i l t T
H

o*

'4

H

EXHIBIT 2.2. The Evolutionary
Path to the Candlestick Charts

prices. Th"y were named stopping charts becausethat was where the
prices stopped by the end of the session. Stopping charts were drawn
with either diagonal lines or horizontal lines connecting the closes.
B. Pole chart-Its name is derived from the fact that the lines resemble
poles. This chart added the extra information imparted by showing the
range between the high and the low of the session.Theselines show not
only the direction of the move, but the extent of the move for each
session.
C. Bar chart-This is a combination of the stopping and pole charts.
D. Anchor chart-Named as such because it looks like an anchor.
Based on legend, these charts originated in the Kyoho Era (from 1716)
from the fact that the usual meeting place for rice traders was port cities.
The anchor chart was an important event in the evolution of charting.
With this chart, the opening price was now added and created a chart
with an open, high, low, and close. Just as important, and something
unique to fapanesecharts, was that the relationship between the open
and closewas pictorially displayed. The top and bottom of the anchor's
vertical line are the high and low of that session.The horizontal line of
the anchor line is the open. The arrow of the anchor line is the close. If
the close is higher than the open, the arrow points up; if the close is
lower, the arrow points down.

18

C-andles

E. Candle chart-The next improvement from the anchor charts was
the candle chart. Although they are shrouded in mystery, the candles
probably started in the early part of the Meiji period (from 1868).As can
be seen in Exhibit 2.28, candle lines were a refinement of the anchor
chart. The use of black and white real bodies made analyzing the underlying supply and demand situation visually easier to determine than
with the anchor charts.
With the arrival of the candle charts, Japanesetechnical analysis flowered as people started thinking in terms of signals and trading strategies.
Patterns were developed and market prediction became more important.
Trying to forecast the market took on extra importance in the L870swhen
the fapanese stock market opened.
As can be seen from Exhibit 2.2, bar charts were one of the ancestors
of the more evolved and productive candle charts. In essence,this means
that since most of the West is still using bar charts, it is also using a less
evolved form of charting than the Japaneseare with candle charts.

CONSTRUCTION OF THE CANDLE LINE
The first step in using the power of candles is learning how to construct
the basic candle line. Exhibits 2.3. and 2.4 show that the candle line
consists of a rectangular section and two thin lines above or below this
section. We see why these are named candlestick charts; the individual
lines often look like candles with their wicks. The rectangular part of the
candlestick line is called the real body. lt represents the range between
the session'sopen and close.When the real body is black (e.g., filled in),
it shows that the closeof the sessionwas lower than the open. If the real
body is white (that is, empty), it means the close was higher than the
oPen.

White Real Body

Black Real Body

EXHIBIT 2.3. White Real Bodv

EXHIBIT 2.4. Black Real Body

I

F.-==*

The Basics

The thin lines above and below the real body are the shadows.The
shadows represent the session'sprice eXtremes.The shadow above the
real body is referred to as the upper shadow and the shadow under the
real body is the lower shadow. Accordingly, the peak of the upper shadow
is the high of the sessionand the bottom of the lower shadow is the low
of the session.
Candle charts can be used throughout the trading spectrum, from
daily, to weekly, and intra-day charting. For a daily chart, one would use
the open, high, low, and close of the session. For a weekly chart, the
candle would be composedof Monday's open, then the high and low of
the week, and Friday's close.On an intra-day basis,it would be the open,
high, low, and close for the chosen time period (i.e., hourly).
Exhibit 2.3 shows a strong sessionin which the market opened near
the low and closed near its high. We know that the close is higher than
the open becauseof the white real body. Exhibit 2.4 illustrates a long
black candlestick.This is a bearish sessionin which the market opened
near its high and closed near its low.
The |apanesefocus on the relationship between the open and close.
This makes sense;probably the two most important prices of the day are
the open and close. It is therefore surprising that American newspapers
have openings for futures prices, but not for stocks. A member of the
Nippon TechnicalAnalysts Associationtold me that he found it unusual
that U.S. newspapers do not have opening stock prices; the Japanese
have the openings in their papers. He said that he did not know why
the Americans disregard the openings.
I would expect that just as almost all technical software vendors now
carry candle charts, so it may be that as candles become more popular
in the equity market, newspapers may, by popular request, carry stock
openings. Until then, in order to obtain the data needed to draw the
candles (the open, high, low, and close)you need to use a data vendor
service.These servicesfurnish prices on disks or through modems. The
data supplied from a data vendor are then transferred into a technical
analysis software package that will draw the candles based on these
data.
A note of caution: Some data vendors who do not have the actual
opening price of a stock default to the prior session's close as today's
open. This, in my opinion, is not valid. You must have the true open to
draw an accuratecandle line. Although an open on a stock will usually
not be much different from the prior close, there are some candle patterns
in which a higher or lower opening (compared to the prior close) gives
valuableinformation. A data vendor that includes actual opens on stocks
is Dial Data (Brooklyn, NY).

t9

20

REAL BODY AND SHADOWS
While an individual candle usually should not be used alone to place a
trade, the size and color of its real body and the length of its shadows
can provide a wealth of information. Specifically,looking at a line's real
body and shadows gives a sense of the supply and demand situation.
This section will discuss this basic idea, and explain how to use real
bodies and shadows to get clues about the market's underlying strength
or weakness.By using the candle lines discussedbelow, you may be able
to get an early and tentative indication of market direction.

THE REAL BODY
In ]apanese charts, even an individual candle line has meaning, and one
of the first clues about the vitality of the market is to look at the size and
color of the real body. To the |apanese, the real body is the essenceof
the price movement. This is a critical and powerful aspectof candle charts;
through the height and color of the real body, candle charts clearly and
quickly display the relative posture of the bulls and the bears.
This section will be segmented according to the decreasingsize of the
real bodies. The first part of this section will consequently focus on long
white and then long black real bodies. After these, attention is turned to
candles with small real bodies called spinning tops. These diminutive
real bodies display a market where the bulls and bears are in a tug of
war.
This section will conclude with candles that have no real bodies. These
candles have the same (or nearly the same) opening and closing. Such
candles, called doji (pronounced d6-gee), reflect a market in a state of
transition. Doji, as you will see later, can be an important market signal.
Long White Real Bodies
A long white real body is defined as a session that opens at or near the
low of session,and then closesat or near the session'shigh. The close
should be much higher than the open. For example, if a stock opens at
$40 and closes at $4ff/v it would not be a long white candle since the
opening and closing range were relatively close. For a long white candle
to have meaning, some Japanesecandlestick traders believe that the real
body should be at least three times as long as the previous day's real
body.

The Basics

, I
I

I

t ,

tl

'il"",'
EXHIBIT 2.5. Long White at a Low Price Level

Long White at a Low Price Level
A single candle by itself is rarely sufficient reason to forecast an immediate reversal. It could, however, be one clue that the prior trend may
be changing. For instance, as shown in Exhibit 2.5, a long white real
body at a low price range may be the first sign of a market bottom. A
long white candle shows that the ability to rise is virtually unimpeded
by the bears. The closer the close is to the high of the session,and the
longer the white real body, the more important the candle line.
Exhibit 2.6 shows that in late \991.,this stock was stabilizing near $5.
The first sign that the bulls were attempting to take control was the
unusually long white real body at 1. Note how this real body was extended compared to the prior real bodies. However, an almost equally
long, but black real body (for information on black real bodies, seepage
29), on the week after candle L showed that the bears still had enough
force to offset the bulls' advance. In early \992, another unusually long
white candle, shown at2, appeared.This white candle opened on its low
(since it does not have a lower shadow) and closed on its high (since it
does not have an upper shadow). Such a candle is exceptionallystrong,
notably when it is so elongated as in candle 2. Candle 3 was another
strong white candle that propelled prices to new multi-month highs. With
the tall white candles L and 2 both appearing near $5, we can see the
significanceof that $5 support area. Consequently,when prices corrected
back to this level in fuly and August 1992, it is not surprising that the
selloff stopped near $5.
Long White Candle Confirms Support
As shown in Exhibit 2.7, the tall white candle that rebounds from support
underscoresthe aggressivenessof the bulls. A long white candle that
bouncesoff a support area such as a trendline, a moving average,or a.
retracement level gives extra confirmation of that support.

21

22

Candles

AURORAELECTRIC- WEEKLY

I6. U

15.0
t5.5

15.5
t5.0
14.5
t4.0
t3.5
13.0
12.5
L2.O
11.5
I1.0
t0.5
10.0
9.5
9.0
8.5

t-5.

t4.5
14.0
13.5
13.0
12.5
L2.O
tt.5
tt.0

.il

U.U
7 q

7.O
b.5

b.u

5.0
4.5

6 n

4.5

'9?

rLE

IlAY JUN JUL

0cT NOU

MetaStockby EQUTSInt'l

EXHIBIT 2.6. Long white Candle at Low price, Aurora Electric-weekly

I

t l

"'I
Movingaverage

Priorlows
as support
2.7.

10.0
9.5
s.0
8.5
8.0
7.5
7.O
5.5
5.0
5.5

u,[,1i"-r+,0[|u*'*"**'?*'rolro*'**ru+n

'91

DGIIBIT

i-u.5

Long White Candle Confirms Support

'93 TLH

23

The Basics

GENLRE_ DAILY

130
123

130
L29
128
L?7
L?6
L25
L24
L23
122

,ilr,
,il[|il+'

i-o
L1A

127
L26
LZ5

L?4
LZ3

'
*l*,.,ofo,,
il*t,
oo,[o,oo

122
L?I
120
I 15

118
LL7
i-rb

LL4
113
LLz
111
LL0
109
108
LO7

'92

LZL

120
119
118
TL7
lt6
tt5
114
lt?
