 Behavioral financial economists understand the feedback mechanisms that lead investors to follow the crowd. When Internet stocks were consistently rising, it was hard not to get swept up in the euphoria—especially when all your friends were boasting of their spectacular stock-market profits. A large literature documents the pervasiveness of the influence of friends on one’s investment decisions. Robert Shiller and John Pound surveyed 131 individual investors and asked what had drawn their attention to the stock they had most recently purchased. A typical response was that a personal contact, such as a friend or relative, had recommended the purchase. Hong, Kubik, and Stein provided more systematic evidence as to the importance of friends in influencing investors’ decisions. They found that social households—those who interact with their neighbors, or attend church—are substantially more likely to invest in the market than nonsocial households, controlling for wealth, race, education, and risk tolerance. 
 Any investment that has become a topic of widespread conversation is likely to be especially hazardous to your wealth. It was true of gold in the early 1980s and Japanese real estate and stocks in the late 1980s. It was true of Internet-related stocks in the late 1990s and early 2000 and condominiums in California, Nevada, and Florida in the first decade of the 2000s. 
 Invariably, the hottest stocks or funds in one period are the worst performers in the next. And just as herding induces investors to take greater and greater risks during periods of euphoria, so the same behavior often leads many investors simultaneously to throw in the towel when pessimism is rampant. The media tend to encourage such self-destructive behavior by hyping the severity of market declines and blowing the events out of proportion to gain viewers and listeners. Even without excessive media attention, large market movements encourage buy and sell decisions that are based on emotion rather than on logic. 
 Because of bad timing, the typical mutual-fund investor earns a rate of return from the stock market far below the returns that would be earned by simply buying and holding a market index fund. This is because investors tend to put their money into mutual funds at or near market tops (when everyone is enthusiastic) and to pull their money out at market bottoms (when pessimism reigns). The exhibit on page 255 makes the point. In the chart, we see that net new cash flow into mutual funds peaked when the market reached a high in early 2000. At the market trough in the fall of 2002, investors pulled their money out. In late 2008 and early 2009, just at the bottom of the market during the financial crisis, more money went out of the market than ever before. You can see the effects of this timing penalty in the chart. 
 There is also a selection penalty. At the peak of the market in early 2000, money flowed into “growth”-oriented mutual funds, typically those associated with high technology and the Internet, and flowed out of “value” funds, those funds holding old-economy stocks that sold at low prices relative to their book values and earnings. Over the next three years, the “value” funds provided generous positive returns to their investors, and “growth” funds declined sharply. During the third quarter of 2002, after an 80 percent decline from the peak of the NASDAQ Index, there were large redemptions out of growth funds. Chasing today’s hot investment usually leads to tomorrow’s investment freeze. 

 2. Avoid Overtrading 
 Behavioral finance specialists have found that investors tend to be overconfident in their judgments and invariably do too much trading for their own financial well-being. Many investors move from stock to stock or from mutual fund to mutual fund as if they were selecting and discarding cards in a game of gin rummy. Investors accomplish nothing from this behavior except to incur transactions costs and to pay more in taxes. Short-term gains are taxed at regular income tax rates. The buy-and-hold investor defers any tax payments on the gains and may avoid taxes completely if stocks are held until distributed as part of one’s estate. Remember the advice of the legendary investor Warren Buffett: Lethargy bordering on sloth remains the best investment style. The correct holding period for the stock market is forever. 
 The cost of overtrading is quite substantial. Using data on the trading behavior of approximately 66,000 households during the period 1991–96, Barber and Odean found that the average household in the sample earned an annual return of 16.4 percent, while the market returned 17.9 percent. In contrast, the annual return to the portfolio of households that traded the most was only 11.4 percent. In other words, the portfolios of those households that traded the most substantially underperformed more passive benchmarks. In addition, men tended to be more overconfident and trade far more frequently than women. Odean’s advice to investors: If you are contemplating making a stock trade (and you are married), ask your wife whether you should do it. 
 3. If You Do Trade: Sell Losers, Not Winners 
 We have seen that people are far more distressed at taking losses than they are overjoyed at realizing gains. Thus, paradoxically, investors might take greater risks to avoid losses than they would to achieve equivalent gains. Moreover, investors are likely to avoid selling stocks or mutual funds that went down, in order to avoid the realization of a loss and the necessity of admitting that they made a mistake. On the other hand, investors are generally willing to discard their winners because that enables them to enjoy the success of being correct. 
 Sometimes, it is sensible to hold on to a stock that has declined during a market meltdown, especially if you have reason to believe the company is still successful. Moreover, you would suffer double the regret if you sold it and the stock subsequently went up. But it makes no sense to hold on to losing stocks such as Enron and WorldCom because of the mistaken belief that if you don’t sell, you have not taken a loss. A “paper loss” is just as real as a realized loss. The decision not to sell is exactly the same as the decision to buy the stock at the current price. Moreover, if you own the stock in a taxable account, selling allows you to take a tax loss, and the government will help cushion the blow by lowering the amount of your taxes. Selling your winners will add to your tax burden. 
 4. Other Stupid Investor Tricks 
 Be Wary of New Issues. Do you think you can make lots of money by getting in on the ground floor of the initial public offering (IPO) of a company just coming to market? Particularly during the great Internet bubble that collapsed in 2000, it seemed that IPOs were the sure path to riches. Some successful IPOs began trading at two, three, and (in one case) even seven times the price at which they were first offered to the public. No wonder some investors came to believe that getting in on an IPO was the easiest way to coin money in the stock market. 
 My advice is that you should not buy IPOs at their initial offering price and that you should never buy an IPO just after it begins trading at prices that are generally higher than the IPO price. Historically, IPOs have been a bad deal. In measuring all IPOs five years after their initial issuance, researchers have found that IPOs underperform the total stock market by about 4 percentage points per year. The poor performance starts about six months after the issue is sold. Six months is generally set as the “lock-up” period, where insiders are prohibited from selling stock to the public. Once that constraint is lifted, the price of the stock often tanks. 
 The investment results are even poorer for individual investors. You will never be allowed to buy the really good IPOs at the initial offering price. The hot IPOs are snapped up by the big institutional investors or the very best wealthy clients of the underwriting firm. If your broker calls to say that IPO shares will be available for you, you can bet that the new issue is a dog. Only if the brokerage firm is unable to sell the shares to the big institutions and the best individual clients will you be offered a chance to buy at the initial offering price. Hence, it will systematically turn out that you will be buying only the poorest of the new issues. There is no strategy I am aware of likely to lose you more money, except perhaps the horse races or the gaming tables of Las Vegas. 
 Stay Cool to Hot Tips . We’ve all heard the stories. Your uncle Gene knows about a diamond mine in Zaire that’s a guaranteed winner. Please remember that a mine is usually a hole in the ground with a liar standing in front of it. Your cousin’s sister-in-law Gertrude was told confidentially about an undiscovered little biotech company. “It’s a screaming bargain. It’s selling at only a dollar a share, and they’re ready to announce a cure for cancer. Think, for $2,000 you can buy 2,000 shares.” Tips come at you from all fronts—friends, relatives, the telephone, even the Internet. Don’t go there. Steer clear of any hot tips. They are overwhelmingly likely to be the poorest investments of your life. And remember: Never buy anything from someone who is out of breath. 
 Distrust Foolproof Schemes . You will be told by amateurs and professionals alike that schemes exist to pick the best fund managers and to keep you out of the market when prices are falling. The sad fact is that it can’t be done. Sure, there are portfolio strategies that in hindsight produced above-average returns, but they all self-destruct over time. There are even market-timing strategies that have been successful for years and even decades. In the long run, though, I agree with Bernard Baruch, a legendary investor of the early twentieth century, who said, “Market timing can only be accomplished by liars.” And Jack Bogle, a legend of the late twentieth century, has remarked, “I do not know of anybody who has done it [market timing] successfully and consistently.” 
 Investors should also never forget the age-old maxim “If something is too good to be true, it is too good to be true.” Heeding this maxim could have saved investors from falling prey to the largest Ponzi scheme ever: the Bernard L. Madoff fraud uncovered in 2008, in which $50 billion was said to have been lost. The real con in the Madoff affair is that people fell for the myth that Madoff could consistently earn between 10 and 12 percent a year for investors in his fund. 
 The “genius” of the fraud was that Madoff offered what seemed to be a modest and safe return. Had he offered a 50 percent return, people might well have been skeptical of such pie-in-the-sky promises. But consistent returns of 10 to 12 percent per year seemed well within the realm of possibility. In fact, however, earning such returns year after year in the stock market (or in any other market) is not remotely possible, and such claims should have been a dead giveaway. The U.S. stock market may have averaged over 9 percent a year over long periods of time, but only with tremendous volatility, including years when investors have lost as much as 40 percent of their capital. The only way Madoff could report such a performance was by cooking the books. And don’t count on the regulators to protect you from such fraudulent schemes. The SEC was warned that Madoff’s results were impossible, but the agency failed to act. Your only protection is to realize that anything that seems too good to be true undoubtedly is untrue. 
 DOES BEHAVIORAL FINANCE TEACH WAYS TO BEAT THE MARKET? 
 Some behavioralists believe that the systematic errors of investors can provide opportunities for unemotional, rational investors to beat the market. They believe that irrational trading creates predictable stock-market patterns that can be exploited by wise investors. These ideas are far more controversial than the lessons provided above, and we will examine some of them in the next chapter.

A Random Walk Down Wall Street 

 11 

 IS “SMART BETA” REALLY SMART? 
 The clairvoyant society of London will not meet Tuesday because of unforeseen circumstances. —An advertisement in the Financial Times 
 T HERE IS A new hotshot investment strategy in portfolio management called “smart beta.” With the implicit promise that it can improve portfolio performance, it has attracted hundreds of billions of dollars in assets and is growing by leaps and bounds. It is important that investors be aware of the strengths and weaknesses of “smart beta” strategies and the role they might play in their investment plans. 
 This chapter explains what “smart beta” is, what kinds of funds pursue this strategy, and why so many people are excited about it. It shows why “smart beta” flunks a safety test, and why it is not as smart as it claims to be. The chapter concludes that “smart beta” is not a smart way to go for the individual investor, and it argues that the tried-and-true approach—investing in low-cost, broad-based, capitalization-weighted index funds—is still the best way to build an investment portfolio. 
 WHAT IS “SMART BETA”? 
 There is no universally accepted definition of “smart beta” investment strategies. What most people who use the term have in mind is that it may be possible to gain excess (greater than market) returns by using a variety of relatively passive investment strategies that involve no more risk than would be assumed by investing in a low-cost Total Stock Market index fund. 
 I have argued in earlier chapters that the core of every investment portfolio should consist of low-cost, tax-efficient, broad-based index funds. Indeed, from the first edition of this book in 1973—even before index funds existed—I urged that they be created because such funds would serve investors far better than expensive, tax-inefficient, actively managed funds. By holding a portfolio containing all the stocks in the market, in proportion to their relative size or capitalization (the number of shares outstanding times the price of their shares), the investor would be guaranteed to receive the market return. Such a fund would minimize trading costs and be tax efficient. If one company doubled in value (and therefore its weight in the index increased), the investor’s portfolio would automatically reflect the change, and no trading would be required. Moreover, the substantial evidence cited in earlier chapters makes clear that index funds generally provide higher net returns for investors than actively managed funds that try to beat the market. 
 If an investor buys a low-cost Total (U.S.) Stock Market index fund, as I have recommended, she will receive the market rate of return as well as assume the risks of the characteristic ups and downs of the U.S. stock market. Remember that the volatility of the market is measured by beta and that the beta of the market is defined to have a value of 1, as presented in the discussion of the capital-asset pricing model in chapter 9 . Now what the “smart beta” investment managers would have us believe is that pure indexing, where each company has a weight in the portfolio given by the size of the company’s total capitalization, is not an optimal strategy. They claim that one doesn’t have to be a stock picker, as most active portfolio managers are, to be able to beat the market. Rather, you can manage a relatively passive (low turnover) portfolio to accomplish good results more dependably without assuming any extra risk. And you can do so at a fee well below that charged by active managers. The trick is to tilt (or flavor) the portfolio in some direction such as “value” versus “growth,” smaller versus larger companies, relatively strong stocks versus weak, and low-volatility stocks versus high-volatility ones. 
 Other tilts or flavors that have been suggested include “quality” (encompassing attributes such as stable sales and earnings growth, and low leverage), profitability, high dividends, and liquidity. Just as good cooking blends a number of food flavors, some “smart beta” portfolios mix two or more flavors together. There are portfolios that blend “value” and “small size” as well as those that mix several of the flavors mentioned above. Moreover, all this can be accomplished without increasing the expected volatility (beta level) of the “smart beta” portfolio. * 
 FOUR TASTY FLAVORS: THEIR PROS AND CONS 
 1. Value Wins 
 The Positives. In 1934, David L. Dodd and Benjamin Graham published a manifesto for investors that has attracted strong adherents, including the legendary Warren Buffett. They argued that “value” wins over time. To find “value,” investors should look for stocks with low price-earnings ratios and low prices relative to book value. “Value” is based on current realities rather than on projections of future growth. The resulting theory is consistent with the views of behavioralists that investors tend to be overconfident in their ability to project high earnings growth and thus overpay for “growth” stocks. 
 I have considerable intellectual sympathy with this approach. One of my cardinal rules of stock selection is to look for companies with good growth prospects that have yet to be discovered by the stock market and sell at relatively low earning multiples. This approach is often described as GARP, “growth at a reasonable price.” I have warned investors repeatedly about the dangers of fashionable high-multiple stocks. Particularly because earnings growth is so hard to forecast, it’s far better to be in low-multiple stocks. If growth does materialize, both the earnings and the earnings multiple will likely increase, giving the investor a double benefit. Buying a high-multiple stock whose earnings growth fails to materialize subjects investors to a double whammy. Both the earnings and the multiple can fall. 
 There is some evidence that a portfolio of stocks with relatively low earnings multiples (as well as low multiples of book value, cash flow, and/or sales) produces above-average rates of return even after adjustment for risk, as measured by the capital-asset pricing model. For example, the figure that follows shows the return from ten equal-sized groups of stocks, ranked by their P/E ratios. Group 1 had the lowest P/Es, Group 2 the second lowest, and so on. The figure shows that as the P/E of a group of stocks increased, the return decreased. 

 Source: Stern School of Business, New York University. 
 Another predictable pattern of return is the relationship between the ratio of a stock’s price to its book value (the value of the company’s assets as recorded on its books) and its later return. Stocks that sell at low ratios of price to book value tend to produce higher future returns. This pattern appears to hold for both U.S. and many foreign stock markets, as has been shown by Fama and French, whose work was described in chapter 9 . 
 The Negatives . Never forget that low P/E multiples and low price-to-book-value (P/BV) ratios can reflect risk factors that are priced into the market. Companies in some degree of financial distress are likely to sell at low prices relative to earnings and book values. For example, the big money center banks such as Citigroup and Bank of America sold at prices well below their reported book values during 2009, when it appeared that these institutions could quite possibly be taken over by the government and the stockholders’ equity be wiped out. 
 Portfolio Examples . It is possible to purchase portfolios that divide the broad stock-market portfolio into two components—the “value” and the “growth” components. The “value” component holds those stocks with the lowest price-earnings and price-to-book ratios. A representative “value” ETF sponsored by the Vanguard Group trades under the ticker symbol VVIAX. VVIAX is designed to track the performance of the CRSP U.S. LargeCap Value Index, a broadly diversified index made up predominantly of “value” stocks of large U.S. companies. It attempts to replicate the target index by investing all, or substantially all, of its assets in the stocks that make up the index, holding each stock in approximately the same proportion as its weighting in the index. The Vanguard VIGAX ETF tracks the performance of the “growth” component of the CRSP Large-Cap Index. “Value” and “growth” ETFs are available for smallcap broad indexes as well. 
 2. Smaller Is Better 
 The Positives . Another pattern that academic investigators have found in stock returns is the tendency over long periods of time for small-company stocks to generate larger returns than those of large-company stocks. Since 1926, according to Ibbotson Associates, small company stocks in the United States have produced rates of return about 2 percentage points higher than the returns from large-company stocks. The diagram that follows shows the work of Fama and French, who divided stocks into deciles according to their size. They found that decile 1, the 10 percent of stocks with the smallest total capitalization, produced the highest rates of return, whereas decile 10, the largest capitalization stocks, produced the lowest rate of return. Moreover, small firms tended to outperform larger firms with the same beta levels. 

 Portfolios of smaller firms have tended to produce higher rates of return than portfolios of larger firms. 
 Source: Fama and French, “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance (June 1992). 
 The Negatives . Nevertheless, we need to remember that small firms may be riskier than larger firms and deserve to give investors a higher rate of return. Thus, even if the “small-firm effect” were to persist in the future, such a finding would not violate market efficiency. A finding that small-company stocks outperform the stocks of larger companies on a risk-adjusted basis depends upon how one measures risk. Beta, the risk measure typically used in the studies that have found “excess” returns from small firms, may be an incomplete measure of risk. We cannot distinguish whether the abnormal returns are truly the result of inefficiencies, or whether they result from inadequacies in our measure of risk. The higher returns for smaller companies may simply be the requisite reward owed to investors for assuming greater risk. Moreover, the small-firm effect found in some studies may simply flow from what is called survivorship bias. Today’s list of companies includes only small firms that have survived—not the small firms that later went bankrupt. 
 Finally, the dependability of the small-firm effect and its likelihood to continue is open to considerable question. Buying a portfolio of small firms is hardly a surefire technique to enable an investor to earn abnormally high returns. 
 Portfolio Examples . Investable instruments are available that contain portfolios of stocks skewed toward small-sized companies, that is, small-cap stocks. For example, the ETF trading under the ticker symbol IWB tracks the Russell 1000 Index of the 1,000 largest U.S. companies. The ETF IWN tracks the small-cap Russell 2000 Index containing the next 2,000 companies in size (total capitalization). 
 3. Momentum and Reversion to the Mean 
