Learn why the markets print repeating patterns over and over again. Discover the trend-range
axis and see how it impacts every trade execution. Find out how swing trading differs from
momentum trading. Begin the task of mastering the trade through knowledge of key market
influences.
CHAPTER 2: PREPARING FOR THE MARKET DAY
Start the new day at the closing bell and get ready for the next market session. Build a solid
database of promising stocks to watch for short-term profit opportunities. Learn the secrets of 3D
charting and how the pattern points to reward and risk. Find out how market polarity continuously
shifts internal trading mechanics between two active states.
CHAPTER 3: ANALYZING THE MARKET
Follow Pattern Cycles as they build new bottoms, eject into strong rallies, stall at major tops,
and decline into painful selloffs. Study the secrets of this master pattern and see why it works
through all markets and time frames. Learn how to apply volume tools that read the crowd and
signal emotional peaks and valleys.
CHAPTER 4: BUILDING A SWING TRADING STRATEGY
Develop the edge that leads to consistent market profits. Measure the risks of momentum
trading and master tactics that succeed in strong and weak market environments. Learn how to stand
apart from the crowd at all times and use its mindless behavior for personal gain. Apply effective
short sale strategies at every opportunity and manage advanced risk techniques to stay in the game
for the long term.
CHAPTER 5: MASTERING THE TOOLS
Add dozens of highly effective technical tools to the trading arsenal. Find out how they work
and when they should be ignored. Study a new proprietary indicator that signals major reversals and
breakouts well ahead of the crowd’s participation. Master morning gaps and quickly separate those
that will fill right away from those that will never fill. Learn the secrets of pattern failure and how

to trade popular technical patterns against the herd. Use multi-time frame Fibonacci retracements to
locate turning points within a single tick.
CHAPTER 6: UNDERSTANDING TIME
Watch the market clock and see how it impacts the trading day. Identify specific times of day
that show bullish or bearish tendencies. See how the 90-minute S&P alternation cycle impacts
buying and selling behavior each day. Master trading strategies through the first and last hours as
high volatility shakes out weak hands.
CHAPTER 7: MASTERING THE SETUP
Study the differences between classic and original chart patterns. Find out why original patterns
provide more dependable results. Learn how to use whipsaws for personal gain. Develop perfect
timing to enter promising trade setups at the lowest risk. Study original patterns that represent littleknown profit opportunities.
CHAPTER 8: DIP TRIP
Learn to trade the pullback in all of its forms and incarnations. Use Fibonacci retracements to
pinpoint reversals before they happen. Recognize bull flags as they print and see how to focus on
their natural breakout levels. Review detailed case studies to gain an edge over the competition.
CHAPTER 9: COILED SPRING
Trade breakouts from the narrow range price bar. Build strategies to capitalize on this versatile
pattern regardless of which way the market goes. Find out the differences between dull sideways
markets and those about to explode into a new trend. Review pattern variations that appear over and
over again in diverse market conditions.
CHAPTER 10: FINGER FINDER
See how one-bar candlestick reversals offer important swing trading signals. Learn to use multitime frame analysis to build profitable setups that respond to dojis, hammers, and harami candles.
Find these patterns in the intraday markets to pin-point turning points and profitable opportunities.
Add three original candle setups to the swing trader’s toolbox.
CHAPTER 11: HOLE-IN-THE-WALL
Study a new gap that generates promising setups and dependable profits. See why other authors
and traders missed it for decades. Build diverse strategies to take advantage of price action after the
gap occurs. Learn how to predict future trend after the crowd responds.
CHAPTER 12: POWER SPIKE
Predict how heavy volume will impact subsequent trading activity. Use high-volume events to
execute a variety of trading tactics that take advantage of Pattern Cycle stages. Recognize the
differences between climax volume and breakout volume. Find out how to trade pullbacks after bigvolume breakouts.

CHAPTER 13: BEAR HUG
Master the short sale and pinpoint the best times to avoid the short squeeze. Find markets in
bear rallies that have run out of fresh buyers. See how narrow range bars signal impending selloffs
and invite low-risk short sale opportunities. Recognize the market patterns that signal imminent
declines and study detailed examples of successful short sale strategies.
CHAPTER 14: 3rd WATCH
See why triple tops offer tremendous profit opportunities. Learn many variations of the classic
cup and handle breakout. Find frequent low-risk entry points with high reward potential. Recognize
this classic setup on many intraday charts. Identify specific stop loss and profit targets that take
advantage of the pattern. Use the third rise into any type of resistance to locate a short-term trade.
CHAPTER 15: PRECISE TRADE EXECUTION
Apply Pattern Cycle analysis to execution tactics and increase profits. Manage diverse intraday
tools to master the market environment regardless of short-term conditions. Find out how to filter
impending setups through the Level II screen or ticker tape to reduce risk. Discover when ECNs
work and when they invite danger. Choose an execution system and broker to match a specific
trading style or personal plan. Find out how the markets tell lies through every session and how to
play with the liars.
CONCLUSION: THIRTY RULES FOR THE MASTER SING TRADER
Review key concepts that build outstanding profit performance. Step into the shoes of the
master swing trader.
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
This book will immediately benefit both active market participants and part-time trading
enthusiasts. Keep a charting database or website close at hand through the study of each chapter.
Find fresh examples of the trading concepts through current market action or favorite stock picks.
The Master Swing Trader describes a visual universe that requires personal experience to be fully
understood. This presentation does not represent an isolated market occurrence. It forms an inner
structure that guides the development of all chart patterns and indicators.
The best results will come when the reader practices these original strategies through actual
trade execution. Experiment with the new concepts and add them slowly into the trading toolbox.
An immediate improvement in market vision will provide the first benefit. Take extra time to
internalize the dozens of case studies and examples throughout the book. They will open up fresh
tactics and build confidence when taking a position ahead of, behind, or against the restless crowd.
But don’t stop there.
The detailed illustrations enable the reader to visualize a new market reality. This unsuspected
world offers intense feedback on the current trading environment. Pattern Cycles also present a
dynamic system that digests price change and updates the charting landscape in real-time. This
allows the swing trader to master a powerful execution strategy that few others will ever see.

PART ONE
THE GATEWAY TO SHORT-TERM TRADING
1 CHAPTER
TRADING THE PATTERN CYCLE

THE PATH TO TRADING POWER
Swing traders must compete against the best-informed crowd in history. Financial institutions spent
decades building expensive barriers to keep their middlemen in the seat of power. The Net
revolution collapsed this unfortunate scheme and opened the markets to the average investor. Now
anyone with a computer can access breaking news, execute a low-commission trade, and witness
the immediate result. Technical analysis has come to the masses as well. The Web ensures that
everyone knows their highs from their lows and can identify popular patterns as soon as they appear
on their favorite stock charts.
Managing information and finding opportunity grow more difficult each day. Common knowledge
of any market condition closes the system inefficiency that allows easy profit. But the masses
respond slowly and continue to throw money at losing strategies for some time. Swing traders
succeed when they recognize changing conditions and stay one step ahead of this restless crowd.
This simple task requires great discipline because they must constantly abandon winning strategies
and trade fresh ones as soon as the herd charges in their direction.
The markets have grown enormously complex over the past century. Look back at Charles Dow’s
revelations on trend and reversal in The Wall Street Journal or read the fascinating accounts of
Roaring 20s trader Jesse Livermore in Edwin LeFevre’s Reminiscences of a Stock Operator. The
middlemen of that day pocketed such a large piece of the trading action that only the well-greased
elite could profit from most market fluctuations. Imagine a world with no electronic
communications networks, derivatives markets, or talking heads.
Yet the core elements of swing trading and technical analysis have not changed in decades. Stocks
still go up or down with many pullbacks to test support and resistance. New highs continue to
generate greed that carries price well past most rational expectations. And modern traders face the
same emotional crowd that Livermore did when he played the bucket shops early in the last century.
Today’s aspirants often confuse execution with opportunity. Rapid placement tools and fast
connections promise a level playing field for any individual interested in the markets. Add some
high-tech software, and the home office may even rival a glass tower financial house. But these
complex systems can short circuit the most critical requirement for consistent profits: market timing
that relies on accuracy rather than speed. And the tremendous ease of execution generates instant
karma for errors and washes out traders at the fastest rate in history.
When new players first enter this fascinating world, they run quickly to bookshelves and absorb the
trading masters. But Murphy, Elder, and Schwager reveal an organism that can only be digested in
small bits and pieces. Neophytes must move slowly and protect capital until experience finally
awakens knowledge. Over time, trade rewards and tragedies condition the mind to develop the
instincts needed for long-term survival. Only then will the journeyman trader finally discover what
works and what doesn’t in this challenging game.
Seasoned traders often carry a flawed and incomplete market reality as well. They limit execution to
a few classic setups rather than build understanding of the entire complex mechanism. When the

market fails to offer perfect conditions for their limited strategies, tactics demand that they stand
aside and wait. But if they lack strong discipline, the restless mind fills in the missing pieces and
encourages bad positions. These narrow tactics may end careers in other ways. If the masses
discover their well-worn game, it could stop working completely and leave them with no source of
income.
The daily demands of trading are so intense that many borderline participants just grow lazy and
evolve a self-destructive style. Fatigue sets in as the mind struggles to organize this complex world
and many valuable shades of gray resolve into black and white illusion. In this dangerous view,
stock positions become all-or-nothing events and wish fulfillment distorts vital incoming signals.
As hope replaces good judgment, another market loser washes out and looks for a safer hobby.
Trading at all skill levels evokes emotions that generate great illusions. Sudden gains convince us
that we are invulnerable, while painful losses confirm our ugly imperfection. We then externalize
and turn to others who will comfort us as they parrot our point of view. Or we try to blame external
systems for our failure. After all, everyone knows that market makers steal our money through evil
tactics while bad connections and buggy software keep us from reaping fortunes.
The path to modern trading power must allow participants to adapt quickly
FIGURE 1.1
Parallel price channels offer a classic breakout pattern favored by many experienced traders. But the setup may
fail when the crowd sees it coming. Note how buyers of the early May 3Com gap never had an opportunity to
profit before the stock reversed. Even those that bought the first pullback to the upper channel paid the price if
they held the position overnight.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

to new inefficiencies, offer profit opportunities throughout changing conditions, and allow fast,
accurate analysis of all system input. It must be powerful enough to short circuit both mental and
emotional trader illusions. This market knowledge must be simple to understand but provide
continuous feedback through all time frames. And it must present a broad context to manage trade
setups, risk, and execution through a variety of strategies, including day trading, swing trading, and
investment.

THE HIDDEN MARKET
The vast majority of destabilizing and supportive market energies remain hidden from individual
traders. Insiders quietly manipulate news to protect options positions. Analysts push stocks so their
trading departments can unload inventory. Operating failures pass through accounting magic and
disappear. As a result, market knowledge has limited value unless it meets one important test: it
must stand alone as a complete fractal image of all hidden and known information about that
market.
Traders and investors study markets through price charts. These powerful visual tools offer a
common language for all equities, derivatives, and indices. The simplest chart just draws a timeprice axis and adds each day’s closing price as a single point or vertical bar. The connected data
points then plot a series of oscillating highs and lows that participants study to predict whether price
will move up or down over time.
Pattern analysis begins with the simple observation that all market activity reflects itself in the
fractal properties of price and volume. These small bits of information create a profound visual
representation when tied together into a continuous time series: a display of both current and past
outcomes for all interactions of infinite market forces as seen through the eyes of all participants.
In contrast to the cold discipline of fundamental analysis, the pattern analyst’s world reeks with lust
and intrigue. The markets are about money. No other controlled substance brings out the best and
worst of humanity with quite so much intensity. The markets become our lovers, our bosses, and the
bullies who beat us up when we were young. As assets shrink or swell, emotions flood in and cloud
reason, planning, and self-discipline. Chronic fight-flight impulses emerge to trigger unconscious
(and often inappropriate) buying and selling behavior.
Actions initiated through emotional impulse generate oscillations in both price and time that print
clearly on charts. The skilled pattern reader observes this unstable behavior and visualizes
impending price movement. But successful trade execution requires both accurate prediction and
excellent timing. Fortunately, chart patterns work without crystal balls or divine intervention. As a
detailed map of all market forces, patterns identify exact trigger points where the swing trader can
exploit the emotional crowd.
Patterns simplify and condense a vast universe of market interplay into easily recognizable setups.
The subsequent analysis actually evokes the subjective right brain processes rather than the cold
analytics of the orb’s left side. Correct interpretation requires that the swing trader focus intuition
on crowd impulses evident within each price chart. Those who divine correctly and apply that
knowledge to obtaining profits are truly artists at their core, not masters of science.
Edwards and Magee did not invent patterns for their 1948 classic Technical Analysis of Stock
Trends. They observed an order within price movement as ancient as the auction place. They also
recognized the existence of cyclical crowd behavior throughout all time frames and all markets.

Although the individual components are simple and easy to understand, these repeating formations
offer the most intriguing predictive methods in the entire financial world.

PATTERN CYCLES
The U.S. stock exchanges trade over 9,000 issues each day. Add to that many thousands of
emerging exchanges and companies worldwide. On any given day, every bull and bear condition,
from euphoria to panic, exists somewhere on the planet. Buried within this universe of volatility and
price movement, perfect trade setups wait to be discovered. But how can the speculator consistently
tap this deep well of profit without being crushed by information overload or burnout?
For many decades, technical traders learned chart interpretation through the concepts of Dow
Theory. Or they studied Edwards and Magee and faithfully memorized the characteristics of
familiar price patterns seen daily on their favorite stocks or futures. These speculators were a
minority within the investment community, and their size allowed them to execute effective
strategies that capitalized on these little-known patterns when they appeared.
Net connectivity revolutionizes public access to price charts. They no longer require an expensive
subscription, and most market participants can view them quickly in real-time. Now everyone reads
the charts and believes that he or she understands the inner secrets of technical analysis. As noted
earlier in this chapter, common knowledge of any market condition closes the system inefficiency
that allows easy profit from it. Triangles, flags, and double tops now belong to the masses and are
often undependable to trade through old methods.
Fortunately, the popularity of chart reading opens a new and powerful inefficiency for swing traders
to manipulate. They can use the crowd’s limited pattern knowledge for their own profit. The new
disciples of technical analysis tend to focus on those few patterns that have worked well over the
past century. Skilled traders can place themselves on the other side of popular interpretation and
fade those setups with pattern failure tactics. More importantly, they can master the unified
structure that underlies all pattern development and awaken the skills required to successfully trade
dependable setups that have no name or adoring crowd.
Pattern Cycles recognize that markets travel through repeated bull and bear conditions in all time
frames. Trends uncoil in a predictable manner, while constricted ranges print common shapes.
Measurable characteristics distinguish each opportunity phase from uptrend to downtrend and back
again. Most participants see these changes as the typical top, bottom, and congestion patterns. But a
far richer trading world exists.
The twin engines of greed and fear fuel the creation of market opportunity. Through their power,
the crowd reacts in a predictable manner at every stage of price development. Prices fall and fear
releases discounted equities into patient value hands. Prices rise and mindless greed bids up hot
shares into the pockets of momentum players. On and on it goes through all markets and time
frames.
Rising prices attract greed. Paper profits distort self-image and foster inappropriate use of margin.
The addictive thrill of a rally draws in many participants looking for a quick buck. More jump on
board just to take a joyride in the market’s amusement park. But greed-driven rallies will continue
only as long as the greater fool mechanism holds. Eventually, growing excitement closes the mind
to negative news as the crowd recognizes only positive reinforcement. Momentum fades and the
uptrend finally ends.

Falling prices awaken fear. The rational mind sets artificial limits as profits evaporate or losses
deepen. Corrections repeatedly pierce these thin boundaries and force animal instinct to replace
reason. Negative emotions build quickly as pockets empty. Personality flaws invade the psyche of
the wounded long while sudden short-covering rallies raise false hopes and increase pain. The
subsequent decline finally becomes unbearable and the tortured shareholder sells, just as the market
reverses.
The emotional crowd generates constant price imbalances that swing traders can exploit. But
successful execution requires precision in both time and direction. Fortunately, this chaotic world of
price change masks the orderly Pattern Cycle structure that generates accurate prediction and
profitable opportunities through all market conditions. This inner order frees the mind, provides
continuous feedback, and empowers spontaneous execution of rewarding trades.
Swing traders capitalize on the emotions of others after they control their own. Pattern Cycles
caution them to stand apart from the crowd at all times. In the simplest terms it represents the
attractive prey from which their livelihood is made. And just as a wild cat stalks the herd’s edge
looking for a vulnerable meal, the swing trader must recognize opportunity by watching the daily
grind of price swings, volume spikes, and market noise.
Prices trend only fifteen to twenty percent of the time through all equities, derivatives, and indices.
This is true in all charts, from 1-minute bars through monthly displays. Markets spend the balance
of time absorbing instability created by trend-induced momentum. Swing traders see this process in
the wavelike motion of price bars as they oscillate between support and resistance.
Each burst of crowd excitement alternates with extended periods of relative inactivity. Reduced
volume and countertrend movement mark this loss of energy. As ranges contract, so does volatility.
Like a coiled spring, markets approach neutral points from which momentum reawakens to trigger
directional price movement. This interface between the end of an inactive period and the start of a
new surge marks a high-reward empty zone (EZ) for those that can find it.
Prior to beginning each new breath, the body experiences a moment of silence as the last exhalation
completes. The markets regenerate momentum in a similar manner. The EZ signals that price has
returned to stability. Because only instability can change that condition, volatility then sparks a new
action cycle of directional movement. Price bars expand sharply out of the EZ into trending waves.
Swing traders use pattern recognition to identify these profitable turning points. Price bar range
(distance from the high to low) tends to narrow as markets approach stability. Skilled eyes search
for a narrowing series of these bars in sideways congestion after a stock pulls back from a strong
trend. Once located, they place execution orders on both sides of the EZ and enter their position in
whatever direction the market breaks out.
Paradoxically, most math-based indicators fail to identify these important trading interfaces.
Modern tools such as moving averages and rate of change measurements tend to flatline or revert
toward neutral just as price action reaches the EZ trigger point. This failure reinforces one of the
great wisdoms of technical analysis: use math-based indicators to verify the price pattern, but not
the other way around.
Volatility provides the raw material for momentum to generate. This elusive concept opens the door
to trading opportunity, so take the time to understand how this works. Technical Analysis of Stocks
and Commodities magazine describes volatility as ‘‘a measure of a stock’s tendency to move up and
down in price, based on its daily price history over the latest 12 months.” While this definition fixes
