
What’s Your Agenda?
Different people participate in the forex market for different reasons. One of the most common questions that new forex traders ask is whether forex
trading is a zero sum game, meaning that whenever one trader makes money, another loses. To answer that question, consider whether or not you
think a traveler exchanging currencies in a foreign country or a company hedging foreign exchange risk would consider the exchange to be a loss?
Probably not. When I go to Australia, I exchange my U.S. dollars into Australian dollars and then forget about it. After exchanging their currencies,
most travelers hurry off to enjoy the views from the Eiffel Tower or sit on a beach in Thailand. As for a medium-sized company importing widgets,
the goal of hedging foreign exchange risk is to stop worrying about it because, once a transaction is hedged, the focus should be on selling the
goods and moving the inventory.
Currency movements affect the financial decisions of equity investors, small-business owners, expats, and even travelers in more ways than
anyone can imagine. Yet many companies do not fully hedge their forex risk because they want to take advantage of currency movements in their
favor. So wouldn’t it be great to be able to figure out where currencies could be headed and whether a trend will last or fade? Next, we’ll be talking
about strategies and tools that can help do just that, and I can’t wait to share them.

Get It? Got It? Good!
Currencies are not as foreign as you think! They are a part of everyone’s lives already.
Even casual travelers can learn a lot about currency trading by considering the exchange rates and fees they pay in different countries.
Companies that have franchises abroad are affected by every move in the currency markets. If you’re an investor in one of those companies, pay attention.
If you invest in foreign companies or real estate, currency fluctuations can increase or decrease returns.
Small-business owners and other companies that import products from abroad should know the importance of hedging against foreign exchange risk!

Chapter Three

The A to Zs of Forex
Basic Knowledge You Need to Have
But before getting too excited about how currency trading works, it is important to get the basics down first; to do that, let’s grab our backpacks and
head back to school to learn the A to Zs of forex trading.
Alpha. Most businesses dabble in the forex market to reduce their exposure to big exchange rate fluctuations, but some companies also want to
earn alpha. Alpha is the “excess” return that a manager earns above and beyond a benchmark index like the S&P 500 or a risk-free investment
such as Treasuries. Alpha is how fund managers earn their keep because there is no point in investing with the fund and paying a management or
performance fee if all that they can do is earn the same return or less than that of the S&P 500. Investors and traders turn to the forex market
because of the desire to earn additional alpha.
Base Currency and Counter Currency. It takes two to tango; the value of a currency is always based upon another currency. For example, if
the euro/U.S. dollar exchange rate is 1.50, it means that one euro can be exchanged for 1.50 U.S. dollars. If the U.S. dollar/Japanese yen exchange
rate is 110, then one U.S. dollar can be exchanged for 110 Japanese yen. The first currency that is quoted in a currency pair is known as the base
currency and the second is known as the counter currency. The symbols can be interchanged, but there are industry standards. When the euro was
first launched in 1999, the European Central Bank actually stipulated that the euro must be a base currency. The currencies of other countries that
are currently or were previously under the Crown, such as the British pound and Australian and New Zealand dollars, are typically base currencies
as well, while the Japanese yen, Swiss franc, and Canadian dollar are almost always counter currencies. The U.S. dollar can be either a base or
counter currency, depending upon what currency it is quoted against.
Currencies. As of 2010, there are approximately 150 currencies in the world, but not all of them are actively traded because some are available
for trading and others aren’t, depending upon whether they are a fixed or floating currency and if the government permits it. The most commonly
used currency in the world is the U.S. dollar. In fact, more than 85 percent of all currency transactions involve the U.S. dollar. How often a currency is
used is extremely important for investors and speculators because it reflects how easy or hard it is to get out of a position in that currency.
Therefore, I always say that if you are investing or trading for alpha, it is best to stick with the most actively traded currencies, which are the U.S.
dollar, euro, Japanese yen, British pound, Swiss franc, Australian dollar, and Canadian dollar. Exhibit 3.1 lists each currency, code, symbol, and the
share that each of these currencies has of the daily turnover in the currency market according to the Bank of International Settlements’ Triennial FX
Survey (2010).

Exhibit 3.1 Codes, Symbols, and Market Share for Key Currencies
Source: BIS 2007 Triennial Survey.

Dealers. Corporations, investors, and speculators access the foreign exchange market through dealers, who can be the direct counterparty or a
middleman. For most travelers, the airport kiosk is their foreign exchange dealer. Corporations, mutual funds, and hedge fund managers, on the
other hand, directly call in to the dealing or sales trading desks of Goldman Sachs or Citigroup to conduct their transactions. Individuals are usually
not trading large enough amounts to matter to a big bank like Goldman Sachs and so, instead, they will usually access the market through a retail
forex broker or an exchange.
Exchange. One of the unique aspects of the forex market is that there is no formalized exchange such as the NYSE (New York Stock Exchange)
or the CME (Chicago Mercantile Exchange). Underlying currency transactions are done over the counter, which means they are handled directly by
dealers. The lack of a formal exchange is probably the main reason some people are hesitant about dabbling in currencies, but the competition in
the market has made pricing extremely competitive and forced many forex dealers to offer free educational resources and tools that would normally
cost hundreds of dollars a month. The governments of many countries have also instituted tough rules and capitalization requirements for the
dealers to protect investors and traders.
Fundamentals. Generally speaking, the movements in currencies reflect how investors and speculators feel about the economic outlook of one
country relative to another. Looking at concrete economic data or hard numbers to compare the outlook of two countries is known as fundamental
analysis. There are many different ways to analyze the markets on a fundamental basis; the topic is so important that an entire chapter is dedicated

to it.

Going Long and Short. One of the interesting things about currencies is that in a forex transaction, you are going long one currency and short
another simultaneously. This is important because it means that you are exposed to the fluctuations of two currencies. For example, the Australian
dollar/New Zealand dollar exchange rate will rise if investors buy Australian dollars, sell New Zealand dollars (NZD), or both. Theoretically, if the
AUD and NZD rise at the exact same time by the same amount, the exchange rate will not move—just like with the tango, nothing happens except
toes being stepped on when both dancers move forward.
Hedging. Most companies dabble in the forex market to hedge or offset the currency-related exposure of their import or export activities, but
they are not the only ones that can benefit from hedging. When stock markets around the world collapsed during the global financial crisis, investors
poured into the safety of the U.S. dollar and low-yielding currencies. As a result, investors who wanted to protect against additional losses in stocks
could have hedged their positions by buying U.S. dollars, Swiss francs, and Japanese yen. Hedging accounts for a lot of the big transactions that
flow through the forex market.
Interest Rates. If I had to pick only one thing to determine where currencies are headed, it would certainly be interest rates. Currencies are
basically little interest-bearing commodities, and almost every country has an official interest rate that determines the borrowing cost of the
government, its banks, and citizens—this is the rate that sets your credit card and mortgage payments. The interest rate is usually manipulated by
the central bank to control growth and inflation in their local economy, but it can also increase or decrease the attractiveness of a currency. In this
modern day and age, it is extremely easy for investors to shift their money from one country to another in search of the highest yield. For most of
2010, Americans could not find a bank in the United States that would offer them a savings account with an annual interest rate of more than 2
percent. During that same year, anyone shopping for a savings account in Australia could easily find a bank offering an interest rate greater than 5
percent. Therefore, if you could, would you prefer to have your money in an Australian or U.S. bank account? This thinking is exactly what caused
the Australian dollar to outperform the U.S. dollar in the first half of 2010. However, it’s a bit more complicated than that—investors move their
money from one country to another not just based upon where interest rates are at but where they are headed. So it is very possible for a country
with a lower interest rate to attract more money than a country with a higher interest rate.
J-Curve. Think about how the letter J is written. First, when your pen hits the page, your hand draws a slight slanted line downward. The line
quickly turns into a curve that rolls into a smile and extends into a large tail upward. Writing the letter J reminds us of recovery followed by strength,
and this is how many experts believe that a country’s trade deficit will respond to a fall in the currency. Currency movements have a big impact on
trade activity. According to the theory of many economists, after a currency experiences a very large decline, the country’s trade deficit will worsen
initially before it improves. On the most basic level, currencies move because of trade-related supply and demand. When a clothing retailer in New
York needs to import handmade Italian suits to be sold at a boutique on Madison Avenue in New York City, at some point or another, the retailer
needs to sell U.S. dollars and buy euros to pay for the order. If the euro were to fall significantly, the Italian suit manufacturer would receive more
orders for suits from Americans, but not immediately because it takes some time for American retailers to realize that the exchange rate has fallen,
sell existing inventory, browse the catalogues, discuss designs, and negotiate prices before they can place a new order. However, companies in
Europe that import from other countries will feel the pain from the drop in the exchange rate almost immediately because they will not be able to
adjust the amount that they import until their existing orders and payments are fulfilled. A weak currency will eventually help a country’s trade
activities, but not before it does some damage.
Kiwi. The kiwi is the nickname for New Zealand’s currency because the flightless birds, a national symbol, are native to the country. The U.S.
dollar is oftentimes called the buck or greenback, the British pound may be referred to as sterling, cable, or just the pound. The Canadian dollar is
known as the loonie (the loon is a popular aquatic bird found throughout Canada), while the Australian dollar is referred to as the Aussie. Become
familiar with these nicknames because they are used interchangeably with the official names of the currencies.
Leverage. Understanding leverage and controlling it divides the winners from the losers in the forex market. Leverage is almost always
described as a double-edged sword, and rightfully so. It is what attracts most speculators to the forex market but also what turns them away. To
leverage means to lean on something to gain an advantage. In trading, you leverage by using borrowed money to magnify your investment. Most
forex brokers will offer their clients 50 times leverage on the major currencies, which means that with $2,000, a trader can control up to $100,000
worth of a currency. Sounds great right? If the value of your investment increases by 2 percent, you would have made $2,000 (2 percent of
$100,000) for a return of 100 percent on your initial investment. But not so fast—the currency can move against you just as easily as it can move in
your favor, so the 100 percent gain can also turn into a 100 percent loss. Therefore, leverage needs to be controlled. Just because the broker is
offering you that much leverage, it doesn’t mean that you need to exhaust it. If you bought an entire box of chocolate chip cookies, should you eat
them all in one sitting? Not unless you want your waistline to expand. Professional traders who survive in the forex market will usually not risk more
than 5 percent of their account on any one trade, and using stops can be a good way to limit the downside risk of leverage.
Margin. Margin is another way of looking at leverage. In the previous example, $2,000 would control $100,000 worth of currency, which meant
that a 2 percent margin deposit was required for the ability to use 50 to 1 leverage. The margin is not the maximum amount that you can lose on
your position because your maximum loss is based upon the actual size of your position. It is how much the broker requires you to allocate in your
account for each open position. In the event of a margin call, when your account falls below the margin requirement to keep the positions active,
your broker will close some or all open positions.
No Uptick Rule. Back when the markets crashed in October 2008, it was very difficult for speculators to short into a rapidly falling market
(countries like the United States require an uptick before a stock can be shorted). One possible way to participate in the sell-off at the time would
have been to buy U.S. dollars and Japanese yen because there is no uptick rule in the forex market; in times of overwhelming nervousness, lowyielding currencies are in big demand. Investors who wanted to offset their losses in stocks could have bought dollars and yen.
Order Types. There are many different ways to enter and exit your forex positions; if you already trade equities, the order types should be
familiar. The standard orders that most brokers offer are limit entry orders, market entry orders, fixed stop, trailing stop, and market exit orders. The
orders can be good till cancelled (GTC), good for the day (GTD), or one cancels other (OCO).
Pip. If you have ever talked to a forex trader, you may have heard them say that the EUR/USD has moved 150 pips and wondered what the word
pip meant. A pip is basically fancy forex lingo for the word point and stands for percentage in point, which is the smallest standardized incremental
price change for a currency. Most currency pairs, such as the EUR/USD, are quoted out to four decimal points, which means that if the EUR/USD
has moved from 1.5015 to 1.5016, it has moved one pip. Currency pairs that involve the Japanese yen have only two numbers after the decimal, so
a one-pip move in those pairs would be .01. Since a pip is worth a different dollar amount for each currency, it is very important to know how to
calculate pip values; otherwise, you won’t know how much a move in a currency is worth in your account.

How to Calculate Pip Values
Example #1 USD/JPY
For a currency pair that has the U.S. dollar as a base currency (quoted first in the pair), simply divide the smallest price change by the current quote and multiply it by the
amount of currency traded. If we trade 100,000 units of USD/JPY at a current exchange rate of 89.00, the pip value would be calculated in the following steps:
1. .01 (pip amount) divided by 89.00 (USD/JPY exchange rate) = .00011235 (pip value per dollar)
2. .00011235 (pip value per dollar) × 100,000 (amount of dollars traded) = $11.23

Example #2 EUR/USD
For a currency pair where the U.S. dollar is the counter currency (quoted second in the pair), there is one additional step. Follow the same method as the above and then
convert the amount back into U.S. dollars by multiplying the pip cost by the exchange rate. If we trade 100,000 units of EUR/USD at a current exchange rate of 1.2250, the pip
value would be calculated in the following steps:
1. .0001 (pip amount) divided by 1.2250 (EUR/USD exchange rate) = 0.000081632 (pip value per euro)
2. 0.000081632 × 100,000 (amount of dollars traded) = 8.16 (pip value in euros)
3. Convert pip value in euros into dollars. 8.16 × 1.2250 (EUR/USD exchange rate) = $10 (pip value in U.S. dollars)
Many free pip calculators can be found on the Internet and some brokers will list the fluctuating pip values on their dealing stations.

Quotes. Since there is no formalized exchange in the forex market, brokers may have different buy and sell prices (known as quotes) at any
point in time. The buy price is also known as the ask price and the sell price is called the bid. When shopping for a forex broker, it is important to
compare their quotes to see who gives you the best pricing.
Rollover. Rollover is unique to the forex market because each currency has an interest rate that is determined by the central bank of the country.
By going long and short two currencies at the same time, forex traders are eligible to earn interest on the currency that they have bought and are
required to pay interest on the currency that they have sold. For example, in 2010, Australia offered a much higher interest rate than the United
States. Anyone going long Australian dollars against U.S. dollars would be eligible to earn interest on positions held overnight, whereas anyone
who shorted the AUD/USD would be obligated to pay interest. The daily interest amount is calculated by subtracting the annual U.S. interest rate
from the Australian rate and dividing it by the number of days in a year.
Spot. Like the word pip, the word spot is another forex-specific term that is used often by investors and traders. The spot price references the
current market price; a spot trade is simply a transaction in the currency or commodity. Because currencies and commodities are traded often in
the futures and options markets, spot can also mean the underlying or physical item that is being transacted.
Technical Analysis. Some forex investors will attempt to predict the direction where currencies are headed using fundamental analysis (FA),
while others like to use technical analysis (TA), the art of chart reading. Many new traders actually prefer technicals over fundamentals because the
same strategies and techniques that are used in stock trading can be used in currency trading. The forex market trades 24 hours a day, which
means that the points in the charts are created using more samples, increasing its statistical significance. If you are unfamiliar with forex but very
skilled at technical analysis, the best thing to do would be to use what you know, especially because this style of analysis is already a very popular
trading and investment style among forex traders.
Units of Trade. Although currencies can be traded in any amounts, there are standardized units of trade. A standard lot in a currency pair is
100,000 units of trade. A mini lot is 1/10th the size of a standard lot and refers to 10,000 units of trade; micro lots are 1/100th the size of a standard
lot or 1,000 units of currency. Unless someone is trading a very significant amount of money, micro lots give most traders more flexibility because
the smaller lot sizes allows them to ease in and out of positions. Micro lots are useful for new traders who want to add in the psychological element
of trading real money but are not comfortable enough to commit a more significant amount of capital.
Volatility. Forex brokers offer trading in as many as 120 different currency pairs; this extensive range of options can be compelling but only if you
understand that currencies can vary significantly in volatility. For example, Exhibit 3.2 shows that the average daily trading range for EUR/CHF over
the past 10 years was 66 pips, while the average range in GBP/JPY was 256 pips. This means that on an intraday basis, GBP/JPY is going to be
far more volatile than EUR/CHF. Therefore, a 40-pip stop may be very significant for EUR/CHF but very insignificant for GBP/JPY. Forex traders
like to consider GBP/JPY the “Google” of the forex market, because it is an exceptionally volatile currency pair with wide intraday swings.
Exhibit 3.2 Daily Trading Ranges for Key Currencies
Currency Pair Daily Range
EUR/CHF
EUR/GBP
NZD/CAD
NZD/CHF
AUD/CAD
AUD/CHF
CAD/CHF
USD/JPY
NZD/USD
USD/CHF
CHF/JPY
AUD/USD
NZD/JPY
USD/CAD
CAD/JPY
EUR/USD

66
89
95
100
103
110
111
112
115
120
128
130
132
141
150
152

AUD/JPY
EUR/CAD
GBP/CHF
EUR/AUD
GBP/USD
EUR/JPY
GBP/CAD
GBP/AUD
GBP/JPY
EUR/NZD

156
163
191
193
196
196
219
254
256
279

Whipsaw. Economic data and big events can create a lot of whipsaw in currencies; therefore, it is essential to know what can potentially move
the markets. Thankfully, the same things that are important to the stock market are important to the forex market. For example, central bank rate
decisions and labor markets reports such as non-farm payrolls are very big market movers, while the pieces of data that are rarely discussed in the
media such as the ABC consumer confidence index usually have very little impact on currencies.
Xenocurrency. The term Xenocurrency is not used often, but it is important. A Xenocurrency refers to a currency that is traded outside its
borders; a good example is the Chinese yuan. The yuan is not actively traded in China but it is traded as a non-deliverable forward (NDF), which is
a cash-settled contract that allows speculators to take a view on where the yuan may be headed in one week’s or one year’s time. Mainland
companies are not allowed to participate in the NDF market because it is conducted offshore.
Yield. Currencies are oftentimes referred to as either high yield or low yield. High-yield currencies offer more attractive interest rates compared
to low-yield currencies. When investors are optimistic, they generally like to buy high-yielding currencies and fund those purchases by selling lowyielding ones, creating what is called a carry trade. When they grow nervous, they will unwind those trades by selling the high-yielding currencies
and buying back the low-yielding ones. This is one of the main reasons the currency market will oftentimes move in lockstep with equities because
equities rally when investors are optimistic and sell off when they are pessimistic.
Zones. The last important item to know about the forex market is that it is open for trading 24 hours a day, 5.5 days a week. Trading begins on
Sunday evening when the Sydney and Tokyo markets open and continues around the clock until Friday afternoon when the U.S. market closes.
Being open 24 hours a day means that traders can access the market at their leisure. For example, if you work during the day, you can trade at
night or wake up a few hours early and trade in the morning with basically the same liquidity as during the day. The forex market is broken up into
three different time zones—Tokyo, London, and New York. Exhibit 3.3 lists the opening and closing hours of each market. Approximately 70
percent of the total average range that a currency pair fluctuates in usually occurs during the European trading hours; 80 percent of the total average
range of trading usually occurs during U.S. trading hours. Just these percentages alone tell day traders that if they cannot sit at the screen all day,
the best time to trade is the U.S. and European overlap between 12:00 and 17:00 GMT. The next best time zone to trade is during the Tokyo and
European session overlap when both Asian and European traders have the opportunity to respond to European economic data. The London open
can also be particularly volatile as European traders react to overnight developments.
Exhibit 3.3 Unofficial Open and Closes
Time Zone Open (GMT) Close (GMT)
Tokyo
0:00
