
Research which currency pairs or other assets to be long or short:
Using sources recommended previously and others you find, research which specific stocks,
bonds, or other assets in those specific currencies you want to own, and acquire them, using
your technical and fundamental analysis (or that of those analysts you follow) to time your
entries. As of this writing, as noted earlier, stocks and many other risk assets remain in a longterm downtrend. If that remains the case, whatever you buy should be with money you can
afford to let sit, and should have a relatively high and sustainable dividend so that you're
relatively well paid while you wait until the next multiyear bull market looks like it's coming.
Similarly, one could consider a mirror image of this strategy, picking the weakest currencies
and shorting weaker assets denominated in or exposed to these currencies. This is a bit more
complicated, especially if global exchanges continue to ban short selling whenever it becomes
most likely to be profitable. There are ways around these rules, but they're beyond the scope
of this book. There are also short exchange-traded funds (ETFs) for all kinds of currencies
and stock sectors, though beware of the rebalancing issues that tend to make these poor
vehicles for long-term holds. See the bonus material for Chapter 10 on the website for details
on the hazards of ETFs that short specific asset classes or currencies.
I could go on and on, but I won't. Beyond these or other general comments, what would be the right
advice for you would depend on what kind of trading or investing you want to do. If you don't know,
experiment. If you do, seek out online gathering spots of like-minded individuals (found in
trading/investing forums and social networks). The whole topic of conservative forex trading and
currency diversified investing is vast and changing, and so all additional thoughts, insights, and
teachings will be on www.thesensibleguidetoforex.com.
May the time you've spent reading this book prove to be among your most fruitful investments. For
further updates and ideas, you're likely to find my current thoughts on one or more of the following
websites.
TheSensibleGuidetoForex.com, the book's companion website, I hope will become a gathering
point for the community of traders and investors to which this book is dedicated: those interested in
smarter, safer ways to use forex for both lower currency risk and higher portfolio returns.
In addition, you can always just search my name online to see the websites where I often post, like
SeekingAlpha.com or ForexFactory.com. I've received a variety of kind invitations from some
excellent forex and financial sites, so there could well be others. If you need to reach me, try either
the Contact Us tab at thesensibleguidetoforex.com, or, you can leave a message for me via the Send
Message button on my profile page at seekingalpha.com (http://seekingalpha.com/author/cliffwachtel). Like everyone else, I'm also on LinkedIn and other major online hangouts, though I don't
always check them regularly.
Good luck!

APPENDIX A
Recommended Free Online Resources
Many of the following websites were mentioned earlier, but here's a one-stop guide to my favorites
for forex traders and investors at all levels. Not only will these websites prove useful from the start,
you're also unlikely to ever outgrow them. They'll lead you to further resources as well. I'll just hit the
highlights: The “About” pages on these sites will provide a more complete picture.

FOREX SITES
Here are my favorite pure forex resources.

Thesensibleguidetoforex.com
If you like the book, you'll love the website. Your online home for continuing education, as well as
trade and investment ideas for those seeking a range of ways to diversify currency exposure either via
active trading or currency diversified income investing. Includes a variety of bonus materials to
supplement the book.

BabyPips.com
BabyPips.com focuses on beginning traders, providing a wide array of lessons and tools needed to
develop the fundamental skills of forex trading and analysis. Don't be put off by the site's more lighthearted, informal take on forex. This is a great site for those seeking an unintimidating, clear, wellorganized, and illustrated introduction to forex.
Its most outstanding feature is its School of Pipsology, an organized multitopic intro to the forex
course. A stand-out feature of the school is that readers can mark the lessons “completed” to track
their progress. New traders looking to build a solid foundation should read through the lessons in
order. More seasoned traders can jump ahead to later lessons as needed for reference or to refresh
their skills in more advanced topics.
On top of educational content, readers can find news, analyses, and trade ideas in the site's blog.
BabyPips.com also provides features like a forex forum, a “Forexpedia,” forex-specific calculators,
and an economic calendar.

DailyForex.com
While there are many sites that offer forex broker reviews, they are for the most part submitted by
volunteer contributors of unknown reliability and objectivity. In contrast, DailyForex.com provides
reviews that incorporate the results of its own in-house testing and research of each broker's trading

platforms, customer service feedback, trading conditions, and so on. In other words, DailyForex puts
its reputation at stake with each review, which should provide much better quality control and
reliability.
The site is funded by broker advertising, but this presents no more of a conflict of interest issue than
there would be, for example, with accounting firms that get paid by the clients they audit, and for the
same reason. DailyForex.com's need to preserve its reputation for reliable reviews is worth more to
it than any one broker's patronage. Practically speaking, the site's visitors appear to get consistently
reliable reporting (I'm familiar with some of the organizations covered and those reviews were
objective and fair) although they will view ads in the process.
Still, don't be shy about seeking second opinions on trader forums regarding a given broker's pros
and cons. Each review also includes screenshots and explanations of each broker's site to give
viewers a quick feel for what's offered.
There are also reviews of forex binary options brokers, as well as of some forex training courses,
and automated trading programs. Credible reviews of these are hard to find, so these really add to the
site. Also, there are a variety of news, analysis, and educational offerings, trader tools, and forums.

DailyFX.com
This is one of the most widely-viewed forex content websites, and justifiably so. It's a one-stop shop
for news, analysis, analyst picks, extensive educational materials, trader tools, and forums. It's as
good a dedicated forex content site as any, beautifully designed, and easy to navigate. My personal
favorite features include:
One of, if not the most extensive offerings of consistently quality analysis from full-time in-house
staff. John Kicklighter and Joel Kruger are among my regular reads for daily and weekly
analysis.
Real-time news feeds of tweets from its staff of obviously sharp analysts. It's the best of its kind
that I've seen, and the analysts are not above wry comedic observations about the markets and
responses to each other's tweets, an added bonus.
A growing archive of quality training materials. What sets apart DailyFX.com from most other
brokers is its serious investment in useful quality content, both analysis and training. It reflects an
all too rare business plan based on profiting from long-term relationships with successful traders,
rather than just marketing to new suckers and getting them to trade and lose money before they're
ready. Which kind of management team do you think is likely to look out for your interests?

Forex.com
Kathleen Brooks' weekly analysis is excellent and one of my weekly reads. As one who does these
myself, I know how hard it is to deliver consistent quality, but she does it.
The site's research team does a solid job covering the market 24×5, and provides intraday, daily
and weekly research and analysis, including:
Daily session updates at the end of each major trading session.
Weekly research including a newsletter that analyzes events that just occurred, with predictions
for the upcoming week and a weekly strategy, providing actionable trade ideas.

Research notes released just before major economic reports, plus an economic calendar.
Periodic commentary on topics ranging from emerging markets to commodities.
24×5 twitter coverage (http://twitter.com/FOREXcom)
Trader education is provided under the “Learn” tab on the website. FOREX.com offers a variety of
resources including a limited library of video tutorials, training modules, articles and other text-based
content, as well as a schedule of regularly held webinars.

ForexCrunch.com
Forex Crunch has news, analysis, and educational materials along with some good links to other forex
sites and articles. Check out the popular posts section.

ForexFactory.com
Along with DailyFX.com, this is one of, if not the most widely viewed forex sites, so you're likely to
wind up here at some point—possibly as a regular viewer, if you become a serious trader.
ForexFactory.com offers news and opinion via an editor-vetted selection of daily articles, forums,
and a variety of trader tools, including one of the best forex economic calendars. Full disclosure: I'm
a contributor as well as daily reader.

ForexMagnates.com
Forex Magnates is the leading site for forex brokerage industry news, such as what's happening with
individual brokers, hot new products, and so on, and consequently is particularly useful as you
narrow your broker selection. To aid in that process, the site has an active forum on broker selection
and other topics of interest, as well as a searchable archive. For the larger brokers, it sometimes
publishes useful data on the percentage of their clients who are profitable.

Forexpros.com
Another one of the more popular forex content portals, it offers a range of news, analysis, trader tools,
and educational materials.

FXstreet.com
This content portal is another of the best content sites in both quantity and quality, from both regular
and guest contributors, many of whom are first rate. This is another one of my regular research
sources. My favorite features of FXstreet.com include:
One of the few content sites to publish high-quality macroeconomic and forex-related research
from leading international banks, a brilliant idea that I wish more content providers would copy.
I try to read this every weekend.
Exceptional educational materials that go beyond the basics.

Bkassetmanagement.com

Another of the very best content sites, lead by Kathy Lien and Boris Schlossberg, arguably the best
one-two combination of analysts anywhere—certainly among the most widely read. The site has
excellent daily and longer-term analysis and is another of my daily reads.

OTHER FAVORITE FINANCIAL SITES
BusinessInsider.com
This is a popular hybrid financial site that combines:
A focus on financial market and business topics with a wide range of other popular verticals
(topic categories organized on the homepage's horizontal navigation bar).
Both in-house reporting and an aggregation of externally produced blogs.
The result is a combination of financial analysis and news mixed with a variety of tech and
tabloid topics ranging from cars, sports, and celebrities to other topic verticals.
Especially useful, the site features a daily preview before the U.S. markets open (“10 Things You
Need To Know Before The Opening Bell”) and an even more useful review of the day's top
stories and events after the U.S. close (no set title). These are useful time-saving tools for staying
up to date with minimal effort, and the bullet-pointed items are often hyperlinked to their sources
for further details.
Full disclosure: I'm an occasional contributor.

Investopedia.com
As the name implies, this site is a virtual encyclopedia of financial markets and investing. It's one of,
if not the best general financial education websites. Whenever you're researching an unfamiliar topic
on markets, this is a great place to start. For those seeking a structured free intro to a forex course
that's got a more academic feel than that of BabyPips.com, this is the place to go. The archive of forex
training articles is as good, or better than any I've seen in both quantity and quality.

SeekingAlpha.com
Seeking Alpha aggregates about 250 financial and investing articles per day, mostly from 400-plus
amateur and professional investors worldwide who serve as regular contributors, augmented by
thousands of irregulars. In other words, the articles and comments are by and for fellow investors and
traders. To help you find the articles you want, you can subscribe to e-mailed lists of daily offerings
on a variety of specific topics. The articles are archived by topic and author, so you can find “that
thing I read about three months ago” fairly easily. In its Investing for Income section, it has extensive
daily articles on US and international dividend paying stocks, to help those seeking to build a
currency diversified income stream, with quality ranging from mediocre to excellent.
While its emphasis is on U.S. equities and related topics, SeekingAl pha.com (SA) also includes
some quality forex and commodity articles, but those aren't necessarily what will keep you coming
back. Here's my take on the five most useful features for forex trading or investing:
1. Extensive daily selection of archived, searchable articles on:

The macroeconomic forces affecting all markets, including daily pre–U.S. market-opening
review of top stories.
The SA Market Currents blog (see number two following).
Income investing (including articles on global dividend stocks). The articles on global stocks
tend to focus on the prospects of the company and its dividends without considering the longterm strength of the currency to which it's tied. So that's still up to you. However, once you
know what percent of your income you want tied to CAD, AUD, CNY, or other currencies,
then SA is a good place to go looking for ideas.
ETFs, including currency and commodity ETFs.
2. Market Currents blog: Imagine you hired someone to keep a diary of the top news and
commentary for global and forex markets, making entries every five minutes, which become
hyperlinks to the sources for those seeking further details. Now imagine you hired a whole team
to do this for general market news and the more popular market sectors or asset types. That's the
Market Currents blog. It's your personal market diary, hyperlinked to sources and searchable by
date. For anyone trying to keep track of the most important news and comments of the day, or
what happened concerning any major asset class on any given day, there is nothing else like it. In
10 minutes you can read the entries for a given day and get caught up fast. It's as good as any 10minute market overview available for any given day. It's among my daily reads.
3. An especially active and useful stream of comments. This is one of the few sites where I
actually read the comments because they're often as useful as the article itself—a tribute to the
quality of the often savvy readership. Full disclosure: I'm a contributor.
4. Investors can set up portfolios and get alerts sent by e-mail whenever something comes up on
that stock or ETF, making this feature very useful for keeping up on currencies represented by an
ETF.
5. “Wall Street Breakfast: Must Know News,” a daily premarket review. There's also a small
paragraph summarizing the U.S. stock market activity that serves as a useful shorter complement
to BusinessIn sider.com's more comprehensive wrap of the major events.

Wall Street Sector Selector (wallstreetsectorselector.com)
A leading ETF portal, this a good place for those seeking information on forex ETFs and related news
and analysis.

INDIVIDUAL ANALYSTS
In addition to the sites already mentioned, the following are names I tend to read regularly. All offer
free content; some offer paid subscriptions as well. You can just search their names online for more
information. In no particular order, these are the writers or blogs that get my attention. For the most
part, they cover the overall macro picture and, at times, include specific investment advice. The list is
far from comprehensive. Unless otherwise noted, they cover general markets, though many have
particular specialties.

Fundamental Analysis
John Mauldin, Cullen Roche, Mike “Mish” Shedlock, Ed Harrison, Reggie Middleton,
ZeroHedge.com (all writers use pseudonyms), Patrick Chovanec (China specialist), Michael Pettis
(China specialist), Ambrose Evans Pritchard, Martin Wolf, Marc Chandler (forex), Bruce Krasting,
Cullen Roche and Ralph Shell (forex).

Technical Analysis

While there are many worthwhile technical analysts and signal providers, one of the best that you've
probably never heard of is Charles Nenner. Unlike anyone else I've seen, this former Goldman Sachs
analyst provides a unique application of sophisticated cycle analysis to forex and related markets that
can be particularly useful for the longer-term and intermarket-focused trading styles we've covered.
While most of his material is subscription only, he regularly appears in interviews, many of which are
archived on his website, CharlesNenner.com, or searchable online. He offers free trials, so you can
sample his work for yourself at no risk.

APPENDIX B
How to Calculate Pip Values and Examples
DEFINITION
A pip is the smallest unit of price movement for any currency pair. For pairs with the JPY as the
counter currency, it's 0.01 Yen. For all other pairs, it's 0.0001 of the counter or quote currency.
For example:
For the EURUSD and most other pairs, movement from 1.4000 to 1.4001 is one pip.
For the USDJPY, a movement from 80.00 to 80.01 is one pip.
Its cash value is always in terms of the quote currency (the one on the right), which you then convert
to whatever currency your account is denominated in, using the currency pair price, which is the
actual exchange rate.

CALCULATION
Happily, you needn't go through the following, because there are plenty of free pip calculators you can
find online, and the better brokers will provide pip calculators, or their dealing platforms will show
pip values in whatever currency your account is denominated.
Still, just so you know, here's the calculation.
The basic formula for calculating a pip value (in the quote or counter currency—the one on the
right):
Pip value per lot equals 1 pip (0.0001 for most currency pairs, or 0.01 if the JPY is the counter
currency)
Divided by the exchange rate or current price of the pair
Times lot size (in base currency)
Or,

You'll then need to convert the result into the currency in which your account is denominated if that
is different from the base currency. (This will all become clear in the following examples.)
Note that a standard lot size is 100,000 units of the base currency (the one on the left). Most online
retail brokers offer mini accounts in lot sizes of 10,000 units, and micro accounts in lot sizes of 1,000
units.

EXAMPLE: EURUSD
Assuming a standard 100,000 lot size, and EURUSD price of 1.4000, account denominated in USD:

If you are trading 3 lots, each pip would be worth 3 times that amount.
If your account is denominated in USD, you'd be finished.
If it is in EUR or JPY, then you'd need to convert the $7.14 into that currency.
For example, if the account is denominated in EUR, then:

HANDY RULE OF TENS
When the account is denominated in the base currency, pip values are in units of 10 (except when the
JPY is the counter or quote currency).
This illustrates how, when the account is denominated in the base currency, the pip value is:
Standard (100,000 lots base currency): 10 units of the currency in which your account is
denominated.
Mini (10,000 lots base currency): 1 unit of the currency in which your account is denominated.
Micro (1,000 lots base currency): 0.10 units of the currency in which your account is
denominated.
For instance:
In the earlier EURUSD example, if the account is denominated in Euros, then each pip would be
worth €10 for a standard lot size, €1 for a mini lot, and €0.1 for a micro lot.
With any currency pair in which the USD is the base currency (with the majors, that only happens
with the USDJPY and USDCAD), the pip value of the USDCAD in a USD-denominated account
would be $10 per standard lot, $1.00 for a mini lot, and $0.1000 for a micro lot.
This rule is handy for those who trade the major pairs with EUR or GBP denominated accounts,
because these are usually the base currencies. The EUR takes precedence over all others as the base
currency, followed by the GBP. Thus the EURGBP is the only major pair with the GBP as the quote
or counter currency.

EXAMPLE USDCAD
Assuming a standard 100,000 lot size, and USDCAD price of 1.01935, denominated in USD:
Divide that value by the 1.01935, and you get $10/pip for a standard lot size, $1 for a mini, and $0.10
for a micro account.

EXAMPLE USDJPY: RULE OF TENS DOESN'T APPLY

WITH THE JPY
The exception to this rule occurs when the JPY is the quote currency (all the time with the majors)
because pips are in increments of 0.01 not 0.0001.
Assuming a standard 100,000 lot size, and USDJPY price of 80, account denominated in USD:

Converting that to USD: ¥12.5/80 = $0.15625/pip for a standard lot, $0.01562/pip for a micro lot,
and so on.
Pip calculation is a bit more complex for cross currencies. For the sake of brevity I'll leave that for
your own online search.1

Note
1. Here's one source to get you started: www.forexfactory.com/showthread.php?t=8568.

APPENDIX C
Forex Trading Time Zones, Liquidity, and Why These
Matter
The trading week runs 5.5 days per week, 24 hours a day. It begins in Asia Sunday afternoon Eastern
Standard Time (EST), or Sunday evening Greenwich Mean Time (GMT), and progresses each day
until the close of trading in the United States as follows.
New Zealand trading is open from 2:00 p.m. to 11 p.m. EST starting Sunday.
Sydney is open from 5:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. EST.
Tokyo is open from 7:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m. EST.
Hong Kong and Singapore are open from 9 p.m. EST to 6 a.m. EST.
Frankfurt, Germany, the primary European market, is open from 2:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. EST.
London is open from 3:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon EST. London is the world's largest forex trading
center.
New York opens at 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. EST. NYC is the second-largest forex center. Not
surprisingly, then, the greatest liquidity occurs when both London and New York are operating.
Table C.1 shows this graphically.
TABLE C.1 The Trading Day per EST
