
IIWOTHESIS TESTING: THE MECIIANICS
"Three ingredients are usually necessary for a hypothesis test: (1) a hypothesis, (2) a test statistic, and (3) some means of generating the probability distribution (sampling distribution) of the test statistic under the
assumption that the hypothesis is true."6 The term test statistic refers to
the sample statistic that is being used to test a hypothesis. Thus, the terms
are interchangeable.

228 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
To recap these items as they pertain to rule testing: (1) the hypothesis
R o is that the rule has an expected return of zero or less, (2) the test statistic is the rule's mean return obtained by back testing it in a historical sample of data, and (3) the sampling distribution represents the random
variation in the rule's mean return if it were to be tested in many independent samples. The sampling distribution is centered at a mean return of
zero, reflecting the assumption asserted by R o'
As discussed in Chapter 4, the sampling distribution can be derived in
two ways: the analytical approach of classical statistics and via computer
simulation. There are two computer-based approaches: Monte-Carlo permutation and the bootstrap. Both will be used in the case study presented
in Part Two.

The Question: Is the Test Statistic Improbable?
The basic idea of a hypothesis test is simple: an outcome (observation)
that would rarely happen under the condition that the hypothesis were
true is good evidence that the hypothesis is not true."7 If my hypothesis
that I am a good tennis player were true, then it would be rare (improbable) for me to lose 20 games in a row. To my surprise and embarrassment I
did lose 20 games in a row. That evidence implies my hypothesis is false.
Suppose a TA rule called MA50 is back tested. The MA50 rule is defined as follows: If S&P 500 close is greater than a 50-day moving average,
hold a long position in the S&P 500, otherwise hold a short position. The
alternative hypothesis (R A ) asserts that the rule has predictive power and
is, therefore, expected to earn a rate of return greater than zero on detrended data. s Zero is the rate of return expected for a rule with no predictive power. The null hypothesis (Ro) asserts that the MA50's expected
return is equal to zero or less. Ro's assertion is depicted in Figure 5.5.

Value of the Population Parameter
Asserted by Ho

Negative Returns

o

Positive Returns

FIGURE 5.5 Value of population parameter asserted by Ho'

229

Hvpothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

The horizontal axis represents expected return over the immediate practical future.
MA50's mean return is obtained by back testing the rule in a sample of
historical data. When this value is plotted on the same axis as the hypothesized value for population parameter, we get Figure 5.6.
ote that in Figure 5.6 there is a positive deviation between the value
predicted by Ho and the performance of the rule obtained in the back test.
This raises the question: Is the positive deviation so surprising that Ho
should be rejected as an implausible hypothesis?
There are two possible explanations for the positive deviation. It
could simply be due to sampling error-the rule got lucky in the particular
sample of data used for back-testing-or, it could be because the hypothesized value of zero is wrong-the rule does have predictive power and its
expected return is indeed greater than zero. The objective of the hypothesis test is to determine if the evidence, specifically the size of positive deviation, is sufficiently rare, surprising, or improbable that it would warrant
a rejection of Ho.
To assess the improbability of the evidence, the observed average
return, in particular its deviation from the hypothesized value, is evaluated in light of the sampling distribution. Recall, the sampling gives the
probability for various sized deviations between the observed value of
the sample statistic and its expected value due to sampling error. If the
observed value's deviation is greater than what could reasonably be attributed to sampling error, then Ho is rejected and the alternative hypothesis, HAl is adopted. In other words, we conclude that the rule has
predictive power.
Figure 5.7 gives us an intuitive sense of the values of the sample statistic

Value of the Population Parameter
Asserted by Ho
Sample Statistic
Back-Tested
Performance
of the rule

Deviation

Negative Returns

o

~

Positive Returns

FIGURE 5.6 Hypothesized value of population parameter compared to backtested performance.

230 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Value of the Population Parameter
Asserted by Ho
Sample Statistic
Sampling Distribution
for
Mean Return

Negative Returns

Deviation

o

Positive Returns

FIGURE 5.7 Unsurprising evidence lies well within the range of sampling variation; Ho not rejected.

that could occur due to sampling variability. Note that the sampling distribution is positioned so that the most likely value of the return is zero. This
merely reflects the value of the population parameter asserted by Ho' Also
note that the observed (back tested) value of the rule's average return falls
well within the range of random variation allowed by the sampling distribution. This is an unsurprising result. In other words, the deviation between the observed value of the test statistic and the hypothesized
(predicted) value could easily be due to sampling error. Hence the evidence is not strong enough to warrant a rejection of Ho'
Figure 5.7 makes it clear that the width of the sampling distribution is
critical in deciding if the deviation between the observed return and the
hypothesized return is large enough to warrant a rejection of HO' We saw
in Chapter 4 that the width of a statistic's sampling distribution is determined by two factors: (1) the amount of variation within the parent population which gave rise to the sample, and (2) the number of observations
comprising the sample. With respect to the first factor, the greater the
variability of the data comprising the population, in this case daily rule returns, the larger the width of the sampling distribution. With respect to the
second factor, the larger the number of observations comprising the sample, the smaller the width of the sampling distribution.
In Figure 5.8 the sampling distribution is relatively narrow. The observed value of the sample statistic lies in the outer right tail of the sampling distribution. This would be considered an improbable or surprising
observation and one that would be incompatible with the hypothesized
value. Such evidence would warrant a rejection of Ho'

231

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

Value of the Population Parameter
Asserted by Ho
Sample Statistic
Sampling Distribution
for
Mean Return
Deviation

Negative Returns

o

Positive Returns

FIGURE 5.8 Surprising (improbable) evidence at the outer edge of the range of
sampling variation; Ho rejected.

These diagrams convey an intuitive sense of how the size of the deviation between an observed value and a hypothesized value (the value predicted by the hypothesis) is used to falsify a hypothesis. To be rigorous,
this intuition must be quantified. This is done by translating the observed
value's deviation into a probability- specifically the probability of observing a deviation that large under the condition that the hypothesized value
is true. A probability that is contingent on the existence of a specified
condition, in this case that the hypothesized value is true, is called a conditional probability. Said differently, a conditional probability is a probability that is conditional upon some other fact being true.
In a hypothesis test, this conditional probability is given the special
name p-value. Specifically, it is the probability that the observed value of
the test statistic could have occurred conditioned upon (given that) the
hypothesis being tested (Ho) is true. The smaller the p-value, the greater is
our justification for calling into question the truth of Ho' If the p-value is
less than a threshold, which must be defined before the test is carried out,
Ho is rejected and HA accepted. The p-value can also be interpreted as the
probability Ho will be erroneously rejected when Ho is in fact true. P-value
also has a graphical interpretation. It is equal to the fraction of the sampling distribution's total area that lies at values equal to and greater than
the observed value of the test statistic.
Let's consider how all of this pertains to the test of a rule. For example, if a rule's return in a back test was +3.5 percent, we mark the value
+3.5 percent on the horizontal axis upon which the sampling distribution
sits. We then determine the fraction of the sampling distribution's area

232 METHODOLOGICAL. PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL. STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

occupying values equal to or greater than +3.5 percent. Suppose that this
area equals 0.10 of the sampling distribution's total area. The value 0.10 is
the sample statistic's p-value. This fact is equivalent to saying that if the
rule's true return were zero, there is a 0.10 probability that its return in a
back test would attain a value as high as +3.5 percent or higher due to
sampling variability (chance). This is illustrated in Figure 5.9.
p-value, Statistical Significance, and
Rejecting the Null Hypothesis
A second name for the p-value of the test statistic is the statistical significance of the test. The smaller the p-value, the more statistically significant the test result. A statistically significant result is one for which the
p-value is low enough to warrant a rejection of Hw
The smaller the p-value of a test statistic, the more confident we can
be that a rejection of the null hypothesis is a correct decision. The p-value
can be looked upon as the degree to which the observed value of the test
statistic conforms to the null hypothesis (Ho)' Larger p-values mean
greater conformity, and smaller values mean less conformity. This is simply another way of saying that the more surprising (improbable) an observation is in relation to a given view of the world (the hypothesis), the
more likely it is that world view is false.
How small does the p-value need to be to justify a rejection of the
Ho? This is problem specific and relates to the cost that would be incurred by an erroneous rejection. We will deal with the matter of errors
and their costs in a moment. However, there are some standards that

Null Hypothesis
&
Sampling Distribution
Mean Return

Test Statistic: +3.5%
p-value = 0.10

o
FIGURE 5.9

Area = 0.10 of total~sampllng distribution

P-Value: fractional area of sampling distribution greater than +3.5%.
conditional probability of +3.5% or more given that Ho is true.

233

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

are commonly used. A p-value of 0.10 is often called possibly significant. A p-value of 0.05 or less is typically termed statistically significant
and is usually considered to be the largest p-value that would give a scientist license to reject Ho' When the p-value is 0.01 or less it is called
called very significant and values of 0.001 or less are termed highly
significant.

Test Conclusions and Errors
A hypothesis test leads to one of two possible conclusions: (1) reject Ho'
or (2) accept Ho' What is actually true also has two possibilities: (l) Ho is
true, that is, the expected return of the rule is zero or less); or (2) Ho is in
fact false, that is, the rule's expected return is greater than zero because it
possesses some degree of predictive power. Given that the test has two
possible conclusions, and the truth has two possible states, there are four
possible outcomes. They can be illustrated by a table with four cells
shown in Figure 5.10.
The hypothesis test can err in two ways. A type I error is said to occur when a low p-value leads us to reject Ho' but in reality Ho is true. This
would be the case when a rule is truly devoid of predictive power, but by
luck it generates a sufficiently profitable back test that its p-value is low
enough to justify rejecting Ho' This is a case of the rule researcher being
fooled by randomness. The second type of error, called a type II error,
occurs when a high p-value leads us to retain Ho' when it is in fact false.
In other words, the back test fooled us into concluding the rule has no
predictive power, but it actually does and its expected return is greater
than zero.

Truth
(The Reality Only Known to God)
H o True

High
P·value

Test
Result
&
Conclusion

Ho

Ho

Rejected

FIGURE 5.10

Rule Return> 0

Correct Decision
TA Rule Useless
We Discard It

Type II Error
TA Rule Good
We Don't Use It
Opportunity Loss

Type I Error
TA Rule Useless
We Use it
Earn Zero Return
& Take Risk

Correct Decision
TA Rule Good
We Use Rule &
Make Profits

Not
Rejected
low
P-value

H o False

Rule Return < = 0

Possible outcomes of a hypothesis test.

234 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
At the time the hypothesis test is conducted, only God knows for certain if an error has occurred and of which type. Mere mortals relying on
statistical inference must accept the reality that the test's conclusion may
be in error.
From the standpoint of an objective technician, the two types of errors have different consequences. A type I error, where Ho is mistakenly
rejected, leads to the use of a worthless rule. This exposes trading capital
to risk without the prospect of compensation. A type II error causes a useful rule to be ignored, resulting in lost trading opportunities. Of the two
kinds of error, type I is more serious. Lost trading capital is worse than
lost opportunities. When capital is exhausted one is out of the game,
whereas there will always be other trading opportunities.
The hypothesis test can also be right in two ways: a correct rejection
of Ho' when the rule does have merit, and a correct acceptance of the Ho'
when the TA rule is useless.

COMPUTER-INTENSIVE METHODS FOR GENERATING
THE SAMPLING DISTRIBUTION
As previously mentioned, hypothesis testing requires a method for estimating the shape of the sampling distribution of the test statistic. There
are two ways to do this: the traditional approach of mathematical statistics, and the more recently developed computer-intensive randomization
methods. This section discusses two computer-based methods: bootstrapping and the Monte Carlo permutation.
Both the traditional and computer-intensive approaches solve the
problem of estimating the degree of random variation in a test statistic
when there is only a single sample of data and, therefore, only a single
value of the test statistic. As previously stated, a single value of a statistic
cannot convey a sense of its variability.
Computer-intensive methods estimate the sampling distribution's
shape by randomly resampling (reusing) the original sample of observation so as to produce new computer- generated samples. A test statistic is
then computed for each resample. This procedure can be repeated as
many times as desired, perhaps thousands of times, thus producing a large
set of values for the sample statistic. The sampling distribution is developed from this large set of computer-generated values. It might seem
strange that reusing the original sample of observations over and over
again would allow one to approximate the variability of a sample statistic,
yet it does! Not only does this work quite well in practice, the approach is
grounded in sound mathematical theory.

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

235

The two computer-intensive methods, the bootstrap and Monte
Carlo permutation, are similar in that they both rely on randomization.
That is, they randomly resample the original sample. However, the two
methods are different in several important respects. First, they test
slightly different versions of Ho' Although, in both, Ho asserts that the
rule being tested has no predictive power, they do so in slightly different ways. The Ho tested by the bootstrap asserts that the population distribution of rule returns has an expected value of zero or less. In
contrast, the Ho tested by the Monte Carlo permutation method asserts
that the rule's output values (+1 and -1) are randomly paired9 with future market price changes. In other words, it asserts that the rule's output is uninformative noise that could have just as easily been generated
by a roulette wheel.
Because the bootstrap and the Monte Carlo methods test somewhat
different versions of the null hypothesis, they require different data. The
bootstrap utilizes a daily history of rule returns. The Monte Carlo uses a
daily history of the rule's output values (Le., a sequence of +1 and -l's)
and a daily history of price changes for the market being traded.
The two methods also use different random sampling methods. The
bootstrap uses a randomization method called resampling with replacement, whereas the Monte Carlo randomly pairs rule output values with
market returns without replacement. This distinction will be clarified in
the description of each method's algorithm.
Because of these differences, the methods generate somewhat different sampling distributions. Therefore, it is possible that the conclusion to
reject or not to reject Ho may not always be the same. However, extensive
simulations conducted by Dr. Timothy Masters, developer of the Monte
Carlo permutation method, show that both methods generally do agree
when they are applied to detrended market data. For this reason, the hypothesis tests conducted in this book use detrended market data for both
the bootstrap and Monte Carlo methods.
The final distinction of the Monte Carlo permutation method is that it
is in the public domain, whereas the bootstrap method that is suitable for
rule testing is a patented product that is available only from its developer,
Quantmetrics. 1O
The Bootstrap

The bootstrap method was first described by Efron ll in 1979 and then refined in several later publications cited in Eric Noreen's Computer Intensive Methods for Testing Hypotheses. 12 The bootstrap derives a sampling
distribution of the test statistic by resampling with replacement from an
original sample.

236 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
The bootstrap is based on a truly amazing mathematical fact, the
bootstrap theorem. A mathematical theorem deduces a previously unrecognized truth from the established theorems and foundational assumptions (axioms) of a mathematical system. Assuming that certain
reasonable conditions are satisfied, the bootstrap theorem assures us that
it will converge to a correct sampling distribution as the sample size goes
to infinity. From a practical standpoint, this means that given a single sample of observations bootstrapping can produce the sampling distribution
needed to test the significance of a TA rule.
In its basic form, the bootstrap is not suitable for evaluating the statistical significance of rules discovered by data mining. However, a modification invented and patented by Dr. Halbert White, professor of economics
at the University of California, San Diego, extended the application of the
bootstrap to rules discovered by data mining. This modification to the
bootstrap, which is incorporated in software called "Forecaster's Reality
Check," is discussed in Chapter 6 and utilized in Chapter 9 to evaluate the
statistical significance of over 6,000 rules for trading the S&P 500.
Bootstrap Procedure: White's Reality Check. The description
that follows pertains to the use of bootstrapping in the context of testing
the statistical significance test of a single TA rule. Thus, the following description does not address the issue of data mining. Figure 5.11 illustrates

Resample 2

1,231 Observations
BS Mean = -1 .8

Resample S,000

1,231 Observations
BS Mean

=-2.6

5000
Resampled Means

1------

0.8

2------

-1.8

3------

1.9

•
•
•
SOOO---

-2.6

Bootstrapped Sampling Distribution
Of The Mean

FIGURE 5. II How bootstrapping produces the sampling distribution for the
sample mean return.

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

237

the bootstrap procedure. The double arrows between each resample and
the original sample indicate that the sampling is being done with replacement (explained below).
There are several things worthy of note in Figure 5.11. First, the original sample, represented by the large oval, is comprised of the daily returns
earned by the rule on detrended data. As discussed in Chapter 1, the detrended market data has an average daily change of zero.
Second, before the resampling operation begins, the daily returns of
the rule are adjusted by a procedure called zero-centering, not to be confused with the detrending. The zero-centering adjustment makes the mean
daily return of the rule equal to zero. In other words, if the rule was able to
earn a nonzero return on detrended data, its returns must be zero centered. This serves the purpose of bringing the daily returns into conformity with the Ho' which asserts that their average value is equal to zero.
This step is accomplished by first computing the mean daily return of the
rule and then subtracting that mean value from each daily rule return.
Once the rule's daily returns have been zero centered in this fashion we
are in a position to generate a sampling distribution that conforms to Ho's
assumption.
Third, the number of daily observations comprising each resample
must be exactly equal to the number of observations in the original sample.
The bootstrap theorem only holds true if the number of observations in
each resample is equal to the number of observations in the original sample. In the figure, the original sample is composed of 1,231 observations.
Thus, each bootstrapped resample is also comprised of 1,231 observations.
Fourth, each resample is produced by sampling with replacement.
This means that after a daily rule return has been selected at random from
the original sample and its value has been noted, it is then replaced back
into the original sample before another daily return is selected at random.
This makes it possible for an individual daily return to be selected more
than once or for it never to be selected at all for a given resample. It is this
element of randomness that enables the bootstrap procedure to model the
variability in the sample statistic.
Fifth, the diagram shows 5,000 resanlples being taken. A mean is computed for each resample. These 5,000 means are used to construct the
sampling distribution of the mean.
The sequence of steps involved in bootstrapping the sampling distribution of the mean is:
t. Calculate the mean daily return for the rule over the observations in
the original sample (1,231 in Figure 5.11).
