
Another possible substitute for the index is a futures contract on the index which
underlies the cash options. If such a contract is available, a trader can use the futures


Stock Index Futures and Options 323

contract in place of the underlying basket in his arbitrage strategies. The futures contract
is not only easier to execute than a basket, with lower transaction costs, but there will
be a 100% correlation between the futures contract and the actual index. If the futures
contract and the index expire at the same time, the futures contract and the option
values will converge to the same price at expiration. Moreover, the trader will not have
to worry about liquidating either his option or futures position. The clearing house will
automatically settle all contracts in cash at expiration.

Providing that the futures contract and the options expire at the same time, a
futures contract on the same index which underlies the cash option market is a perfect
substitute for the basket. Indeed, if the options are European with no chance of early
exercise, an arbitrage between the futures contract and options is virtually riskless. Once
the trader has completed his arbitrage, he knows that the futures contract and index
will correlate perfectly and will converge at expiration. In the United States, traders in
the S&P 500 options market at the Chicago Board Options Exchange often treat the S&P
500 futures contract traded at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange as the underlying
contract in their strategies. Traders take a similar approach on many European and
Asian exchanges which trade index options on cash and where a futures contract with
the same underlying index is also available.

If the futures contract offers an acceptable substitute for the index basket, the
problem then becomes one of the prices at which an arbitrage can be executed. While
it may be easy to buy and sell a futures contract, can it be done at prices which make a
conversion or reverse conversion profitable? If the synthetic market is mispriced by 1.00
in the index option market, and we can trade the futures contract at exactly its fair
value, there is no problem. But is that likely to be the case? If it were, everyone in the
marketplace would line up to buy or sell a synthetic in the option market, and take an
Opposing position in the futures market. This activity would force the markets back to
fair value, and any arbitrage opportunity would quickly disappear. Traders find that if
contracts are mispriced in one index market, they are often mispriced by an equal
amount in other index markets. If a synthetic underlying position (long call, short put)
is 1.00 too cheap in the option market, a trader usually finds that the futures contract
is also 1.00 too cheap. If this were not the case, everyone would take advantage of the
Situation by purchasing the cheaper contract, either the synthetic or futures contract,
and selling the more expensive. In this respect, markets are typically very efficient. A
mispricing in one market usually means a similar mispricing in all related markets.

Tf it can be traded at the right price, a futures contract on an index is perhaps the
best substitute an option trader can find. If such a contract is not available, a trader might
instead consider a futures contract on a different, but similar, index. For example, the
largest index option market in the United States is the S&P 100 (OEX) market at the
Chicago Board Options Exchange. Traders in this market are always searching for an
acceptable substitute for the underlying basket of 100 stocks. A futures contract on this

6. Options on S&P 500 futures are also traded at the CME. Because there is so little early exercise premium
in futures options, and because the S&P 500 cash options traded at the CBOE are European, it turns
out that the markets for both the futures options and cash options are almost identical.


324 Chapter 15

index would be an ideal substitute but, unfortunately, one does not exist,? However,
there is a strong correlation between the S&P 100 and S&P 500 indices and, as noted
earlier, a futures contract on the latter index is actively traded at the Chicago Mercantile
Exchange.

Using an alternative index futures contract as a substitute for the actual underlying
index presents several problems. The first is correlation. Just as a pseudo-basket may not
correlate exactly, not all indices correlate exactly, even those with many of the same
stocks. Figure 15-3 shows the spread between two highly correlated indices, the S&P
500 and the S&P 100, during 1992 and 1993. Note that the spread had a range of almost
20 index points over this period. Moreover, it was not uncommon for the spread to
change by as much as five points over a period of several weeks. This highlights the
trading risk that can arise when one index is used as a substitute for another.

In addition, not all indices expire at the same time. S&P 100 options are settled
from the closing stock prices on the last trading day, while the S&P 500 futures are
settled from the opening stock prices on the same day. Because of this, holding an S&P
100 option versus an S&P 500 futures position to expiration represents a substantial and,
for most traders, unacceptable risk. If a trader uses S&P 500 futures as a hedge against
S&P 100 options, he will almost certainly close one side of the position prior to
expiration. Traders have found that using S&P 500 futures contracts as a hedge against
S&P 100 options is a short-term solution at best.

The best solution for most index option traders is to avoid using substitute index
contracts whenever possible, and to attempt to execute all strategies within the same
index market. For arbitrage traders, this means focusing on boxes and jelly rolls, and the
time spreads, vertical spreads, and butterflies from which these strategies are con-
structed. For example, a trader might buy a call time spread, and then try to sell the
companion put time spread, thereby creating a jelly roll. Or he might buy a bull vertical
call spread, and then try to buy the companion bear vertical put spread, thereby creating
a box. Or he might look for butterflies which he believes are mispriced, and try to
combine them later with other butterflies to create relatively low risk strategies which
act much like an arbitrage.

But even boxes and jelly rolls can present problems. Both carry the risk of early
exercise. And a trader who executes a jelly roll still has to decide what to do with his
near-term synthetic position as near-term expiration approaches. For example, suppose
a trader is long the March/June 410 jelly roll:

short March 410 call long June 410 call
long March 410 put short June 410 put

At March expiration the March synthetic will be settled in cash, and the trader will be
left with the June synthetic position. If he wants to hold the position and convert it into
a reverse conversion, he will have to sell the underlying basket or a suitable substitute.
When he tries to do this he will encounter the same problems we have already

7. In the early 1980s the Chicago Mercantile Exchange did trade an S&P 100 futures contract. But the
contract was delisted due to insufficient activity.


325

Stock Index Futures and Options

pe-uer

£6190

€6-1nr
+.

e6ady ee-uer e6-PO 26 Ine zeudy ares

Se

LOE

Sb
{OO d¥S SNuIW 00S d'¥S) Peaids OOL d¥S / 005 dS :e-S} eunbly



326 Chapter 15

discussed. This means that jelly rolls, involving two expiration months, can be mispriced
in the same way a simple synthetic relationship can be mispriced within one expiration
month. If the March 410 synthetic is 1.00 too cheap, while the June 410 synthetic is
1.50 too cheap, the March/June 410 jelly roll will be 50 too cheap. But this is only in
theory, since to take advantage of the mispricing, a trader would have to be able to carry
the underlying index from March to June expiration. But there is usually no true
underlying available, only reasonable substitutes.

BIASES IN THE INDEX MARKET

Although there can be widespread mispricing of synthetic relationships in an index
option market, especially where early exercise is a possibility and options are subject to
cash settlement, we might assume that this mispricing is random. Sometimes synthetic
markets will be too expensive and sometimes they will be too cheap compared to their
theoretical values. In the real world, however, synthetic markets always seem to be
under pressure. That is, the synthetic market tends to trade at less than theoretical value.
If the synthetic market (the difference between a call price and its companion put price)
is worth 1.00, the actual market price usually seems to be something less than 1.00.
What causes this systematic, downward bias?

Index markets, with their great liquidity, are the most popular of all option markets.
They offer all types of traders—directional, volatility, arbitrage—a chance to make
decisions based on general market conditions rather than on the unique factors which
can affect individual stocks. True or not, most traders believe that the general market is
less subject to manipulation than individual stocks, so that index options markets offer
a more level playing field.

One especially active participant in index markets is the portfolio manager. A
portfolio manager is responsible for going into the market and generating a maximum
return on capital with a minimum amount of risk. Historically, portfolio managers have
achieved this goal in the equity markets by maintaining a portfolio of stocks which the
manager believed would outperform the general market. As the manager identified new
stocks which met this criteria he added them to the portfolio, while at the same time
selling off other stocks in the portfolio which had either met his performance goals or
ceased to perform as expected.

A manager with an equity portfolio might naturally want to protect his holding by
taking advantage of the hedging opportunities in an option market. For example, he
might want to buy puts to protect the stocks in the portfolio, or sell calls to enhance the
stocks’ performance. Until the introduction of index options he had to execute the
hedging strategy for each individual stock within that stock’s option market. If he owned
40 stocks and wanted to execute a uniform hedging strategy for the portfolio, the
manager had to go into the individual option markets for the 40 different stocks and
execute each hedging strategy separately. This was not only time consuming, but the
transaction costs tended to reduce the expected benefits of the hedge.

With the introduction of index options, a manager with a broadly based portfolio
realized that his holdings often mimicked an index on which derivative instruments


Stock Index Futures and Options 327

were available. If the manager believed that the characteristics of his portfolio were
sufficiently similar to the index, index options now offered a way of hedging the stocks
in the portfolio without the time consuming and costly process of executing a hedging
strategy in each individual stock.

However, the effect of portfolio hedging strategies on stock index derivatives has
peen one-sided. Whereas a professional trader will take either a long or short position
in the underlying instrument, as market conditions dictate, the vast majority of equity
portfolio managers take only long positions in equities. Even if a manager believes a
stock will underperform the market, one rarely hears of a manager selling stock short
(selling stock which he doesn’t own) as part of his investment program. Therefore, a
portfolio manager is almost always trying to hedge a long position in the market. This
means that the manager is either buying protective puts, selling covered calls, or
pursuing some combination of these strategies. The result is that there is constant selling
pressure on calls and constant buying pressure on puts.

This downward bias is also evident in stock index futures markets, where a
portfolio manager can pursue a dynamic hedging strategy, such as portfolio insurance,
by selling futures contracts to protect his equity holdings against adverse market
movement. The effect is the same as in option markets—there is always downward
pressure on the markets.

If there were a sure way to profit from this downward bias in the market,
arbitrageurs would take the opposite position in the underlying index. But we have seen
that executing an exact basket is not always possible. Moreover, when the portfolio
manager protects his long equity position by selling calls, buying puts, or selling futures,
a market maker or arbitrageur ends up taking the opposite position. He is long calls,
short puts, or long futures. If he wants to hedge his position with an underlying basket
of stocks, he must sell stocks short. And selling stocks short is never as easy as buying
stocks. While not totally prohibited in the United States, as it is in many markets, traders
who want to sell short are subject to an uptick rule (see Chapter 5). And there is no
guarantee that an uptick will occur in even one stock, let alone several hundred.®
Moreover, most traders are subject to different borrowing and lending rates. Even if a
trader can sell short all the stocks in the basket, the interest earnings from the short
Stock sale may not be the same as the interest cost when stock is purchased.

Given all these factors, the stock index market is not a symmetrical one. Many
More factors seem to result in downward pressure on synthetics and futures than
upward pressure. This does not mean that such markets can never become inflated,
with calls trading for more than expected with respect to puts, or with futures contracts
trading at greater than fair value. But this is by far the exception. In stock index markets
around the world, there tends to be constant downward pressure on derivative
Products.

8. The Chicago Stock Exchange has tried to facilitate the trading of index products by introducing the
Chicago Basket (CMX), a basket of 20 major U.S. stocks which can be traded at one time, and which
is not subject to the uptick rule. Hence, a trader who wants to be short all 20 stocks can sell the basket
without worrying about finding an uptick in each individual stock.


Chapter 15

328

cower gene eeyer tenn keer oeynr eer saynr oer

AUNejOA [e011

(%) ANWelOA pezijenuuy

xepu| AuMe|OA parjduuy

ge
(XIA) xepuy AWNeIOA perdu KAO SNsseA AWHEIOA [e140}SIH AeQ-OF XAO ‘-St aunbi4



Stock Index Futures and Options 329

Finally, there also tends to be a consistent bias in premium levels in index option
markets. This can be seen in Figure 15-4, a comparison of the 30-day historical volatility
of the OEX with the OEX implied volatility index from 1989 to 1992.9 Note that the
implied volatility is almost always greater than the historical volatility. If one believes
that the traditional theoretical pricing models are reasonably accurate, it is clear that
those who purchase index options are consistently overpaying for them.

While a professional trader would not expect to be very successful if he consistently
paid more for options than their theoretical values, such an approach is not necessarily
unreasonable for a hedger. If one thinks of options as insurance protection, there are
definite benefits that go with owning options. In particular the owner of an option has
limited risk with unlimited profit potential. Regardless of theoretical value, these are
benefits for which hedgers are very often willing to pay an extra amount. To see why,
consider a homeowner who buys insurance to protect his family. Since the insurance
company is in business to make a profit, the homeowner knows that the premiums being
charged are more than the policy’s theoretical value. Nonetheless, the homeowner is
willing to pay the extra premium for the privilege of knowing his family is protected
against calamity. In the same way, a portfolio manager who believes that his selection
of stocks will outperform the market may be willing to pay something more than
theoretical value to protect the value of the portfolio when the market moves against
him. If he believes that his portfolio will consistently appreciate by more than the cost
of the options, he may be willing to overpay since the options will protect him, while
at the same time leaving him ahead in the long run.

9. The OEX volatility index (VIX), disseminated by the Chicago Board Options Exchange, represents the
implied volatility of a theoretical at-the-money OEX option with 30 days remaining to expiration.


Se 16 &

Intermarket Spreading

While most spreading takes place within one underlying stock, commodity, or index
(intramarket spreading), a trader need not limit himself to such a narrow playing field.
If a trader can identify a relationship between contracts in two different markets, and
finds that the instruments are mispriced relative to each other, it is possible to spread
one instrument or its derivative products against another instrument or its derivative
markets (intermarket spreading).

For example, suppose a trader follows two instruments, ABC and XYZ, and decides
that ABC will be stronger than XYZ over the next several months. Based on this
assessment, the trader might create a spread by purchasing ABC and selling XYZ.

Let’s assume the trader purchases ABC at its current price of 50, and sells XYZ at
its current price of 100. If ABC rises to 53 and XYZ falls to 98, the trader will show a
five-point profit since he can buy back the spread, which he originally sold for 50, at 45.
Note that it is not necessary for ABC to rise and XYZ to fall. If ABC rises to 60 and XYZ
rises to 105, the trader will still realize a five-point profit. Or if ABC falls to 47 and XYZ
falls to 92, the trader will realize the same five-point profit. All that is necessary is that
in total points ABC is stronger, or less weak, than XYZ.

Suppose that after initiating the spread, the trader finds that ABC has risen to 60,
while XYZ has risen to 115. The spread seems to have gone against the trader as it has
widened from the original price of 50 to 55. In point terms the trader was wrong since
XYZ was five points stronger than ABC. But many traders would still contend that ABC
was stronger than XYZ since ABC rose 20% (10/50) while XYZ only rose 15% (15/100)
over the same period. If a trader chooses to measure movement in percent terms, he
cannot simply buy ABC and sell XYZ. In order to equalize the percent price changes, his
spread must be long and short an equal number of points. In order to accomplish this,
for each 100-point XYZ contract the trader sells, he must purchase two 50-point ABC
contracts. Now he is long and short an equal number of points. If ABC rises to 60 (a
20% gain) and XYZ rises to 115 (a 15% gain), he will show a profit of:

2 x (60-50) - 1 x (115 - 100) =5

Tf ABC falls 6% to 47 and XYZ falls 10% to 90, the trader will likewise realize a profit
Since:

—2 x (50 - 47) + 1 x (100 - 90) = 4

Now in order to make a profit, ABC need only be stronger (or less weak) than XYZ in
Percent terms.

331


332 Chapter 16

In our example we tried to ensure that we were long and short the same number
of points on each side of our spread. However, the situation can be further complicated if
the point values of the instruments are unequal. Suppose that each point in ABC is worth
$400, while each point in XYZ is worth $100. Now if we buy two ABC contracts and sell
one XYZ contract to equalize the point values, we find that the dollar value of our ABC
position is $400 x 2 x 50 = $40,000, while the dollar value of our XYZ position is $100
x 1x 100 = $10,000. If ABC falls 6% to 47 and XYZ falls 10% to 90, the result will be:

[-2 x (50 - 47} x $400] + [1 x (100 - 90) x $100] = -$2,400

Even though ABC outperformed XYZ in percent terms, we still ended up losing because
the dollar values of each point were different.

The trader’s ultimate goal is to equalize the dollar value of each side of his spread.
If he wants to achieve this, he must ensure that:

(ABC contracts) x (price of ABC) x (point value of ABC) =
(XYZ contracts) x (price of XYZ) x (point value of XYZ)

He must therefore sell two contracts of XYZ for each one contract of ABC which he
buys, since:

1 x 50 x $400 = 2 x 100 x $100

Putting things in slightly different form, we can express the proper ratio of XYZ
contracts to ABC contracts required for a balanced spread as:

(price ABC / price XYZ) x (point value of ABC / point value of XYZ)
= (50 / 100) x (40/10)
= 2 (2:1 ratio)

Now suppose that instead of creating his spread using the underlying instruments
ABC and XYZ, the trader decides to create his spread using options on one or both
instruments. That is, the trader wants to get long ABC and/or short XYZ by either
buying or selling an appropriate number of options. A logical starting point might be to
consider the delta positions of each spread. In traditional terms each underlying contract
has a delta of 100, and if we buy one ABC contract and sell one XYZ contract we seem
to have a neutral spread. But we already know that the price and the point value of the
instruments are different. For purposes of intermarket spreading it might be useful to
consider the dollar delta ($delta) of each instrument, the total dollar value of the
contract divided by 100:

$delta = (contract price x point value) / 100

We can interpret the $delta as the dollar value change for a one-percent change in
the price of the underlying contract. This is slightly different than the traditional
interpretation of the delta, the change in a contract’s value for a one-point change in the
price of the underlying contract. However, the $delta makes it easier to create and
evaluate delta positions between instruments trading at different prices and with
different point values,


Intermarket Spreading 333

Using the $delta calculations, for ABC we have a $delta of SO x $400 / 100 =
$200. For XYZ we have 100 x $100 / 100 = $100. For purposes of delta calculations
we can see that each delta of ABC is worth two deltas of XYZ. A balanced spread
therefore requires us to sell (buy) two deltas of XYZ for each one delta of ABC which
we buy (sell). This is simply another way of expressing the proper ratio of underlying
instruments required for a balanced spread.

We can also assign a $delta to an option by multiplying the $delta of the underlying
contract by the option’s delta, keeping in mind that, even though deltas are often
expressed in whole numbers for convenience, they really represent a percent or decimal
fraction:
