
175

176 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
However, you’ll soon discover that what worked when using historical data
often fails miserably when trading real money in real time. This problem is
well known to statisticians and economists who build mathematic models to
forecast future events. It is called curve fitting, because you are molding your
model to fit the historical data. We talk about this problem more in Chapter
15. For now, know that fine-tuning an indicator for a specific stock or index
rarely has any predictive value and you must avoid it. You simply can’t trade
using historical data. You’re better off settling on a moving average period
that satisfies the requirements for a great many situations, rather than trying
to fine-tune the time frame of a moving average to fit each stock.

Understanding Stochastic Oscillators
The stochastic oscillator indicates momentum and attempts to show buying
and selling pressure. This indicator compares current closing prices with
the recent range of high to low prices and displays the results on a chart.
Stochastic oscillator values cycle, or oscillate, between zero and 100 percent.

Calculating stochastic oscillators
The typical stochastic oscillator is measured across a 14-day period, but a
different time frame can be specified. Here’s the calculation:
%K = 100 × (closing price – lowest low (N)) ÷ (highest high (N)
– lowest low (N))
% D = 3-period moving average of %K
Where: N is the number of periods used in the calculation (usually 14)
This calculation describes a fast stochastic. The names %K and %D, respectively, identify the stochastic oscillator and the signal line. We typically use a
variation of this indicator that’s called a slow stochastic. The slow stochastic
oscillator calculation is
%K = 3-period moving average of (100 × (closing price – lowest low (N))
÷ (highest high (N) – lowest low (N)))
% D = 3-period moving average of %K
Where: N is the number of periods used in the calculation (usually 14)

Chapter 11: Calculating Indicators and Oscillators
In effect, the slow stochastic uses the %D value from the fast stochastic
calculation as its starting point. While the fast and slow stochastics look
similar when plotted on a chart, the slow stochastic is smoother and less
jumpy. It generates fewer and more reliable trading signals, but the signals
appear more slowly than with the fast stochastic. Note: You will find that
some charting packages permit you to specify different values for the moving
average period, and some even permit you to change from an SMA to an EMA.

Interpreting stochastic oscillators
As we mention earlier, the stochastic oscillator cycles between zero and 100
percent. Readings of more than 80 percent imply an overbought condition.
Readings of less than 20 percent are interpreted as an oversold condition.
As with most indicators, an overbought condition can be resolved if a stock
trades lower or enters a period of consolidation. Similarly, an oversold
condition can be resolved if a stock trades higher or enters a period of
consolidation.
Overbought and oversold conditions can persist for long periods of time;
therefore, readings that stay above 80 percent or below 20 percent are not
enough to generate trading signals. Instead, stochastic oscillator signals are
generated
✓ When the stochastic oscillator moves from below to above 20 percent,
triggering a buy signal
✓ When the stochastic oscillator moves from above to below 80 percent,
triggering a sell signal
Figure 11-4 shows a slow stochastic oscillator on a price chart for Apple
(APPL). Note the transitions from below to above 20 percent that occurred
in February, April, August, and November. All three represented good entry
opportunities for this uptrend. Also note that the stochastic buy signals
coincided with a retracement pattern. Finally, note that few of the indicator’s
sell signals, where the stochastic oscillator crosses below 80 percent,
represented good selling or shorting opportunities while Apple was trending
higher.
Some traders use a stochastic oscillator crossover strategy where buy signals
are triggered when %K crosses above %D, and sell signals are triggered when
%K crosses below %D. For our style of trading, that generates too many signals, a very high percentage of which are false, as you can see in Figure 11-4.

177

178 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis

Figure 11-4:
Chart of
Apple stock
prices
includes
a slow
stochastic
oscillator.

The stochastic oscillator is most useful when it’s used in conjunction with
other indicators. When a stock is trending, the stochastic oscillator is useful
in finding entry points within a dominant trend. In an uptrend, for example, a
buy signal that’s generated when the stochastic oscillator moves from below
to above 20 percent is likely to be a good one. The stochastic oscillator
signals many overbought conditions within an uptrend and rarely generates
useful sell signals. It also works well in trading-range situations, and you’ll
find short-term traders who use it to trigger buy and sell signals when a stock
is in a trading range.

Discovering MACD
The moving average convergence divergence indicator (MACD) is a trendfollowing momentum indicator. MACD is designed to generate trend-following
trading signals based on moving average crossovers while overcoming problems associated with many other trend-following indicators. MACD also acts
as a momentum oscillator, showing when a trend is gaining strength or losing
momentum as it cycles above and below a center zero line. MACD is an excellent indicator and an integral part of our trading toolset.

Calculating MACD
Charting packages routinely calculate MACD for you, but knowing how this
indicator is created is important for gaining a better understanding of how
it works. The MACD calculation isn’t complex; it’s just three exponential
moving averages. Here are the steps:

Chapter 11: Calculating Indicators and Oscillators
1. Calculate a 12-period EMA (see the earlier section on “Exponential
moving average”).
2. Calculate a 26-period EMA.
3. Subtract the 26-period EMA from the 12-period EMA to create the
MACD line.
4. Use the resulting MACD line to calculate a 9-period EMA to create the
signal line.
5. Plot the MACD as a solid line; plot the signal line as either a dashed or
lighter-colored line.
An additional indicator, the MACD Histogram, is usually shown as part of the
MACD. It uses a histogram to show the difference between the MACD line and
the signal line. The histogram is plotted above the zero line when the MACD
line is above the signal line, below the zero line when the signal line is above
MACD, and at zero when they cross.
Figure 11-5 shows a weekly chart of AGCO Corp. (AG) along with an MACD
indicator and an MACD Histogram. When using MACD, we prefer weekly
charts. That’s how the indicator was originally designed to be used, and for
our style of trading, a weekly MACD indicator provides more useful information about the strength and direction of a trend and potential trend reversals.
You will find that other traders use this indicator for both longer and shorter
periods as well.

Figure 11-5:
A weekly
chart of
AGCO Corp.
stock with
MACD
and MACD
Histogram.

179

180 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
AG experienced a long period of consolidation before starting to rally in
early 2006. The stock continued its ascent through 2006 and 2007. Notice the
corresponding periods on the MACD. The MACD line (the solid line) crosses
over the zero center line during the third week in February. This was a buy
signal for this stock. You might also notice that the MACD line crossed the
signal line in early January 2006. This MACD crossover signal is another early
indication suggesting a possible new uptrend. See Chapter 13 for more about
how we use this signal.

Using MACD
MACD provides a remarkable amount of information in a concise format. As
you can see in Figure 11-5, MACD oscillates above and below a center zero
line and is a good indicator for showing the direction of the dominant trend,
signaling
✓ An uptrend when the MACD line crosses above the center line
✓ A downtrend when the MACD line crosses below the center line
Some short-term traders use the signal line to trigger
✓ Buy signals when the MACD line crosses above the signal line
✓ Sell signals when the MACD line crosses below the signal line
We don’t, however, find that short-term technique to be very reliable because
it generates too many false signals. Instead, we prefer using the position of
the MACD line relative to the zero line as an indication that the stock has
begun trending.
Figure 11-6 shows a chart of weekly prices for the S&P 500 Depository
Receipts, sometimes called SPDR or Spyders. (The stock symbol is SPY.) SPY
is an exchange-traded fund that tracks the S&P 500 index.
Notice how the SPY establishes a series of higher highs and higher lows
during the period from June through October 2007, but the MACD line establishes a series of lower highs during this period. This creates what’s known
as a divergent pattern. This particular example of a divergent pattern is a
bearish divergence. In a bearish divergence, the stock establishes a series of
higher lows and higher highs, while the MACD establishes a series of lower
highs. A bullish divergence is the reverse, the stock establishes a series of
lower lows and lower highs, while the MACD establishes a series of higher
highs.

Chapter 11: Calculating Indicators and Oscillators
Divergences that occur in the same direction as the dominant trend are often
useful for entering positions. However, a divergence that is counter to the
dominant trend is less likely to be a reliable trading signal. For example, a
bearish divergence in a dominant uptrend is rarely a good signal to enter a
short position. This type of bearish divergence may, however, signal that the
stock has entered, or is about to enter, a period of retracement.
This bearish divergence on SPY is best interpreted as a signal showing that
the momentum of the multiyear S&P 500 bull market was slowing. In fact,
the market peaked in October 2007 and remained in a downtrend for many
months.
Each time the MACD line crosses above or below the signal line suggests a
potential change in the direction of the dominant trend. While this is not an
outright buy signal or sell signal, it does suggest a change may be in the wind.
In the case of a bearish divergence, the best way to exploit that information
is to monitor individual stocks and ETFs for weakness, and either close long
positions when they deteriorate, or initiate new short positions as they
present themselves. In Chapter 13, we provide additional ideas to help
integrate the information generated by the MACD indicator into a useful
trading strategy.

Figure 11-6:
Chart of the
SPY shows
a divergent
MACD
pattern.

181

182 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
Most charting packages enable you to fine-tune the MACD calculation. Many
traders vary the 12-, 26-, and 9-week values. Although nothing is inherently
wrong with this approach, you nevertheless risk the curve-fitting problem
whenever you try to find parameters that give you better results for a specific
stock. That said, Gerald Appel, the man who developed MACD, uses values different than the original 12, 26, and 9. He also uses different values to generate
buy signals than he does to generate sell signals. So feel free to experiment
and have fun after you gain some experience with the default parameters.

Revealing Relative Strength
Relative strength measures the performance of one stock against another, or
more commonly, against the performance of an index such as the S&P 500.
The idea is to determine how the stock is performing compared with the
broad market.
Unfortunately, you may run across another indicator with a similar name
when working with your charting software. The other indicator is called the
relative strength index (RSI) and it is something completely different than the
relative strength discussed here. RSI is an oscillator that is used in a similar
way as the stochastic oscillator described earlier. To keep the two separate,
we suggest you call the RSI by its initials and use the phrase “relative
strength” when you mean to compare the performance of a stock against a
broad-based index or another stock.

Calculating relative strength
Among the many ways that you calculate relative strength is simply dividing
the stock price by the index value and plotting the result, like this:
Relative strength No. 1 = stock price ÷ index value
Another technique compares the price of the stock during a given period of
time against the index during the same period. Our preference is comparing
percentage changes during the same period. The calculation looks like this:
Relative strength No. 2 = percentage change in stock price ÷ percentage
change in index value
Either of these approaches, or any other that you may invent, can be plotted
on a stock chart. Some Internet sites provide a relative strength capability.
See www.stockcharts.com/charts/performance for an example.
Unfortunately, if you’re using a charting software package, you’ll probably
have to program it into your system by using its formula-editing capabilities.

Chapter 11: Calculating Indicators and Oscillators
Or, you can look it up. Investor’s Business Daily has a proprietary calculation
for relative strength that ranks stocks based on their six-month performance.
It is a handy tool.

Putting relative strength to work
The goal when examining a stock’s relative strength is not necessarily to find
the best performing stocks in the universe of all stocks, but rather to find
stocks that are performing better than the average stock as each stock signals
a buy.
Relative strength is one of the final pieces to the technical analysis puzzle.
You’ve found a trading candidate when you find a stock that:
✓ Exhibits fundamentals as a strong company
✓ Has earnings that are growing faster than average
✓ Functions well in a strong sector
✓ Operates in a growing economy
✓ Is approaching a technical buy signal on its bar chart
✓ Performs better than the average stock
These characteristics favor a long position, of course. For short position candidates, reverse each criterion.

183

184 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis

Part IV

Developing Strategies
for When to Buy and
Sell Stocks

A

In this part . . .

ll of the pieces come together in this part as we
show you how to get started as a trader and use
fundamental analysis and technical analysis to develop
a profitable strategy. In addition, we show you how to
create a trading system of your own that matches your
trading goals and your personality, and we explain how
you can effectively implement that strategy and work with
your broker to enter trading positions and exit them
under the right circumstances. But most important of all,
in this part, we show you how to manage your money to
achieve profitable results.

Chapter 12

Money Management
Techniques: When to Hold ’em,
When to Fold ’em
In This Chapter
▶ Building your trading characteristics
▶ Trading successfully and cutting your losses
▶ Managing your holdings
▶ Protecting your money
▶ Knowing your risks

Y

ou may find this hard to believe, but some successful traders have
more losing trades than winning trades. How? Their profits from
winning trades overwhelm the losses from losing trades. The key to this
success is knowing when to hold ’em and when to fold ’em — disciplined
money management. You must develop a discipline that keeps your losses
under control by quickly closing losing positions. The trick is to follow the
rules you set. Good money management minimizes your trading losses
when they occur and helps you realize a profit when it hits you right in the
old kisser. Recognizing winners and losers — and setting your target prices
before ever entering a position — is crucial to your money management
strategy. In this chapter, we give you a set of rules to follow to get you started.

Identifying Important Characteristics
of a Successful Trader
Successful traders share a common trait. You’ll find that they all successfully
manage their money. The critical points of successful money management
may be difficult to implement, but they’re easy to identify. They include

188 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
✓ Planning your trades carefully by identifying entry and exit points
✓ Minimizing losses by ruthlessly adhering to your stop-loss points
✓ Protecting your profits with trailing stops
✓ Exiting your position when the trend ends
When using technical analysis to make your trades, you won’t get the
lowest entry price or the highest exit price. That means you will always leave
something on the table. The idea is identifying when a trend has begun,
entering the position, and riding the trend until it ends.

Opening the Door to Successful Trading
Because your way to successful trading is disciplined money management,
the key to opening that door to success is developing a plan for your trades
and sticking to that plan, even if it goes against what your gut tells you.
Sometimes you think you’ve picked what seems like the perfect stock, but
then it just doesn’t perform the way you expected.
Before entering that trade, you need to set an entry point, the price at which
you’ll enter a trade, and an exit point where you will exit the trade if it goes
poorly. Don’t deviate from your plan, even if it means accepting the fact that
you made a mistake. We discuss setting entry and exit points in the section
“Protecting Your Principal.” For more info about entering and exiting positions, check out Chapters 10 and 11.
Although it may be cliché, it’s nevertheless true: You need to cut your losses
short and let your profits run. In other words, fold (sell) when your losses first
appear and hold as your profits continue to build.
Your most important money management goal is to get out of losing positions
as quickly as possible. After taking normal up and down price fluctuations (as
discussed in Chapters 9 and10) into consideration, you must develop a
method of recognizing when a stock is not behaving the way you expected,
and as a result, be prepared to close a losing position before it consumes too
much of your trading capital. Try to keep losses below 5 or 6 percent for any
position. Or you could think in terms of your total trading capital and try to
keep the loss from any single position below 1 or 2 percent. Unfortunately,
achieving a balance between recognizing your losers and dumping them in
time (knowing when to fold ’em) is more difficult than it sounds.

Chapter 12: Money Management Techniques: When to Hold ’em, When to Fold ’em

Managing Your Inventory
To be successful, you need to treat trading as a business and stocks as your
business inventory. Just like any other business, you must carefully manage
your inventory to succeed. Factors paramount to successful trading are:
✓ Viewing trading as a business. You trade to make money. Sometimes
you pick the wrong stock and have to accept a loss. Losses are a part of
any business. The key to good business planning is minimizing losses.
✓ Overcoming the most common trader’s dilemma. Many traders get
caught up in the moment, trying to defend their position even as it
moves in the wrong direction. When your choices no longer make good
business sense, you must quickly make cold, hard decisions and decisively act to cut losses short.
✓ Approaching the solution to your trading dilemma as if it’s a business
problem to solve. Sell when you stand the chance of making a healthy
profit or when you must accept that you’ve made a mistake and it’s time
to move on. Select your entry and exit target points before you buy the
first share of any stock.

Thinking of trading as a business
So, how do you start thinking of trading as a business? Conceptually, it’s
simple. Like any other business, traders have fixed costs; variable costs;
finite amounts of working capital, assets, and liabilities; fickle customers
(or fickle market conditions); fickle vendors (market conditions again); and
inventory. Managing these business factors results either in profits or losses,
and you, of course, want to maximize the profits and minimize the losses.
The most important step you can take in treating trading as a business is
thinking of the contents of your portfolio as your inventory.
Traders need to manage their businesses with the same clear-eyed, coldhearted detachment as any successful business owner. But many traders,
even the experienced, find thinking about trading as a business a difficult task.
They make a decision, take a position, and stick with it regardless of how far
prices go down — even when their stock flushes farther down the toilet.

189

190 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
Recognizing the trader’s dilemma
Selling is hard. For some reason it’s emotionally more difficult to close a
position, especially a losing position, than it is to open it. Traders rationalize
holding a losing position by saying to themselves, “I’ll give it some room to
work out, it’s only a paper loss.” But that rationalization is foolhardy. You
never hear traders describe a winning trade as a paper gain, and you shouldn’t
rationalize losing positions that way, either.

Falling in love
Traders fall in love with their stocks. Understanding how falling in love with
a stock can happen is easy. You spend many a late night finding the right
stock. You evaluate the economy, find a strong sector, research the financial
condition of the top companies in the sector, and check the charts.
You didn’t mean for it to happen, but you try to justify your actions as
nothing more than a fling . . . really. You find a stock that looks promising,
and then something clicks. You hardly notice at first, but now you’re in love.
So you enter your trade, and . . . your stock’s price goes the wrong way.
Which way is the wrong way depends on your position. If you own the stock
and its price falls, obviously that’s the wrong way. But if you sell the stock
short, the wrong way is if its price rises. We discuss the mechanics of selling
short in Chapter 14. Either way, you’re losing money.

Breaking up is hard to do
After all the late nights, the hard work, and the brilliant analysis, you may
end up asking yourself, “How could I have been so wrong?” You’re not alone.
We just kept thinking: “How can everyone else be so wrong? This is a great
stock. It has to go up. We’ll wait for everyone else to come to their senses, to
realize the error of their ways, and then this trade will turn out just fine.”
The idea that the market may not love your stock, too, sometimes is hard to
swallow. After you’ve taken a position, a psychological quirk (everyone has it)
makes you want to be right. Somehow, you need to overcome this quirk.
Otherwise, it can lead to many losses and possibly to financial ruin.
