
266

Inside the Currency Market

“If Qo is replaced by Q1, the numerator equals market value and the denominator is replaced by a divisor represents initial market value and sets the base
value.” Recognize the similarities of the SMI and the German DAX indices.
Dow Jones indices are ﬂoat adjusted and price weighted. Price weight
means the weight is commensurate with price (DJ Indexes). Charles Dow
calculated his index by adding stock prices and dividing by the number of
stocks (DJ Indexes). Today, add prices of components and divide by the
current divisor. The divisor is published daily in the Wall Street Journal and
is employed to hold the index steady in terms of stock splits, mergers, and
acquisitions (DJ Indexes). The base value 40.94 of the Dow 30 Industrial
Average is derived from 1896 (DJ Indexes). Dow Indices that include the
Dow 65 Composite, Utility and transportation averages are calculated every
two seconds, every 15 seconds during German DAX trading.
The Dow Transportation index comprises 20 of the top transportation
companies and predates the Dow 30 average by almost two years (DJ Indexes).

Transportation Index, New Zealand Dollar/U.S. Dollar
and Australian Dollar/U.S. Dollar

Consider the Dow 30 year to date increased 9.74 percent, the Dow
Transportation Average increased 17.51 percent, Australian dollar/U.S. dollar
price increased year to date from 8800 to 1.0110, and New Zealand dollar/
U.S. dollar increased from 7041 to 7970.

Some Things to Consider
Traditional Dow Theory aligns with the supposition that the Dow Industrial
averages is the measure of manufacturing health while the transportation
index is the measure of transporting manufactured goods. Each index moves
traditionally in conjunction with each other as a measure of an economy
in proper order. Australian dollar and New Zealand dollar can be measured
in terms of the transportation index due to the vital importance transportation
plays in the shipment of Australian dollar and New Zealand dollar goods to
and across the United States. The idea is a healthy economy will see shipment
rates in terms of rail, air, and land decrease and beneﬁt both currencies. This
is not the only Australian dollar and New Zealand dollar measure but both
pairs strongly correlate to transportation indices. Rare mention is rendered
due to many new instruments with a short-term focus.

Stock and Bond Markets

267

The Dow Utility average was ﬁrst calculated in January 1929 with a
base of 86.64 and 15 present stocks in the index (DJ Indexes). The index
comprises electric and natural gas companies (DJ Indexes). Traditionally,
rising utility prices was a sign of falling interest rates, and rising interest
rates saw averages decline as interest cost to electric companies rose and fell.
Some argue this phenomenon doesn’t hold any longer due to deregulation
(DJ Indexes).
U.S. Dollar/Swiss Franc and Dow Jones Utility Average

Consider 2010 year to date total returns of 6.42 percent, 4.06 percent
total for ﬁve years, with a 2010 dividend yield in 2010 of 4.30 percent (DJ
Indexes). Now consider U.S. dollar/Swiss franc began 2010 at 1.0265 and sits
at 0.9598 presently. The inverse correlation is fairly consistent year to year,
which could say that the Utility Index tops during year end as the currency
price drops under a normal wave pattern.
Treasury bond, S&P, and Dow Jones futures trade almost around the
clock on Globex and are quite easy to track.
Interest Rates

Most important in terms of currency pairs is the purpose of trade and movements in interest rates, and interest rates are determined ﬁrst by the most
interest-rate sensitive instruments. In the United States, Fed funds is what
prices bonds and bonds are what determine direction for stock markets. OCR
determines New Zealand and Australia movements in terms of bonds and
stock markets.
Consider Fed funds contracts begin at $5 million, $5 million for Australia
OCR contracts. The course is to follow the smart money. But during the
course of any trading day, rates can change up or down depending on market circumstances, so the focus switches to bonds, yields, and stock markets.
Stock markets are always ancillary indicators, while bonds, yields, and interest
rates are primary indicators because the cost of money is determined, so
therefore can a cost be valued for currency pairs. Currency pairs are moneymarket instruments, so prices are reﬂected in interbank trading as bonds and
rates are factored. The methodology should be to focus on those short-term
instruments ﬁrst before the bond, yield, and stock market.

268

Inside the Currency Market

Conclusion

The bond/yield interplay is reﬂected and priced into stock markets. Stock
markets as an indicator are then a factor that can be used to gauge spot prices.
Each currency pair has a characteristic in its movement and purpose from
market to market. Each market is quite different depending on the pair.
The euro is one pair where movements are the same throughout all markets.

Inside the Currency Market: Mechanics, Valuation, and Strategies
by Brian Twomey
Copyright © 2012 Brian Twomey

CHAPTER 9

Currency Cycles,
Currency Futures,
Options, and Volatility
The purpose of this chapter is ﬁrst to understand currency cycles and how
those cycles were ﬁrst applied to market instruments. To know inverted pairs
is to know how to apply the right indicator. Gann and Elliot are the premier
indicators and offered with detailed explanations. A pure cycle indicator, how
it is applied, methodology, and formula are explained in depth. E-Quivalents
are discussed at length due to its insight as not only a market tool but its
many functions as an insightful market guide.
A detailed and insightful discussion of options is offered, including how
to factor option premiums, how to know and detect barrier options, and
implied volatility and its calculation.
Volatility and volatility indicators in terms of various formulas, calculations, strategies, purposes, and uses are discussed with a step-by-step detailed
approach. Popular risk models and their purposes and uses are addressed.
All essential information, calculations, formulas, purposes, methodologies, and historic frameworks are discussed in depth and detail in order for
those methods to easily be applied in any trade plan.
In order to properly measure such currency pairs as euro/U.S. dollar
and U.S. dollar/euro, it’s imperative to understand these pairs in relation
to currency cycles and cycle measurements, a topic with ﬁrm adherents or
diametrically opposite views. The concept of cycles particularly as it relates
to currency trading is certainly not new and is quite popular among
researchers and found in many different research reports. All reports vary
however in lengths of cycles in relation to time. If historic currency-pair tops
269

270

Inside the Currency Market

and bottoms can be the measure since the euro introduction, currency cycles
last anywhere from 12 to 16 weeks, although 16 is on the high side as that
occurred only once since the euro inception in 1999. Notice the correlation
with cycle tops and bottoms and seasonality. The variation of reports may be
because only one side of the inversion is measured. Another may be related to
the historic understanding of cycles.
Cycles in the modern day were measured in terms of business peaks
and troughs to predict recession and expansion and many can be credited
historically. Nokolai Kondratieff identiﬁed 54-year cycles, Simon Kuznets
found 18-year cycles, Clement Juglar is noted for the long nine-year cycle,
and Joseph Kitchens identiﬁed the four-year cycle. Joseph Schumpeter in
1939 published a deﬁnitive two-volume set called Business Cycles. It was only
a matter of time before market professionals employed various cycle methods
to predict stock prices.
In simple terms, William Gann’s great contribution to technical analysis
was to divide time and price by geometric angles, while Ralph Elliott’s ﬁvewave pattern employed Fibonacci numbers to measure each wave. Both
are wave-pattern forms, but both can be measured in relation to time and
price with accuracy.
The basics of Gann say a price over time is equal to a one-by-one angle
drawn at 45 degrees. The idea is that prices rise and fall based on time. Angles
provide support or resistance and highlight where the market is trading at
any given moment. Gann devised nine lines, nine angles, each with various
degrees relative to price and time.
Elliott’s waves comprise ﬁve: A, B, C, D, and E. The basics of Elliott in
up trends says A waves rise, B waves correct, C waves rise, D waves are down,
and E waves rise. Then the down waves begin with E waves falling to an
A, B becomes an upward correction, and C continues the downtrend. Smaller
waves may exist within the patterns, called impulse waves, so Fibonacci numbers are employed to measure time and price in relation to dominant waves.
The exact timing of the study of pure-cycle analysis in markets is anyone’s
guess. One possible source is JM Hurst’s 1970 classic Proﬁt Magic of Stock
Transaction Timing. With degrees in mathematics and physics, Hurst built
on the work of nineteenth century mathematician Joseph Fourier and the
Fourier Transform and applied it to stock transactions.
Hurst invented a cyclic system that claimed “8.9 percent yield per transaction every 9.7 days” (Proﬁt Magic). The book is a highly recommended
read, but it is not for the mathematically challenged.
The basic components of Hurst are summarized in Technical Analysis,
the Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians by Charles Kirkpatrick

Currency Cycles, Currency Futures, Options, and Volatility

271

and Julie Dahlquist. Three basic aspects are measured by cycles: amplitude,
period, and phase.
“Amplitude is measured as the distance of the horizontal axis from peak
to trough, period is the distance between consecutive lows or consecutive
highs and phase is how far from the y-axis cycles begin. The location along
the cycle of each point is measured by this formula: f(x)  a  cos(bx  c)  d,
where a  amplitude, bx  period (constant b times  time in radians), c  phase
in radians and d  error factor.” (Kirkpatrick and Kahlquist) Lastly, “Hurst
measured period lengths in multiples of two or three longer or shorter than
next larger or smaller cycles. A 20-day cycle says another longer cycle of
40- or 60-day length exists. Cosine waves, multiple waves are each calculated
and added to form a summation.” The question of does this method work,
can be answered with just as well as Elliott and Gann, but much more exists
to the methodologies presented here. For example, Hurst factored frequencies, parameters of prices, and measured corrections. Hurst stated in Proﬁt
Magic that his methodologies took 10 years to perfect. The study of cycles
in this modern day can possibly be credited to Hurst and incorporated by
others.
For example, Doug Schaff invented an indicator for currency traders
called the Schaff Trend Cycle that was based on a variation of Hurst. This is
the ﬁrst of its type, and is based on Schaff ’s years of cycle research. Schaff ’s
idea was to ﬁnd an indicator that traded into the dominant cycle trend. This
was accomplished by blending an Exponential Moving Average and Fast
Stochastics with a cycle component.
For currency pairs, the best measure is by far the ABC pattern, where A
and B are up candles and C corrects down, or A and B are down candles and
C corrects up. Compare this pattern to Elliot’s ﬁve waves and one can understand critical arguments to cycles.
Currency pairs cycle from peaks to troughs, as one inverted pair tops,
then the other bottoms, or relatively close. The question is the measure of
inversions.
CME Group Equivalents

An extraordinarily useful tool to traders is Equivalents, offered by the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange (CME). Equivalents operates 23 hours a day from
Sunday to Friday and can be viewed by anyone around the world from any
computer at cmegroup.com/equivalents. Equivalents allows traders to view
currency-pair futures prices live in any contract month, and view live volume

272

Inside the Currency Market

and notional amounts. More useful is the ability to determine spot prices,
cash positions, and a four-time daily update of forward points.
First, view high, lows, and last trades to determine the parameters of
the market. Then determine market bids and offer prices, important because
these prices can represent major support and resistance; more important is
the ability to view market liquidity.
Liquidity is the key to determine if a pair will break a support or resistance
point or if a pair will bounce and maintain a range. Nearest-term contracts are
always represented ﬁrst. Futures contracts settle quarterly based on International
Money Market standards, M  June, U  September, Z  December, and
H  March.
Bids are buy prices and offers are sell prices. What is shown is how many
contracts are bid and offered at various bid and offer prices. This will determine market direction in terms of longs and shorts. If 200 contracts are bid
at a certain price and 50 contracts are offered at another price, this says the
market is long, so spot prices can go long. Bids and offers can be seen in
longer-dated contracts.
Another tool is to convert futures prices to spot equivalents. Euro is the
most widely traded of all currency pairs and trades at $12.50 per tick, which
converts to $125,000 euros per contract. The formula is number of contracts
multiplied by contract size is equal to currency denomination. For example,
50 contracts multiplied by $125,000 is equal to $6,250,000. This represents
how many euros are offered. For bid prices, 200 contracts multiplied by
$125,000 is equal to $25,000,000 euros bid. The market can now be viewed
in euro liquidity terms.
Japanese yen/U.S. dollar trades yen at 12,500,000, British pounds/U.S.
dollar at 62,500, Canadian dollar/U.S. dollar at Canadian100,000, Swiss
francs/U.S. dollar trade at Swiss francs 125,000, 100,000 for Australian
dollar/U.S. dollar. Ticks are equal to 0.0001, except for the yen quoted at
0.000001 (CME).
The point here is the quote conventions. The question is how many U.S.
dollars will it take to buy one euro? U.S. dollar pairs are quoted directly as
how many dollars to buy X amount of another currency.
In this situation, euro was well bid at a certain price. This says the market sees a long euro/U.S. dollar. In inverted cycle terms, the market also sees
a short U.S. dollar/euro. This example serves for the British pounds/U.S.
dollar, Australian dollar/U.S. dollar, and New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar, all
traded pairs at the CME and offered through Equivalents.
The opposite holds for non-dollar pairs such as Japanese yen/U.S. dollar.
This is the standard arrangement of trade for the yen. It’s called an indirect

Currency Cycles, Currency Futures, Options, and Volatility

273

quote. It asks how many yen to buy one U.S. dollar? This example could
be any pair arranged in this manner. For Japanese yen/U.S. dollar, determine direction in terms of contracts, and evaluate in U.S. dollar/Japanese yen
terms which pair to trade. How far each will trade in cycle terms can be found
in cash equivalents.
Forward points are shown at bid and offer prices. Forward points represent interest-rate differentials between currency pairs, important because they
establish cash equivalents for each currency pair. All pairs will have different forward points due to different interest rate differentials. An interest-rate change
in a nation can change forward points dramatically. The CME updates forward points four times daily to reﬂect interest-rate changes in the short term.
Interest-rate changes are reﬂected in cash prices. The formula is futures rate
minus forward points is equal to spot cash equivalents.
The methodology now is to evaluate spot-cash prices to futures prices.
Cash prices are almost always above futures prices, it’s the cost of capital now
instead of the future. More important is what is the relationship between spot
and futures prices. Forward prices are established in this manner by forward
price is equal to spot price plus forward points.
Spreads are factored as:
Spot  (European foreign currency  Eurodollar deposit rate)
 (t/360)  100 or S  (Eurodollar rate European foreign currency)
 (t/365)  100 (CME)
This equation answers the question is futures trading at a discount or premium to the cash spot price? Both formulas establish either the direct or
indirect quote convention. This methodology allows a view in terms of central bank meetings, rate determinations, and direction to pairs when interest
rates are raised or lowered. A caveat, Eurodeposits are established daily for
not only U.S. dollar but the euro, British pounds, and Swiss francs are also
priced and reported shortly after the British Bankers Association (BBA)
LIBOR release.
Forward points are calculated as:
Spot quote/Bid  (I quote  I base)  time/360  100
Add forward points to the spot quote and it’s a forward quote. A forward quote
is what the market is willing to pay for future spot. This is the measure to factor
inversions. Yet it is not necessarily the method to factor forward-exchange rates.
Forward exchange rates are found in forward interest rate formulas.

274

Inside the Currency Market

Approximately 30 years ago, the International Standardization Organization
(ISO) located in Switzerland determined quoting conventions for currency
pairs. Today it’s called the International Standards Organization. Pairs quoted
as the foreign currency ﬁrst such as euro/U.S. dollar or British pounds/U.S.
dollar is termed the American-quote convention, a direct quote in market
parlance, while U.S. dollar/Japanese yen or U.S. dollar/Swiss francs are
known as European quotes and quoted as an indirect quote. The establishment, methodologies, and factors of those decisions derived from the ISO
4217:2008 country-codes sectors of the ISO.
The proper name is Codes for the Representation of Currencies and Funds
is and maintained by SIX Interbank Clearing, located in Zurich, Switzerland,
but they fall under responsibility of the British Standards Institution, an ISO
member from the United Kingdom(ISO).
The purpose of 4217 is to enhance trade, commerce, and banking across
borders with identifying features (ISO). Nations are identiﬁed by a threeletter alpha and three- number numeric code. Alpha U.S. dollar is identiﬁed
by numeric 840 and includes nations that use U.S. dollars in exchange. The
Alpha euro is identiﬁed by numeric 978 and includes all nations that use
the euro in currency exchanges. ISO also establishes decimal points for minor
currencies. The last ISO list was published in 2008, while the prior list was
published in 2001 (ISO).
Currently, 41 pairs trade at the CME and a vast majority are offered
on Equivalents. Pairs such as British pounds/Japanese yen, Australian dollar/
Japanese yen, Canadian dollar/U.S. dollar, and U.S. dollar/Swiss francs can
all be evaluated for direction and inversion terms. A further method is the
March 2009 introduction of the E-micro contracts.
E-Micro

E-Micro currency futures contracts are one-tenth the size of standard contracts so euro is attendant as .001  1 point and Japanese yen at .01  1
point. Currently six pairs trade on Globex around the clock on the trading
ﬂoor, and all can be viewed on Equivalents with the same features as standard
contracts. The six pairs are: euro/U.S. dollar, Australian dollar/U.S. dollar,
British pounds/U.S. dollar, U.S. dollar/Japanese yen, U.S. dollar/Canadian
dollar, and U.S. dollar/Swiss francs. The point of note is pair arrangements.
Standard futures contracts trade Japanese yen/U.S. dollar, Canadian
dollar/U.S. dollar, and Swiss francs/U.S. dollar, while E-Micro contracts
trade U.S. dollar/Japanese yen, U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar, and U.S.

Currency Cycles, Currency Futures, Options, and Volatility

275

dollar/Swiss francs. This is termed spot market, interbank market, or cash
markets to align market parlance properly. Since both contracts trade opposite arrangements, no better instrument is available to measure inversions. As
one pair cycles up, the inverted pair cycles down. But inversions, like cycles,
never match perfectly at times so what is important is directional determination of each paired inversion.
Options and Volatility

The latest preferred method to trade currency pairs is by option premiums
and volatility. Such a new and sophisticated strategy can only say old methodologies are no longer useful as a strategy nor even as a guide.
For example, Put/Call ratios were once the measure to determine if the
market was long or short. If call buyers exceeded put sellers across all strike
prices, the market is considered long, while put sellers exceeding call buyers is
considered a short market. Traders would then pick and choose strike prices
that aligned to their preferred time frames and determined ratios of longs to
short. While put/call ratios still may work for stock options or other markets,
it appears to be outmoded as a currency-trading plan. The next method was
risk reversals.
Popular market-risk-reversal deﬁnition says it’s the difference in implied
volatility between a currency option same strike, same expiration of an outof-the-money delta 25 put and delta 25 call. The purpose is to measure future
volatility in relation to deltas, but more importantly to gauge market direction. As future volatility increases, deltas will increase as the value of options
increase due to higher premiums expected by the market. The Chicago Board
Options Exchange (CBOE) deﬁnition of delta is “the amount an option’s
theoretical value will change for a one unit change in price of the underlying
instrument.” Out-of-the-money options are employed as a strategy to follow
the underlying currency pair. Delta is a 30-day time frame and the shortest of
the Greek options: Gamma, Vega, Theta, and Rho. From an opposing view,
as an option moves toward expiration, deltas decrease and end at zero at expiration. Some then graph and plot strategy based on a skew, yet it accompanies
successes and failures. This is because enormous fallacies are associated with
this strategy.
The ﬁrst question must be what type of options were measured: over
the counter, exchange-traded options, or both. The second question: were
European and/or American options considered? This is vitally important
because European options are exercised at expiration while American options
