
the impulse swing—the pole. I discuss specifics of how to draw Fibonacci grids in Chapter 6, so use
that as a reference if you are unfamiliar with Fibonacci retracements. Usually, the retracement portion
of the flag will retrace up to 50 percent (the halfway point) of the impulse before finding support. You
don't even need to draw a Fibonacci grid to find the half-way point. Measure the distance from the
current swing high to the prior swing low and then determine the midpoint of the swing. This will be
your reference point. However, it's often helpful to have the 38.2 percent and the 61.8 percent
Fibonacci retracement numbers handy when making a trading decision. You can enter your position as
you see a reversal candle form at the 50 percent retracement price and then place your stop under the
61.8 percent retracement price for added protection. If price retraces greater than 61.8 percent of the
initial impulse, then that deeper-than-usual retracement reduces the odds that we will see the full
target of a measured move achieved, so you might want to go ahead and exit a position, or not put on a
bull flag position (if not long already) that retraces deeper than the 61.8 percent Fibonacci line.
Fifth, you can look for a three-wave, ABC-style retracement to comprise the retracement or flag
portion of the pattern. Identifying simple three-wave retracements is the easiest form of Elliott Wave
(discussed in Chapter 7) analysis, as the theory teaches that retracements against an impulse or
uptrend take the form of a three-wave move, where the A-wave is a mini-down move, the B-wave is
a mini-up move, and the C-wave is the final mini-down move that suggests that the correction has run
its course and that the main uptrend will be resuming at the final point in the C-wave. If you look
closely at the ideal flag, captured in candlestick form, in Figure 5.5, then you can see the mini-three
wave progression, ABC, that comprised the retracement portion of the larger pattern. Waiting for a
three-wave sequence to appear can prevent you from thinking that price has found a bottom too early
in what is actually a B-wave rally that then resolves into a tiny C-wave down. You can enhance your
confidence and increase your edge if you can clearly observe a mini-three wave structure unfolding
within the flag retracement portion.
The perfect entry into a bull flag pattern would be one that derives from an initial impulse swing up
in the context of an established uptrend, where the flag portion pulls back to the 50 percent Fibonacci
retracement price in an ABC three-wave progression that also happens to correspond either with the
lower parallel trendline channel of the flag itself or a rising short-term moving average that also
forms a bullish reversal candle at the confluence support area. You would take the trade entry after a
bullish reversal candle has completed and price has broken the high of that candle on the next bar.
You would then place a stop either under the 61.8 percent Fibonacci retracement of the initial
impulse, or under the most recent swing low from the reversal candle.
While you may never find all of these ideal conditions in alignment in your personal trading, you
will likely find at least two or three components in alignment when you are observing a potential bull
flag in real time. Entering as close to the low of the swing of the retracement as possible will give
you the greatest reward-to-risk relationship for a larger, defined target with a smaller, defined risk.

Coca-Cola Example: Bull Flag
Coca-Cola's daily chart through 2009 gives us a good example of the bull flag forming with some of
the enhancements mentioned above (see Figure 5.6).
FIGURE 5.6 A Confluence Bull Flag Example in Coca-Cola Daily Chart through 2009

Instead of seeing an ideal version of a bull flag, Coca-Cola (KO) gives us a chance to see a sixmonth bull flag formation in the real world. I've also added the 50-day simple moving average along
with the Rate of Change momentum oscillator to show some of the examples of how to enhance a
standard bull flag pattern. I also drew a Fibonacci retracement grid (described in Chapter 6) to
measure the price retracement—flag portion—from the high to the low of the pole. Finally, I labeled
abc to show the three-wave Elliott style correction that can guide your decisions as to when to enter a
bull flag trade.
In context, Coca-Cola was in a prevailing daily chart uptrend after forming a bottom at $38.00 per
share along with the broader stock market in March 2009. Price consolidated from June to September
2009 (an example of the Price Alternation Principle as described in Chapter 3) and then broke out of
the upper resistance at $53.00 per share in early September. Price then rallied sharply in a single
swing that simultaneously formed a new price high and new ROC oscillator high (labeled NPH and
NMH respectively). According to the momentum principle, when price and a momentum oscillator
form a new high simultaneously, odds favor a higher high yet to come in price after an initial
retracement. In this case, the retracement developed into a bull flag price pattern.
We can label the pole portion as the entire swing, with a small retracement, from $49.00 to $55.00
per share. The chart above is a good example because there is a small retracement of four days in late
September that does not constitute a full swing, but rather a mini-retracement in the context of a larger
price swing. It's rare that you will see a perfect bull flag that rallies every single bar in the pole, so
allow for a few bars of retracement when determining where the pole ends and begins.
Price retraced, starting with a gap, in mid-October to form an abc three-wave correction that lasted
until November began. Recall that it is important to assess supply and demand, as well as the logic of

both bulls and bears, when contemplating taking a trade based on a price pattern. The retracement
portion often reflects the orderly, not panicked, selling from bulls who purchased shares at lower
prices and then realize the share price has rallied quickly, so they begin to lock in (sell) profits on any
weakness after a sharp rally. Short sellers may decide to enter new short-sale trades as
overbought/oversold oscillators register an overbought condition, or play for mean reversion by
shorting a stock that is deemed overextended beyond its 50-day moving average.
Once price retraced back to the rising moving average, these short sellers will likely cover their
position, buying back their shares for a profit, while traders who see the potential bull flag will also
begin buying shares as price retraces to an expected support level, such as the 38.2 percent Fibonacci
retracement at $52.83 or the rising 20-day moving average, also at the $53.00 level. The main idea is
that a shift in the supply/demand relationship occurs at expected support levels as traders buy shares,
either to cover short positions or initiate new long positions, into an expected support level.
If you are trading this pattern, this is the spot that you should get long: when price retraces to the
confluence of the 38.2 percent or 50.0 percent Fibonacci retracement and a key rising moving average
(like the 20-, 50-, 100-, or 200-day averages). In this case, price touched the exact confluence of the
38.2 percent Fibonacci retracement and the rising 50-day simple moving average on November 3,
2009, giving aggressive traders an immediate buy signal at $52.83. These traders would place their
stops either just under the 50 percent Fibonacci retracement at $52.00, which serves as a logical point
because $52.00 is a round-number psychological support zone and the price is just beneath the rising
50-day moving average. Traders willing to accept more risk from a wider stop would place their stop
under $51.00, which was the 61.8 percent moving average. In the event that you bought shares at
$52.83 and price continued to fall, breaking under the 61.8 percent retracement, the odds of price
completing a full price target for the bull flag, or that a bull flag is developing, are reduced, so you
would want to exit your position when the odds deteriorate.
Aggressive traders look to enter on the immediate pullback to a known price level, and they will
buy shares without waiting for confirmation that price is rallying. This allows them to enhance their
risk/reward relationship, in that they have a much closer logical stop (the $51.00 area) and are
playing for a much larger target, which is a projection or measured move of the pole—in this case
$7.00, which is the high of the pole at $55.50 minus the low of the pole at $48.50 added to the
expected low of the swing at $52.80. Entering at the $53.00 level allows for a $2.00 stop to play for a
$7.00 target, for a $7.00 to $2.00 reward-to-risk relationship, or a three and a half-to-one reward-torisk ratio. Anything above two to one is desired.
However, where would a conservative trader enter the flag position? Those traders who need extra
confirmation would notice the price retracement to the 38.2 percent Fibonacci area and the 50-day
moving average, but would want proof that price was likely to support at this area. They could wait
for a reversal candle to form or for price to break officially above the descending trendline at the
$54.00-per-share level.
On November 4, 2009, a clear doji candle formed, with the high of the doji at $54.00 even, which
happened to rest just beneath the declining trendline as drawn, comprising the flag pattern. A
conservative trader would enter when price rose above the high of the doji and also broke the high of
the trendline. In this case, the doji high corresponded with the trendline, but in other cases where a
reversal candle forms under a trendline, a trader must decide if price breaking the high of a reversal
candle is sufficient evidence for a likely trade entry, or if waiting for a break above the upper
trendline is enough evidence to risk their capital. As we will see later, no two traders are identical in

