
INVESTMENT VEHICLES
There are all types of trading and investment vehicles. Some are slightly
more complex than others, and some offer increased leverage, such as futures and even forex currency markets. Some have short life spans due to
expirations, such as an option or a futures contract. A trader or an investor
needs to examine his or her personality profiles, tolerance for risk, personal
time availability to devote to trading, and the time objective or turnover for
achieving specific profit objectives. Once those are determined, then he or
she needs to choose the right trading vehicle or a mixture of asset classes
in order to apply a trading strategy.
Therefore, it is important to have several different types of trading accounts for taking advantage of various investment products and levels of
risk, such as long-term retirement versus short-term speculative trading opportunities. A stock account will allow you to trade stocks, stock options,
mutual funds, and ETFs.
A futures account will allow you to take advantage of the many opportunities of various commodity markets and options, in addition to day and
swing trading the highly liquid stock index futures markets such as the
Dow, Standard & Poor’s (S&P), Russell 2000, and Nasdaq 100 contracts.
Some futures brokerage firms even have access for spot foreign currency
trading on their trading platforms. I have been in the futures and trading
business since 1978. I trade my own money, I have been a broker, managed
a brokerage firm, owned a trading firm, but, most of all, I enjoy trading my
own money. In fact, the principles I am sharing in this book are the same
techniques that I have taught my family. Remember that my father used to
think commodity trading or day trading was like gambling. But at age 71, he
started gaining an interest in what I was doing, especially as he saw the
fruits of my labors. More important, he witnessed the trading successes my
son was also achieving and started to see that the pattern of what I was
doing was teachable. In 2002, I had my son start a retirement stock account
with what I call a core position of select stocks. One such stock was General Electric, which he purchased at 24.60; another stock I had him purchase was Rambus at 5.62. In both cases, he made out extremely well. In
fact, if you know stocks, you may recognize that those prices were darn
close to the exact lows in 2003. Let me tell you it was not by chance or luck
that I had picked those prices; it was by using the methods I am going to describe in this book.

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

17

Incidentally, here is how my son got hooked on day trading: In early
2005, he was watching me on one of my appearances on CNBC. My son is
self-employed; he owns cellular phone stores and sells satellite dish systems. He keeps the television on in his stores to show customers the satellite systems. After watching my appearance on CNBC, he left the television
on; later that day, he started listening to Mad Money—the Jim Crammer
show. Anyway, my son started trading his own stock account.
He called me one day to ask my opinion on a particular stock. That’s
when I found out what he was up to. Now, my son is pretty smart; but there
were several things he was not familiar with, for instance, what a stop-loss
order was. As you might imagine, I was insanely furious with him for not
knowing important yet basic concepts of trading. After I got through yelling
at him, his mom (my wife) got hold of him; after that conversation, one of
my trading courses was shipped out FedEx, and he quickly studied. He got
back on the right track, gained an interest, and learned how to trade by my
set of rules and by looking for such trading patterns as a high close doji
(HCD) buy signal and a low close doji (LCD) sell signal. Both of these specific setups and triggers are covered in this book. The next course of action
was to get him set up with the right markets to day trade and to open the
right brokerage account to meet his needs for both his short- and long-term
objectives. Now this is what I taught my son, and he has been consistently
improving in his trading ever since. That is what my Dad saw, and he found
merit in my methods. Therefore, I hope this solidifies your belief that
traders can and do make money trading in the markets. Just find the right
methods with which you are comfortable, stick to the trading rules (such as
waiting for the triggers, rather than anticipating and acting prematurely),
find and investment strategy (such as day, swing, or position trading), and
then get confident that you are applying the right strategy with the right
product (whether it is stocks, futures, options, foreign currencies, or forex
markets). You have the potential to become a successful trader once you
have these conditions mastered. The next process is finding the right software product and brokerage firm.
I have been in the industry for over a quarter of a century, so I know
what to look for in both trading firm and software that suit my needs. I have
the experience to know that not all trading companies are equal. The plain
truth about it is that some companies are just better than others. Remember the debacle of REFCO? These guys were a behemoth in the futures and
spot foreign currency trading business. They had a ton of talented people,
some who are ex-employees of mine and some who I consider friends. I
never did trade through them. Mainly, I was happy elsewhere. But as the
years passed, REFCO just became too big. I like personalized service, and
I don’t need a company to provide me with daily research. You need to find
out what appeals to you and how to make a brokerage firm work for you.

18

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

It’s not the other way around. Keep in mind that a brokerage firm should be
considered an employee—it works for you! I have a rating sheet for my subscribers of my advisory service of the pros and cons of several brokerage
firms. If and when you are looking for a brokerage firm and want to see a
ratings consensus, just visit www.nationalfutures.com, where I can give
you a heads up on the pros and cons of several trading firms and the ones
that I have accounts with. You can use it to find out which one fits your
trading needs. As I say, some are better than others. Trading expenses such
as commissions are important, but dealing with a cheap deep-discount
commission brokerage firm that has no backup support does not suit my
needs. A solid company that has competitively priced commissions, a loyal
support staff, and pleasant customer service is what I look for. I like one
that actually answers the phones and takes care of an issue immediately;
that is the ideal company to do business with, and there are many of them.
That is the information I share on my web site.

FX—FOREX
You may be familiar with or have heard the term foreign exchange market,
which is known as the spot forex or FX market or foreign currency market.
It is an over-the-counter foreign currency market. You can trade foreign
currencies against the dollar, which is knows as the cross, such as the euro
currency versus the U.S. dollar; or you can trade pairs, which is two separate foreign currencies traded against each other, such as the euro versus
the Japanese yen. It is a 24-hour marketplace in which most companies do
not charge commissions; rather, a spread on each side of the bid-and-ask of
a trade is taken. Traders like this feature because they feel it is a “pay as you
go” cost of doing business.
This book will go into explaining several investment vehicles, such as
stocks, futures, options, and forex. I want you to realize that the technical
trading patterns, setups, and triggers I will teach and explain in this book
are applicable to all of these trading vehicles.

STOCK TRADING OPPORTUNITIES
Stocks offer opportunities to long-term investors based on a company’s
performance. There are many advantages and disadvantages when trading
stocks. Some feel that stocks should be a buy-and-hold investment vehicle,
and I agree to some extent. I believe the world and business move in cycles,
as does any industry or business sector. Investors need to monitor which

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

19

sector or industry is hot or running cold, as the dot-com bubble demonstrated. Since we can learn from history and a picture speaks a thousand
words, let’s go over a few chart examples if you want to know more about
the disadvantages of investing in stocks. If you were invested in these companies, had a bad experience, and do not want to be reminded, just flip
through these next few pages. If you are new to the investment world and
want to know how fast fortunes and retirement accounts were lost, just ask
investors who bought Enron, WorldCom, United Airlines, Kmart, and FAO
Schwartz just before these companies filed for bankruptcy. And that is just
a few of the companies that took major dives. There are those investors
that are hanging onto hopes of their stocks coming back to life, companies
like Lucent, as shown in Figure 1.1. Lucent Technologies, Inc., engages in
the design and delivery of systems, services, and software to communications service providers, governments, and enterprises worldwide. It will
take a lot more patience to see this stock come back to life. This stock was
going to be the next IBM of the telecommunications world, which goes to
prove that you can’t believe everything you hear.

FIGURE 1.1
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

20

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

Then there was the new age revolution of fiber optics. Remembers JDS
Uniphase? This company provides communications test and measurement
solutions and optical products for telecommunications service providers,
cable operators, and network equipment manufacturers. The company operates in three segments: Optical Communications, Commercial and Consumer, and Communications Test and Measurement. As Figure 1.2 shows,
this stock has just never come back to life.
Then there are some companies that had investors gleaming with joy—
that there was never a chance those stocks would drop, but drop they did.
However, not all stories have bad endings. Take a look at Rambus, Inc., a
company that provides chip interface products and services. Its memory interface products include XDR memory interface, RDRAM memory interface, and DDR controller interface technologies, which provide an interface
between memory chips and logic chips. Figure 1.3 shows that there is life
and hope for some stocks, this one included.
One more darling from the Internet craze was Red Hat, Inc., which provided a competitive operating system to Microsoft. Red Hat has related

FIGURE 1.2
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

21

FIGURE 1.3
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

software and services based on open source technology for various enterprises. Its products include Red Hat Enterprise and Linux Red Hat Application Solutions, which include software for managing web content and
software development. The Linux systems and storage availability was a
sure thing for investors, one of those “can’t lose” propositions. As Figure 1.4
shows, that is not how Wall Street saw it in the long run or how it rewarded
the stock price. However, there is hope; and as you can see, the stock is
springing to life. The examples here illustrate how investors need to watch
over their own investments. The markets generally overreact both on rallies
and on declines. Sectors and business cycles change; competition can force
companies to lower prices, thus resulting in lower profit margins. Business
models, consumer spending habits, and the leadership or management of a
firm can change. That can have a direct impact on and can change the
morale and the business structure of a company. And that is what can affect
a company’s bottom line.
The dot-com implosion and stock market crash did not wipe out all
companies; and, of course, some companies fared better than others. A
great example of bringing a company back to life is, without a doubt, Apple
Computer, Inc.! This company manufactures, designs, and markets per-

22

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 1.4
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

sonal computers and related software, services, peripherals, and networking solutions worldwide. The company’s products and services include the
Macintosh line of desktop and notebook computers. It was the introduction
of the iPod portable digital music player, accessories, and services that
helped propel this company into a killer performer and one of the best
comeback stocks from the dot-com and stock market peak in 2001. Steve
Jobs is the cofounder and CEO of Apple; and as I stated a moment ago, it is
leadership and motivation that can help inspire a company to great fortunes, as Figure 1.5 shows.
When you look at a strong performer of a stock in a specific sector,
traders and investors are obviously looking for appropriate risk/reward opportunities to trade that stock. There are many choices and various strategies to employ. This is the selection process of what we do in “finding
opportunities and selecting the right strategy.” Once again I call it the “let’s
make a deal” game. What we are doing is simply looking for the best strategy that maximizes our level of expected returns while minimizing our
risks. We are looking for the optimal trading strategy. Traders can examine
and weigh what is the most apropriate risk/reward perspective:

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

23

FIGURE 1.5
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

• Door Number One: Could be an outright stock purchase with a selective stop-loss.
• Door Number Two: Could be utilizing the options market. That can be
an exciting and worthwhile exploration of a simple purchase of a call
option to utilize leverage or the use of a more complex strategy, such as
a bull call spread, or a hedging program, such as a collar strategy. The
latter uses the premiums collected from the sale of an out-of-the-money
call option to purchase a close-to-the-money put option, which in turn
protects the price erosion of an underlying stock position.
• Door Number Three: Could be taking a trading opportunity by implementing a spread strategy, which would involve buying one stock and
selling short another. This is a sophisticated strategy and one that beginners should study extensively prior to implementing. However, if
you enjoy following and understanding who and what the competitor is
in a specific sector or industry group, this could be your cup of tea. Selecting the right stocks requires extensive research and a good working
knowledge of the fundamentals of that sector or industry. After all, you

24

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

are looking for one company to outperform the competitor, so you
need to know as much as possible about that business.
Trading decisions and correct stock selection involve more than looking at a chart and a few technical indicators. I believe it helps to look a little deeper in expected earnings forecasts and price-to-earnings (P/E) ratios
to see if the stock is expensive or cheap relative to current prices. Calculating P/E ratios is an easy concept; for example, if a stock is trading at $40
per share and has an earnings of $4 per share, the P/E ratio would be the
price of the stock divided by the earnings—$40/$4, or 10 times earnings.

SPREAD TRADING TIPS
If you decide to take advantage of a spread trade, you should realize that it
is a risky business. You could be on the wrong side of both markets. Since
spreading involves selling short one stock and simultaneously buying another stock, if the price goes in the opposite direction of both trades, you
can lose on both sides of the trade. Selling short is a hard concept for many
traders, both novice and experienced, to grasp. Believe it or not, there are
some folks who are not aware that you can sell first without owning the security. Short selling means you are betting that the price of a given product
will decline; therefore, you would be selling first without owning the underlying product with the hopes of buying back later at a lower price. Selling short is considered highly speculative for stock traders; the process
involves “borrowing” the stock from the brokerage firm, if the firm has that
security in inventory. Shorting stock is very similar and should not scare investors. It is a very simple concept; in fact, it is just the opposite for longs.
You want to buy low and then sell out later at a higher price. With shorting,
you are selling first and buying back later, hopefully at a lower price to generate a profit.
There are certain restrictions; for one, you need to set up a margin account with your brokerage firm. Another restriction carries potential execution risks: Due to Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
regulations, there is what is known as the “uptick” rule. The uptick rule was
established in the 1930s to prevent a bear market raid on a stock. In order
to execute a trade, the stock needs to trade at a price higher than the preceding transaction price in the same security. For example, if you wanted
to enter a spread by selling Dell Inc. and buying Apple, you would have
been anticipating or looking for Apple to outperform Dell’s price gains. Or
if both stock prices decline, you would want Dell to decline more than
Apple. But in order to effectively execute that strategy, you would want to

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

25

enter the sell side of the spread first because there are no restrictions on entering the long side, just on the short side of the transaction. Let’s say you
enter the long side first without confirmation that you were filled on the
short side; if the market on the position you hold—the long side—goes
down and if both markets moved in tandem, you would need an uptick on
the short side in order to be in the spread. Imagine if you went long first and
the stock dropped. Then when you are finally able to execute the short
side, the market has plunged. That would translate into an actual loss. So if
you do not get filled first on the short side, the worst that can happen is that
you lose a trading opportunity. This is a great example of why traders have
the obligation of knowing all there is about the market they trade in. As you
can see in Figure 1.6, Dell has moved in the same direction as Apple, but
Apple has outperformed as a price leader. The spread opportunity between
these two computer manufacturers, long Apple and short Dell, would have
generated a tidy profit.
Another example of a spread opportunity within competitors of the
same industry or sector would be Best Buy versus Circuit City, as shown in

FIGURE 1.6
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

26

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

Figure 1.7. As consumers flocked to retail malls before the holidays to purchase gifts such as Apple’s iPods, if you want long Best Buy as the sector
leader and short Circuit City, Best Buy stock outperformed Citcuit City
stock. As you can see from the chart, after the stock market bubble burst in
2000, Best Buy managed to maintain a positive trend higher. It is the leadership of the company and the consumer loyalty that really have helped to
support this company’s growth and profitability. One reason is Best Buy
continued to sell appliances versus one of their rival competitors and as a
result they saw sales rise 7.7 percent from 2004 through 2005. They also had
aggressive gains in web sales, and online revenue jumped 40 percent as
more customers shopped and redeemed gift cards online for the same time
period.
Best Buy’s main competitor, Circuit City, decided or needed to cut back
and close stores and then discontinued selling appliances to stay afloat. It
depended on increasing DVD and CD sales and on electronic products. As
the housing boom materialized soon after that decision, Circuit City gave
up market share to Best Buy; and no doubt companies such as Home Depot
and Sears picked up increased revenues in appliance sales. Therefore, it

FIGURE 1.7
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

27

FIGURE 1.8
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

was hard for Circuit City to reenter selling that product line. As you can see
in Figure 1.8, Circuit City’s stock just had not been a great performer in that
sector. The company was founded in 1949, so it has a long history and may
survive the competition. However, if consumers start to spend less on
home electronic products in 2006 and 2007, this company may have trouble
getting its stock price back up to the 2000 high near 65 per share. Circuit
City will need consumers to continue to buy and upgrade new televisions,
camcorders, and digital cameras to boost revenues. I personally have no intentions of buying another camcorder; I barely use the one I have. As for
game software, game hardware, and personal computer software, those are
competitive products; so I believe Circuit City will have to do more to survive the next few years of what is being forecast as a consumer electronic
sales recession. Therefore, one would need to look closer at these two companies and decide which one has more to gain or which one has more to
lose; once a decision is made, this would be a good pairs market for a
spreading strategy.
Investors have many trading opportunities with stocks, as you can see

28

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

from the preceding few pages. There are many ways to analyze a company,
from taking a simple look at the P/E ratio to using technical analysis studies. Investors can see which company is the leader in a specific sector and
invest with that leader. As you can see in the cases of Apple versus Dell and
Best Buy versus Circuit City, holding a diversified portfolio of stocks may
help investors see profits or a positive cash flow. Realistically, you can’t
own shares in every stock. Longer-term investing—you know, the buy-andhold mentality, sometimes referred to as the Warren Buffett method—helps
toward generating big gains in solid companies. But remember that WorldCom and even Lucent Technologies were solid companies at one point. So
the message here is that investors need not only to be selective in which
markets they buy and hold but also to monitor their positions. There is the
idea that you can buy stock in a company to which you relate or from which
you purchase products . . . companies like Starbucks, as shown in Figure
1.9. This company has solid growth, great coffee; it carries with each 20ounce cup, named a Vente, a solid jolt of caffeine. That is what keeps me
