
281

282 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
In some cases, your trading practices may overlap more than one index. If so,
pick the indexes that are appropriate and compare them only to those trades
that match. If you trade 40 percent currencies and 60 percent metals, then
you should create your own hybrid index that’s 40 percent currencies and 60
percent metals.

Performance relative to your time
In the earlier section “Pulling everything into a profit and loss statement,”
where I talk about tracking your trades and doing a profit and loss statement,
I say that you should calculate your hourly wage. There’s a reason for that.
Instead of day trading, you could put your money in a nice, simple index
mutual fund and take a regular job. If your hourly wage is less than what you
can earn elsewhere, you may want to consider doing just that.
Of course, there are benefits to working on your own that don’t often show
up in your bank account. I say this as someone who left finance to be a financial writer. If you enjoy day trading and if you make enough money to suit
your lifestyle, by all means, don’t let the relative numbers stop you.

Performance relative to other traders
You probably want to know how you’re doing relative to other people who
are trading. However, you’ll probably never know. No central repository of
trading returns exists (although wouldn’t it be interesting if the brokerage
firms or exchanges could report that?). Some academics have done studies of
day-trading returns, but they’re working with historic data stripped of
customer information.
On message boards and at get-togethers, you may hear other traders talk
about their returns. Take this information with an entire box of salt. Some
people lie. Others exaggerate or obfuscate. Someone who has average or
poor returns may want to lie to try to impress others, while those with great
returns may not want to call attention to their prowess.
Ignore whatever other traders tell you about their returns. If you are satisfied
with your performance relative to your risk and your time, nothing else matters.

Chapter 17

Day Trading for Investors
In This Chapter
▶ Developing the trader’s discipline
▶ Marking market momentum
▶ Seeing when trading strategies are the best move

I

t takes a special person to be a day trader — one who has quick reflexes, a
strong stomach, and a short-term perspective on the markets. Not everyone’s meant to parcel out his or her workday a minute at a time. Most people
do better with a long-term perspective on their finances, looking to match their
investments with their goals and thinking about their investment performance
over months or years rather than right now.
But patient long-term investors can learn a thing or two from the frenetic day
trader, and that’s what this chapter is all about. Many day-trading techniques
can help swing traders, position traders, and investors — people who hold
positions for days, months, or even decades — improve their returns and
make smarter decisions when it comes time to buy or sell. In this chapter,
I cover some trading and analysis techniques used by day traders that can
help longer-term investors improve their returns. Then I discuss some ways
that long-term investors may want to add day trading to their list of tricks as
a way to achieve a better total return.

What Investors Can Learn from Traders
In theory, investors may be willing to wait forever to see great stock picks
play out, but in reality, they only have so much time and money. A company’s
stock may be ridiculously cheap, but the stock can languish a long time
before everyone else catches on and bids the price up. The investor who
buys and sells well can add a few extra dollars to his investment return, and
who doesn’t want that? In addition, some long-term investors will take a daytrading flyer on a hot idea. Maybe a few will even want to give day trading a

284 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
try, especially for those securities they’ve followed long enough to know how
the market reacts to news and whether those reactions are appropriate. For a
long-term investor, given the time to test strategies and set limits, day trading
in known markets may result in some nice incremental short-term returns.
Investors who are interested in occasionally (or frequently) day trading
need to adopt not only a few key day-trading strategies but also the key
characteristics that make day traders successful.

Being disciplined
Successful day traders have an innate sense of discipline. They know when to
commit more money to a trade and when to cut their losses and close shop
for the day.
Unfortunately, a lot of long-term investors can get sloppy. They have done so
much research and committed so much time waiting for a position to work
that they often forget the cardinal rule of the trader: The market doesn’t
know that you’re in it. The stock doesn’t know you own it, so it’s not going to
reward your loyalty. Securities go up and down every day for no good reason,
and sometimes you are going to make a mistake and will have to cut your
losses. There’s no shame in that, as long as you learn from it.
Now, how can you get that discipline? By doing these things:
✓ Develop an investment and trading plan, covered in Chapter 2.
Although investing is probably not your primary occupation, you do
want to have in writing what your objectives are and how you plan to
meet them given other constraints: time, tax considerations, and risk
tolerance.
✓ Carefully evaluate your performance (covered in Chapter 16). Keep
a trading diary so that you know what you’re trading and why. Can you
find ways to improve? Are you making mistakes that can be avoided?
✓ Set up a sell rule. A quick way for an investor to improve her trading
discipline is to set up a sell rule, a rule that tells her when to cut her
losses and move on. For example, if a stock is down 20 percent from
where it was purchased or where it traded at the beginning of the year,
it may be time to sell, regardless of what you hope it will do.
Traders have to go through these exercises to survive. Investors often skip
these steps, but they shouldn’t.

Chapter 17: Day Trading for Investors

Dealing with breaking news and
breaking markets
One reason that the markets are so volatile is that they respond to news
events. Prices reflect information, changing when any little bit of information
comes into the market — even if the info is just that someone wants to buy and
someone wants to sell right now. The problem is that sometimes the market
participants don’t react in proportion to the news they receive. Good traders
have an almost innate ability to discern news that creates a buy from news that
creates a sell. (You can find out more about market indicators and strategies
in Chapter 8.) Sometimes traders want to go with the market, and sometimes
they want to go against it.
When your investment idea has been affected by a news announcement,
you need to consider how your position — and you — will react. After all,
no matter how long your time horizon and how careful your research, things
happen to companies: CEOs have heart attacks, major products are found to
be defective, financial statements turn out to be fraudulent, and so on. How
are you going to respond?
The first point is that you have to respond. The market doesn’t know your
position, and the market doesn’t care. (Have I mentioned that already?) You
need to assess the situation and decide what to do. Given the information, is
it time to buy, sell, or stay put? Holding your long-term position in the face of
long-term news is often okay, but that decision should be an active one, not a
fallback. The trick is to be objective, which isn’t easy when real dollars are
at stake.
Successful day traders are able to keep their emotions under control and keep
the market separate from the rest of their lives. Good investors should be able
to do the same. Chapter 14 has some ideas that may help.
When evaluating news, day traders look at how the news is different from
expectations. Investors can also consider how the news is different relative
to the known facts about the company to date. For example, suppose that
the Timely Timer Company is expected to report earnings of $0.10 per share.
Instead, the news hits the tape saying that earnings will be only $0.05 because
of accounting charges. The trader may see that the earnings are below expectations and short the shares to play on the bad news. The investor may know
that the accounting charges were expected and quickly buy more shares
while the price is depressed. The fact that there is a way for a buyer and a
seller to match their differing needs is the whole reason that the financial
markets exist!

285

286 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
To a day trader, perception is reality. To a keen-eyed investor, the difference
between perception and reality may be an opportunity to make money.
Day traders have to think about the psychology of the market because
everything moves so quickly. Investors sometimes forget about psychology
because they can wait for logic to prevail. When it comes time to place a buy
or sell order, however, understanding the psychological climate that day can
give the investor a price advantage, and every bit of profit improvement goes
straight to the bottom line.
Day traders keep their sanity by closing out positions at the end of the day
so that they can get on with their lives until the next market opens. Investors,
on the other hand, may want to know what’s happening to their positions at
other times. Many brokerage firms offer mobile-phone alert services, which
I think are a terrible idea for a day trader but may not be a bad idea for an
investor.

Setting targets and limits
Good day traders set limits. They often place stop and limit orders to automatically close out their positions when they reach a certain price level.
They have profit targets in mind and know how much they’re willing to risk in
the pursuit of those gains.
Good investors should set similar limits. It can be harder for them, because
they have often done so much research that they feel almost clairvoyant.
Why worry about the downside when the research shows that the stock has
to go up?
Well, the research may overlook certain realities. And even with thorough
analysis, things change. That’s why even the most ardent fundamentalist
needs to have a downside risk limit. In most cases, stop and limit orders are
bad ideas for a long-term investor because they force the sale of a security
during a short-term market fluctuation and force the sale when it’s really
a good time to buy more. Investors have a different risk profile than day
traders, so they need to manage risk differently — but they do still need to
manage it.
With a stop order, the broker buys or sells the security as soon as a predetermined price is met, even if the price quickly moves back to where it was
before the order took effect. A limit order is only executed if the security hits
the predetermined level, and it stays in effect only if the price is at that level
or lower (for a buy limit order) or at that level or higher (for a sell limit order).

Chapter 17: Day Trading for Investors
Day traders close out their positions at the end of each day, so they rarely
review their limits. A swing trader or an investor, on the other hand, who
holds for a longer period of time, needs to review those limits frequently.
How much should a position move each month, quarter, or year before it’s
time to cover losses or cash out with a profit? How has the security changed
over time, and do the limits need to change with it?
When the position is working, an investor thinks of letting it ride forever.
But, alas, few investments work that long into the future, so the investor also
needs to think in term of relative performance. Has the time come to sell and
put the money into something else with greater potential?
When managing money, day traders usually think about maximizing return
while minimizing the risk of ruin. For an investor, the goal is maximizing
return relative to a list of long-term objectives, including a target for risk.
But because long-term objectives change, the portfolio has to as well. That
means that a position that has been working out fine may have to be changed
in order to meet the new portfolio goals. The discussion is starting to get
beyond the scope of this book, but the point remains: Like successful day
traders, successful investors have a plan for how they will allocate their
money among different investments, and they adjust it as necessary.
Although investing is a long-term proposition and lacks the frenzy of trading,
it is still an active endeavor. Instead of putting energy into buying and selling,
the investor puts it into monitoring.

Judging execution quality
Day traders rely on outstanding trade execution from their brokers. They
need to keep costs as low as possible in order to clear a profit from their
trading, especially because their profits are relatively small.
Investors may have a greater likelihood of making a profit, given that they are
waiting for a position to work out rather than closing it out every night. Even
then, better execution leads to better profits. The magnitude of the few extra
cents may be smaller relative to the entire profit, but it still counts.

Looking at total execution costs
Your broker makes money three ways. The first is on the commission charged
to make the trade. The second is on the bid-ask spread (also called the bidoffer), which is the difference between the price that the broker buys the
security from customers and the price that the broker sells it to customers.

287

288 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
The third is any price appreciation on the security between when the broker
acquired it and when the firm sold it to the customer. Because three sources of
profit are available, some brokers don’t even charge commission. But note that
the broker can still make money — lots of money — even without a commission.
When choosing a broker, consider total execution costs, not just commission.
Some brokers offering deep commission discounts make money from high
levels of trading volume, but others make their money from execution.

Improving execution
The broker has a few tricks for improving execution. The first is to invest
heavily in information systems that can route and match orders, because
even the slightest delay can make a difference if the markets are moving.
The second is to have a large enough customer base to be able to match
customer orders quickly. Third, and most important, is to decide that
execution is a strategic advantage it can use to keep customers happy.
Many brokerage firms would rather concentrate on research, financial
planning, customer service, or other offerings to keep customers happy
instead of offering excellent execution.
In general, a firm that offers low commissions and emphasizes its services
to active traders has better execution than a firm that emphasizes its fullservice research and advisory expertise. But there are exceptions, and in
some cases, the exceptions vary with account size.
Brokerage firms use several numbers to evaluate their execution, including
the following:
✓ Average execution speed: This is the amount of time it takes the firm to fill
the first share of an order. Firms also track — and sometimes disclose —
how long filling an entire order takes, on average.
✓ Price relative to National Best Bid or Offer: At any time, there is a
list of bid and ask prices in the market, and your broker may not have
the best spread. The National Best Bid or Offer is the best price in the
market. You may not be able to get this price for all sorts of reasons,
usually because of the number of shares you want to buy or sell. For
example, if the best bid is for 100 shares and you want to sell 500, you
won’t be able to get all of the order filled. Brokerage firms track and
report how close the price you received was to the best bid or offer at
the time.
✓ Price improvement: Most brokerage firms buy and sell securities for
their own accounts. In fact, working as a trader at a brokerage firm may
be a great alternative to day trading. Because the firm may own the
security or want it for its own account, it may give you a slightly better
price than what’s in the market.

Chapter 17: Day Trading for Investors
✓ Average effective spread: This number measures how much the spread
between the bid and the offer differed from the National Best Bid or
Offer, on average. The lower the average effective spread, the better.
Brokerage firms have to disclose information monthly about the differences
between market orders and public price quotes and the size of effective
spreads in different securities. You can look up this info to help compare the
performance at different firms. Certainly, your results will vary based on what
types of securities you’re trading, what market conditions are like when you
are trading, and how big an account you have with the firm. But investigating
the averages for a brokerage firm can help long-term investors decide whether
changing firms to improve profits makes sense.
So what can you do to improve your execution? Here are three suggestions:
✓ Ask the brokerage firm for its policies. The firm should provide this
information, as well as give you some of its recent data, so that you can
decide whether the total value of the firm’s services matches the total
cost.
✓ Check the weekly “Electronic Trader” column in Barron’s as well as
the magazine’s annual review of online brokerage firms. Execution
cost is a key component of Barron’s evaluation.
✓ Update your own hardware and Internet connection so that they’re
as fast as possible. If you’re a day trader, having access to good data
is imperative (see Chapter 12 for more information on your equipment
needs). If you are not a day trader but actively manage your investment
account, you may want to consider an upgrade as well. A few seconds
can make a difference.

Applying Momentum
Momentum investors look for securities that are going up in price, especially
if accompanied by acceleration in underlying growth. In a sense, they are
looking for the same thing day traders are — a security that is going to move
big — but they have the expectation of making money over a longer period of
time. The thought is that a security starting to go up in price will keep going
up unless something dramatic happens to change it. In the meantime, plenty
of money can be made.
In momentum investing, instead of buying low and selling high, the goal is to
buy high and sell even higher.

289

290 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
Like most investors, a momentum investor starts with careful fundamental
analysis (described in Chapter 7), analyzing a security to determine what will
make it go up. Then the momentum investor looks for certain technical and
market indicators, similar to those described in Chapters 7 and 8 and used by
day traders. In addition, some momentum investors rely on chart services,
especially the Value Line and William O’Neil charts, to help them identify
securities that are likely to have momentum.

Earnings momentum
Earnings momentum is the province of the investor, not the trader. The
investor is looking at the earnings that a company reports every quarter
to see whether the earnings are going up at a faster rate, say from a steady
rate of 10 percent a year to 12, 13, or more. Such an increase often happens
because of a new technology or product that turns a decent company into
a hot property in the stock and options markets. If the earning growth rate
is accelerating, then the underlying price should go up at an accelerating
rate, too.
Day traders don’t look for earnings momentum, but they do look for price
momentum. The two are usually related.

Price momentum
When a security goes up in price, especially at a fast clip with strong demand
underneath it, it is said to have price momentum. Most day traders are looking
for price momentum in order to make a swift profit. Many long-term investors
should look for price momentum, too, in order to avoid being stuck with a
position for months before it starts to move. After all, patience pays, but it
pays even better if your money is working for you while you wait.
Many momentum traders don’t care why something is going up in price; they
only know that it is going up and that they can profit by being there for even
part of the ride. Following are some of the different indicators that these
traders look at:
✓ Relative strength: You can calculate relative strength in different ways,
discussed in Chapter 7, but the basic idea is that a security that’s going
up faster than the market as a whole is showing momentum and may be
a buy.
✓ Moving average convergence/divergence (MACD): This indicator
looks at how the average price of the security is changing over time.

Chapter 17: Day Trading for Investors
Is the indicator staying relatively level, meaning that the price is moving
slowly back and forth, or is the indicator gradually going up, meaning
that the price is gradually going up, too? If you plot the moving average
against the actual price levels, a wide gap means that the security is
moving up or down faster than the average, and if it’s moving up, you’d
probably want to buy it. (Otherwise, consider shorting the security; you
can read more about that in Chapter 9.)
✓ Stochastics index: This index is the difference between the high and the
low price for a security over a given time period. Some analysts look at
days, some at weeks. The idea is that, if the difference is getting bigger,
it may be because the security is moving up or down in price at a faster
than normal rate, creating an opportunity for a momentum buyer.
At an extreme, momentum investing leads to bubbles, like the infamous dot-com
bubble in the late 1990s. People were buying the stocks because they were
going up, not because they necessarily thought that the businesses were worth
much. This run was fun while it lasted, but a lot of people lost a lot of money
when reality set in during March and April 2000. The same thing happened in
the real estate market. People were playing momentum when they were flipping
condominiums in Las Vegas in the first decade of the 21st century, but prices
couldn’t go up forever — and they didn’t.
