
P1: OTA
JWBT642-c14

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

232

22:32

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

too many zones on your chart. If in doubt, err on the side of using fewer
zones on your chart.
As a naked trader, you will spend a lot of time waiting for the market
to hit your zones. This is fine; this is part of what it means to be a naked
trader. If you find yourself feeling as though you need to take action, perhaps you should back-test your trading. Test one year’s worth of data (on
a shorter timeframe), and then test a lower frequency trading system on
longer-timeframe charts. Compare the profitability of each back-test. Are
you surprised at what you find? Sometimes making money is easier when
you do not trade. Sometimes avoiding trades is just as important as taking
trade opportunities when they arise.
Goal: Learn to quickly identify zones on any chart.

Step Two: Decide on a Catalyst
The second step toward expertise is for you to decide on which catalyst
you will use in your trading. You have learned about several catalysts (and
there are more at www.fxjake.com/book), and hopefully by now you have
back-tested some of them. So which one resonates with you? Do you prefer
the simplicity of the kangaroo tail? Or do you like the added confirmation
of the last kiss? Perhaps you find the trendy kangaroo to be an excellent
method for capturing trending markets. It does not matter which catalyst
you have chosen. What does matter is that you trade a catalyst that fits with
your view of the markets.
You must trade a catalyst that fits with your beliefs. Choosing a catalyst
that fits with your beliefs will help you to ride out any bumps in your equity
curve and avoid the cycle of doom.
Goal: Choose the one trading catalyst that you want to build
your expertise on.

Step Three: Back-Test
By now you probably have a good understanding of all the benefits associated with back-testing your trading system. Back-testing will verify that
your trading system works. It will help to build your confidence in your
trading system. It will help you when you are experiencing drawdowns,
it will help save you from falling back into the cycle of doom. In short,

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c14

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

22:32

Printer: Courier Westford

Becoming an Expert

233

back-testing is what separates those consistently profitable traders from
those traders who are forever stuck in the cycle of doom.
If there is one idea that you take from this book let it be this: Backtesting your trading system is the one thing that you can do to accelerate your trading. This one thing is the most important habit that you can
develop in an effort to become a professional trader. Back-testing is that
important.
You should have a clear goal in mind when you back-test your trading
system. Try to triple your trading account with a small percentage at risk
for each trade (e.g. 1 percent or 2 percent at risk). Tripling your trading
account will help you to believe in your trading skills.

Goal: Risking 2 percent or less, triple your back-testing
account.

Step Four: Forward Test
If you have back-tested your trading system, and you are happy with the
results, you’re ready for the next step. The next step is to employ your
trading system in real time. Unfortunately, this is a very slow stage. You
will be unable to speed up time as you can when you are back-testing, but
you will closely mirror the live market trading experience.
Create a goal for your forward testing. Try to triple your demo account.
Because you will be trading in real time, it will probably take longer to
triple your account than it did when you tripled your back-testing account.
However, in some ways, demo trading much more closely resembles “real”
trading because you cannot quickly advance the charts to see if you have
made the correct trading decisions. Embrace the time it takes to accumulate expertise with your forward testing.
To forward test, you simply need to open up a demo account. These
accounts are offered by any forex broker.

Goal: Risking 2 percent or less on each trade, triple your demo
account.

Step Five: Trade a Small Account
After you have found success back-testing and found success forward
testing, it is time to start trading a live account. Live trading can never

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c14

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

234

22:32

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

really be duplicated. Back-testing is wonderful and adds to your confidence; forward-testing is also great because it closely resembles live trading. However, the only thing that matters is live trading profits. Begin with a
very small trading account. What is small to you may not be small for someone else. The size of your account should be made up of 100-percent risk
money. This is money that you are willing to risk for this exercise. Never
risk more money than you can afford to lose.
Once you triple this small account, you are ready. You have built your
confidence by trading (back-testing with historical data, live data with your
demo account, and, finally, you have tripled your small live account). At
this stage, you probably cannot wait to begin trading your standard live
account.

Goal: Risking 2 percent or less on each trade, triple your small
account.

Step Six: Trade a Live Account
Most traders do not do what you have just done. You have built your
confidence over the previous five steps. Now you are ready. It is time to
put into practice what you know, and by this stage you will be excited.
Make sure that you maintain your discipline and continue to do the same
thing that you have been doing. The important thing here is to follow
your system, without regard to whether you are in the midst of a lucky
streak or an unlucky streak.) Remember, you have the power of your
trading, and you understand that you will successfully pull profits from the
market.
The most important thing at this stage is to duplicate what you have
been doing. Just because you are trading a standard account does not mean
anything changes. Concentrating on your trading system rules will yield
positive results. Thinking about the money involved in each trade will probably be distracting and will likely throw you off track. Keep doing what you
do well, and you will become an expert.

Goal: Risking 2 percent or less on each trade, stick to your
trading rules. Focus solely on following your trading system
rules.

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c14

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

22:32

Printer: Courier Westford

Becoming an Expert

235

DOING IT AGAIN
Is it possible to duplicate these steps with another trading system? If you
have decided to follow the path of the market expert, you probably will add
more systems to your repertoire. It is not necessary that you do so. It may
be easier for you to trade one system comfortably for at least eight months
before attempting to become an expert with another system.
Eventually, you may decide to do what many profitable traders decide
to do. You may want to gain expertise with an additional trading system.
It is not necessary to do so, and it may be tempting to jump headfirst into
another system, but you should first give yourself time to get bored with
your first system. There are at least two reasons for becoming an expert
with a new trading system. The first is that trading the profitable system
is boring. Perhaps it seems crazy to you that you may one day become
bored with consistent trading profits, but it may happen. You may want
to expand your horizons, and add another tool to your trading tool chest.
The second reason for becoming an expert with a new trading system is
based on risk management. By diversifying your trading strategy, you may
reduce the likelihood of an extended drawdown. All trading systems have
drawdown, but if you have a complementary trading system, one that is
likely to make profits while the other is struggling, then you have the makings of a solid trading strategy. Many professional traders eventually get to
the stage where trading diversified trading strategies makes sense. It is not
necessary, of course, but it is possible for you to become an expert all over
again with a new trading strategy. This is a great way to reduce your risk.

BORING TRADING IS EXPERT TRADING
If you find yourself bored with your trading, you are probably consistently
profitable. The desire for change or a new challenge is often the biggest
threat to profitable trading.
Exciting trading is often a sign of one of two problems. Either the trading system is new and unproven (not back-tested) or there is too much risk
on each trade. If the system is unproven, the excitement is due to the unknown. This is not a good thing. Exciting trading is exciting because it is
akin to gambling. Gambling is exciting. This is precisely why risking too
much on any given trade is exciting. Trading should be fun, but if it is exciting. It is a sign that the system is unproven or you are risking too much.
Remember the story about Miguel? He is an expert trader, and by his
own admission, his trading is boring. Embrace the day that your trading

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c14

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

236

22:32

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

becomes boring. It may still be very fun to make money consistently, but it
does not have to be exciting.

A SIMPLE TRICK
Right now you know how to become an expert. You know what you can
do to get to expertise, it involves work, but if you choose to take the path
of the expert, it is now available to you. The problem with the steps to
expertise is just that; there are steps, and it takes time to achieve this expertise. Obviously patience is needed to get there. The work and effort is
well worth it, but the fact remains, it does take time to get there. What if
you could use a simple trick to gain invaluable experience? Would you like
to be able to learn to see the markets as an expert over the course of only
a few hours? That is what this trick will give you, this is another means of
gaining expertise. This is a true favorite of mine, a way for you to “see” the
markets for what they are, an ebb and flow of buyers and sellers.
Set aside several hours for this exercise. It is great to do this over four
hours, but you can do it with less time if you wish. The length of the exercise is determined by the timeframe of the charts. So if you are looking
at the 30-minute charts this will take 30 minutes, if you’re looking at fourhour charts this will take four hours. The four-hour charts are my favorite
charts, so I love to do this exercise over four hours.
Open a chart, and wait for a new candlestick to appear. If you are
watching a shorter timeframe chart, such as the 30-minute chart, after a
few minutes, about three minutes or so, take a screenshot of the candlestick. The idea is that you are taking snapshots of the candlestick as it is
coming to life. While you are doing this, you should consider what you
think is going to happen. It does not matter if you are correct or not, it only
matters that you make a guess.
You should take at least six snapshots of your candlestick at equal time
intervals. If you are watching a 30-minute candlestick, you should take six
snapshots at five-minute intervals. If, however, you are watching a fourhour candlestick, you should take a snapshot at 40-minute intervals, and
so forth.
After each snapshot, answer the following questions:

r Is the candlestick now trading higher or lower than the opening price?
r Do you think the candlestick will start trading higher or lower between
now and the next snapshot?

r Will this candlestick close as an up (bullish) or as a down (bearish)
candlestick?

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c14

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

22:32

Printer: Courier Westford

Becoming an Expert

237

Do this for all of the snapshots. Watching the candlestick print like
this is a lot like watching your child grow up. Maybe in some ways you
may be able to anticipate the future, but there will be turning points that
are critical, and by recording the candlestick at regular intervals you will
be able to see how well you can anticipate the market. The point of this
exercise is not to show you how unpredictable the markets are, or to
encourage you to get in touch with your inner psychic. The point of this
exercise is that, by watching the market, you earn valuable experience.
Just as working in a forex tester will help you to get trades on your belt, it
is also true that watching a candlestick unfold in a live market is invaluable
experience.
At the end of the exercise you will have a slow-motion record of the
lifespan of a candlestick. Once the candlestick has finished printing, answer these questions.

r How does the second screenshot of the candlestick differ from the last
screenshot of the candlestick?

r Did the candlestick start moving up or down?
r Did the candlestick close in that same direction, or did it end up closing
in the opposite direction?

r During which trading session (Asian, European, or North American)
did you choose to do this exercise?

r Do you think the results may have been different if you had chosen a
different trading session?

r Did the candlestick after the one you observed close in the same direction as the candlestick you observed?

r Based on the first two screenshots of the candlestick would you have
been able to predict what the candlestick ended up looking like?
If you are interested in really accelerating your trading, do this exercise
often. It is quite different to the back-testing in that you are watching the
market unfold in real time, just as you would during a live trading session.
The most important thing you can learn from doing this exercise is the
importance of the closing price.
The closing price is actually critical to the expert naked trader. Think
about this: If the closing price is not in the right spot, do you get a kangaroo
tail? If the closing price is not in the precise spot for a bullish big shadow,
do you have a valid buy signal? If the closing price for a bearish big belt is
not near the low, but rather near the middle of the candlestick, is it a valid
sell signal? The closing price is absolutely critical to the naked trader.
The real secret to this simple trick is that the opening price of the candlestick does not matter as much as the closing price. Where the candlestick prints during the first two or three snapshots is not as important as

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c14

238

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

22:32

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

where the candlestick ends up, where the closing price is. A slight difference in the closing price can drastically change the look of a price pattern, and is, therefore, why this exercise is so critical, why you can watch
a candlestick and see that the beginning of the candlestick is not nearly as
important as the closing price.
Think about how much you learned since you began reading this book.
Now you should be able to look at a chart and immediately know whether
you can take a buy trade, a sell trade, or no trade. Now, you know how
to become an expert trader. Not only that, but you know what to focus
on to become an expert trader. Now, you know how important the closing
price is to your naked trading setups. You should be feeling more confident
now. You know precisely the steps you need to take to begin following
the path to expert trading. In the next chapter, we will explore confidence
in yourself, confidence in your system, what to do when you experience
confidence problems, and why losing trades should have nothing to do with
your confidence.

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c15

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

23:21

Printer: Courier Westford

CHAPTER 15

Gaining
Confidence

Inaction breeds doubt and fear. Action breeds confidence and courage. If you want to conquer fear, do
not sit home and think about it. Go out and get busy.
—Dale Carnegie

I

magine you have the following:

r A trading system you are comfortable trading.
r A trading system with a very high win rate.
r An incredible amount of money to trade your system.
r All the time you need to trade.
r The best computer and a fast internet connection.

Is this all that you need to trade successfully? Will you find consistent
profits with only these things? The answer is no. You need much more than
this to trade successfully. To find consistent profits you need to have confidence. In fact, confidence is the most important ingredient for trading success. Confidence will help you profit with an average trading system, but
without confidence you will be unable to find success, even with a brilliant
trading system.
You will find that there are two different types of confidence problems
for forex traders: (1) a lack of confidence in the trading system, or (2) a
lack of confidence in yourself.

239

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c15

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

23:21

240

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

THE ORIGIN OF CONFIDENCE ISSUES
All traders will have losing streaks. Losing streaks may lead to feelings of
inadequacy and disparity. However, if the trading system is a valid winning
trading system, it has been tested, and is profitable over the long run, there
is probably nothing wrong with the system. Most of the time, a losing streak
is due to the wrong application of the trading system. In other words, most
losing streaks are due to the misapplication of the system (caused by the
trader), and not the system itself.
There are several common issues that many traders have, all of which
may lead to losing streaks and confidence issues.

Risk-Management Issues
The next chapter will examine risk in detail. For now, it is important only
to note that without proper application of risk management rules, a trading drawdown may be exacerbated and, therefore, may be very difficult to
handle for many traders. Traders who have issues with risk management
will usually multiply their drawdown and find it difficult to make money
consistently. Normal, everyday losing streaks are unfortunate and difficult
for many traders to endure, but when these drawdowns are accentuated by
poor risk management, the results are often disastrous.

Problems with Discipline
Discipline problems are common. Many traders at banks are not brilliant
traders (in fact, many retail forex traders are much better traders than bank
traders). Bank traders do not have a sixth sense for the markets. These
traders do not have access to secret algorithms or indicators. Many traders
are consistently profitable because there is a built-in discipline system at
the bank.
Bank traders have a risk manager. The risk manager ensures that the
bank trader trades with discipline. The bank hires intelligent trainees to
become disciplined traders on the forex desk. The risk manager ensures
that the bank traders do not risk too much on their trades.
All the bank traders must follow one simple rule: They must not take
more risk than they are allowed. Each bank trader knows how much he
may risk, every bank trader has a number, and his risk cannot exceed this
number. The risk manager on the forex desk oversees the risk associated
with each of the trades taken by the traders. If a trader takes on too much
risk, the trader is warned once. If a trader makes this mistake again, the

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c15

JWBT642-Nekritin

Gaining Conﬁdence

January 11, 2012

23:21

Printer: Courier Westford

241

trader loses his job. These are the rules. Each bank trader understands
this, and the forex trading desk is set up to tightly manage risk.
The interesting thing about this system is that even those traders
who are exceptionally profitable—the traders who make millions for the
bank—even these traders are shown the door if they take on too much
risk. Banks understand trading is a game of risk. All the bank traders must
be disciplined traders. Any trader who steps out of line is a severe concern
for the bank.
Retail forex traders such as you and I do not have a risk manager. However, it is possible to re-create the bank system. This is how you can do this:
become accountable to someone. Find a trading buddy, your partner, a relative, anyone you respect. Offer them your trading statement each week.
This is your report card. Report the risk for each trade. Be accountable to
this person. If you take on too much risk (win or lose), your risk manager
should reprimand you. Perhaps your “risk manager” will change your trading platform password so you are unable to trade for one week if you take
on too much risk. You must learn to keep risk manageable if you want to
consistently extract profits from forex trading.

Changing Systems
If you have a losing streak, you may become too careful or too reckless
with your trading system. This is a common reaction to a drawdown. This
often leads to a downward spiral. It is important to keep track of what you
are doing. There are many ways to do this, but be most common way is to
keep track of your trading. To make sure that you are not changing your
trading rules, do one of the following: Take screenshots of your trades
before you take the trade (the set up), during the trade, and after the trade
is closed.
You may also want to create a trading journal. This journal should include information such as why you decided to take the trade, the system
you employed for the trade, your feelings about the trade, the result of the
trade, and a rating on how well you applied the rules of your trading system
to that particular trade.
Alternatively, you may set up a video journal; there are many software
options for this, some of them freely available on the Internet, but a popular
one is called Jing, which will allow you to take a quick recording of your
trade. A final option would be to look over your trading printouts—in other
words, your trading record. This is another place where you may notice
what is happening, why you are changing your trading, and what exactly
you are doing that is different to your system.
The key to combating this problem is to become aware, more selfaware of what you are doing as a trader. Just as a professional gardener

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c15

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

242

23:21

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

does not mow the lawn the same way every single week, you may not
be taking your trades the same way even though you are trading the
same system. Taking records of what you are doing is invaluable for selfassessments later, in order to look at exactly how you are executing your
trades and what changes you might be making.
