
into Harvard. Since Howard Buffett scratched no backs, his own back went unscratched, and his son’s as
well.
Warren was relying on his knowledge of stocks to make a good impression in the interview. So far his
experience had been that whenever he started talking about stocks, people could not help but listen. His
relatives, his teachers, his parents’ friends, his fellow students—all wanted to hear him discourse on this
subject.
But he had misunderstood Harvard’s mission, which was to turn out leaders. When he arrived in Chicago and
introduced himself to the interviewer, the man saw past his confidence as a prodigy in a single subject straight
through to his self-consciousness, his shaky inner core. “I looked about sixteen and emotionally was about
nine. I spent ten minutes with the Harvard alumnus who was doing the interview, and he assessed my
capabilities and turned me down.”
Warren never got the chance to show off his knowledge of stocks. The man from Harvard told him gently
that he would have a better chance in a few years. Warren was naive; it did not quite sink in what this meant.
When the letter arrived from Harvard refusing him admission, he was shocked. His first thought, he says,
was, “What am I going to tell my dad?”
Awkward and stiff-necked he might be, but Howard was undemanding of his children. The Harvard dream
was Warren’s, not his father’s. Howard was accustomed to failure and resolute in defeat. The real question
must have been: What am I going to tell my mom?
These conversations took place, but their memory has drained away. And yet Warren would later come to
consider his rejection by Harvard the pivotal episode of his life.
Almost immediately, he started investigating other graduate schools. While leafing through the Columbia
catalog one day, he came across two names that were familiar to him: Benjamin Graham and David Dodd.
“These were big names to me. I’d just read Graham’s book, but I had no idea he was teaching at
Columbia.”
“Graham’s book” was The Intelligent Investor, published in 1949.6 This book of “practical counsel” for all
types of investors—the cautious (or “defensive”) and speculative (or “enterprising”)—blew apart the
conventions of Wall Street, overturning what had heretofore been largely uninformed speculation in stocks. It
explained for the first time in a way that ordinary people could understand that the stock market does not
operate through black magic. Through examples of real stocks such as the Northern Pacific Railway and the
American-Hawaiian Steamship Company, Graham illustrated a rational, mathematical approach to valuing
stocks. Investing, he said, should be systematic.
The book had mesmerized Warren. For years, he had been going downtown to the library and checking out
every book available on stocks and investing. Many of the books dealt with stock-picking systems based on
models and patterns; Warren wanted a system, something that would work reliably. He had been fascinated
by numerical patterns—technical analysis.
“I read all of them over and over. The book that probably had the most influence on me was Garfield Drew,
who wrote an important book about odd-lot stock trading.7 I read that about three times. I read Edwards
and McGee, which is the bible of technical analysis.8 I would go down to the library and just clean them
out.” But when he found The Intelligent Investor, he read and reread it. “It was almost like he found a god,”
said Truman Wood, his housemate.9 After careful study and thought, he had gone ahead and made a “value”
investment on his own. Through a connection of his father’s, he had heard of a company called Parkersburg
Rig & Reel, which he researched according to Graham’s rules. He bought two hundred shares.10
According to the catalog Warren had now picked up, the man who had become his favorite author, Ben
Graham, was lecturing in finance at Columbia University. And David Dodd was there too. Dodd was

associate dean of the Graduate School of Business, and head of the department of finance. In 1934 Graham
and Dodd had coauthored the seminal text on investing, Security Analysis. The Intelligent Investor was the
layman’s version of Security Analysis. Enrolling at Columbia would mean he could study with Graham and
Dodd. And as Columbia’s catalog pointed out: “No other city in the world offers as many opportunities to
become acquainted at firsthand with the actual conduct of business. Here a student may come into personal
contact with the outstanding leaders of American business, many of whom give generously of their time to
take part in seminars, institutes, and conferences…. Business establishments of the city cheerfully welcome
groups of students as visitors.”11 Even Harvard could not offer this.
Warren now determined that he would go to Columbia. But it was almost too late.
“I wrote in August, about a month before school started, way past when you were supposed to do it. Who
knows what I wrote? I probably wrote that I just found this catalog at the University of Omaha, and it said
that you and Ben Graham taught, whereas I thought you guys were on Mount Olympus someplace just
smiling down on the rest of us. And if I can get in, I’d love to come. I’m sure it was not a very conventional
application. It was probably fairly personal.”
But in a written application, however unconventional, Warren could shape the impression he made more
successfully than in a personal interview. The application wound up on the desk of David Dodd, who as
associate dean was in charge of admissions. By 1950, after teaching at Columbia for twenty-seven years,
Dodd had effectively become the junior partner of the famous Benjamin Graham.
A thin, frail, balding man who cared for a disabled wife at home, Dodd was the son of a Presbyterian minister
and eight years older than Warren’s father. While Dodd may have been touched in some way by the personal
nature of the application, it was also true that at Columbia, he and Graham were more interested in their
students’ aptitude for business and investing than their emotional maturity. Graham and Dodd were not trying
to create leaders. They taught a specialized craft.
Whatever the reason, after the deadline, and without an interview, Warren was accepted by Columbia.

16
Strike One
New York City • Fall 1950

Warren arrived in New York City alone. The only person he knew there was his aunt Dorothy Stahl, widow
of the revered Marion Stahl. Otherwise, the motherly women to whom he usually attached himself were
unavailable. His teachers and classmates at the business school would consist almost entirely of men. Unlike
Penn, where his family had been only a couple of hours away, he was on his own. And his father was once
again immersed in politics, running to regain his seat in Congress—this time managing the campaign himself.
But even if he won, New York was a long way from Washington.
Warren had applied to Columbia too late to get into a university dorm, so he found the cheapest lodgings
available: joining the YMCA for a dime a day and paying a dollar a day for a room at the Y’s Sloane House
on West 34th Street, down near Penn Station.1 He was far from broke, enriched by $500 from the Miller
scholarship and $2,000 from Howard, a graduation gift and part of a deal not to start smoking.2 He also had
$9,803.70 saved, some of it placed in stocks.3 His net worth included $44 in cash, his half interest in the car,
and $334 invested in his Half-Witek golf ball business. But since Warren looked at every dollar as ten dollars
someday, he wasn’t going to hand over a dollar more than he needed to spend. Every penny was another

snowflake for his snowball.
On his first day in David Dodd’s class, “Finance 111–112: Investment management and security analysis,” he
recalls that Dodd broke his customary reserve and greeted him personally and warmly. Warren had already
more or less memorized the course textbook, Security Analysis, Graham and Dodd’s seminal book on
investing.4 As the principal drafter and organizer of Security Analysis, Dodd was of course intimately familiar
with its contents. Yet when it came to the text itself, Buffett says, “The truth was that I knew the book even
better than Dodd. I could quote from any part of it. At that time, literally, almost in those whole seven or
eight hundred pages, I knew every example. I had just sopped it up. And you can imagine the effect that
would have on the guy, that somebody was that keen on his book.”
Published in 1934, Security Analysis was a mammoth textbook for serious students of the market, laying out
in much more detail the innovative concepts that were later summarized for a popular audience in The
Intelligent Investor. Dodd had taken meticulous notes at Ben Graham’s lectures and seminars for four years,
organizing them and enriching the examples with his own knowledge of corporate finance and accounting. He
structured the book and proofread the galleys from his summer home on rustic Chebeague Island in Maine’s
Casco Bay, in between golf games and mackerel-fishing tournaments.5 He described his role modestly: “The
genius was [Graham’s], supplemented by long experience of a distinguished character, and exceptional
literary talent. My most important role was to be a devil’s advocate on a variety of issues where I thought he
had got himself out on a limb.”6
Dodd’s class focused on valuing defaulted railroad bonds. Since childhood, Warren had been slightly
obsessed with trains, and, of course, thanks to the long, checkered, and colorful history of the Union Pacific,
Omaha was practically the center of the universe when it came to bankrupt railroads.7 Warren had read his
favorite book on bonds, Townsend’s Bond Salesmanship, for the first time at the age of seven after making a
special plea to Santa Claus for this tome.8 Now he took to the subject of bankrupt railroad bonds like a duck
to the warm spring rain. Unsurprisingly, Dodd showed an unusual interest in him, introducing him to his
family and taking him to dinner. Warren soaked up the fatherly attention and also felt sympathy for Dodd,
who cared for his mentally ill wife.
In class, Dodd would ask a question and Warren’s arm would shoot into the air before anyone else’s, waving
for attention. He knew the answer every time, wanted to give it, was not afraid of attention, and did not mind
looking silly. Nor did he seem to be showing off, as a classmate recalled; he was simply young, eager, and
immature.9
Unlike Warren, most of his Columbia classmates had little interest in stocks and bonds and were probably
bored by this mandatory class. They were a remarkably homogenous group of men,10 mostly headed to
General Motors, IBM, or U.S. Steel after they got their degrees.
One of them, Bob Dunn, was on his way to becoming the academic star of the class of 1951. Warren admired
his presence and intelligence and often went over to the dorm to visit him. One afternoon, in the other room
of Dunn’s two-room suite, Fred Stanback found himself wakened from a nap by a loud voice. Half asleep, he
began to realize that the voice was saying such interesting things that he didn’t want to doze off again. Rising
from his bunk, he wandered into the next room. There he found a crew-cut, badly dressed kid, rattling a mile
a minute, who leaned forward in his seat as if a starting gun were poised behind his head. Stanback plopped
down in a chair and began to listen to Warren, who was declaiming with great authority about some
undervalued stocks he’d found.
It was clear Warren had already immersed himself in the stock market. He talked about a clutch of tiny
companies, including Tyer Rubber Company and Sargent & Co., which made locks, and a somewhat larger
business, hardware wholesaler Marshall-Wells.11 Listening, Stanback became an instant disciple. He went
out straightaway and bought stocks for the first time in his life.
Stanback was the son of a live-wire salesman who had gotten rich peddling envelopes of headache powder

and “SnapBack Stimulant Powders”—full of caffeine—from the back seat of a Model T Ford.12 Fred Jr.
grew up, analytical and reserved, on Confederate Avenue in the tiny hamlet of Salisbury, North Carolina. He
was a born audience for Warren. The two started spending time together—a fast-talking, scrawny-looking kid
and a sandy-blond handsome young man with a molasses voice. One day Warren had an idea. He asked
Professor Dodd’s permission to cut class to attend the annual meeting of Marshall-Wells. A few months
before starting at Columbia, he and Howard had jointly bought twenty-five shares of this stock.
“Marshall-Wells was this wholesale hardware company up in Duluth, Minnesota. That was the first annual
meeting I ever attended. They held their meeting in Jersey City, New Jersey, probably so fewer
shareholders would attend.”
Warren’s vision of shareholder meetings rose from his conception of the nature of a business. He had
recently sold his tenant farm, doubling his money over five years. During the time he had owned it, he and his
tenant farmer had shared the profits on the crop. But his tenant didn’t share the profits from selling the land.
As the capitalist, Warren put up the money and took the risk, and then he got the gain, if there was any.
Warren thought of all businesses this way. The employees who managed the business shared in the earnings
that their labors produced. But they were accountable to their owners, and it was the owners who got the
gains as the value of the business increased. Of course, if the employees bought stock themselves, they
became owners, too, and partners with the other capitalists. But no matter how much stock they owned, as
employees their job required them to report to the owners on how well they had done. Thus, Warren saw a
shareholder meeting as a time of accounting for the stewardship of the managers.
This vision was rarely shared by company managements, however.
Warren and his new friend Stanback took the train to Jersey City. Arriving in a drab meeting room on an
upper floor of the Corporation Trust Company, they found half a dozen people awaiting a session in which
the company planned to shuffle through an agenda of legal obligations in a perfunctory fashion.
Paradoxically, management’s indifference and shareholder negligence both worked on Warren’s behalf, for
the fewer folks came to the show, the more valuable would be whatever knowledge he could wrest from the
company.13
One of those few was Walter Schloss, a thirty-four-year-old man who was working for the pittance of fifty
dollars a week as one of four employees of Ben Graham’s company, the Graham-Newman Corporation.14 As
the meeting began, Schloss starting asking pointed questions of management. He was a bantamweight,
mild-mannered, dark-haired man from a family of New York Jewish immigrants, but he probably struck the
Marshall-Wells crowd as abrupt by the standards of Duluth. “They were a little upset,” says Stanback, “that
these outsiders were barging in on their meeting. They’d never had anybody come to their meeting before,
and they didn’t like that.”15
Warren was immediately taken with Schloss’s approach, and when Schloss identified himself as working for
Graham-Newman, he reacted as though at a family reunion. As soon as the meeting ended, Warren
approached Schloss and they began to talk. He found him a man after his own heart, a believer that wealth is
hard to accumulate and easy to lose. Schloss’s grandfather had dallied away his hours in New York City at
the Harmonie Club, leaving his apparel company in the charge of a bookkeeper who—as custodian of the
money and the records—applied himself to using the latter to embezzle the former. Next, his father had set
up a radio factory with a partner. The warehouse burned down under suspicious circumstances before a
single radio was sold. Then, when Walter was thirteen, his mother lost her inheritance in the crash of 1929.
The Schloss family got by through perspiration and determination. Walter’s father got a job as a factory
manager, then sold stamps. Fresh out of high school in 1934, Walter worked as a Wall Street runner—a
member of the Pony Express of the brokerage firms—carrying messages up and down the street. Next,
working in the company’s “cage” handling securities, he had asked his boss if he could analyze stocks. The
answer was no—but, he was told, “There’s a fellow named Ben Graham who’s just written a book called
Security Analysis. Read that book and you won’t need anything else.”16

Schloss read Graham’s book cover to cover and wanted more. Two nights a week from five to seven, he
started going to the New York Institute of Finance, where Graham taught investing. Graham had begun these
seminars in 1927 as trial runs for a college course he was thinking of teaching at Columbia. At the time, the
public couldn’t get enough of stocks, and the class was packed. “Although I warned my students that any
stocks mentioned were for illustration only and under no circumstances were to be taken as recommendations
to buy, it did happen that some of the issues I discussed as undervalued subsequently enjoyed substantial
advances,” he said, in something of an understatement.17
When Graham mentioned names of stocks he was currently buying, people like Gustave Levy, the head
trader at Goldman Sachs, scurried back to act on these ideas and make their firms and themselves rich.
Schloss was so captivated that he wound up as one of a couple of employees working for his idol, Ben
Graham, and his partner, Jerry Newman. Warren found himself instinctively drawn to Walter, not just for his
enviable job but also because of the story of his gritty, disadvantaged background. At the Marshall-Wells
meeting, Warren also recognized another shareholder by his barrel-shouldered, cigar-smoking profile. This
was Louis Green, a well-known investor who was a partner in a small but respected securities firm, Stryker &
Brown, and an ally of Ben Graham’s.18 Together, Green, Graham, and Jerry Newman hunted for companies
whose stock was cheaper than a warehouse full of stale Barbecubes dog biscuits. They tried to buy enough
stock to get elected to the board of directors and thus influence management.
Warren was mightily impressed by Lou Green and wanted to make a good impression, so he struck up a
conversation with him, and he and Stanback and Green rode back together on the train from New Jersey.
Green offered to take the two young men to lunch.
That was like hitting the jackpot. Warren discovered Green was tightfisted, a man after his own heart. “This
guy was enormously wealthy, and we went to some cafeteria or something like that.”
At lunch Green began explaining what it was like to be pursued by women who were after his money. As he
was somewhat past middle age, his technique for dealing with this was to confront the woman’s motives
directly: “You like these false teeth? How about my bald head? Or the pot belly?” Warren was enjoying the
conversation, until Green suddenly changed the subject and put him on the spot.
“He said to me, ‘Why did you buy Marshall-Wells?’
“And I said, ‘Because Ben Graham bought it.’”
True, Graham was already his hero, even though the two had never met. And since the inspiration for buying
Marshall-Wells had indeed come from Security Analysis, Warren may have felt he had to be scrupulous
about how he had learned of it.19 But, in fact, he had good reason to own Marshall-Wells beyond its mention
in Security Analysis.
Reputedly the largest hardware wholesaler in North America, Marshall-Wells was earning so much money
that if it had paid out those earnings to shareholders as a dividend, they would have gotten $62 a share. The
stock traded at around $200 a share. Owning a Marshall-Wells share was something like owning a bond, one
that paid thirty-one percent interest (the $62 earnings on a $200 share). At that rate, in three years, Warren
would have nearly two dollars of value for every dollar he had invested in Marshall-Wells. Even if the
company didn’t pay the money out, the stock would have to rise eventually.
You would be crazy to pass up such a stock.
But Warren did not explain any of this to Lou Green. Instead, he said, “‘Because Ben Graham bought it.’
“Lou looked at me and said, ‘Strike one!’
“I’ll never forget the way he looked at me when he said it.”

It dawned on him: “Warren, think for yourself.” He felt foolish.
“We’re sitting in this little cafeteria, I’m with this impressive character, and all of a sudden I’m striking
out.”
He did not want to make any more mistakes like this, and he did want to find more stocks like MarshallWells, so as Graham’s seminar approached, Warren started memorizing everything he could find out about
Ben Graham’s method, his books, his specific investments, and Graham himself. He had learned that Graham
was chairman of the board of a company called Government Employees Insurance Company, or GEICO.20
This stock was not mentioned in Security Analysis. When he looked in the Moody’s Manual, he found that
the Graham-Newman Corporation had owned fifty-five percent of it but had recently given out the stock to
its shareholders.21
What was this GEICO? Warren was curious. So on a cold, wintry Saturday morning a few weeks later, he
jumped on the earliest train to Washington, D.C., and showed up at GEICO’s door. No one was about, but a
guard answered his knock. As he recalls, Warren asked in his humblest manner whether anyone was there
who might explain GEICO’s business to him. He made sure to mention that he was a student of Ben
Graham’s.
The guard trotted upstairs to the office where GEICO’s financial vice president, Lorimer Davidson, sat
working. Faced with this request, Davidson thought to himself that “being a pupil of Ben’s, I would give him
five minutes and thank him, find a polite way of sending him on his way.”22 He told the guard to show
Warren in.
Warren introduced himself to Davidson with precise but flattering sincerity: “‘My name is Warren Buffett.
I’m a student at Columbia. Ben Graham is going to be, probably, my professor. I read his book, and I think
he’s wonderful. And I noticed that he’s the chairman of Government Employees Insurance. I don’t know
anything about it, but I wanted to come here and learn.’”
Davidson started talking to Warren about the arcane business of auto insurance, thinking that out of kindness
to a pupil of Graham’s, he would waste a few minutes of his valuable time. But, he said, “After about ten to
twelve minutes of his questions, I realized that I was talking to a highly unusual young man. The questions he
was asking me were the questions that would have been asked by an experienced insurance-stock analyst.
His follow-up questions were professional. He was young, and he looked young. He described himself as a
student, but he was talking like a man who had been around a long time, and he knew a great deal. When my
opinion of Warren changed, I began asking him questions. And I found out that he had been a successful
businessman at age sixteen. That he had filed his own income tax at age fourteen and every year since then.
That he had had a number of small businesses.”
Lorimer Davidson had accomplished so much himself that he was hard to impress. “Davy,” as he was
universally known, had been a mediocre student, but, he says, “Almost from the time I was ten, eleven years
old, I knew what I wanted to do. I wanted to be just what my father was. I never thought of any other
business [than being a bond salesman].” He saw Wall Street as Mecca, “the ultimate place.”
In 1924 Davidson had made $1,800 in commissions in his first week selling bonds. Over time, he began to
play the stock market using borrowed money, trading “Radio,” the Radio Corporation of America, or RCA.
In July 1929, he “shorted” Radio, which was trading at an absurd price, betting that it would go down. But
absurd prices can become even more absurd, and when the stock went up another 150 points, Davidson lost
everything. Then, when the market crashed on October 29, he had to forget his pregnant wife and the loss of
every cent he’d ever made in order to navigate the horror his clients now faced. He and his colleagues stayed
up until five a.m. calling their accounts. Almost without exception, they, too, had traded on borrowed money.
At first the clients came up with the cash to repay their loans. Market seers and government officials kept
saying stocks would quickly rebound. They got the velocity right but the direction all wrong. With each
