
05_178089 ch01.qxp

10

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 10

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis
this chapter to discuss how to get started as well as give some insight into
the characteristics and habits that successful traders employ in their pursuit
of profits. Enjoy, and happy charting!

Considering Charting Methods
and the Role of Candlesticks
With advancements in technology and the growing availability of trading and
investing resources available to traders, many options exist for the charting
of securities. There are several different types of charts and dozens of variations and features to be configured on each type. It’s important that you’re
clear on the options and, perhaps more importantly, why candlestick charting is at the top of the heap. This section explains.

Getting a feel for your options for charting
When it comes to alternatives to candlestick charting, the three main charting
contenders are as follows:
 Line charts: These charts are simple and helpful for short-term decisions,
but they’re quite limited in the amount of data presented.
 Bar charts: These are much more useful than line charts and are the
most common, but they’re not as versatile as candlestick charts.
 Point and figure charts: These are tried-and-true charting methods, and
they’re great for recognizing support and resistance levels, but they’re
far less dynamic than candlestick charts.
Each one of these charting methods can be used effectively to ratchet up the
effectiveness of your trading strategy, but they pale in comparison to candlestick charts for a number of reasons, a few of which I describe in the next
section.

Realizing the advantages
of candlestick charting
You’d be hard pressed to find someone who’s more enthusiastic about
candlestick charting than yours truly. I can go on and on about the advantages that candlesticks afford. If you want to read more of my gushing about
the many great advantages of candlestick charting, turn to Chapter 2, but
here are my top reasons:

05_178089 ch01.qxp

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 11

Chapter 1: Understanding Charting and Where Candlesticks Fit In
 One of the best features of candlestick charting in general is the visual
appeal and readability. You can glance at a candlestick chart and quickly
gain an understanding of what’s going on with the price of a security.
You can also tell whether sellers or buyers have dominated a given day,
and get a sense of how the price is trending.
 Also, even after reading up on the most rudimentary of candlestick basics,
you can easily spot the opening and closing price for a security on a
candlestick chart. These price levels can be very important areas of support and resistance from day to day, and knowing where they are can be
extremely helpful, especially for short-term traders.
 Candlesticks aren’t just a pretty face. Candlestick charts also feature
specific patterns that you can identify and use to decide when it’s time
to buy, sell, or wait on a trade or investment. These patterns can be a
real boon to your work with securities, and you can combine them with
other technical indicators for even more reliable results.

Understanding Candlestick Components
You can’t trade and invest effectively by using candlestick charts unless you
understand candlestick patterns, and you may have a very hard time understanding those patterns if you aren’t familiar with basic candlestick construction. Candlestick charting starts with the knowledge of what it takes to make
a candlestick and how changes in that basic information impact a candlestick’s appearance and what it means. For starters, you need to know what
goes into creating a candlestick’s wick (the thin vertical line) and its candle
(the thick part in the middle).
The following four pieces of information are combined to create a candlestick:
 Price on the open: The price at which a security opens on a given period
is the first piece of information used in creating a candlestick. Depending
on whether the security’s performance is bullish or bearish, the opening
price corresponds to either the bottom edge of a candlestick’s candle or
the top edge.
Candlesticks that represent bullish price action appear white on a chart,
and candlesticks that represent bearish price action appear black.
 High price: The highest price that a security reaches during a given
period corresponds to the top of a candlestick’s wick. If a security opens
at a certain price and then trades consistently lower than that price
throughout the period, there won’t be any wick at all above the candle.
 Low price: The lowest price that a security reaches during a period corresponds to the bottom of a candlestick’s wick. If the price action for
that period is extremely bullish and prices trade higher than the open,
there won’t be any wick below the candle.

11

05_178089 ch01.qxp

12

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 12

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis
 Price on the close: After a security finishes trading during a given period,
its closing price is the last piece of information used to create a candlestick. Depending on the security’s performance during that period, the
closing price can correspond to either the top edge of a candlestick’s
candle (if the period was bullish) or the bottom edge (if the period was
bearish).
As a true candlestick devotee, I believe that you can gain far more insight into
a period’s trading by looking at a candlestick than you can by looking at
another type of charting tool. Want proof? Take a look at Figure 1-1.

High
Close
Up day
bullish
Figure 1-1:
Bullish and
bearish
candlesticks
side by side.

Down day
bearish

Open
Low

You can tell right away that the up day has a white candle and the down day
has a black candle. That simple difference alone clearly reveals the nature of
the price action that took place during that period. In the case of the candlestick with the black candle, there was more selling pressure than desire to
buy. And the candlestick with the white candle indicates that there was more
buying pressure than desire to sell.
Why is this so important? Candlestick charts quickly clue you in on the type
of buying and selling that’s been going on during a given period and where it
may occur again. In many cases, the buyers continue to buy and the sellers
continue to sell during subsequent periods or if the price reaches a level that
has spurred them to action in the past.
For more information on candlestick construction, refer to Chapter 3.

Working with Candlestick Patterns
The components of a candlestick may be the bones of candlestick charting,
but candlestick patterns are the heart and soul. Patterns appear on candlestick charts as simple, single-stick occurrences or complex, multi-stick

05_178089 ch01.qxp

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 13

Chapter 1: Understanding Charting and Where Candlesticks Fit In
formations, and many different types of patterns can tell you what may be in
store for a security that you’ve had your eye on for trading or investing. And
knowing what may lie ahead can be the difference between a profitable trade
and a flop.
Candlestick patterns indicate when prevailing trends reverse or when they
continue. Both types of patterns are very useful because they tell you when
to get into a trade, when to get out of a trade, when a trade you’re in may
make no sense, and even when to hang onto a trade you’re already in. Check
out Chapters 5 through 10 for more info on identifying and trading on a wide
variety of candlestick patterns.

Simple patterns
Some candlestick patterns are very simple: A single candlestick on a chart
can serve as a candlestick pattern. A single candlestick that signifies time to
buy or sell is very appealing to traders who are just starting to work with
candlestick charts because after you understand the basics of candlestick
construction, you can immediately start identifying simple patterns and using
them to make more informed trading decisions. Flip to Chapters 5 and 6 for
several great examples of how just one candlestick can tell you what a security’s price is going to do in the immediate future.
I also consider double-stick candlestick patterns as simple patterns, and you
can explore several varieties in Chapters 7 and 8.

Complex patterns
When a candlestick pattern includes three periods’ worth of price action
(three candlesticks), I consider it a complex pattern. Many complex candlestick patterns require specific price activity over the course of three days
for the pattern to be considered valid, and I discuss a range of them in
Chapters 9 and 10.
Complex candlestick patterns can be frustrating at times because you may
watch with anticipation as a pattern develops nicely for the first two days
only to fizzle out on the third.
Complex candlestick patterns are more rare than their simple counterparts,
but they can be worth the wait. Because the conditions and criteria for a
complex pattern are so specific, it’s more likely that the signals they offer will
be good ones.

13

05_178089 ch01.qxp

14

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 14

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis

Making Technical Analysis Part of
Your Candlestick Charting Strategy
A stunning amount of mathematical ingenuity is applied to security trading
analysis. The options for technical analysis can be as simple as the average
of a few days of closing prices and as complex as applying calculus to price
action to indicate the momentum of prices. The possibilities are endless, and
you shouldn’t be shy about including some of them in your trading strategy
alongside candlestick charts.
Take the time to get familiar with an array of technical indicators to make you
a more versatile trader and enrich your work with candlestick charts. For
example, it’s great when you spot a candlestick pattern indicating that it’s
time to buy, and at the same time, your favorite technical indicator is also
flashing a buy signal. Combining trading tools helps build your confidence
and can help you quickly determine when a trade isn’t going to work out,
allowing you to exit with minimal losses.
I explore several different types of technical indicators in Chapter 11 and clue
you in on a few ways that you can combine these indicators with candlestick
patterns in Part IV (Chapters 11 through 15). Find a few technical indicators
that match up to the type of trading you want to pursue and add them to
your candlestick charts. Read up on the choices, and if Chapter 11 isn’t
enough, you can always turn to Technical Analysis For Dummies (Wiley) by
Barbara Rockefeller. The added understanding of technical indicators can
really aid you in your candlestick charting efforts.

Trading Wisely: What You Must Understand Before Working the Markets
Security trading and investing can be a financially rewarding and fulfilling
experience, but it’s far from a risk- and stress-free undertaking. I want to
make clear to you a few key points and concerns before diving into my
candlestick charting discussion, so that you’re fully aware of what you’re
up against and what you can do to maximize rewards and minimize risks.

Trading can be an expensive endeavor
There’s money to be made on the security markets, but don’t be fooled
into thinking that earning profits is easy or effortless. Many smart people
have taken on trading as a hobby or profession and been quickly humbled

05_178089 ch01.qxp

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 15

Chapter 1: Understanding Charting and Where Candlesticks Fit In
by poor trades and losses. Do your homework and practice wise money management, or you could end up joining their ranks!
By doing homework, I mean look at charts and develop a trading plan. The
more you prepare, much like for a test, the better your trading results should
be. I’ve seen a direct correlation between the level of trading success I’ve
achieved and how much time I’ve put into preparing for trading situations.
As far as wise money management, the key here is making sure to take a loss
when it becomes apparent a trade isn’t going to work. Take the loss and move
on. Take this loss early and quickly before it becomes a much bigger loss.
The most important rule for managing your trading and investing funds is to
not risk money that you can’t afford to lose. There are many obvious and
unforeseen risks in the financial markets. If your lifestyle changed dramatically because a trade or investment wiped out your account, then you’re
probably putting too much of your personal net worth on the line.

Paper trading costs you nothing but time
Paper trading refers to the practice of tracking trades on paper that haven’t
been traded in an account. Professional traders tell you that paper trading
isn’t the same as putting real money at risk on the markets. As a professional
trader, I totally agree. The emotional rollercoaster involved with making and
losing money can’t be matched in a dry run. But if you’re a novice who’s just
starting to understand the ways of the market, I think paper trading is a great
idea. The risks are nil, and the educational benefits are outstanding. Even
after 15 years of trading experience, I still tend to paper trade new ideas or
systems for a while before putting real money to work.
If you’re new to trading, test out your trading ideas and refine your trading
strategy by signing up for a trial account online with an electronic broker.
(You can read all about electronic trading resources in Chapter 4.) All you
stand to lose is a little time and some pride. But that’s better than jumping
right into a live trading scenario and getting taken to the cleaners!

Developing rules and sticking to them
Throughout this book, I stress the importance of setting rules for yourself
and sticking to those rules. I just can’t stress enough what a good practice
that is for any trader. Making and losing money on the market is a very emotional experience, and one of the main reasons some traders lose big when
they should lose just a little (or even win) is that they let their emotions take
control of their trading. You can help take emotions out of the equation if you
develop trading rules and adhere to them no matter what happens.

15

05_178089 ch01.qxp

16

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 16

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis
Create a set of trading rules for yourself, and stick to those rules. Include rules
such as the following:
 When to get into trades
 Where to place stops in various trading situations
 What amount of money to risk on trades and investments
 When to get out of trades, either with a loss or profit
Write down your rules and keep them handy for a quick review when you’re
in the midst of a trade, and you’re having second thoughts about what action
to take.
I’ve been trading for a long time, and I can say without reservation that creating and adhering to a set of trading rules is the best way to reward yourself
both personally and financially for the effort you put into the markets. I
always follow the rules that I’ve set for myself, and although it may sound
crazy, at this point I’m more proud of my rules than I am of my profits. All
traders have to come up with their own sets of rules that talk to their trading
style and comfort with risk, and you should keep that in mind and jot down
potential rules as you explore the contents of this book.

06_178089 ch02.qxp

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 17

Chapter 2

Getting to Know
Candlestick Charts
In This Chapter
 Considering the advantages of candlestick charting
 Examining a few potential candlestick problems
 Checking out the competition: Line, bar, and point and figure charts versus candlesticks

E

ver wonder why a trader or investor would choose candlestick charts
over other types of charts when analyzing price action of investments
or markets? Well, this chapter provides some answers.
Trading and investing aren’t easy undertakings, and they’re certainly not easy
professions. Most traders — professional and amateur alike — and investors
struggle just to keep up with the market’s performance as measured by the
Standard & Poor’s 500 Index (S&P 500). The S&P 500 is an index comprised of
500 of the largest stocks traded in the United States (U.S.) and is considered
representative of the stock market as a whole.
In order to be one of the successful few who beats the market and other market
participants, you should strive to develop a competitive advantage or some
unique insight, commonly referred to as your “edge,” that you believe most
market participants aren’t using or considering. I can’t say that using candlestick charting provides an edge by itself — and it does come with a couple of
potential problems. But when combined with recurring patterns and other
technical indicators, you can find your edge!
In this chapter, I cover candlestick charts — the good and the bad — and I
review a handful of alternative charting methods. But in the end, you understand why candlestick charting is the way to go!

06_178089 ch02.qxp

18

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 18

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis

Brief history of candlestick charting
The history of candlestick charting stretches
back to Japanese rice traders in the 17th or 18th
century. This fact is why candlestick charts are
frequently referred to as Japanese candlestick
charts. A very smart man named Munehisa
Homma developed the methodology of monitoring the price of daily rice trading, and his methods eventually evolved into what traders and
other market watchers call candlestick charting.
Homma found that having a visual representation of daily rice trading allowed him to make
more informed buy-and-sell decisions during
the hectic trading day. It’s said that Homma
once had a streak of over 100 winning trades!

Fast forward to the early 1990s, when Steve
Nison published a book and magazine article on
candlestick charting. Until then, candlestick
charting wasn’t widely used. Nison’s first book,
Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques
(Prentice Hall Press), served as an introduction
to candlestick charting methods for many
traders and investors in the United States. Over
the next 15 years, the acceptance and use of
candlestick charting became widespread, and
the use of computer software for analyzing
recurring patterns proved profitable for many
traders.

Recognizing the Many Benefits
of Candlestick Charting
Trading, investing, and charting styles are plentiful. You can spend hours
debating what type of approach to the markets is the best. For me, and for a
growing number of other traders, the benefits of a candlestick chart versus
other types of charts aren’t really debatable. Let me tell you why.
Changes and developments in the way stocks and other securities are traded
(and when they’re traded) have made trading an increasingly complex undertaking. (For more info, see the nearby sidebar, “What makes up a day?”)
Because trading is becoming more and more complex, the need for a consistent, dynamic charting method is more important than ever. Traders need
easy-to-read charts that allow them to make quick decisions and efficiently
analyze patterns. Candlesticks offer those benefits and many more, all
covered in this section.

06_178089 ch02.qxp

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 19

Chapter 2: Getting to Know Candlestick Charts

Seeing is believing: Candlesticks
are easy to read
It sounds pretty simplistic, but one noteworthy advantage candlesticks have
over other charts is their readability. For many people who strain to read
the fine print and also for the younger traders who don’t want to deal with the
headaches that can come from staring at bar charts all morning, candlesticks
are an attractive option. Consider Figure 2-1, which displays a bar and a
candlestick in a side-by-side comparison.
Figure 2-1 gives you a basic idea of why candlesticks are easier to read, but it
doesn’t really provide a full picture of why they’re also much better at helping traders to visually interpret price action (how the stock or market traded
during the day relative to the opening price), which is an essential skill for
successful trading. Take a look at Figure 2-1, which takes a couple of weeks’
worth of trading data and displays it using traditional bar charts and candlestick charts, respectively.
High

Close

Figure 2-1:
A bar
versus a
candlestick.

Open

Low

19

06_178089 ch02.qxp

20

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 20

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis

What makes up a day?
The definition of a trading “day” used to be very
simple. Trading was done on a central exchange
with specific opening and closing times. For
example, trading on stocks listed on the New
York Stock Exchange (NYSE) began at 9:30 a.m.
and ceased at 4:00 p.m. Now trading in these
stocks commences on some electronic communication networks (ECNs) hours before the NYSE
opens and hours after it closes. (An ECN is a network of brokerage firms and traders, which
allows for trading directly between the brokerage firms and traders.) A “day,” therefore, is
much different than it was in the past. Throw in
futures exchanges and currency markets that

trade almost 24 hours a day, and this issue
becomes even more confusing. With all that
trading outside of exchange hours, what constitutes an actual day, for data purposes?
Currently, in the case of stocks, the official open
and close are based on the primary exchange
they trade on, but in this world of expanding
electronic trading, the actual open and close
are becoming more blurred. With respect to
futures markets that trade almost 24 hours a
day, it’s almost impossible to pin down a day. For
daily testing, I use data between 7 a.m. eastern
standard time (EST) and the close at 3 p.m. to
constitute a day.

Notice the dramatic difference between the bar chart and the candlestick
chart. By comparing them, you can clearly interpret what’s occurred from
day to day, including the openings, closings, and how they change from day
to day. The candlestick chart is a superior way to interpret the price action
from day to day when compared to a bar chart. Don’t worry — I cover how to
read candlestick charts extensively in several other chapters, but even in this
simplistic example you can see that knowing where a stock closed relative to
its open on a given day is a powerful piece of information that you can glean
quickly from a candlestick chart.

You can spot bears and bulls quickly
Knowing a security’s closing price relative to its opening price during a certain period is vital information. Candlestick charts allow you to quickly identify the days when a closing price is above an opening price and vice versa.
I like to think of the daily price action as a battle between bears and bulls.
Bears win when the price of a security closes lower than its open, and bulls
win on the days when the close settles higher than the open.
