
What direction is your research?
Securities are affected by matters specific to each type and by huge global
macroeconomic factors that affect every security in different ways. Some
traders prefer to think of the big picture first, whereas others start small.
And some use a combination of the two approaches. Neither is better; each is
simply a different perspective on what’s happening in the markets.

Top-down research
With a top-down approach, the trader looks at the big economic factors: interest rates, exchange rates, government policies, and the like. How will these
things affect a particular sector or security? Is this a good time to buy stocks
or short interest-rate futures? The top-down approach can help evaluate the
prices in big market sectors, and it can also help determine what factors are
affecting trading in a subsector. You don’t have to trade stock market index
futures to know that the outlook for the overall stock market will have an
effect on the trading of any specific company’s stock.

Chapter 7: Technical Analysis 101
Bottom-up research
Bottom-up analysis looks at the specific performance of the asset. It looks
at the company’s prospects and then works backward to figure out how it
will get there. What has to happen for a company’s stock price to go up 20
percent? What earnings does it have to report, what types of buyers have to
materialize, and what else has to happen in the economy?

Fundamental research
Day traders do very little fundamental research. Sure, they know that demand
for ethanol affects corn prices, but they really want to know what the price
will do right now relative to where the price was a few minutes ago. How a
proposed farm bill might affect ethanol prices in six years doesn’t figure into
day trading.
Knowing a little bit about the fundamentals — those basic facts that affect
the supply and demand for a security in all markets — can help the day
trader respond better to news events. It can also give you a better feel for
when swing trading (holding a position for several days) will generate a
better profit than closing out every night. But knowing a lot can drag a day
trader down.
Fundamental analysis can actually hurt you in day trading, because you may
start making decisions for the wrong reasons. If you know too much about the
fundamentals, you may start considering long-term outlooks instead of shortterm activity. For example, many people buy Standard & Poor’s (S&P) 500
Index mutual funds for their retirement accounts because they believe that in
the long run, the market will go up. That does not mean that people should
trade E-mini S&P futures or an S&P exchange-traded fund today, because a lot
of zigzagging can happen between now and the arrival of the long-run price
appreciation.
Fundamental research falls into two main categories: top-down and bottom-up.
As I mention earlier, top-down starts with broad economic considerations
and then looks at how those will affect a specific security. Bottom-up looks at
specific securities and then determines whether those are good buys or sells
right now.
If you love the very idea of fundamental research, then day trading is probably not for you. Day trading requires quick responses to price changes, not
a careful understanding of accounting methods and business trends. A little
fundamental analysis can be helpful in day trading, but a lot can slow
you down.

117

118 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
Technical analysis
Information about the price, time, and volume of a security’s trading can be
plotted on a chart. The plots form patterns that can be analyzed to show
what happened. How did the supply and demand for a security change, and
why? And what does that mean for future supply and demand? Technical
analysis is based on the premise that securities prices move in trends and
that those trends repeat themselves over time. Therefore, a trader who can
recognize a trend on the charts can determine where prices are most likely to
go until some unforeseen event comes along that creates a new trend.
Most traders rely on software to spot patterns because it makes them easier
to find and to act upon. Remember that the vast volume of short-term trading
takes place by computer algorithm. You can’t beat them, so join them.
The basic element of technical analysis is a bar, which shows you the high,
low, open, and closing price of a security for a given day. It looks like the one
shown in Figure 7-1.
High

Close

Figure 7-1:
A bar
displays Open
high, low,
open, and
closing.
Low

Bulls and bears and pork bellies
Traders work cattle and hogs at the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange, but bulls and bears
are in every market. What do those animals
symbolize?
✓ Bulls believe that the market is going up,
and bullish news and bullish patterns are
good for them.

✓ Bears believe that the market is going
down, so bearish news and bearish patterns are good for them.
No one is exactly sure why the words came to
symbolize market behavior, but the best guess
for the symbolism is that, when attacked, bulls
charge and bears retreat.

Chapter 7: Technical Analysis 101
In most markets, every day generates a new bar (many traders talk about
bars instead of days, and they aren’t talking about where they go after work).
A collection of bars, with all their different high, low, open, and close points,
is put together into a larger chart. Often, a plot of the volume for each bar
runs underneath, with the result looking like Figure 7-2.
45
40

35

Millions

Figure 7-2:
A plot of
volume
underneath
a year’s
worth of
bars.

30
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0

Many patterns formed in the charts are associated with future price moves.
Technical analysts thus spend a lot of time looking at the charts to see
whether they can predict what’s going to happen. Many software packages
(some of which are discussed in Chapter 12) send traders signals when certain technical patterns occur so that the traders can place orders accordingly.
Technical analysis is a way to measure the supply and demand in the market.
It’s a tool for analyzing the markets, not predicting them. If deciphering the
meaning of the data were that easy, everyone would be able to make money
in the markets.

Price changes
Market observers debate market efficiency all the time. In an efficient market,
all information about a security is already included in the security’s price, so
there’s no point to doing any research at all. Few market participants are willing to go that far, but they concede the point that the price is the single most
important summary of information about a company. That means that technical analysis, looking at how the price changes over time, is a way of learning
about whether a security’s prospects are improving or getting worse.

Volume changes
The basic bar shows how price changed during the day, but adding volume
information tells the other part of the story: how much of a security was

119

120 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
demanded at that price. If demand is going up, then more people want the
security, so they are willing to pay more for it. The price tells traders what
the market knows; the volume tells them how many people in the market
know it.

Using Technical Analysis
Technical analysis helps day traders identify changes in the supply and
demand for a security that may lead to profitable price changes ahead. It
gives traders a way to talk about and think about the market so that they
can be more effective.
Most brokerage firm quote systems generate charts, sometimes with the help
of additional software that automatically marks the chart with trendlines.
Technical traders look for those trendlines. Before placing an order to buy
or sell, a trader needs to know whether the security’s price is going up and
whether that trend is going to continue.
One interesting aspect of technical analysis is that the basics hold no matter
what market you’re looking at. Technical analysis can help you monitor
trends in the stock market, the bond market, the commodity market, and
the currency market. Anywhere people try to match their supply and their
demand to make a market, technical analysis can be used to show how well
they’re doing it.

First things first: Should you follow
a trend or deviate from it?
The next sections go into all sorts of detail about how to spot a trend, but the
key thing to understand as a day trader is whether you should follow a trend
or not. Sometimes a trend is good to follow, but sometimes deviating from it
is better.
Remember when you were a kid wanting to do something that all your friends
were doing and your mother would invariably say, “If all your friends jumped
off of a bridge, would you have to jump off, too?”
Well, Mom, guess what? If the bridge were on fire, the escape routes blocked
by angry mobs, and the water just a few feet down, then yes, I just might
jump off the bridge like everyone else. Likewise, if someone were paying us
good money to jump and I knew I wasn’t likely to get hurt on the way down,

Chapter 7: Technical Analysis 101
I’d be over the railing in a flash. Sometimes being a follower is good. But if my
friends were idiots, there were no fire and no angry mob, and I couldn’t swim,
I might not be so hasty to leap.
Trend following is like those mythical childhood friends on that mythical
hometown bridge. Sometimes, you should join the crowd. Other times, deviating is best. When should you follow and when should you deviate? Well,
that depends. You need to know what you’re trading and what the other
people trading that asset are considering when they place their orders.
That’s why a good understanding of what trends are and how they work can
help you.

Finding trends
A technical analyst usually starts off by looking at a chart and drawing lines
that show the overall direction of the price bars for the period in question.
Rather than plot the graph on paper or print out the screen, she probably
uses software to draw the lines. Figure 7-3 shows what this basic analysis
looks like.
With the basic trendlines in place, the trader can start thinking about how
the trends have played out so far and what may happen next.

Figure 7-3:
Basic
analysis of
trends in
price bar
changes
draws lines
showing
the general
movement.

121

122 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
Drawing trendlines
As shown in the preceding section, the most basic trendline is a line that
shows the general direction of the trend. And that’s a good start, but it
doesn’t tell you all you need to know. The next step is to take out your ruler,
or set your software, to find the trendlines that connect the highs and the
lows. Doing so creates a channel that tells you the support level (the trendline for the lows) and the resistance level (the trendline for the highs), as
Figure 7-4 shows. Unless something happens to change the trend, securities
tend to move within the channel, so extending the line into the future can
give you a sense of where the security is likely to trade.

Resistance Line

Figure 7-4:
Drawing
trendlines
to identify
channels.

Support Line

When a security hits its support level, it is usually seen as relatively cheap,
so that’s a good time to buy. When a security hits its resistance level, it is
usually seen as relatively expensive, so that’s a good time to sell. Some day
traders find that simply moving between buying at the support and selling at
the resistance can be a profitable strategy, at least until something happens
that changes those two levels.

Calculating indicators
In addition to drawing lines, technical analysts use their calculators — or have
their software make calculations — to come up with different indicators, numbers used to gauge performance. The following sections cover some common
indicators, with definitions.

Pivot points
A pivot point is the average of the high, low, and close price for the day. If the next
day’s price closes above the pivot point, that sets a new support level, and if the
next day’s price is below the pivot point, that sets a new resistance level. Hence,

Chapter 7: Technical Analysis 101
calculating pivot points and how they change may indicate new upper and lower
stops for your trading. (Refer to Chapter 2 for more about using stops.)
For markets that are open more or less continuously, such as foreign
exchange, the close price is set arbitrarily. The usual custom in the United
States is to use the price at 4 p.m. Eastern time, which is the closing time for
the New York Stock Exchange.

Moving averages
Looking at all those little high-low-open-close lines on a chart will give your
bifocals a workout. To make the trend easier to spot, traders calculate a
moving average by averaging the closing prices for a given time period.
Some traders prefer to look at the last 5 days; some at the last 60 days.
Every day, the latest price is added, and the oldest price is dropped to make
that day’s calculation. Given the wonders of modern computing technology,
pulling up moving averages for almost any time period you want is easy. The
average for each day is then plotted against the price chart to show how
the trend is changing over time. Figure 7-5 shows an example of a 10-day
moving average chart.

Figure 7-5: A
price chart
showing a
10-day
moving
average.

Traders use the moving average line to look for crossovers, convergences,
and divergences. A crossover occurs whenever the price crosses the moving
average line. Usually, buying is a good idea when the price crosses above the
moving average line, and selling is a good idea when the price crosses below it.
To use convergence and divergence in analysis, the trader looks at moving
averages from different time periods, such as 5 days, 10 days, and 20 days.
Figure 7-6 shows what convergence and divergence look like.

123

124 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies

Figure 7-6:
Moving
average
convergence and
divergence.

91.0
90.5
90.0
89.5
89.0
88.5
88.0
87.5
87.0
86.5
86.0
85.5
85.0
84.5
84.0
83.5
83.0
82.5
82.0
81.5
81.0
80.5
80.0
79.5
79.0
78.5
78.0
77.5

Three Moving Averages
5-day
10-day
20-day
April

May

June

July

When two or three of the moving average lines converge (come together), that
means that the trend may be ending. That often makes it a good time to buy if
the trend has been down and a good time to sell if the trend has been up. If
two or three of the moving average lines split up and diverge, the trend is
likely to continue. That means it’s probably a good time to buy if the trend is
up and sell if the trend is down.
A moving average is a lagging indicator. It sums up trading activity in the last
5, 10, 30, or 60 days, which means that the line smooths out changes in the
trend that may affect future prices, giving you a more accurate picture of the
overall trend over the time period.

Observing trend phases
Price trends tend to move in cycles that can be seen on the charts or observed
in market behavior. Knowing the phases of a trend can help you better evaluate
what’s happening. Here is a summary of some phases of a trend:
✓ Accumulation: This is the first part of the trend, where traders get
excited about a security and its prospects. They start new positions or
add to existing ones.
✓ Main phase (also called continuation): Here, the trend moves along
nicely, with no unusual price action. The highs get higher on an uptrend,
and the lows get lower on a downtrend. A trader may make money —
but not big money — following the trend here.

Chapter 7: Technical Analysis 101
✓ Consolidation (also called congestion): This phase indicates a sideways
market. The security stays within the trend but without hitting higher
highs or lower lows. It just stays within the trading range. A consolidation phase is good for scalpers, who make a large volume of trades in
search of very small profits. It can be boring for everyone else.
✓ Retracement (also called correction or pullback): Retracement is a
secondary trend, a short-term pullback away from the main trend to the
support level. Retracements create buying opportunities, but they can
also kill day traders who are following the trend.
✓ Distribution: In the distribution phase, traders don’t think that the
security can go up in price any more. Hence, they tend to sell in large
volume.
✓ Reversal: At this point, the trend changes. It’s time to sell if you’ve been
following an uptrend and buy if you’ve been following a downtrend.
Many reversals follow classic patterns, which are discussed later in this
chapter.

