
Burniske 03.indd 252

9/9/17 2:41 PM

THE WILD WORLD OF ICOs

253

cryptoassets is doubly disruptive. By leveraging crowdfunding, cryptoasset
offerings are creating room for the average investor to stand alongside venture
capitalists, and the crowdfunding structure is potentially obviating the need
for venture capitalists and the capital markets entirely. The second aspect is
what makes the integration of crowdfunding with cryptoassets doubly disruptive, and puts cryptoasset offerings in another league entirely separate from
Kickstarter. Joel Monegro, cofounder of Placeholder Ventures and former
blockchain lead at Union Square Ventures (USV), was the first to encapsulate
this idea cleanly in a blog titled, “Fat Protocols.”
Monegro’s thesis is as follows: The Web is supported by protocols like the
transmission control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP), the hypertext
transfer protocol (HTTP), and simple mail transfer protocol (SMTP), all of
which have become standards for routing information around the Internet.
However, these protocols are commoditized, in that while they form the backbone of our Internet, they are poorly monetized. Instead, what is monetized is
the applications on top of the protocols. These applications have turned into
mega-corporations, such as Facebook and Amazon, which rely on the base
protocols of the Web and yet capture the vast majority of the value. The construction of the Web as we currently know it is shown in Figure 16.1 from USV
with “Value Captured” on the y-axis.
Contrast this model with that of cryptoassets, where the protocol layer
must be directly monetized for the applications on it to work. Bitcoin is a good
example. The protocol is Bitcoin itself, which is monetized via the native asset
of bitcoin. All the applications like Coinbase, OpenBazaar, and Purse.io rely on
Bitcoin, which drives up the value of bitcoin. In other words, within a blockchain ecosystem, for the applications to have any value, the protocol needs to
store value, so the more that applications derive value from the protocol, the
more the value of the protocol layer grows. Given many applications will be
built on these protocols, a protocol should grow to be larger in monetary value
than any single application atop it, which is the inverse of the value creation
of the Internet. See Figure 16.2 for a depiction of how value is captured within
blockchain architectures.

Burniske 03.indd 253

9/9/17 2:41 PM

254 CRYPTOASSETS

>)4=-+)8<=:-,

The Web

)8841+)<176;
4)A-:

8:7<7+744)A-:

Figure 16.1 n Thin protocols and fat applications:
how value is captured within the Web
Source: www.usv.com/blog/fat-protocols

Blockchain

>)4=-+)8<=:-,

)8841+)<176;4)A-:

8:7<7+74
4)A-:

Figure 16.2 n Fat protocols and thin applications:
how value is captured within blockchains
Source: www.usv.com/blog/fat-protocols

Interestingly, once these blockchain protocols are released, they take on lives
of their own. While some are supported by foundations, like the Ethereum
Foundation or Zcash Foundation, the protocols themselves are not companies.
They don’t have income statements, cash flows, or shareholders they report to.
The creation of these foundations is intended to help the protocol by providing some level of structure and organization, but the protocol’s value does not
depend on the foundation. Furthermore, as open-source software projects,
anyone with the proper merits can join the protocol development team. These
protocols have no need for the capital markets because they create self-reinforcing economic ecosystems. The more people use the protocol, the more valuable
the native assets within it become, drawing more people to use the protocol,
creating a self-reinforcing positive feedback loop. Often, core protocol developers will also work for a company that provides application(s) that use the

Burniske 03.indd 254

9/9/17 3:06 PM

THE WILD WORLD OF ICOs

255

protocol, and that is a way for the protocol developers to get paid over the long
term. They can also benefit from holding the native asset since inception.

LAUNCHING A NEW CRYPTOASSET WITH AN ICO
Initial coin offering (ICO) is the term most commonly used to describe crowdfunding the launch of a new cryptoasset. We’d like to expand this term to refer
to initial cryptoasset offering, as the specific use of the term “coin” implies that
these are currencies, which as we covered in Chapter 4, is most certainly not
the case for all cryptoassets. Our definition is more expansive, as many new
ICOs relate to the creation of new cryptotokens and cryptocommodities.
To get an idea of the growth of ICOs over the last few years, see Figure 16.3.
In this chart, note two of the major ICOs that occurred during this period: the
successful Ethereum launch in 2014 and the infamous launch of The DAO in
2016. For a few months after the DAOsaster there was a significant drop-off
in ICOs, but by the end of 2016, cumulative ICO funding was $236 million
for the year, which was nearly 50 percent of the $496 million raised through
traditional venture capital for blockchain projects in 2016.17 Given the rate of
growth in ICOs, 2017 may be the year where more money is raised through
ICOs than through traditional venture capital.
Individual ICOs (Left Axis)

Total Annual Amount (Right Axis)
250

N

20

200
The DAO Raised over
$130 Million in ETH

Ethereum Raised over
$15 Million in BTC

10

150
100

5

USD Millions

USD Millions

15

50

Oct-16

Jul-16

Apr-16

Jan-16

Oct-15

Jul-15

Apr-15

Jan-15

Oct-14

Jul-14

Apr-14

Jan-14

Oct-13

Jul-13

Apr-13

Jan-13

0

Figure 16.3 n ICOs since January 2013. (Light gray lines show individual ICOs
and the amount they raised, while the dark gray bars show the cumulative
amount raised via ICOs in a year.)
Source: https://www.smithandcrown.com/icos-crowdsale-history/

Burniske 03.indd 255

9/9/17 2:41 PM

256 CRYPTOASSETS

Announcing the ICO
The new cryptoasset can be announced any number of ways: a conference, on
Twitter, Reddit, Medium, or Bitcointalk. It is important that the announcement is followed by a white paper containing details about the founders and
advisory board, and that it clearly outlines the structure of the initial crowdsale. It should be easy to contact the founding team, whether through one of
the aforementioned social media channels or a dedicated Slack or Telegram
channel. If an ICO is scant on information, that is an immediate red flag.
The innovative investor should use the relevant aspects of the framework
we detailed in Chapter 12 to investigate whether an ICO is a sound investment. That said, things are a little trickier with ICOs than with currently functioning cryptoassets. Since ICOs use the crowdfunding model to raise money
to build a network, there often is no existing network up and running, thus
no blockchain, hash rate, user base, or companies built on it. Everything is an
idea at this stage. As a result, the integrity and prior history of the founding
and advisory team are all the more important, as is the thematic investigation
of whether this ICO is filling a marketplace and business need.

Structuring and Timing of the ICO
ICOs have a fixed start and end date, and often there is a bonus structure
involved with investing earlier. For instance, investing at an early stage may
get an investor 10 to 20 percent more of a cryptoasset. The bonus structure is
meant to incentivize people to buy in early, which helps to assure that the ICO
will hit its target offering. There’s nothing like bonuses followed by scarcity to
drive people to buy.
It’s best practice that an ICO also have a minimum and maximum amount
that it plans to raise. The minimum is to ensure the development team will
have enough to make a viable product, and the maximum is to keep the speculation of crowds in check. For example, the infamous DAO ICO didn’t set a
maximum limit on the fundraising amount, which led to rampant speculation.
The offering should lay out how the new asset will be distributed, and
how the funds that are raised will be used. Often the founding team will keep
some of the assets for themselves, which is similar to when a founding team
of a startup keeps a percentage of the company. What’s important is that these
terms are fair and accompanied by reasonable explanations.

Burniske 03.indd 256

9/9/17 2:41 PM

THE WILD WORLD OF ICOs

257

Crowdsale Begins
Typically, the innovative investor will submit funds for an ICO by sending
either bitcoin or ether to a special address the developer team provides. Just
as one could send bitcoin or ether to an address to pay for an online purchase,
innovative investors can send bitcoin or ether to an address to reserve their
share of an ICO.
Depending on the intent of the ICO, investors may receive a cryptocurrency, cryptocommodity, or cryptotoken in return for their initial investment.
How an investor receives the appropriate cryptoasset can differ, as some may
require the creation of a wallet to store the asset prior to making them available for sale on an exchange (creating this wallet might be a more technical
effort and could require following detailed instructions from the ICO provider); others will simply provide access to the asset that can be moved to an
exchange (this can have an impact on the value of an asset if there’s a large
amount of early sales on exchanges soon after the closing of an ICO). Typically,
information on the ICO will outline how the asset delivery process will work,
and this should be read prior to making an investment so that there are no
surprises for the investor.

Keeping Track of the ICOs
Numerous online sites list new ICOs and other resources to keep tabs on current and future ones.18 Smith + Crown is a well-respected firm that’s positioning itself as an information source for the ICO world. It provides an updated
list of current, past, and upcoming ICO sales.19 Other resources include ICO
Countdown20 and Cyber-Fund.21 CoinFund also operates a great Slack community, with dozens of threads, many of which are dedicated to conversations
about the specifics of upcoming ICOs.

Criticism of the ICO Model
Daniel Krawisz of the Satoshi Institute22 considers ICOs “snake oil” and “pump
and dump scams.”23 Pavel Kravchenko, founder of Distributed Lab, questions
if we “really need all of these coins” and advises, “Let’s think for a moment
before participating in an ICO — could the same technology solve the same
problems without the coin?”24 While some ICOs can be from misleading asset

Burniske 03.indd 257

9/9/17 2:41 PM

258 CRYPTOASSETS

issuers or seem “Ponzi-like,” innovative investors have the resources provided
in Chapter 11 to help them avoid such schemes. Others will scream that an
ICO is a scam simply because they disagree with the funding model, as can be
common with some Bitcoin Maximalists.
The ICO debate will continue, and it’s prudent for the innovative investor
to stay abreast of contemporary thinking around the benefits and drawbacks
of ICOs.

The Howey Test for Discerning If an ICO Is a Security
The Howey Test is the result of the 1946 U.S. Supreme Court case, SEC v
Howey Co, which investigated whether a convoluted scheme to sell and then
lease tracts of land qualified as an “investment contract,” also known as a security. The Howey Test determines whether something should be classified as a
security, even if it is referred to differently in an offering to avoid regulatory
action. If something classifies as a security, SEC oversight requires a long list
of requirements to be met, which would likely dampen all but the most wellcapitalized innovations in the exciting new world of cryptoasset offerings.
If an asset meets the following criteria, it will likely be considered a security:
1. It is an investment of money.25

2. The investment of money is in a common enterprise.

3. There is an expectation of profits from the investment.

For the most part, the teams behind ICOs want to avoid classification as a
security because it will demand hefty legal fees, delay innovation, and require
restructuring of the current cryptoasset landscape. While most ICOs meet
the first two conditions, the third condition is up for interpretation. Do
investors buy into an ICO as an “expectation of profit,” or do they buy into
an ICO to gain access to the ultimate utility that will be provided by the
blockchain architecture? While the distinction may seem small, it can make
all the difference.
A joint effort by Coinbase, Coin Center, ConsenSys, and Union Square
Ventures, with the legal assistance of Debevoise & Plimpton LLP, produced a
document called, “A Securities Law Framework for Blockchain Tokens.”26 It is
especially important for the team behind an ICO to utilize this document in
conjunction with a lawyer to determine if a crypto­asset sale falls under SEC
jurisdiction. The SEC made it clear in July 2017 that some cryptoassets can be
considered securities.27

Burniske 03.indd 258

9/9/17 2:41 PM

THE WILD WORLD OF ICOs

259

The document includes a framework for scoring the ICO and identifying its applicability as a security, and thus its consideration in light of the
regulations that go along with that classification. Innovative investors may
also want to evaluate these criteria on their own in line with what they know
about the ICO: if there’s a belief by the investor that the offering should be
considered an investment contract and the offering team is moving forward
without that assumption, that could be a red flag about the legitimacy of
an ICO. The SEC made it clear in July 2017 that some cryptoassets can be
considered securities.28
The framework document is also helpful because it includes best practices
for an ICO, which provides a good checklist for innovative investors. They are
paraphrased below to provide context for what an investor should consider
for any potential ICO investment (much of this overlaps with what has been
stated already, but with ICOs, it’s best to be doubly sure.) Note that in this context, cryptoasset is synonymous with token:
1. Is there a published white paper?

2. Is there a detailed development road map that includes a breakdown

of all appropriate financials along the way?

3. Does it use an open, public blockchain, and is the code published?
4. Is there clear, logical, and fair pricing in the token sale?

5. Is it clear how much of the token has been assigned for the develop-

ment team and how those tokens will be released? Releasing them
over time keeps the developers engaged and protects against centralized control of the token.
6. Does the token sale tout itself as an investment? It should instead be
promoted for its functionality and use case and include appropriate
disclaimers that identify it as a product, not an investment.

ANGEL AND EARLY STAGE INVESTORS
One of the most exciting and potentially lucrative opportunities for an accredited investor is to be an angel investor with a startup. Angel investors can range
from the family member who provides capital (or a credit card) to more formalized angel investors, who are either aligned with a venture capital firm or
on their own seeking investment opportunities.
Angel investments can vary in size from the low thousands to much higher
via early stage investment opportunities. If a venture moves on to more formalized funding after the angel stage, those who invested as angels may see the

Burniske 03.indd 259

9/9/17 2:41 PM

260 CRYPTOASSETS

value of their investment increase, on paper at least. As a company grows and
ultimately arrives at its exit strategy of an IPO or takeover, angel investors can
achieve sizable gains from their initial investment.
The online site BnktotheFuture.com provides angel investing opportunities
in cryptoassets and related companies to accredited investors. The site has provided opportunities to be angel and early stage investors in big names, such as
Factom, BitPay, BitPesa, ShapeShift, Kraken, and even BnktotheFuture itself. It
also provides access to mining pools for bitcoin and ether, in which investors
can gain a daily dividend from the cryptoassets mined through those pools.
Angel investors may also join online communities such as AngelList29 and
Crunchbase30 where accredited investors can connect with startups. Both have
robust listings for blockchain related companies. In fact, AngelList has over 500
blockchain companies listed with an average $4 million valuation and a growing list of over 700 blockchain investors.31 These sites are great ways to find
information on existing startups and venture capitalists, and they can provide
the accredited innovative investor with good information and background on
the process of being an angel investor and the opportunities therein.
One of the oldest groups of angel investors in the blockchain and bitcoin
space is called BitAngels.32 Michael Terpin of BitAngels has been active in
angel investing in blockchain companies for as long as the opportunities have
existed. Terpin’s annual conference, CoinAgenda, is one of the best opportunities for investors to see and hear management from blockchain startups
present their ideas and business models. Each year, Terpin brings together the
top startups in the space to present to varying levels of investors. In 2016, the
company that won the conference’s award for best of show33 was Airbitz, which
provides a single sign-on platform for blockchain apps. Soon after the conference, Airbitz raised over $700,000 on Bnktothefuture.com.34
•

•

•

Opportunities for the innovative investor to gain access to cryptoassets and
the companies involved will continue to grow. We believe that these opportunities will not only impact the way people view their investing philosophy, but
will also affect how they work with financial professionals who are involved in
their investments, such as their financial advisors or accountants. The innovative investor can’t lose sight of his or her financial goals and objectives.
Chasing after what seem to be high-profit opportunities must be tempered by
an understanding of the accompanying risk. Of all the chapters in our book,

Burniske 03.indd 260

9/9/17 2:41 PM

THE WILD WORLD OF ICOs

261

this chapter has covered material that is moving the most quickly. Therefore
the innovative investor that wants to play in the world of ICOs will need to do
ample due diligence beyond what he or she has read here, including staying
abreast of statements from regulators on the classification of these assets.
We’ve shown the various, and still growing, ways investors can gain access
to cryptoassets. Now that the innovative investor has come this far down the
cryptoasset rabbit hole, it’s time to revisit his or her current approach and
investment portfolio in light of what has been learned.

Burniske 03.indd 261

9/9/17 2:41 PM

This page intentionally left blank

Burniske 03.indd 262

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Chapter 17
Preparing Current Portfolios
for Blockchain Disruption

W

hen Toffler stated in the 1970s that exponential change would cause
millions of people to have an “abrupt collision with the future,” it was
issued as a warning. When considering investing in cryptoassets,
innovative investors need to not only consider an individual investment (like
bitcoin or ether) but also how this new asset class and the overall concept of
blockchain technology could impact other assets within their portfolio. This
chapter focuses on the importance of actively evaluating and potentially protecting one’s portfolio in the face of exponential change.
When pondering the changes cryptoassets are bringing to the way we invest
today, we must also recognize that the entire concept of blockchain technology
heralds significant disruption to companies and industries. For most investors,
these disruptions will affect investments that have already been made or are
under consideration.
For instance, if Bitcoin influences how remittances are handled, what
impact may that have on stocks like Western Union, a remittances kingpin? If
Ethereum takes off as a decentralized world computer, will that have any effect
on companies with cloud computing offerings, such as Amazon, Microsoft,
and Google? If companies can get paid more quickly and with lower transaction fees using the latest cryptocurrency, will that have an impact on credit
card providers like Visa and American Express?

263

Burniske 03.indd 263

9/9/17 2:41 PM

264 CRYPTOASSETS

EXPONENTIAL DISRUPTION
Clayton Christensen, a professor at Harvard Business School, wrote the seminal text on how large companies, often referred to as incumbents, struggle with
maneuvering around exponential change. In The Innovator’s Dilemma: When
New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail, Christensen makes no qualms
about how even the most well managed of firms can fail when confronted with
a technology that threatens to disrupt their market. Broadly disruptive technologies lay the foundation for new growth, with the most influential blossoming into what are called general purpose technologies, which include electricity, the automobile, the Internet, and yes, blockchain technology. While
such growth provides many opportunities, even if large companies recognize
the potential of a technology, they are often handcuffed when they try to capitalize on it. The problem they face is threefold:
First, disruptive products are simpler and cheaper; they generally promise lower margins, not greater profits. Second, disruptive technologies typically are first commercialized in emerging
or insignificant markets. And third, leading firms’ most profitable
customers generally don’t want, and indeed initially can’t use,
products based on disruptive technologies.1

Pursuing a product line in the new market is not additive to the incumbent’s
existing business because, as Christensen explains, disruptive products have
lower margins, smaller markets, and target a customer base with whom the
company is not familiar. Sometimes the new product line can even be subtractive from the company’s existing business line—known as cannibalization—
because it is superior to other products it already offers, and so customers start
buying the new product as opposed to the more lucrative (for the company)
older product. However, avoiding the new technology because of a fear of cannibalization can be the kiss of death. As Christensen points out,
The fear of cannibalizing sales of existing products is often cited
as a reason why established firms delay the introduction of new
technologies. . . . But in disruptive situations, action must be
taken before careful plans are made. Because much less can be
known about what markets need or how large they can become,
plans must serve a very different purpose: They must be plans for
learning rather than plans for implementation.
