
AU3772_book.fm Page 454 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

454

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Since, ordinarily, a Top will be formed after a Bottom and a Bottom after
a Top, we will expect to draw, alternately, a Blue Trendline and then a Red
Trendline, these lines being drawn as soon as the new Top or Bottom is
established. (In some cases, a light pencil line may be drawn to indicate
suspected Tops or Bottoms, until developments confirm their validity.)
We have already taken up the important and rather difficult question of
determining the Minor Tops and Bottoms. Very often, these points will be
clear and obvious. Sometimes they will be obscure, and you will be able to
draw trendlines with confidence, in such cases, only after considerable experience covering many types of action. The most difficult times to determine
Minor Trends are during Reversals, especially where these are of the rounded
and irregular types. However, in these cases (of Reversal), we will not
depend so much on the trendlines to determine buying and selling points.
So long as a stock persists in a Parallel Trend Channel, it is perfectly
clear that you should buy near the Bottom of the channel and sell near the
Top. From the geometry of the situation (see examples), you will see at a
glance that it is not likely to be profitable to sell short in an upward-moving
trend (since the reactions are necessarily smaller than the advances), nor to
buy stock in a downward-moving trend.
Therefore, a trend must show that it is presumably an uptrend before
you are justified in buying stock. And you must have what is presumably a
downtrend to justify a short sale.
You will notice from the simplified examples shown here that pattern
formations indicate trends. The breaking of a Rectangle on the upside results
in an upward slope of the Blue Trend. The move up out of an Ascending
Triangle confirms the rising Red Trend and creates a rising Blue Trend. The
downside breaking of a Head-and-Shoulders neckline confirms a descending
Blue Trend and sets up a descending Red Trend. And so on.
From studies of these patterns and various trend actions, we arrive at a
compact set of trading rules based on these Red and Blue trendlines. These
rules are summarized below.

Buying Stock, “Going Long”
• Preparatory Buying Signals (indicating that a buying opportunity
may be in the making). Penetration of Blue Trend to a new high
closing (in most cases). (The simple breaking of a descending Blue
Trendline, where no other pattern or indication is present, is not
sufficiently conclusive evidence of Reversal to justify commitments.)
– Contact with the ascending Blue Trend if Red Trend is also ascending, provided the trends do not converge (Parallel or Divergent Trend Channel).

AU3772_book.fm Page 455 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-nine:

Trendlines in Action

455

–

Contact with horizontal Blue Trend if Red Trend is also horizontal
or ascending (Rectangle, Ascending Triangle).
– Penetration of descending Blue Trend on volume if Red Trend is
ascending (Symmetrical Triangle).
• Execution of Buys (after preparatory buying signal).
– In case the previous Blue Trend has been ascending, draw the
Blue Parallel and buy at or near this line.
– In case the previous Blue Trend has been horizontal or descending
(that is to say, emerging from Rectangles, Triangles, and various
Reversal Patterns), buy on a reaction of 40 to 45% of the distance
from the last previous Minor Bottom to the extreme Top of the
most recent move.

Liquidating, or Selling a Long Position
Immediately on execution of the buy order, determine the stop level (see
Chapter 27 on Stop Orders), and place your protective stop. Penetration of
this stop level will automatically close out your transaction. The stop level
may be moved up according to the “three days away” rule, but may never
be moved down (except to adjust for ex-dividend or ex-rights). If the stock
closes below a previous Minor Bottom (thus setting up a descending Red
Trend), sell on tight (EN: or hair-trigger) progressive stops.
If the stock advances on moderate volume and then develops unusually
high volume on any day during the advance before either the Blue Trend is
broken (with a close above that trendline) or before the stock has made a
new high closing over the last Minor Top, close out the transaction on tight
progressive stops.
If the stock develops high volume on the day on which it either tops
and closes above the Blue Trend or makes a new high closing over the
previous Minor Top, hold it. If heavy volume again occurs on the following
day or any subsequent day, however, sell on tight progressive stops.
You will find that, in many cases, the heavy volume signal will develop
(sometimes with also a One-Day Reversal or an Exhaustion Gap) on or near
the Red Parallel. You will watch especially for this volume indication as a
sign of a good profit-taking point. If the volume signal does not show up,
your selling objective is this Red Parallel, at a limit or on tight progressive
stops. In case there is no such volume signal at the top of the move and the
move does not reach the Blue Trend nor make a new high, you are very
likely running into a Triangle situation. In that case, you will have to wait
for a breakout one way or the other. Meanwhile, maintain your stop protection underneath.

AU3772_book.fm Page 456 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

456

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

DIAGRAM 8. Preparatory buying signals shown by trend action.
(A) Penetration of an ascending Blue Trendline.
(B) Penetration of a horizontal Blue Trendline.
(C) The penetration of a descending Blue Trendline without other technical indications is not conclusive evidence of a change in trend, and does not justify long
commitments.
(D) Contact with the Blue Trendline of an Ascending Parallel Trend Pattern.
(E) Contact with the Blue Trendline of an Ascending Divergent Trend Pattern.
(F) In this case, contact with the Blue Trendline does not suggest a buy on the next
reaction, since the trend appears to be converging; a possible Wedge in the making,
with Bearish implications.
(G) Contact with the Blue Trendline of a Rectangle at its fifth point of Reversal.
(H) Contact with the Blue Trendline of an Ascending Triangle.
(I) Penetration on volume of descending Blue Trendline when Red Trendline is ascending (Symmetrical Triangle).
In rising trends, the Blue Trendline is a Return Line, and purchases will be made
on reactions to a line parallel to the new Blue Trendline established at the Top of the
signal move, and drawn through the intervening Bottom. Note that in the case of
decisive breakouts from patterns such as Rectangles and Triangles, a purchase may
also be made on the basis of a computed 40–50% correction of the breakout move,
or on a return to Support.

AU3772_book.fm Page 457 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-nine:

Trendlines in Action

457

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

R

DIAGRAM 9. Preparatory signals for short sales shown by trend action.
(J) Penetration of a descending Red Trendline.
(K) Penetration of a horizontal Red Trendline.
(L) The penetration of an ascending Red Trendline without other technical indications
is not conclusive evidence of a change in trend, and does not justify short commitments.
(M) Line of a Descending Parallel Trend Channel.
(N) Contact with the Red Trendline of a Descending Divergent Trend Pattern.
(O) In this case, contact with the Red Trendline does not suggest a short sale on the
next rally, since the trend appears to be converging; a possible Wedge in the making,
with Bullish implications.
(P) Contact with the Red Trendline of a Rectangle at its fifth point of Reversal.
(Q) Contact with the Red Trendline of a Descending Triangle.
(R) Penetration of ascending Red Trendline (with or without volume) when Blue
Trendline is descending (Symmetrical Triangle).
In descending trends, the Red Trendline is a return Line, and short sales will be
made on rallies to a line parallel to the new Red Trendline established at the Bottom
of the signal move and drawn through the intervening peak. Note that in the case
of decisive breakouts from patterns such as Rectangles and Triangles, a short sale
might also be made on the basis of a computed 40–50% correction of the breakout
move, or on a return to Resistance.

AU3772_book.fm Page 458 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

458

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Selling Stock Short
• Preparatory Selling Signals (indicating that an opportunity for short
sales may be in the making).
– Penetration of Red Trend to a new low closing (in most cases).
(The simple breaking of an ascending Red Trendline where no
other pattern or indication is present is not sufficiently conclusive
evidence of Reversal to justify commitments.)
– Contact with descending Red Trend if Blue Trend is also descending, provided the trends do not converge (Parallel or Divergent Trend Channel).
– Contact with horizontal Red Trend if Blue Trend is also horizontal
or descending (Rectangle, Descending Triangle).
– Penetration of ascending Red Trend (with or without volume
increase) if Blue Trend is descending (Symmetrical Triangle).
• Execution of Short Sales (after preparatory selling signal).
– In case the previous Red Trend has been descending, draw the
Red Parallel and sell at or near this line.
– In case the previous Red Trend has been horizontal or ascending
(that is to say, emerging from Rectangles, Triangles, and various
Reversal Patterns), sell on a rally of 40 to 45% of the distance from
the last previous Minor Top to the extreme Bottom of the most
recent move.

Covering Short Sales
Immediately on execution of the short sale, determine the stop level (see
Chapter 27 on Stop Orders), and place your protective stop. Penetration of
this stop level will automatically close out your transaction. The stop level
may be moved down according to the “three days away” rule, but may never
be moved up.
If the stock closes above a previous Minor Top (thus setting up an
ascending Blue Trend), buy to cover on tight progressive stops.
If the stock declines on moderate volume and then develops unusually
high volume on any day during the decline before either the Red Trend is
broken (with a close below that trendline), or before the stock has made a
new low closing under the last Minor Bottom, close out the transaction on
tight progressive stops.
If the stock develops high volume on the day on which it either breaks
and closes below the Red Trend or makes a new low closing under the
previous Minor Bottom, hold it short. If heavy volume again occurs on the
following day or any subsequent day, however, buy to cover on tight progressive stops.
You will find that in many cases the heavy volume signal will develop
(sometimes with also a One-Day Reversal or an Exhaustion Gap) on or near
the Blue Parallel. You will watch especially for this volume indication as a

AU3772_book.fm Page 459 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-nine:

Trendlines in Action

459

sign of a good profit-taking point. If the volume signal does not show up,
your buying objective is the Blue Parallel, at a limit or on tight progressive
stops. In case there is no such volume signal at the bottom of the move and
the move does not reach the Red Trend nor make a new low, you are very
likely running into a Triangle situation. In that case, you will have to wait
for a breakout one way or the other, meanwhile maintaining your stop
protection overhead.

Additional Suggestions
When a level is reached which appears to be either a Minor Bottom on a
reaction or a Minor Top on a rally, and when the stock continues to stall and
remain at this point, moving in a very narrow range for 3 weeks or more
without giving any signal either by way of price change or volume action
as to its next move, it is wise to assume that this congestion is definitely a
key area, should be considered a Minor Top or Bottom, and protective stops
adjusted to it as a Basing Point, instead of the previously established Top or
Bottom, as against the possibility that the move out of this area, when it
comes, may be in the wrong direction.
After a series of moves in a trend, with each move in the Primary
Direction marked by heavier volume than the retreats or Corrective Moves
against the trend, you are likely to have a move in the Primary Direction,
which is marked by extraordinary volume; that is to say, by much larger
volume than the normal increase for a Primary Move. On such a move, after
taking your profits on previous commitments, you would ordinarily begin
to plan the next commitment on the Correction. But in this particular case,
noting the extreme volume, you would cancel any immediate plans for
further commitments in the Primary Direction.
The reason for this is that such climactic volume normally indicates the
final “blow-off” of the Intermediate Trend, to be followed either by a Reversal, or at least by a period of stagnation, or formation of Consolidation
Patterns, or Intermediate Correction. In such a case, it is not safe to make
any further commitments on this trend pending further developments and
the positive reassertion of the trend.
If you examine daily charts of various stocks, covering long and important trends, you will find that the series of Minor Moves making up the
Intermediate Trend is likely to culminate in a Minor Move marked by tremendous volume. This is more true of Tops than Bottoms, although at the
end of the Panic Phase of a Bear Market, we very often see climactic volume.
The climax indicates, on the other hand, the sale of large amounts of stock
by strong investors to weak traders, near the top; on the other hand, the
liquidation of holdings by weak traders occurs near the bottom, into the
hands of strong investors who will hold them for the next Major Move.
One of the most common errors, and one of the easiest to fall into, is to
mistake a Climactic Top or Bottom for a normal confirmation or preparatory
signal for a new commitment in line with the preceding trend.

AU3772_book.fm Page 460 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

460

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

It is similar in nature to the error often made by novices in the market
of buying on the Minor Tops (becoming dazzled with the rapid price advance
and the great volume of activity). However, in the case of these final “blowoff” moves, the volume is greater and the adverse portent far more serious.

General Outline of Policy for Trading in the Major Trend
A. Always trade in the direction of the Major or Primary Dow Trend
(EN: See the editor’s comments in Chapter 3) as it is indicated at the time.
B. If the two component Averages of the Dow Theory (Industrials and
Rails EN9: Transportations) are not in agreement, trade in the direction
of the last established Primary Trend but only in the component
which is still following that trend.
C. Examine charts of group Averages covering groups of businesses in
the same or related lines; trade in the Primary Direction when the
trend of the group corresponds.
D. Trade in any particular stock when its own individual chart indicates
a trend in the same direction as the Primary Trend, and when the
technical picture has indicated a probable move in that direction.
Make all new commitments on the reactions or rallies following the
signaling move in the Primary direction, except in the case of Primary Reversals from Bull Market to Bear Market, when short sales may be made at the
market immediately following the Reversal.
Exception: after an extended move or a series of moves in the Primary
Direction, when signs of exhaustion and Reversal appear in individual
charts, commitments in the opposite direction may be made with objectives
limited to a correction of the preceding Intermediate Move in the Primary
Direction.
EN9: Now the reader’s head is spinning and the color blind are completely
confused. As this book is unfortunately printed in black and white the reader without
colored pencils will be at sea. But the principles articulated here by Magee are of
great value to a Trader and are worth study. Technology rides to the rescue. A color
PDF of this chapter will be found in the distant future on the John Magee Techical
Analysis website at www.edwards-magee.com.

AU3772_book.fm Page 461 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter thirty

Use of Support and
Resistance
We know that after many breakouts from well-defined Reversal and Consolidation Patterns, we get a short countermove back to the edge of the
pattern, and that the checking of this move at that point is an example of
Support or Resistance, as the case may be. Also, we should be familiar by
now with the tendency of stocks to move up or down in a series of zigzag
steps. If the move is upward, the reaction after each advance tends to stop
at the level of the preceding peak. If the move is downward, the rally after
each decline tends to stop at the level of the preceding bottom. This is again
a matter of Support and Resistance, and provides the basis for buying on
reactions or selling on rallies.
It has also been pointed out that Intermediate Secondary Moves will
frequently stop at or close to the previous Intermediate Top or Bottom.
It is necessary to evaluate the importance of these phenomena of Support
and Resistance, and apply them in market practice, for they are among the
most important tools we have. Unfortunately it is not easy to reduce this
particular subject to a neat formula or body of rules. (EN9: And the effort will
be made. See endnote of this chapter for an interesting effort to do just that.) Here
you will depend very largely on experience and observation. You will have
to be alert in spotting the levels where Resistance or Support is likely to be
encountered, and some judgment is needed in balancing the various factors
that will affect the situation.
For example, there is a stock which has broken up out of a well-defined
Rectangle of considerable duration. Should the heavy volume of the breakout
move give way to a dull reaction, you will look for an opportunity to buy
this stock at a point a little above the top level of the Rectangle. It will
probably not penetrate very far below that level and, indeed, will often fail
to react all the way to the Support. If the stock should then advance to a
new high, and once more decline on low volume, you may look for another
buying point at about the level of the peak reached on the original breakout.
Another advance may be followed by reaction to the second peak, and this
process may be repeated a number of times, each reaction carrying back to
the level of the preceding high.

461

AU3772_book.fm Page 462 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

462

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Now we all know that this sort of thing does not continue indefinitely.
When the stock first breaks out, moving from, say, 15 to 19, we may buy
rather confidently on the reaction to 17, if that is the Support Level. If we
did not buy on this move, we may buy with considerable assurance on the
reaction to Support after the next advance. This advance might have carried
the price to 21 and our buying point would, of course, be at the previous
peak of 19. However, as the stock moves up to 25, 30, 40, it must be clear
that we are approaching a real Top; that although we cannot say where that
Top will be reached, we can be sure that it is becoming increasingly tempting
to long-time holders of this stock to sell and take their substantial gains. The
series of steps is bound to come to an end. To be sure, the Major course of
the stock and of the market may continue up for months or years, but after
a series of sharp rises, we may reasonably expect a Reversal and a rather
substantial Intermediate Decline before the upward move is continued.
Therefore, we must regard each successive step of advance with increasing suspicion, and it is a fair rule that after a stock has made three such
moves in the Primary Direction, it is time to look for an Intermediate Correction, or at least an important period of Consolidation.
Thus, we have the rough shape of a rule. Buy on the reaction to Support
after the first breakout. Buy on the reaction to the first Minor Peak after the
next move. But do not buy on the reaction to the second Minor Peak.
Let us say, then, that we have been successful in two short-term moves,
buying on the reaction to Support and selling on the climax after a new Top
has been made. But we have decided not to attempt a third such trade. What,
then, may we expect next? We may see a period of Consolidation, we may
see the beginning of an Intermediate Decline, or we may see the stock
actually go right on moving up. No matter. We will wait for the Intermediate
Reaction. We will wait until the stock makes a very substantial decline, and
this may take many weeks. Then, if the Major Trend has not reversed itself,
we will again look for a buying opportunity at (or somewhat above) the
Intermediate Support, which will usually be the top level of the advance
preceding the one just completed, for this is the level from which the next
Primary Advance is likely to proceed and is a good buying point.
Of course, we find the same situation in Bear Markets. A breakout is
likely to be followed by one, two, three, or more steps of decline, with
intervening rallies to Minor Resistance. Sooner or later (and we would count
on no more than three such steps in a series), we will get a turn and an
Intermediate Recovery. We will then wait for this rally, which may itself be
made up of several Minor steps, to reach or approach closely the preceding
Intermediate Bottom, at which point we may look for substantial Resistance.
Here is the place again to put out shorts.
Questions will come to your mind. One of them, and one of the most
important is: how do we decide when an expected Support or Resistance
has failed us, and at what point do we then abandon our position?
It will be clear that this question can be a very painful one. Let us suppose
you have seen a stock rise to 25 and have placed an order to buy it at 23½

AU3772_book.fm Page 463 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty:

Use of Support and Resistance

463

on the basis of expected Support at 23, the level of a previous Minor Peak.
The order is executed during a dull reaction. The next day, the stock slips
down to 22½, on perhaps only two or three sales. The next day, it continues
down to 21½, still on low volume. And during the next week, it goes down
steadily, without much volume, nearly every sale being at a lower price, as
though no new bids were being received, and as though no substantial
number of bids were standing on the book at any point. A decline of this
sort can eventually assume the magnitude of an Intermediate Reaction. The
move may carry down to 15 before it turns. Obviously this was not what
you expected, and you should be out of the stock.
The painful part of these drifting moves is that you do not want to sell
your stock (which you bought at 23½) on just a slight move down, say to
22¾, since the probability is strong that it will shoot up at any moment to
new high levels. And yet, at some point during a continued decline, you
must decide, “This has gone through the Support; I should sell and take a
small loss now, rather than risk a more serious loss.” And the most painful
part of all is that sometimes, the moment you have sold and taken your loss,
the stock will come to life and complete what would have been an extremely
profitable move.
You might just as well prepare yourself for this sort of disappointment;
for it will happen to you. But to avoid nights of pacing the floor and days
of worry, you should decide, at the time you make the original commitment, just
how much leeway you are prepared to give the stock. Then you will not be
tempted to put off a decision from day to day if things are not going the
way you hoped.
In the case of purchases or short sales made against Minor Peaks or
Bottoms, as the case may be, you might set up the following rule. Measuring
from the extreme high of the previous (Supporting) Minor Top, or the
extreme low of the previous (resisting) Minor Bottom, set a stop using the
method we have outlined in Chapter 27. (EN9: See also Chapter 28. And
consider the risk limitation procedures in Chapter 42.) This would often be the
intraday high or low, not necessarily the closing price. Penetration to that
extent should be presumptive evidence that your expected Support or Resistance is not going to function.
Where you are buying against Major or Intermediate Support, or selling
short against Major or Intermediate Resistance, you can allow a little more
leeway for penetration. In such cases, examine the Support or Resistance
Area, and estimate visually its core or axis; in other words, try to gauge the
“center of gravity” of this area, the point which is most nearly the mean
price of sales occurring there, taking into account the volume, since the
important thing is to determine the approximate price level at which a great
many shares changed hands. Having determined this point, set your stop
beyond it, according to the methods specified in Chapter 27.
Up to this point we have concerned ourselves (reversing the usual order)
with how to get out of situations which have gone bad. We have said nothing
about where, precisely, to get in, nor where, precisely, to take profits.
