
 I have it from unreliable sources that the cost of the voyage Isabella originally underwrote for Columbus was approximately $30,000. This has been considered at least a moderately successful utilization of venture capital. Without attempting to evaluate the psychic income derived from finding a new hemisphere, it must be pointed out that … the whole deal was not exactly another IBM. Figured very roughly, the $30,000 invested at 4% compounded annually would have amounted to something like $2,000,000,000,000 [two trillion] … 15 

 His serious point was that even trifling sums should be invested with the utmost care. To Buffett, blowing $30,000 represented the loss not of $30,000 but of the potential for $2 trillion. 
 In another letter, he chided partners for being overly influenced in their financial planning by the desire to avoid taxes. Indeed, many of life’s errors were the result of people forgetting what they were really trying to do. 

 What is one really trying to do in the investment world? Not pay the least taxes, although that may be a factor to be considered in achieving the end. Means and end should not be confused, however, and the end is to come away with the largest after-tax rate of compound. 

 It must be, he added, that people’s emotional distaste for paying taxes blinded them to acting rationally—a misstep that Buffett was careful to avoid. “Ultimately,” he reasoned, there were only three ways to avoid a tax: (1) to give the asset away, (2) to lose back the gain, and (3) to die with the asset—“and that’s a little too ultimate for me—even the zealots would have to view this ‘cure’ with mixed emotions.” 16 
 Buffett returned to such thematic grace notes again and again. Indeed, reading the letters front to back, they are full of early sightings of later Buffett melodies. But reading them singly, one is more aware of the tone, and specifically of Buffett’s intense focus on his own development. Written at night, when the rest of the house was asleep, the letters have about them a quality of self-discovery—a pimply, self-conscious honesty. The writer of these letters has the same engaging informality that Buffett did in person. 
 Of course, Buffett knew many of his readers on a personal basis, as family or friends. But the collective relationship that he had with them as his partners—even though, in a sense, an abstract one—had a special significance to him. 
 In person, he kept a distance, but as a general partner, Buffett was revealing about what was, in effect, his most intimate concern. If his work in the partnership amounted to a sort of self-portrait, the background motif of the letters was Buffett’s own character. He used these semiannual missives to prepare his partners, and to align their expectations and thinking with his own. He talked to them. 

 I am not in the business of predicting general stock market or business fluctuations. If you think I can do this, or think it is essential to an investment program, you should not be in the partnership. 17 

 It was enormously important to Buffett that his partners see him as trustworthy. He and Susie put more than 90 percent of their personal money in with the partners’, as did Bill Scott, Buffett’s assistant. “So we are all eating our own cooking,” Buffett assured them. 18 
 He took pains to explain his approach in advance , and in concrete terms—precisely because he knew that a misunderstanding could sunder the union. One time, a partner barged into the reception area at Kiewit Plaza intent on finding out where the money was invested. Buffett, who was meeting with a banker named Bill Brown—later chairman of the Bank of Boston—told his secretary he was busy. She returned in a moment and said the man insisted on seeing him. Buffett disappeared for a minute and then told his secretary, “Price that guy out” [of the partnership]. Turning to Brown, Buffett added, “They know my rules. I’ll report to them once a year.” 19 
 Buffett made no attempt to predict his results, but he was obsessed with the notion that his partners should judge him fairly—meaning unemotionally and according to a neutral, arithmetic scale. (That is how Buffett judged himself.) 

 I believe in establishing yardsticks prior to the act; retrospectively, almost anything can be made to look good in relation to something or other. 20 

 His own goal, stated at the outset, was to beat the Dow by an average of 10 points a year. On this topic, he took his readers deeper. The Dow, he noted, was an unmanaged group of thirty stocks. Yet most of the pros couldn’t match it. Why was it, he wondered, that “the high priests of Wall Street,” with their brains, training, and high pay, couldn’t top a portfolio managed by no brains at all? He found a culprit in the tendency of managers to confuse a conservative (i.e., reasonably priced) portfolio with one that was merely conventional . 21 It was a subtle distinction, and bears reflection. The common approach of owning a bag full of popular stocks—AT&T, General Electric, IBM, and so forth— regardless of price , qualified as the latter, but surely not as the former. Buffett blamed the committee process and group-think that was prevalent on Wall Street: 

 My perhaps jaundiced view is that it is close to impossible for outstanding investment management to come from a group of any size.… 22 

 Such decision-via-consensus—then and now the rule on Wall Street—tended to produce a sameness from one fund to the next. It nourished the seductive syllogism “whereby average is ‘safe’ ” and unorthodox is risky. In truth, Buffett countered, sound reasoning might lead to conventional acts, but often it would lead to unorthodoxy. 

 In some corner of the world they are probably still holding regular meetings of the Flat Earth Society. We derive no comfort because important people, vocal people, or great numbers of people agree with us. Nor do we derive comfort if they don’t. 23 

 Buffett’s portfolio was decidedly unconventional. With his big bets on American Express, Berkshire Hathaway, and two or three others, the lion’s share of the pool was in just five stocks. 24 Ideally, Buffett would have preferred to spread his assets, provided that he could have found, say, fifty stocks that were equally “superior.” But in the real world, he found that he had to work extremely hard to find just a few. 25 
 He ridiculed the fund managers who took the opposite tack—which is to say, most of those working on Wall Street. Diversification had become an article of faith; fund managers were commonly stuffing their portfolios with hundreds of different stocks. Paraphrasing Billy Rose, Buffett doubted that they could intelligently select so many securities any more than a sheik could get to “know” a harem of one hundred girls. 

 Anyone owning such numbers of securities … is following what I call the Noah School of Investing—two of everything. Such investors should be piloting arks. 26 

 A portfolio with scores of securities would be relatively unaffected if any one stock fell, but similarly unaffected should an issue rise. Indeed, as the number of stocks grew, the portfolio would come to mimic the market averages. That would be a safe and perhaps a reasonable goal for the novice, but in Buffett’s view, it undermined the very purpose of the professional investor, who presumably was being paid to beat the average. Owning so many stocks was an admission that one could not pick the winners. 
 None of this is to suggest that Buffett was a gambler. He was just as determined as Ben Graham had been to avoid taking a loss. But where Graham had insisted on substantial (if not extreme) diversification, 27 Buffett thought he could safeguard his eggs without spreading them around. † Beneath his surface modesty he was, in effect, making a very brassy claim. And he continued to live up to it. The partnership portfolio jumped an astonishing 39 percent in 1963 and 28 percent in 1964. By then, Buffett was managing $22 million. His personal net worth was close to $4 million—at that time, quite a fortune. 28 
 This spiraling accumulation had no noticeable effect on Buffett’s lifestyle. He remained partial to Parsow’s gray suits, Ross’s steaks, and University of Nebraska football games. During the week, aside from an occasional business trip, his X coordinate merely traversed an alley between his home and office; the Y coordinate barely moved at all. Nor was there anything in Buffett’s manner that suggested money. He did add some rooms and a racquetball court to his house, the variously sloping roofs of which now seemed to ramble disjointedly over the lot. But for a multimillionaire, it was remarkably ordinary, and of course remained close to a busy suburban thoroughfare. Outside, a blinking yellow traffic light stood watch like a sentry. 
 Buffett scarcely thought about spending his wealth on material comforts. That wasn’t why he wanted it. The money was a proof: a score-card for his favorite game. 
 He did ask Susie to upgrade his VW, explaining that it looked bad when he picked up visitors at the airport. But he didn’t have the slightest interest in it. 
 “What kind of car?” Susie asked. 
 “ Any car. I don’t care what kind.” 29 (She got him a wide-finned Cadillac.) 
 Scott Hord, a vice president of Data Documents, the Omaha computer-card company, got to the heart of the matter when Buffett and he flew to Houston on a business trip. 
 “Warren, what’s it feel like to be a millionaire?” Hord asked innocently. “I’ve never known a millionaire.” 
 “I can have anything I want that money will buy. But I always could.” 
 Whatever was the object of Scotty Hord’s fantasies—toys, trucks, cars, paintings, jewelry, silks—Buffett could have had. But they didn’t mean a thing to him. Buffett’s fantasy was to be in Kiewit Plaza, piling up more money day after day. 
 Paradoxically, Susie projected an air of disinterest in having money but was a virtuoso shopper. She dropped $15,000 on a home refurnishing, which “just about killed Warren,” according to Bob Billig, one of his golfing pals. Buffett griped to Billig, “Do you know how much that is if you compound it over twenty years?” 
 Beneath his becoming lack of acquisitiveness, Buffett had a certain obsession. In his mind, every dime had the potential of Queen Isabella’s lost fortune. When a nickel today could become so much more tomorrow, spending it drove him nuts. He didn’t even buy life insurance, figuring that he could compound the premiums faster than an insurance company. ‡ Buffett said of himself that he was “working [his] way up to cheap.” 30 (He was not stingy, though, about picking up the check.) 
 When it came to money, Buffett seemed to have twin personalities—it was nothing to him and it was everything. He had an overly reverent view of money’s proper role, as if spending were a sort of sinfulness. Even when he dieted, he inserted money into the equation. He would write a $10,000 check to his daughter, payable on such-and-such a date unless his weight had dropped . Little Susie would try to ply him with ice cream or drag him to McDonald’s—but it was useless. Her daddy didn’t want the ice cream as much as he wanted to keep the money. 
 Buffett acknowledged his contrasting sentiments, quite comically, one summer when the family was touring San Simeon, the William Randolph Hearst mansion in California. The guide was giving a blow-by-blow account of how much Hearst had paid for every item—the drapes, carpets, antiques, and so on. Bored to tears, Buffett protested, “Don’t tell us how he spent it. Tell us how he made it!” 31 
 Buffett’s money seems to have affected him politically—but not in the manner one would expect. As he became independently wealthy—roughly during the early and middle sixties—he finally asserted his political autonomy from his father. Warren based his evolving politics not on his personal economic interests, as most millionaires—and most people—do, but on his fears for society writ large. In the turbulent 1960s, several issues awakened him. The Cuban missile crisis mortified him, just as Hiroshima had. According to his friend Dick Holland: 

 Warren was afraid. He was interested in studying the attitudes that led to extreme nationalism, and how wars could be prevented. He was always trying to calculate the odds of the world’s blowing up. 

 Buffett read Bertrand Russell, the pacifist philosopher and mathematician, extensively during this period, and adopted much of Russell’s internationalist outlook. 32 An agnostic like Russell, and deeply aware of his mortality, Buffett thought it was up to society, collectively, to protect the planet from dangers such as nuclear war. Unlike his isolationist and antigovernment father, Warren recognized a need for government. 
 This was also true on the burning issue of civil rights. Omaha had a substantial black population, and strict segregation in housing and many jobs. Howard Buffett did not have a public record on civil rights, but as an avid member of the John Birch Society, 33 he presumably did not lose sleep over it. 
 Warren was emphatically on the other side. He quit the Omaha Rotary Club specifically because he objected to its racist and elitist policies. 34 Discrimination collided with his belief in merit and his faith in neutral yardsticks, which lay at the heart of his investing. In the same vein, he thought it was wrong that rich kids got a big head start over everyone else. 
 Buffett was also being exposed to the idealism of his wife. Susie was an organizer and an active member of the Panel of Americans, a group of Omaha women of various religions and races who would speak to churches, schools, and clubs about their experiences with ethnic prejudice. The panel included a refugee from Nazi camps, a Mississippi-born black, and so on. Susie would give the Wasp perspective. In the Omaha of the early and mid-sixties, the Panel of Americans was rather daring. 35 Women of Susie’s caste were expected to go to Junior League meetings. The Buffetts, though, were one of the few families in the lily-white Happy Hollow area—for a while, probably the only family—that regularly and routinely entertained blacks at home. 
 Repelled by the Republicans’ indifference to civil rights, Warren decided to break from his father’s party and become a Democrat. This was a major step for him. His father, his best friend, was fighting a protracted battle with cancer, and the GOP had been a huge part of his life. 
 In the winter of 1964, Howard was suffering greatly and stoically. Warren would go to the hospital every night. One evening, he had “a difficult conversation with him about changing parties.” 36 As he explained to Charlie Munger, he wasn’t sure that his father was wrong on a lot of issues, but he didn’t want to be “consumed by ideology” as Howard had been. (Perhaps to spare his father anguish, Warren didn’t change parties or publicly acknowledge the switch until Howard’s death.) 
 In the spring, his father took a turn for the worse. After learning of his condition, Buffett showed up for a table tennis game at Dick Holland’s looking clearly out of sorts. But he kept the awful news to himself. Not many days later, Buffett arrived home looking glummer than his daughter had ever seen him. “He was very withdrawn and sad,” she recalled. “I think I asked him why he wasn’t going to the hospital. He said, ‘Grandpa died today.’ Then he went upstairs.” 
 Five hundred mourners attended Howard’s funeral. Colleagues from both parties saluted his integrity and warmth. Warren sat through it silently. Then, he left town, without telling friends of his where-abouts. 37 When Buffett returned to Kiewit Plaza, he hung a large-size likeness of his father on the wall facing his desk. But his best friend was gone. 
 As his father had been with him, Warren was a moral exemplar to his own children. But Warren was the same unsentimental analyst with his kids as he was with his partners. He was a concerned parent, and a supportive one—but not demonstrative. He took Susie to the office on Saturdays, as his father had taken him; he threw a football with Howie and helped Pete with his math. But he rarely if ever talked to them about subjects—such as his own parents—that might have exposed his feelings. 
 He and little Susie shared a certain tenderness. But Warren’s sons felt emotionally neglected by him. Howie, the second child, was a bit of a troublemaker, and was repeatedly frustrated by his dad’s lack of outward feeling. 38 “I used to misinterpret his tone to mean that he didn’t care about me,” he said. “It’s the exact same quality that makes him so good as an investor. There was no emotion in it.” 
 Most people—high-powered executives perhaps especially—tend to compartmentalize their lives. They may be tigers at the office and kittens at home. But Buffett was all of a remarkably consistent piece. To young Peter, his father ran on an inner clock whose springs and gears never ceased to turn. Day to day, Buffett was in his own solar system. 39 “I remember I gave him a birthday card once,” Peter said. “He just sort of opened it and closed it—he read it that fast. I guess I was waiting for some response.” Warren was expressive in his letters, but mute with his son. 
 A bit later, when Peter was in a drugstore with his mother, he saw a book called The Father’s Handbook . He said rather flippantly, “You should get that for Dad.” So she did. When Warren got the book, he called Peter up to his study and said, “Hey, what’s going on? What do you mean?” Peter meant there was nothing that he could tell his dad that his father wanted to know—or such was Peter’s impression then. Buffett, obviously, was concerned. But he couldn’t show it. He made efforts to reach out, but they struck Peter as halfhearted. 
 The Buffett house was like a storm center with Warren at its eye. As little Susie said, her father was always reading. The house was a hub of comings and goings: friends, relatives, lonely-hearts talking to Susie. Susie herself went around the house singing. The kids would climb from the attic onto the Dutch gambrel roof, or go trooping into the family room. And Warren was just up there , buried in his work. He would dart out of his study just long enough to grab a Pepsi with syrupy cherry flavoring or to entreat his wife to calm the kids. “Susan-O—tell them to quiet down.” 
 His abstractedness was a running joke. One time he came downstairs and asked what had happened to the greenback wallpaper in the study. Susie had changed it a couple of years before. 
 Susie tolerated him perhaps because Warren, in his absentminded way, was unfailingly good-natured. As she said to her sister, “You can’t get mad at someone who is so funny .” Moreover, she, and even the children, understood that Warren was on a sort of spiritual mission that diverted him from the more routine aspects of family living. They referred to his office, only half-jokingly, as the “temple.” His work was a “canvas”—a work of art. Susie, referring to Buffett’s maestrolike self-absorption, once remarked to Marshall Weinberg, their Manhattan stockbroker chum, “Let’s face it—I’m married to Artur Rubinstein.” 40 
 Weinberg, a music lover, knew full well. Buffett could hum the chords, and the concertinos, and even the entire symphonies of Wall Street in his sleep. Once in a while, Weinberg would play a few bars for his friend, hoping—just once—to show him something new. One time, for instance, he told Buffett about a certain cement stock that was cheap relative to its book value. Buffett shot back, “Yeah, but the book isn’t worth anything. Look at the record of selling cement plants in the last seven years.” 41 
 As Weinberg also knew, the explanation, or part of it, lay in Buffett’s relentless focusing on his craft. In 1965, after Weinberg had returned from a trip to Egypt, Warren and Susie visited him at his Manhattan apartment. Few Americans had been to Egypt, and Weinberg, who was so often impressed with Buffett, was eager to show his genius friend his slides of the pyramids. 
 Buffett said easily, “I have a better idea. Why don’t you show the slides to Susie and I’ll go into your bedroom and read an annual report.” The pyramids were out of his zone, like the wallpaper. 
 The report that Buffett had with him may well have been Walt Disney Productions’. At around the time of his visit to Weinberg, he went to see the company’s latest film, Mary Poppins , in Times Square. Needless to say, Buffett was not so interested in Julie Andrews, the show’s star, but in Disney’s stock. 
 Settling into a seat, with his tweeds, briefcase, and popcorn, he noticed that the other patrons were staring at him. He suddenly realized that he was the only adult unaccompanied by a child, and must have looked rather odd. 42 
 But when the theater went dark, the other moviegoers forgot him. Buffett saw that they were riveted to the picture, and he asked himself, in effect, what it would be worth to own a tiny bit of each of those people’s ticket revenues—for today and tomorrow and as many tomorrows as they kept coming back to Disney. 
 In the summer, when the Buffetts were in California, they went with the Mungers to Disneyland. While the kids did the park, Buffett and Munger dissected it financially, ride for ride, a kind of Fellini fantasy version of a corporate balance sheet. 43 
 Subsequently, Buffett visited Walt Disney himself on the Disney lot. The animator, meeting him in shirtsleeves, was as enthusiastic as ever. Buffett was struck by his childlike enchantment with his work—so similar to Buffett’s own. 44 
 Disney’s stock, meanwhile, was trading at only about ten times earnings. Buffett tried to analyze it not as a stock, but as a whole company, perhaps as a business down the street in Omaha that was willing to sell him a part ownership. 45 In Buffett’s view, its most valuable feature was its library of old cartoons and films, such as Snow White and Bambi . A Ben Graham would not have been interested in such an imprecise asset. However, Buffett estimated that, on a proportional basis, the library alone was worth the price of a share. 46 Plus, he would own a slice of Disneyland, and he would have the unpretentious Mr. Disney as his partner. With such thoughts in mind, Buffett bought 5 percent of Disney for $4 million. 47 Disney himself would be dead within the year. 
 Buffett, it should be understood, was not abandoning the Graham credo of hunting for securities that were well below “intrinsic value.” But his definition of value was changing, or rather, broadening. To Buffett, the value of Disney’s film library, even though imprecise and mostly off the books, was no less real than a tangible asset such as a factory. 
 He was no doubt encouraged by his similar bet on American Express, which had begun to see its way clear of the salad-oil scandal. By 1965, the stock had hit 73½, double its recent low. And Buffett Partnership beat the Dow that year by a phenomenal 33 percentage points. 
 Buffett warned his partners not to expect a repeat. 48 In the following year he would top the Dow by 36 percentage points. But then, his doleful forecasts had long been sounding like a broken record. Fearful that success would sow the seeds of disappointment, he had repeatedly prophesied his own fall. 
