
CASE IN POINT
FRUIT OF THE LOOM, 2002
In 2002, Warren Buffett bought the core business (apparel) of
bankrupt Fruit of the Loom for $835 million in cash. With the
purchase, Berkshire acquired two strong assets: an outstanding
manager and one of the country’s best-known and best-loved
brand names. It also acquired some $1.6 billion in debt, and a
bitter history of ill will among shareholders, suppliers, retailers,
and consumers.
The company that sells one-third of all men’s and boys’ underwear in the United States started as a small Rhode Island mill
in 1851. Over the next century, it grew into the nation’s leading
maker of underwear and T-shirts. It could not, however, escape
the economic struggles that increasingly threatened the apparel
industry, and in 1985 was snapped up by financier William Farley, known for acquiring financially troubled companies.
Farley, often described as “f lashy” and “f lamboyant,”
guided the company through a few years of growth and then
into a disastrous decline. Everything seemed to go wrong. An
aggressive $900 million acquisitions program left the company
over-leveraged—long-term debt was 128 percent of common
shareholders’ equity in 1996—without providing the expected
rise in revenues. Suppliers went unpaid and stopped shipping raw
materials. Farley moved 95 percent of manufacturing operations
offshore, closing more than a dozen U.S. plants and displacing
some 16,000 workers, only to find that the net result was serious
problems of quality control and on-time delivery. To counteract
the delivery snafus, he parceled out the manufacturing to contract firms, adding enormous layers of overtime costs. He created
a holding company for Fruit of the Loom and moved its headquarters to the Cayman Islands, avoiding U.S. taxes on foreign
sales but triggering a massive public relations headache.
The headache got worse when Farley, in a maneuver that is
now illegal, convinced his hand-picked board to guarantee a

86

personal bank loan of $65 million in case he defaulted—which
he did. The board, which earlier had set his compensation at
nearly $20 million and repriced stock options to significantly
favor key executives, then forgave $10 million of the loan.
In spite of the cost-cutting attempts, the company was
sinking deeper into the red. In 1999, Fruit of the Loom posted
losses of $576 million, seven times larger than analysts’ expectations; and gross margins sagged to a paltry 2 percent, not
enough to cover the $100 million interest expense needed to
service its $1.4 billion debt. That same year the Council of Institutional Investors listed Fruit of the Loom as one of the nation’s twenty most underperforming companies. Shareholders
cringed as the stock price plunged: From $44 a share in early
1997 to just over $1 by the end of 1999; in that one year, 1999,
the shares lost more than 90 percent of their value.
Few were surprised, therefore, when the company filed for
Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in December 1999. The company’s shares sank even lower, and by October 2001 were down
to $0.23.
So why would Warren Buffett be interested? Two reasons:
a very strong brand that offered growth potential under the
right management, and the arrival of a man on a white horse.
John B. Holland had been a highly respected executive
with Fruit of the Loom for more than twenty years, including
several years as president and CEO, when he retired in 1996. In
2000, he was brought back as executive vice-president charged
with revamping operations.
Holland represents a perfect example of the management
qualities Buffett insists upon. Although publicly he remained
largely silent about Farley, beyond a brief reference to “poor
management,” Buffett has made no secret of his disdain for executives who bully their boards into sweet compensation deals,
and boards that allow it. In contrast, he is enthusiastically vocal
about his admiration for Holland.
(Continued)

87

He explained his thinking to Berkshire shareholders: “John
Holland was responsible for Fruit’s operations in its most bountiful years. . . . [After the bankruptcy] John was rehired, and he
undertook a major reworking of operations. Before John’s return, deliveries were chaotic, costs soared, and relations with key
customers deteriorated. . . . He’s been restoring the old Fruit of
the Loom, albeit in a much more competitive environment. [In
our purchase offer] we insisted on a very unusual proviso: John
had to be available to continue serving as CEO after we took
over. To us, John and the brand are Fruit’s key assets.”7
Since Holland took the reins, Fruit of the Loom has undergone a massive restructuring to lower its costs. It slashed its
freight costs, reduced overtime, and trimmed inventory levels. It
disposed of sideline businesses, eliminated unprofitable product
lines, found new efficiencies in manufacturing process, and
worked to restore customer satisfaction by filling orders on time.
Almost immediately, improvement was apparent. Earnings
increased, operating expenses decreased. In 2000, gross earnings
rose by $160.3 million—a 222 percent increase—compared to
1999, and gross margin increased 11 percentage points. The
company reported an operating loss in 2000 of $44.2 million,
compared to the 1999 loss of $292.3 million. Even more revealing of improvement are the fourth-quarter results—an operating
loss of $13.5 million (which included one-time consolidation
costs related to the closure of four U.S. plants) in 2000, compared to $218.6 million—more than sixteen times greater—just
one year earlier.
In 2001, the positive trend continued. Gross earnings grew
another $72.5 million, a 31 percent increase over 2000, and gross
margin increased 7.7 percentage points to 22.7 percent for the
year. That means the company ended 2001 with operating earnings of $70.1 million, compared to 2000’s $44.2 million loss.
Of course monumental problems such as the company faced
are not fully corrected overnight, and Fruit of the Loom must
still operate in a ferociously competitive industry environment,
but so far Buffett is pleased with the company’s performance.

88

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s

89

Lest anyone still consider buying a debt-ridden bankrupt
company a surprising move, there was also a third reason for
Buffett’s decision, which should come as no surprise whatsoever: He was able to acquire the company on very favorable financial terms. For details, see Chapter 8.
Buying an underwear maker creates lots of opportunities
for corny jokes, and Buffett, an accomplished punster, made the
most of it. At the 2002 shareholders meeting, when asked the
obvious question, he teased the audience with a half answer:
“When I wear underwear at all, which I rarely do . . .” Leaving
the crowd to decide for themselves whether it’s boxers or briefs
for Buffett. He pointed out why there’s “a favorable bottom
line” in underwear: “It’s an elastic market.” Finally, he deadpanned, Charlie Munger had given him an additional reason to
buy the company: “For years Charlie has been telling me,
‘Warren, we have to get into women’s underwear.’ Charlie is
78. It’s now or never.”8

another, a company that must integrate and manage a new business is apt
to make mistakes that could be costly to shareholders.
In Buffett’s mind, the only reasonable and responsible course for
companies that have a growing pile of cash that cannot be reinvested at
above-average rates is to return that money to the shareholders. For that,
two methods are available: raising the dividend or buying back shares.
With cash in hand from their dividends, shareholders have the opportunity to look elsewhere for higher returns. On the surface, this seems to
be a good deal, and therefore many people view increased dividends as a
sign of companies that are doing well. Buffett believes that this is so only
if investors can get more for their cash than the company could generate
if it retained the earnings and reinvested in the company.
Over the years, Berkshire Hathaway has earned very high returns
from its capital and has retained all its earnings. With such high returns,
shareholders would have been ill served if they were paid a dividend.
Not surprisingly, Berkshire does not pay a dividend. And that’s just fine

90

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

with the shareholders. The ultimate test of owners’ faith is allowing
management to reinvest 100 percent of earnings; Berkshire’s owners’
faith in Buffett is high.
If the real value of dividends is sometimes misunderstood, the second
mechanism for returning earnings to the shareholders—stock repurchase—is even more so. The benefit to the owners is in many respects
less direct, less tangible, and less immediate.
When management repurchases stock, Buffett feels that the reward is
twofold. If the stock is selling below its intrinsic value, then purchasing
shares makes good business sense. If a company’s stock price is $50 and its
intrinsic value is $100, then each time management buys its stock, they
are acquiring $2 of intrinsic value for every $1 spent. Such transactions
can be highly profitable for the remaining shareholders.
Furthermore, says Buffett, when executives actively buy the company’s stock in the market, they are demonstrating that they have the
best interests of their owners at hand rather than a careless need to expand the corporate structure. That kind of stance sends good signals to
the market, attracting other investors looking for a well-managed company that increases shareholders’ wealth. Frequently, shareholders are rewarded twice; first from the initial open market purchase and then
subsequently from the positive effect of investor interest on price.

Coca-Cola
Growth in net cash f low has allowed Coca-Cola to increase its dividend
to shareholders and also repurchase its shares in the open market. In
1984, the company authorized its first-ever buyback, announcing it
would repurchase 6 million shares of stock. Since then, the company has
repurchased more than 1 billion shares. This represented 32 percent of
the shares outstanding as of January 1, 1984, at an average price per share
of $12.46. In other words, the company spent approximately $12.4 billion to buy in shares that only ten years later would have a market value
of approximately $60 billion.
In July 1992, the company announced that through the year 2000, it
would buy back 100 million shares of its stock, representing 7.6 percent
of the company’s outstanding shares. Remarkably, because of its strong
cash-generating abilities, the company was able to accomplish this while
it continued its aggressive investment in overseas markets.

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s

91

American Express
Buffett’s association with American Express dates back some forty
years, to his bold purchase of its distressed stock in 1963, and the astronomical profits he quickly earned for his investment partners (see
Chapter 1 for the full story). Buffett’s faith in the company has not diminished, and he has continued to purchase its stock. A big buy in 1994
can be traced to management decisions, both good and bad, about the
use of excess cash.
The division of the company that issues the charge card and travelers’ checks, American Express Travel Related Services, contributes the
lion’s share of profits. It has always generated substantial owner earnings and has easily funded its own growth. In the early 1990s, it was
generating more cash than it needed for operations—the very point at
which management actions collide with Buffett’s acid test. In this case,
American Express management did not do well.
Then-CEO James Robinson decided to use excess cash to build the
company into a financial services powerhouse by buying other related
businesses. His first acquisition, IDS Financial Services, proved profitable. But then he bought Shearson Lehman, which did not. Over
time, Shearson needed more and more cash to carry its operations.
When Shearson had swallowed up $4 billion, Robinson contacted Buffett, who agreed to buy $300 million worth of preferred shares. Until
the company got back on track, he was not at all interested in buying
common stock.
In 1992, Robinson abruptly resigned and was replaced by Harvey
Golub. He set himself the immediate task of strengthening brand
awareness. Striking a familiar tone with Buffett, he began using terms
such as franchise and brand value to describe the American Express
Card. Over the next two years, Golub began to liquidate the company’s
underperforming assets and to restore profitability and high returns on
equity. One of his first actions was to get rid of Shearson Lehman, with
its massive capital needs.
Soon American Express was showing signs of its old profitable self.
The resources of the company were solidly behind Golub’s goal of building the American Express Card into “the world’s most respected service
brand,” and every communication from the company emphasized the
franchise value of the name “American Express.”

92

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

Next, Golub set financial targets for the company: to increase earnings per share by 12 to 15 percent a year and 18 to 20 percent return on
equity. Before long, the company was again generating excess cash and
had more capital and more shares than it needed. Then, in September
1994 the company announced that, subject to market conditions, it
planned to repurchase 20 million shares of its common stock. That was
music to Buffett’s ears.
That summer, Buffett had converted Berkshire’s holdings in preferred stock to common, and soon thereafter, he began to acquire even
more. By the end of the year, Berkshire owned 27 million shares. In
March 1995, Buffett added another 20 million shares; in 1997, another
49.5 million; and 50.5 million more in 1998. At the end of 2003, Berkshire owned more than 151 million shares of American Express stock,
nearly 12 percent of the company, with a market value of more than $7
billion—seven times what Buffett paid for it.

The Washington Post Company
The Washington Post generates substantial cash f low for its owners, more
than can be reinvested in its primary businesses. So its management is
confronted with two rational choices: Return the money to shareholders
and/or profitably invest the cash in new investment opportunities. As
we know, Buffett prefers to have companies return excess earnings to
shareholders. The Washington Post Company, while Katherine Graham
was president, was the first newspaper company in its industry to repurchase shares in large quantities. Between 1975 and 1991, the company
bought an unbelievable 43 percent of its shares at an average price of $60
per share.
A company can also choose to return money to shareholders by increasing the dividend. In 1990, confronted with substantial cash reserves,
the Washington Post voted to increase the annual dividend to its shareholders from $1.84 to $4.00, a 117 percent increase (see Figure 6.1).
In addition to returning excess cash to its owners, the Washington
Post has made several profitable business purchases: cable properties from
Capital Cities, cellular telephone companies, and television stations. Don
Graham, who now runs the company, is continually beset with offers. To
further his goal of developing substantial cash f lows at favorable investment costs, he has developed specific guidelines for evaluating those

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s

93

Figure 6.1 The Washington Post Company dividend per share.

offers. He looks for a business that “has competitive barriers, does not require extensive capital expenditures, and has reasonable pricing power.”
Furthermore, he notes, “we have a strong preference for businesses we
know” and given the choice, “we’re more likely to invest in a handful
of big bets rather than spread our investment dollars around thinly.”9
Graham’s acquisition approach mimics Buffett’s strategy at Berkshire
Hathaway.
The dynamics of the newspaper business have changed in recent
years. Earlier, when the economy slowed and advertisers cut spending,
newspapers could maintain profitability by raising lineage rates. But
today’s advertisers have found cheaper ways to reach their customers:
cable television, direct mail, and newspaper inserts. Newspapers are no
longer monopolies; they have lost their pricing f lexibility.
Even so, Buffett is convinced that the Post is in better shape than
other media companies. There are two reasons for his optimism. First,
the Post’s long-term debt was more than offset by its cash holdings.
The Washington Post is the only public newspaper that is essentially
free of debt. “As a result,” explains Buffett, “the shrinkage in the value
of their assets has not been accentuated by the effects of leverage.”10
Second, he notes, the Washington Post Company has been exceptionally well managed.

94

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

The Pampered Chef
Doris Christopher, the founder, chairman and CEO of the Pampered
Chef, has allocated her capital well—financing all expansion and growth
through internal earnings. She has reinvested virtually all her profits
in the company and the resulting expansion has brought tremendous
growth in sales. Between 1995 and 2001, the Pampered Chef ’s business
grew an astonishing 232 percent, with pretax profit margins above 25
percent. And the only debt the company ever had was the original $3,000
seed money that Christopher borrowed from her life insurance policy.
From all appearances, Doris Christopher is a careful and profitable
manager, and she runs a tight ship. She displays keen management intuition by treating her representatives well but competitively. The Pampered Chef ’s direct marketers across the country are the bread and butter
of the business and the company’s only direct contact with its over 12
million customers. The sales force earns commissions of 18 to 20 percent
on goods they sell, and 1 to 4 percent on the sales of kitchen consultants
whom they bring into the company.

CANDOR
Buffett holds in high regard managers who report their companies’ financial performance fully and genuinely, who admit mistakes as well as
share successes, and who are in all ways candid with shareholders. In
particular, he respects managers who are able to communicate the performance of their company without hiding behind Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles (GAAP).
Financial accounting standards only require disclosure of business
information classified by industry segment. Some managers exploit this
minimum requirement and lump together all the company’s businesses
into one industry segment, making it difficult for owners to understand
the dynamics of their separate business interests.
“What needs to be reported,” Buffett insists, “is data—whether
GAAP, non-GAAP, or extra GAAP—that helps the financially literate
readers answer three key questions: (1) Approximately how much is
this company worth? (2) what is the likelihood that it can meet its future obligations? and (3) how good a job are its managers doing, given
the hand they have been dealt?”11

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s

95

Berkshire Hathaway’s own annual reports are a good example. They
meet GAAP obligations, but they go much further. Buffett includes the
separate earnings of each of Berkshire’s businesses and any other additional information that he feels owners would deem valuable when judging a company’s economic performance. Buffett admires CEOs who are
able to report to their shareholders in the same candid fashion.
He also admires those with the courage to discuss failure openly.
He believes that managers who confess mistakes publicly are more
likely to correct them. According to Buffett, most annual reports are a
sham. Over time, every company makes mistakes, both large and inconsequential. Too many managers, he believes, report with excess optimism instead of honest explanation, serving perhaps their own
interests in the short term but no one’s interests in the long run.
Buffett credits Charlie Munger with helping him understand the
value of studying one’s mistakes instead of concentrating only on success. In his annual reports to Berkshire Hathaway shareholders, Buffett
is open about Berkshire’s economic and management performance,
both good and bad. Through the years, he has admitted the difficulties
that Berkshire encountered in both the textile and insurance businesses
and his own management failures with these businesses.
His self-criticism is blunt, and unstinting. The merger with General
Re reinsurance company in 1998 brought significant trouble, a good
deal of which remained undiagnosed for several years, and came to light
only in the wake of the World Trade Center bombing in 2001. At the
time of the merger, Buffett said later, he thought the reinsurance company operated with the same discipline he demanded of other Berkshire
insurance companies. “I was dead wrong,” he admitted in 2002. “There
was much to do at that company to get it up to snuff.”12
The General Re problem was not limited to its insurance practices.
The company also had a division that dealt in trading and derivatives, a
business Buffett considered unattractive at the time of the merger (although, as part of the package, unavoidable) and financially disastrous
several years later. In 2003, he wrote this straightforward apology to
shareholders: “I’m sure I could have saved you $100 million or so, if I had
acted more promptly to shut down Gen Re Securities. Charlie would
have moved swiftly to close [it] down—no question about that. I, however, dithered. As a consequence, our shareholders are paying a far higher
price than was necessary to exit this business.”13

96

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

Critics have argued that Buffett’s practice of publicly admitting his
mistakes is made easier because, since he owns such a large share of
Berkshire’s common stock, he never has to worry about being fired.
This is true. But it does not diminish the fundamental value of Buffett’s
belief that candor benefits the manager at least as much as it benefits the
shareholder. “The CEO who misleads others in public,” he says, “may
eventually mislead himself in private.”14

Coca-Cola
Roberto Goizueta’s strategy for strengthening Coca-Cola when he took
over as CEO pointedly included shareholders. “We shall, during the next
decade, remain totally committed to our shareholders and to the protection and enhancement of their investment,” he wrote. “In order to give
our shareholders an above-average total return on their investment, we
must choose businesses that generate returns in excess of inf lation.”15
Goizueta not only had to grow the business, which required capital
investment, he was also obliged to increase shareholder value. By increasing profit margins and return on equity, Coca-Cola was able to increase dividends while simultaneously reducing the dividend payout
ratio. Dividends to shareholders, in the 1980s, were increasing 10 percent per year while the payout ratio was declining from 65 percent to 40
percent. This enabled Coca-Cola to reinvest a greater percentage of the
company’s earnings to help sustain its growth rate without shortchanging shareholders.
Coca-Cola is undeniably a superior company with an outstanding
historical economic performance record. In the most recent years, however, that level of growth has moderated. Where some shareholders
might have panicked, Buffett did not. He did not, in fact, do anything;
he didn’t sell even one share. It is a clear testament to his belief in the
company, and a clear illustration of staying true to his principles.
