rate of gain in intrinsic business value on a per-share basis. We do
not measure the economic significance or performance of Berkshire
by its size; we measure by per-share progress. We are certain that the
rate of per-share progress will diminish in the future-a greatly enlarged capital base will see to that. But we will be disappointed if
our rate does not exceed that of the average large American
corporation.
Since that was written at yearend 1983, our intrinsic value (a
topic I'll discuss a bit later)6 has increased at an annual rate of
about 25%, a pace that has definitely surprised both Charlie and
me. Nevertheless the principle just stated remains valid: Operating
with large amounts of capital as we do today, we cannot come close
to performing as well as we once did with much smaller sums. The
best rate of gain in intrinsic value we can even hope for is an average of 15% per annum, and we may well fall far short of that target. Indeed, we think very few large businesses have a chance of
compounding intrinsic value at 15% per annum over an extended
period of time. So it may be that we will end up meeting our stated
goal-being above average-with gains that fall significantly short
of 15%.
4. Our preference would be to reach our goal by directly owning a diversified group of businesses that generate cash and consistently earn above-average returns on capital. Our second choice is to
own parts of similar businesses, attained primarily through
purchases of marketable common stocks by our insurance subsidiaries. The price and availability of businesses and the need for insurance capital determine any given year's capital allocation.
As has usually been the case, it is easier today to buy small
pieces of outstanding businesses via the stock market than to buy
similar businesses in their entirety on a negotiated basis. Neverthe6

[See the essay Intrinsic Value, Book Value, and Market Price in Part V.E.]

32

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

less, we continue to prefer the 100% purchase, and in some years
we get lucky: In 1995, in fact, we made three acquisitions. Though
there will be dry years also, we expect to make a number of acquisitions in the decades to come, and our hope is that they will be
large. If these purchases approach the quality of those we have
made in the past, Berkshire will be well served.
The challenge for us is to generate ideas as rapidly as we generate cash. In this respect, a depressed stock market is likely to
present us with significant advantages. For one thing, it tends to
reduce the prices at which entire companies become available for
purchase. Second, a depressed market makes it easier for our insurance companies to buy small pieces of wonderful businessesincluding additional pieces of business we already own-at attractive prices. And third, some of those same wonderful businesses,
such as Coca-Cola and Wells Fargo, are consistent buyers of their
own shares, which means that they, and we, gain from the cheaper
prices at which they can buy.
Overall, Berkshire and its long-term shareholders benefit from
a sinking stock market much as a regular purchaser of food benefits from declining food prices. So when the market plummets-as
it will from time to time-neither panic nor mourn. It's good news
for Berkshire.
5. Because of our two-pronged approach to business ownership and because of the limitations of conventional accounting, consolidated reported earnings may reveal relatively little about our true
economic performance. Charlie and 1, both as owners and managers, virtually ignore such consolidated numbers. However, we will
also report to you the earnings of each major business we control,
numbers we consider of great importance. These figures, along with
other information we will supply about the individual businesses,
should generally aid you in making judgments about them.
To state things simply, we try to give you in the annual report
the numbers and other information that really matter. Charlie and
I pay a great deal of attention to how well our businesses are doing,
and we also work to understand the environment in which each
business is operating. For example, is one of our businesses enjoying an industry tailwind or is it facing a headwind? Charlie and
I need to know exactly which situation prevails and to adjust our
expectations accordingly. We will also pass along our conclusions
to you.
Over time, practically all of our businesses have exceeded our
expectations. But occasionally we have disappointments, and we

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

33

will try to be as candid in informing you about those as we are in
describing the happier experiences. When we use unconventional
measures to chart our progress . . . we will try to explain these
concepts and why we regard them as important. In other words,
we believe in telling you how we think so that you can evaluate not
only Berkshire's businesses but also assess our approach to management and capital allocation.
6. Accounting consequences do not influence our operating or
capital-allocation decisions. When acquisition costs are similar, we
much prefer to purchase $2 of earnings that is not reportable by us
under standard accounting principles than to purchase $1 of earnings that is reportable. This is precisely the choice that often faces us
since entire businesses (whose earnings will be fully reportable) frequently sell for double the pro-rata price of small portions (whose
earnings will be largely unreportable). In aggregate and over time,
we expect the unreported earnings to be fully reflected in our intrinsic business value through capital gains.
We attempt to offset the shortcomings of conventional accounting by regularly reporting "look-through" earnings .... The
look-through numbers include Berkshire's own reported operating
earnings, excluding capital gains and purchase-accounting adjustments (an explanation of which occurs later in this message) plus
Berkshire's share of the undistributed earnings of our major investees-amounts that are not included in Berkshire's figures under
conventional accounting. From these undistributed earnings of our
investees we subtract the tax we would have owed had the earnings
been paid to us as dividends. We also exclude capital gains,
purchase-accounting adjustments and extraordinary charges or
credits from the investee numbers.
We have found over time that the undistributed earnings of
our investees, in aggregate, have been as fully as beneficial to
Berkshire asif they had been distributed to us (and therefore had
been included in the earnings we officially report). This pleasant
result has occurred because most of our investees are engaged in
truly outstanding businesses that can often employ incremental
capital to great advantage, either by putting it to work in their businesses or by repurchasing their shares. Obviously, every capital
decision that our investees have made has not benefitted us as
shareholders, but overall we have garnered far more than a dollar
of value for each dollar they have retained. We consequently regard look-through earnings as realistically portraying our yearly
gain from operations.

34

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

In 1992, our look-through earnings were $604 million, and in
that same year we set a goal of raising them by an average of 15%
per annum to $1.8 billion in the year 2000. Since that time, however, we have issued additional shares-including the B Shares
sold recently-so that we now need look-through earnings of $1.9
billion in 2000 to match the per-share goal we originally were
shooting for. This is a tough target but one we still hope to hit.
7. We use debt sparingly and, when we do borrow, we attempt
to structure our loans on a long-term fixed-rate basis. We will reject
interesting opportunities rather than over-leverage our balance sheet.
This conservatism has penalized our results but it is the only behavior that leaves us comfortable, considering our fiduciary obligations
to policyholders, lenders and the many equity holders who have
committed unusually large portions of their net worth to our care.
(As one of the Indianapolis "500" winners said: "To finish first, you
must first finish.")
The financial calculus that Charlie and I employ would never
permit our trading a good night's sleep for a shot at a few extra
percentage points of return. I've never believed in risking what my
family and friends have and need in order to pursue what they
don't have and don't need.
Besides, Berkshire has access to two low-cost, non-perilous
sources of leverage that allow us to safely own far more assets than
our equity capital alone would permit: deferred taxes and "float,"
the funds of others that our insurance business holds because it
receives premiums before needing to payout losses. Both of these
funding sources have grown rapidly and now total about $12
billion.
Better yet, this funding to date has been cost-free. Deferred
tax liabilities bear no interest. And as long as we can break even in
our insurance underwriting-which we have done, on the average,
during our 29 years in the business-the cost of the float developed
from that operation is zero. Neither item, it should be understood,
is equity; these are real liabilities. But they are liabilities without
covenants or due dates attached to them. In effect, they give us the
benefit of debt-an ability to have more assets working for us-but
saddle us with none of its drawbacks.
Of course, there is no guarantee that we can obtain our float in
the future at no cost. But we feel our chances of attaining that goal
are as good as those of anyone in the insurance business. Not only
have we reached the goal in the past (despite a number of important mistakes by your Chairman), but have now, with our acquisi-

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

35

tion of GEICO, materially improved our prospects for getting
there in the future.
8. A managerial "wish list" will not be filled at shareholder
expense. We will not diversify by purchasing entire businesses at
control prices that ignore long-term economic consequences to our
shareholders. We will only do with your money what we would do
with our own, weighing fully the values you can obtain by diversifying your own portfolios through direct purchases in the stock market.
Charlie and I are interested only in acquisitions that we believe will raise the per-share intrinsic value of Berskhire's stock.
The size of our paychecks or our offices will never be related to the
size Berkshire's balance sheet.
9. We feel noble intentions should be checked periodically
against results. We test the wisdom of retaining earnings by assessing
whether retention, over time, delivers shareholders at least $1 of market value for each $1 retained. To date, this test has been met. We
will continue to apply it on a five-year rolling basis. As our net
worth grows, it is more difficult to use retained earnings wisely.
We continue to pass the test, but the challenges of doing so
have grown more difficult. If we reach the point that we can't create extra value by retaining earnings, we will pay them out and let
our shareholders deploy the funds.
10. We will issue common stock only when we receive as
much in business value as we give. This rule applies to all forms of
issuance-not only mergers or public stock offerings, but stock-fordebt swaps, stock options, and convertible securities as well. We will
not sell small portions of your company-and that is what the issuance of shares amounts to-on a basis inconsistent with the value of
the entire enterprise.
When we sold the Class B shares, we stated that Berkshire
stock was not undervalued-and some people found that shocking.
That reaction was not well-founded. Shock should have registered
instead had we issued shares when our stock was undervalued.
Managements that say or imply during a public offering that their
stock is undervalued are usually being economical with the truth or
uneconomical with their existing shareholders' money: Owners unfairly lose if their managers deliberately sell assets for 80¢ that in
fact are worth $1. We didn't commit that kind of crime in our recent offering and we never will.
11. You should be fully aware of one attitude Charlie and I
share that hurts our financial performance: Regardless of price, we

36

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

have no interest at all in selling any good businesses that Berkshire
owns. We are also very reluctant to sell sub-par businesses as long as
we expect them to generate at least some cash and as long as we feel
good about their managers and labor relations. We hope not to repeat the capital-allocation mistakes that led us into such sub-par
businesses. And we react with great caution to suggestions that our
poor businesses can be restored to satisfactory profitability by major
capital expenditures. (The projections will be dazzling and the advocates sincere, but, in the end, major additional investment in a terrible industry usually is about as rewarding as struggling in
quicksand.) Nevertheless, gin rummy managerial behavior (discard
your least promising business at each turn) is not our style. We
would rather have our overall results penalized a bit than engage in
that kind of behavior.
We continue to avoid gin rummy behavior. True, we closed
our textile business in the mid-1980's after 20 years of struggling
with it, but only because we felt it was doomed to run never-ending
operating losses. We have not, however, given thought to selling
operations that would command very fancy prices nor have we
dumped our laggards, though we focus hard on curing the
problems that cause them to lag.
12. We will be candid in our reporting to you, emphasizing the
pluses and minuses important in appraising business value. Our
guideline is to tell you the business facts that we would want to know
if our positions were reversed. We owe you no less. Moreover, as a
company with a major communications business, it would be inexcusable for us to apply lesser standards of accuracy, balance and
incisiveness when reporting on ourselves than we would expect our
news people to apply when reporting on others. We also believe candor benefits us as managers: The CEO who misleads others in public may eventually mislead himself in private.
At Berkshire you will find no "big bath" accounting maneuvers or restructuring. And we won't "smooth" quarterly or annual
results: If earnings figures are lumpy when they reach headquarters, they will be lumpy when they reach you. Finally, when the
numbers are a very rough "guesstimate," as they necessarily must
be in insurance reserving, we will try to be both consistent and conservative in our approach.
We will be communicating with you in several ways. Through
the annual report, I try to give all shareholders as much value-defining information as can be conveyed in a document kept to reasonable length. We also try to convey a liberal quantity of

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

37

condensed but important information in our quarterly reports,
though I don't write those (one recital a year is enough). Still another important occasion for communication is our Annual Meeting, at which Charlie and I are delighted to spend five hours or
more answering questions about Berkshire. But there is one way
we can't communicate: on a one-on-one basis. That isn't feasible
given Berkshire's many thousands of owners.
In all of our communications, we try to make sure that no single shareholder gets an edge: We do not follow the usual practice
of giving earnings "guidance" to analysts or large shareholders.
Our goal is to have all of our owners updated at the same time.
13. Despite our policy of candor we will discuss our activities
in marketable securities only to the extent legally required. Good
investment ideas are rare, valuable and subject to competitive appropriation just as good product or business acquisition ideas are.
Therefore we normally will not talk about our investment ideas.
This ban extends even to securities we have sold (because we may
purchase them again) and to stocks we are incorrectly rumored to be
buying. If we deny those reports but say "no comment" on other
occasions, the no-comments become confirmation.
Though we continue to be unwilling to talk about specific
stocks, we freely discuss our business and investment philosophy. I
benefitted enormously from the intellectual generosity of Ben Graham, the greatest teacher in the history of finance, and I believe it
appropriate to pass along what I learned from him, even if that
creates new and able investment competitors for Berkshire just as
Ben's teachings did for him.
AN ADDED PRINCIPLE

To the extent possible, we would like each Berkshire shareholder to record a gain or loss in market value during his period of
ownership that is proportional to the gain or loss in per-share intrinsic value recorded by the company during that holding period. For
this to come about, the relationship between the intrinsic value and
the market price of a Berkshire share would need to remain constant, and by our preferences at I-to-l. As that implies, we would
rather see Berkshire's stock price at a fair level than a high level.
Obviously, Charlie and I can't control Berkshire's price. But by
our policies and communications, we can encourage informed, rational behavior by owners that, in turn, will tend to produce a stock
price that is also rational. Our it's-as-bad-to-be-overvalued-as-tobe-undervalued approach may disappoint some shareholders, par-

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

38

[Vol. 19:1

ticularly those poised to sell. We believe, however, that it affords
Berkshire the best prospect of attracting long-term investors who
seek to profit from the progress of the company rather than from
the investment mistakes of their partners.

B.

Boards and Managers7

[The performance of CEOs of investee companies], which we
have observed at close range, contrasts vividly with that of many
CEOs, which we have fortunately observed from a safe distance.
Sometimes these CEOs clearly do not belong in their jobs; their
positions, nevertheless, are usually secure. The supreme irony of
business management in that it is far easier for an inadequate CEO
to keep his job than it is for an inadequate subordinate.
If a secretary, say, is hired for a job that requires typing ability
of at least 80 words a minute and turns out to be capable of only 50
words a minute, she will lose her job in no time. There is a logical
standard for this job; performance is easily measured; and if you
can't make the grade, you're out. Similarly, if new sales people fail
to generate sufficient business quickly enough, they will be let go.
Excuses will not be accepted as a substitute for orders.
However, a CEO who doesn't perform is frequently carried
indefinitely. One reason is that performance standards for his job
seldom exist. When they do, they are often fuzzy or they may be
waived or explained away, even when the performance shortfalls
are major and repeated. At too many companies, the boss shoots
the arrow of managerial performance and then hastily paints the
bullseye around the spot where it lands.
Another important, but seldom recognized, distinction between the boss and the foot soldier is that the CEO has no immediate superior whose performance is itself getting measured. The
sales manager who retains a bunch of lemons in his sales force will
soon be in hot water himself. It is in his immediate self-interest to
promptly weed out his hiring mistakes. Otherwise, he himself may
be weeded out. An office manager who has hired inept secretaries
faces the same imperative.
But the CEO's boss is a Board of Directors that seldom measures itself and is infrequently held to account for substandard corporate performance. If the Board makes a mistake in hiring, and
perpetuates that mistake, so what? Even if the company is taken
over because of the mistake, the deal will probably bestow substan7

[Divided by hash lines: 1988; 1993; 1986.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

39

tial benefits on the outgoing Board members. (The bigger they are,
the softer they fall.)
Finally, relations between the Board and the CEO are expected to be congenial. At board meetings, criticism of the CEO's
performance is often viewed as the social equivalent of belching.
No such inhibitions restrain the office manager from critically evaluating the substandard typist.
These points should not be interpreted as a blanket condemnation of CEOs or Boards of Directors: Most are able and hardworking, and a number are truly outstanding. But the management failings that Charlie and I have seen make us thankful that
we are linked with the managers of our three permanent holdings.
They love their businesses, they think like owners, and they exude
integrity and ability.
At our annual meetings, someone usually asks "What happens
to this place if you get hit by a truck?" I'm glad they are still asking
the question in this form. It won't be too long before the query
becomes: "What happens to this place if you don't get hit by a
truck?"
Such questions, in any event, raise a reason for me to discuss
corporate governance, a hot topic during the past year. In general,
I believe that directors have stiffened their spines recently and that
shareholders are now being treated somewhat more like true owners than was the case not long ago. Commentators on corporate
governance, however, seldom make any distinction among three
fundamentally different manager/owner situations that exist in
publicly-held companies. Though the legal responsibility of directors is identical throughout, their ability to effect change differs in
each of the cases. Attention usually falls on the first case, because
it prevails on the corporate scene. Since Berkshire falls into the
second category, however, and will someday fall into the third, we
will discuss all three variations.
The first, and by far most common, board situation is one in
which a corporation has no controlling shareholder. In that case, I
believe directors should behave as if there is a single absentee
owner, whose long-term interest they should try to further in all
proper ways. Unfortunately, "long-term" gives directors a lot of
wiggle room. If they lack either integrity or the ability to think
independently, directors can do great violence to shareholders
while still claiming to be acting in their long-term interest. But assume the board is functioning well and must deal with a manage-

40

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

ment that is mediocre or worse. Directors then have the
responsibility for changing that management, just as an intelligent
owner would do if he were present. And if able but greedy managers over-reach and try to dip too deeply into the shareholders'
pockets, directors must slap their hands.
In this plain-vanilla case, a director who sees something he
doesn't like should attempt to persuade the other directors of his
view. If he is successful, the board will have the muscle to make
the appropriate change. Suppose, though, that the unhappy director can't get other directors to agree with him. He should then feel
free to make his views known to the absentee owners. Directors
seldom do that, of course. The temperament of many directors
would in fact be incompatible with critical behavior of that sort.
But I see nothing improper in such actions, assuming the issues are
serious. Naturally, the complaining director can expect a vigorous
rebuttal from the unpersuaded directors, a prospect that should
discourage the dissenter from pursuing trivial or non-rational
causes.
For the boards just discussed, I believe the directors ought to
be relatively few in number-say, ten or less-and ought to come
mostly from the outside. The outside board members should establish standards for the CEO's performance and should also periodically meet, without his being present, to evaluate his performance
against those standards.
The requisites for board membership should be business
savvy, interest in the job, and owner-orientation. Too often, directors are selected simply because they are prominent or add diversity to the board. That practice is a mistake. Furthermore,
mistakes in selecting directors are particularly serious because appointments are so hard to undo: The pleasant but vacuous director
need never worry about job security.
The second case is that existing at Berkshire, where the controlling owner is also the manager. At some companies, this arrangement is facilitated by the existence of two classes of stock
endowed with disproportionate voting power. In these situations,
it's obvious that the board does not act as an agent between owners
and management and that the directors cannot effect change except through persuasion. Therefore, if the owner/manager is mediocre or worse-or is over-reaching-there is little a director can do
about it except object. If the directors having no connections to
the owner/manager make a unified argument, it may well have
some effect. More likely it will not.
