
c04.indd 80

11/2/07 12:17:44 PM

The Trader’s Toolbox

81

where a stock has rallied for a long time and finally breaks down
below short-term support. The fall is fast and furious, yet the price
will inexplicably stop as if it were a ball hitting a concrete floor. When
the 200-day SMA is overlaid onto the chart, the price stops almost
to the penny at the 200-day moving average.
Another common application of the moving averages is to select
two different time periods and use both moving averages as crossover
indicators. A simple example would be to use the 20-day SMA and
the 50-day SMA. The 20-day SMA is called the fast moving average,
and the 50-day SMA is the slow moving average. They are referred to
as fast and slow due to their speed in responding to changes in price.
If the 20-day SMA is below the 50-day SMA and the stock is trading
below both, the stock is in a short- intermediate-term downtrend.
For a buying signal, we would look for the price to first break above
the moving average resistance lines. Next, we would look for the
20-day SMA to cross above the 50-day SMA. This is referred to as a
bullish moving average crossover. At the point that the fast moving
average is above the slow moving average, we would enter a long
position and place our sell stop below the slow moving average. As the
price establishes the uptrend, we could tighten the stop by bringing
it up to just below the fast moving average.
A word of caution is in order when using moving averages.
Because the moving average is specifically intended to identify trends
and reversals, they become much less reliable when the price is moving sideways. Even if the price has a wide range, the moving average
will go flat for a sideways stock. When this happens, there will be
numerous buy and sell signals, but they won’t have much validity.
Be sure that the chart you’re looking at has a trend in either direction before applying the moving average as a technical indicator. In
Figure 4.6, the stock has been in a sideways trading range and the
200-day SMA flattens out. While there are a couple of points where
the moving average appears to be holding as support or resistance,
there are many more where the price simply ignores the line and
bounces to either side.

Example

Figure 4.7 shows an example of a stock that was trading above the
50-day SMA for the latter part of 2006 and into January 2007. We can

c04.indd 81

11/2/07 12:17:44 PM

82

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 4.6 200-Day Moving Average in a Sideways Stock

Figure 4.7 50-Day Simple Moving Average as Support

clearly see the price bounce off the 50-day SMA with little to no dip
below that support level. The first part of February shows a decisive
break below the support, and the price remains below for the rest of
the chart. In this example, any long position would have been exited
based on a sell stop below the 50-day SMA.
As the stock is trading above the 50-day SMA level, there are several points where the price dips to the moving average and starts
to rally. These would all be good entry points for a new long position

c04.indd 82

11/2/07 12:17:45 PM

The Trader’s Toolbox

83

because the price is above support and the buyers are regaining
control as they push the price back up from the moving average.
Short-term profits would be recognized by using a trailing stop on
each of the minor cycles. Longer-term profits would require placing
your stop below the moving average and raising the stop price as the
moving average rises.
Figure 4.8 includes both the 20-day SMA (thin gray line) and the
50-day SMA (bold black line). Notice how the 20-day SMA is much
more volatile due to the fact that it is faster than the 50-day SMA.
In this chart, we observe the moving average crossover. At point A,
we can see where the price has started to trade above both moving
averages and the 20-day SMA crosses above the 50-day SMA. A long
trade would be entered at point A, based on the bullish crossover.
We would manage this trade by placing a sell stop below the 50-day
moving average if we’re looking to capture the intermediate-term
profit. As an alternative, some traders will wait until they see a bearish moving average crossover before exiting a trade that was entered
on a bullish crossover. Notice that the bearish crossover, where the
20-day SMA drops back below the 50-day SMA, occurs at point B.
This is just a few trading days past the drop below the 50-day SMA
support. Either exit from the long position would have generated
a handsome profit from the extended rally that followed the initial
moving average crossover.

Figure 4.8 Moving Average Crossover

c04.indd 83

11/2/07 12:17:45 PM

84

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Fibonacci Retracement Lines
Overview

Fibonacci retracement lines are perhaps the most elegant of the
technical indicators, if not the most reliable, because of their origin and ubiquity in nature. Named after the famous twelfth-century
mathematician, the Fibonacci retracement lines are based on the
Fibonacci number sequence. The sequence is as follows:
1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, etc.
Notice that each number is the sum of the previous two numbers. Every two successive numbers in the sequence approaches the
Golden Ratio when their quotient is calculated. As the sequence gets
higher, the ratio is more closely followed. The Golden Ratio is 1.618
and is observed as follows:
3/2  1.5
5/3  1.67
8/5  1.6
13/8  1.625
21/13  1.615
34/21  1.619
55/34  1.618
89/55  1.618
An interesting characteristic of the Golden Ratio is that its inverse
is equal to the Golden Ratio minus one. This is shown as
(1/1.618)  (1.618  1)  .618
Finally, as if all this weren’t enough to entertain the puzzle
fanatic within us, the Fibonacci sequence is evident throughout all of
nature. The Golden Ratio has been observed in such diverse natural
phenomena as the spiral of a nautilus shell, the petals on a flower,
the formation of a pine cone, and the height of your belly button
(your total height  .618!).
Calculation

The standard Fibonacci retracement lines used in most trading
software packages are 23.6 percent, 38.2 percent, 50 percent and

c04.indd 84

11/2/07 12:17:45 PM

The Trader’s Toolbox

85

61.8 percent. We see from the overview that 61.8 percent is derived
directly from the Golden Ratio of .618. 100 percent less 61.8 percent yields 38.2 percent and 61.8 percent less 38.2 percent yields
23.6 percent. We see that 50 percent is not a standard number in the
Fibonacci sequence, but it is generally included because 50 percent
is considered a common retracement for stock prices.
Trading software packages will draw these common retracement
levels after you have identified the low and high points along a trading range. For example, if a stock has moved from a low price of $20
to a high price of $30, you would select these two price extremes
and the software would draw the appropriate retracement levels at
$27.64, $26.18, $25.00, and $23.82.
Application

The objective of using Fibonacci retracement lines is to identify levels of support when a stock pulls back following a rally or, alternately,
to identify levels of resistance when a stock rallies following a drop.
Care must be taken to not enter a trade based solely on the
Fibonacci retracement level. As with any support or resistance line,
whether drawn such as the trend line or calculated such as the moving
average, it is best to confirm the level. An illustration of how you might
confirm the level is with the example in the previous calculation paragraph. Let’s assume that over the last few weeks the stock has moved
from $20 to $30 and is now starting to pull back. You want to enter
a long position at some point in the pullback. What would you look
for as an entry opportunity? You watch as the stock drops to the first
retracement level at $27.64, but you don’t see any signs of the price
drop slowing. However, as the price approaches $26.18, you notice
two things occurring. First, the trading volume, which started strong,
has tapered off significantly. Second, the price dipped to $26.00 for
a brief time during the day but has since closed above $26.18. Upon
examining the daily candlestick chart, you see that today’s candle pattern is a hammer reversal. In this instance, you have the Fibonacci
retracement level confirmed by both volume and the chart pattern. If
the buyers start to step in tomorrow, you may enter a long trade and
protect yourself with a sell stop just below the $26.18 level.
Example

When we look at the range of trading for the uptrend in Figure 4.9,
we see the low and high ends of the range identified. Since we’re

c04.indd 85

11/2/07 12:17:45 PM

86

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 4.9 Fibonacci Retracement Levels in an Uptrend

starting with an uptrend, we’re interested in which price levels will
act as support based on the Fibonacci retracements. As we can see
at the far right side of the chart, the long black candle indicates a
sharp price drop on heavy volume. The following day showed that
the selling had halted, at least temporarily, and the volume was much
lighter than the initial sell-off. Notice how closely the price reached
to the first support line at 38.2 percent. The lower shadow on the
long black candle came very close to this level, which was identified
by the Fibonacci retracement of the overall trend range.
In this example, we would watch to see if the candle patterns
give us any more confirmation of a pending reversal. Simply taking a
breather, as is the case here, is not sufficient for a new long position.
However, if the price trades close to this support level over the coming
few days without falling below, we could buy into a new position and
place our sell stop slightly below the 38.2 percent retracement line.

Stochastic Oscillator
Overview

The stochastic oscillator, also referred to simply as the stochastic,
is an indicator that measures a stock’s buying and selling strength
relative to its own past performance. By this, we mean that we’re
not comparing the stock to any market or sector benchmark to
determine when it may be time to buy or sell. The Stochastic is

c04.indd 86

11/2/07 12:17:46 PM

The Trader’s Toolbox

87

generally comprised of two lines: the fast line (called %K) and the
slow line (called %D).
As we’ll observe in the calculations, the stochastic indicator
ranges in value between 0 and 1 (or 0 to 100 percent). As a rule,
any value below about 25 percent is considered oversold. The thinking is that the stock is too weak relative to its own past performance
and, therefore, should correct with rising prices. Any value above
about 75 percent is considered overbought and should correct with
falling prices. As an oscillator, the stochastic tends to work better in
channels. When a stock moves into a strong uptrend, for example,
the stochastic will reach overbought levels without the price correcting downward. Conversely, in a strong downtrend the stochastic will
reach the oversold levels without a correction upward.
Calculation

The first stochastic line is called the fast line because it is calculated
directly from the price data. The indicator is based on the current
closing price as measured against the highest high and the lowest
low in the period over which the stochastic is calculated. The equation is as follows:
%K  (Today’s close  Lowest low)/(Highest high  Lowest low)
If we’re using a period of 10 days, then we would identify the
highest trade price over the 10-day period and the lowest trade price
over the 10-day period for our calculation.
The second stochastic line is referred to as the slow line since it
is smoothed through a moving average calculation. As we saw in the
section on moving averages, a moving average smooths the volatility
of the price data. With the slow stochastic, or %D, the volatility of
the %K is smoothed in the same manner. The equation for the slow
stochastic is as follows:
%D  N-period moving average of %K
where N is the number of periods over which the %K is smoothed.
%D often uses three periods as a common smoothing factor. As with
the moving average on price, the %D may use either a simple, exponential, or weighted moving average calculation. The SMA and EMA
are the most common moving averages used in the %D calculation.

c04.indd 87

11/2/07 12:17:46 PM

88

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Application

There are three primary ways in which the stochastic is used to identify trading opportunities. The first is as a threshold indicator. As we
previously mentioned, the stochastic helps to identify when a stock is
overbought or oversold as compared to its own recent past performance. The overbought region is around 70 to 80 percent, while the
oversold region is around 20 to 30 percent. There isn’t a right or
wrong threshold to use with the stochastic. Rather, you need to decide
how sensitive you want the indicator to be in generating signals. As
you widen the range, the number of signals will decrease. However,
the signals that are generated should be stronger. For example, if
you decide to use 10 percent and 90 percent as your thresholds, it
is apparent that the stochastic will hit these levels fewer times than
if you use 30 percent and 70 percent. As a threshold indicator, most
traders look for the stochastic to pass the threshold, and then they’ll
enter a trade when the indicator crosses the threshold in the other
direction. Looking at Figure 4.10, we see at point A where the stochastic initially crossed below the 20 percent line, telling us that the
stock was oversold. A few days later at point B, the stock crossed back
up above the 20 percent line. It is here that we would enter into a
new long position based on the stochastic as a threshold indicator.
The second application of the stochastic is to use both the %K
and %D together as crossover indicators. Figure 4.11 is the same
chart we see in Figure 4.10, except we’re using both the %K (black

Figure 4.10

c04.indd 88

Using the Stochastic Oscillator as a Threshold Indicator

11/2/07 12:17:46 PM

The Trader’s Toolbox

Figure 4.11

89

Using the Stochastic Oscillator as a Crossover Indicator

line) and the %D (gray line). At point A, %K initially crosses up
above %D near the 20 percent threshold. We would consider this a
bullish crossover and we’d buy the stock. We would hold the position open until %K crosses back below %D near the upper threshold. This occurs at point B in Figure 4.11. As we can see, while this
doesn’t let us buy the low and sell the high, it does allow us to take a
nice bite out of the uptrend.
The third application of the stochastic is to look for a divergence
between the price trend and the stochastic trend. Figure 4.12 shows

Figure 4.12

c04.indd 89

Using the Stochastic Oscillator as a Divergence Indicator

11/2/07 12:17:46 PM

90

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

a daily candlestick chart with %K in the middle window and volume
in the lower window. As we can see in the chart, the price highs are
getting lower while the highs on the %K are getting higher. This is a
divergence between the price and the stochastic, and it is expected
that price will correct to follow the stochastic indication. As we can
see, the price did rally toward the end of the divergence. Notice how
the rally began when the price was approaching a support level and
ended as it reached the resistance level. This is an important point:
Stochastic divergences tend to be highly subjective and should be
used as a confirming indicator, rather than as a stand-alone signal.
Example

We’ll use the stochastic as a crossover indicator for our example
in Figure 4.13. We’ve drawn the %K (black) with a 14-day period
and the %D (gray) with a three-day simple smoothing. In this
example, we see a region prior to point A where both stochastic
lines are below the 20 percent threshold, indicating an oversold
condition. In order to enter the long trade, we want to see the %K
cross above both the %D line and the 20 percent threshold line.
We also want both %K and %D to be rising, which will be further
confirmation of the expected price rally. These conditions occur
at point A, which is where we would enter the long position. The
reverse conditions are the reason for exiting the trade. After moving into the overbought territory above 80 percent, we look for

Figure 4.13

c04.indd 90

Stochastic Oscillator Crossover Example

11/2/07 12:17:47 PM

The Trader’s Toolbox

91

%K to cross below %D and the 80 percent mark. We’ll further
confirm this by waiting until both stochastics are trending downward. These conditions are met at point B, and it is here that the
position is sold.

Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD)
Overview

The moving average convergence divergence (MACD) indicator is
a trend-following indicator that combines two exponential moving
averages into an MACD line. It is used with a second line, the signal
line, which is an exponential moving average of the MACD line. The
MACD tends to work best when the stock price has long, wide swings.
Buy and sell signals are generated based on the relationship of the
MACD line to the signal line.
It is also common to use an MACD histogram, which is a graphical representation of the difference between the MACD line and the
signal line. Many traders find it easier to identify crossovers and
trends with the histogram than with the crisscrossing nature of the
MACD and signal lines.
Calculation

The MACD line is a combination of two EMAs. The most common
EMAs used in constructing the MACD line are the 12-period EMA
and the 26-period EMA. Recall from the calculation of the EMA that
a 12-period EMA has an exponential smoothing factor of 15 percent
(ESF  2/(12  1)  0.154) and the 26-period EMA has an exponential smoothing factor of 7 percent (ESF  2/(26  1)  0.074). For
this reason, the 12-day EMA and the 26-day EMA are also referred to
as the 15 percent EMA and the 7 percent EMA. The equation for the
MACD line is as follows:
MACD  12-period EMA  26-period EMA
The second line used in the MACD indicator is the signal line.
The signal line is an exponential moving average of the MACD. As
we’ve seen from previous discussions, when we smooth data through
a moving average calculation, the new line is slower to respond than
the original line. For that reason, the MACD is considered the fast
line and the signal line is considered the slow line. Notice how this

c04.indd 91

11/2/07 12:17:47 PM

92

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

mirrors the fast and slow lines in the moving average and stochastic
sections of this chapter. The equation for the signal line is:
Signal line  9-period EMA of the MACD
Bear in mind that we’re using the common values for the MACD
calculation (12, 26, and 9); however, these values may be adjusted to
create more or less sensitivity in the indicator. Don’t get caught up
in the minutia of tweaking these values, thinking that if you use the
10 and 33 MACD line, for example, you’ll unlock the secret door
to the market. It’s fine to increase or decrease the sensitivity of the
MACD, but you still want to confirm your trading against the price
and volume, as we discuss through this book.
The MACD histogram is plotted as the difference between the
MACD line and the signal line or
Histogram value  MACD  signal
The histogram can assume a positive or negative value, depending on whether the MACD is above or below the signal line.
Application

There are two primary applications of the MACD indicator. The
first is as a crossover indicator. Once again, we look for the crossing between the fast and slow lines. When the MACD line has been
trending below the signal line and then crosses up above the signal
line, we would consider this to be a bullish sign. This signal would
be especially strong if the bullish crossover occurred when the price
started to rally off a strong support level. The opposite holds true for
a bearish crossover. Here we would look for the MACD line to drop
below the signal line, preferably as the price is falling off a strong
resistance level.
Figure 4.14 shows an example of a bullish and bearish MACD
crossover. At point A, we see that the MACD line has crossed above
the signal line. Notice that the histogram is positive, however slightly.
Based on the crossover, you would buy the stock at point A. The bearish crossover occurs at point B, where the histogram first drops into
negative territory. This tells us that the MACD line has crossed below
the signal line, and it is here that you would exit the trade. If we look

c04.indd 92

11/2/07 12:17:47 PM

The Trader’s Toolbox

Figure 4.14

93

MACD as a Crossover Indicator

more closely at the price, it’s apparent that the stock had dropped
around $3 from its high before the MACD crossover generated a sell
signal. While we didn’t sell at the peak, we see that the MACD still
got us out of the trade before the stock fell another $3 the next day.
The second application of the MACD is to use the histogram
as an overbought and oversold indicator. Since the MACD may
assume any range of values, as opposed to the stochastic, which
ranges from 0 to 1, we cannot assign an absolute threshold for
overbought and oversold. With the MACD, we’re interested in
looking at extreme levels of the histogram as compared to recent
past performance. If we observe that the histogram suddenly rises
significantly higher than it has at any other time in our chart
range, then that tells us that the MACD line is rapidly accelerating past the signal line. The interpretation is that the price is too
strong relative to its own past performance and, therefore, should
correct to the downside.
In Figure 4.15, the histogram peak identified is much more
extreme than the previous peaks in the chart. This indicates that
the MACD is separating from the signal line more than usual. As
such, we would expect the price to correct downward. In order to
profit from this, we could enter a short trade when the histogram
first begins to descend and then manage the trade with a trailing
stop or when the next bullish crossover occurs. It is instructive to see
how the histogram generated the sell signal almost two weeks earlier
than the bearish crossover signal.

c04.indd 93

11/2/07 12:17:48 PM

94

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 4.15

MACD as an Overbought/Oversold Indicator

Example

We can see our first sell signal in Figure 4.16 at point A. The stock
had been trading at a resistance level for two to three weeks when
the MACD line dropped below the signal line and the histogram
went negative. You could enter a short trade at point A and place
your buy stop above the resistance level shown. At point B, we get the
bullish crossover when the histogram turns positive, indicating that
the MACD line has crossed above the signal line. Since the recent
price lows were very close to the lows we see on the left side of the
chart, we would consider this to be our support level. It wouldn’t be
