
lowered from the tower, and that of Bohemund hoisted in its stead, who assumed from
that time the title of Prince of Antioch. Raymond, however, persisted in retaining
possession of one of the city gates and its adjacent towers, which he held for several
months, to the great annoyance of Bohemund and the scandal of the army. The Count
became in consequence extremely unpopular, although his ambition was not a whit more
unreasonable than that of Bohemund himself, nor of Baldwin, who had taken up his
quarters at Edessa, where he exercised the functions of a petty sovereign.
The fate of Peter Barthelemy deserves to be recorded. Honours and consideration had
come thick upon him after the affair of the lance, and he consequently felt bound in
conscience to continue the dreams which had made him a personage of so much
importance. The mischief of it was, that like many other liars he had a very bad memory,
and he contrived to make his dreams contradict each other in the most palpable manner.
St. John one night appeared to him, and told one tale, while, a week after, St. Paul told a
totally different story, and held out hopes quite incompatible with those of his apostolic
brother. The credulity of that age had a wide maw, and Peter's visions must have been
absurd and outrageous indeed, when the very men who had believed in the lance refused
to swallow any more of his wonders. Bohemund at last, for the purpose of annoying the
Count of Toulouse, challenged poor Peter to prove the truth of his story of the lance by
the fiery ordeal. Peter could not refuse a trial so common in that age, and being besides
encouraged by the Count and his chaplain, Raymond, an early day was appointed for the
ceremony. The previous night was spent in prayer and fasting, according to custom, and
Peter came forth in the morning bearing the lance in his hand, and walked boldly up to
the fire. The whole army gathered round, impatient for the result, many thousands still
believing that the lance was genuine and Peter a holy man. Prayers having been said by
Raymond d'Agilles, Peter walked into the flames, and had got nearly through, when pain
caused him to lose his presence of mind: the heat too affected his eyes, and, in his
anguish, he turned round unwittingly, and passed through the fire again, instead of
stepping out of it, as he should have done. The result was, that he was burned so severely,
that he never recovered, and, after lingering for some days, he expired in great agony.
Most of the soldiers were suffering either from wounds, disease, or weariness, and it was
resolved by Godfrey, -- the tacitly acknowledged chief of the enterprize, -- that the army
should have time to refresh itself ere they advanced upon Jerusalem. It was now July, and
he proposed that they should pass the hot months of August and September within the
walls of Antioch, and march forward in October with renewed vigour, and numbers
increased by fresh arrivals from Europe. This advice was finally adopted, although the
enthusiasts of the army continued to murmur at the delay. In the mean time the Count of
Vermandois was sent upon an embassy to the Emperor Alexius at Constantinople, to
reproach him for his base desertion of the cause, and urge him to send the reinforcements
he had promised. The Count faithfully executed his mission, (of which, by the way,
Alexius took no notice whatever,) and remained for some time at Constantinople, till his
zeal, never very violent, totally evaporated. He then returned to France, sick of the
Crusade, and determined to intermeddle with it no more.

The chiefs, though they had determined to stay at Antioch for two months, could not
remain quiet for so long a time. They would, in all probability, have fallen upon each
other, had there been no Turks in Palestine upon whom they might vent their impetuosity.
Godfrey proceeded to Edessa, to aid his brother Baldwin in expelling the Saracens from
his principality, and the other leaders carried on separate hostilities against them as
caprice or ambition dictated. At length the impatience of the army to be led against
Jerusalem became so great that the chiefs could no longer delay, and Raymond, Tancred,
and Robert of Normandy marched forward with their divisions, and laid siege to the
small but strong town of Marah. With their usual improvidence, they had not food
enough to last a beleaguering army for a week. They suffered great privations in
consequence, till Bohemund came to their aid and took the town by storm. In connexion
with this siege, the chronicler, Raymond d'Agilles, (the same Raymond, the chaplain,
who figured in the affair of the Holy Lance,) relates a legend, in the truth of which he
devoutly believed, and upon which Tasso has founded one of the most beautiful passages
of his poem. It is worth preserving, as showing the spirit of the age and the source of the
extraordinary courage manifested by the crusaders on occasions of extreme difficulty.
"One day," says Raymond, "Anselme de Ribeaumont beheld young Engelram, the son of
the Count de St. Paul, who had been killed at Marsh, enter his tent. 'How is it,' said
Anselme to him, 'that you, whom I saw lying dead on the field of battle, are full of life ?' - 'You must know,' replied Engelram, 'that those who fight for Jesus Christ never die.' -- '
But whence,' resumed Anselme, 'comes that strange brightness that surrounds you ?'
Upon this Engelram pointed to the sky, where Anselme saw a palace of diamond and
crystal. 'It is thence,' said he, 'that I derive the beauty which surprises you. My dwelling is
there; a still finer one is prepared for you, and you shall soon come to inhabit it. Farewell!
we shall meet again to-morrow.' With these words Engelram returned to heaven.
Anselme, struck by the vision, sent the next morning for the priests, received the
sacrament; and although full of health, took a last farewell of all his friends, telling them
that he was about to leave this world. A few hours afterwards, the enemy having made a
sortie, Anselme went out against them sword in hand, and was struck on the forehead by
a stone from a Turkish sling, which sent him to heaven, to the beautiful palace that was
prepared for him."
New disputes arose between the Prince of Antioch and the Count of Toulouse with regard
to the capture of this town, which were with the utmost difficulty appeased by the other
chiefs. Delays also took place in the progress of the army, especially before Arches, and
the soldiery were so exasperated that they were on the point of choosing new leaders to
conduct them to Jerusalem. Godfrey, upon this, set fire to his camp at Arches, and
marched forward. He was immediately joined by hundreds of the Provencals of the Count
of Toulouse. The latter, seeing the turn affairs were taking, hastened after them, and the
whole host proceeded towards the holy city, so long desired amid sorrow, and suffering,
and danger. At Emmaus they were met by a deputation from the Christians of Bethlehem,
praying for immediate aid against the oppression of the infidels. The very name of
Bethlehem, the birthplace of the Saviour, was music to their ears, and many of them wept
with joy to think they were approaching a spot so hallowed. Albert of Aix informs us that
their hearts were so touched that sleep was banished from the camp, and that, instead of
waiting till the morning's dawn to recommence their march, they set out shortly after

midnight, full of hope and enthusiasm. For upwards of four hours the mail-clad legions
tramped steadfastly forward in the dark, and when the sun arose in unclouded splendour,
the towers and pinnacles of Jerusalem gleamed upon their sight. All the tender feelings of
their nature were touched; no longer brutal fanatics, but meek and humble pilgrims, they
knelt down upon the sod, and with tears in their eyes, exclaimed to one another,
"Jerusalem ! Jerusalem!" Some of them kissed the holy ground, others stretched
themselves at full length upon it, in order that their bodies might come in contact with the
greatest possible extent of it, and others prayed aloud. The women and children who had
followed the camp from Europe, and shared in all its dangers, fatigues, and privations,
were more boisterous in their joy; the former from long-nourished enthusiasm, and the
latter from mere imitation, [Guibert de Nogent relates a curious instance of the
imitativeness of these juvenile crusaders. He says that, during the siege of Antioch, the
Christian and Saracen boys used to issue forth every evening from the town and camp in
great numbers under the command of captains chosen from among themselves. Armed
with sticks instead of swords, and stones instead of arrows, they ranged themselves in
battle order, and shouting each the war-cry of their country, fought with the utmost
desperation. Some of them lost their eyes, and many became cripples for life from the
injuries they received on these occasions.] and prayed, and wept, and laughed till they
almost put the more sober to the blush.
The first ebullition of their gladness having subsided, the army marched forward, and
invested the city on all sides. The assault was almost immediately begun; but after the
Christians had lost some of their bravest knights, that mode of attack was abandoned, and
the army commenced its preparations for a regular siege. Mangonels, moveable towers,
and battering rams, together with a machine called a sow, made of wood, and covered
with raw hides, inside of which miners worked to undermine the walls, were forthwith
constructed; and to restore the courage and discipline of the army, which had suffered
from the unworthy dissensions of the chiefs, the latter held out the hand of friendship to
each other, and Tancred and the Count of Toulouse embraced in sight of the whole camp.
The clergy aided the cause with their powerful voice, and preached union and goodwill to
the highest and the lowest. A solemn procession was also ordered round the city, in
which the entire army joined, prayers being offered up at every spot which gospel records
had taught them to consider as peculiarly sacred.
The Saracens upon the ramparts beheld all these manifestations without alarm. To
incense the Christians, whom they despised, they constructed rude crosses, and fixed
them upon the walls, and spat upon and pelted them with dirt and stones. This insult to
the symbol of their faith raised the wrath of the crusaders to that height that bravery
became ferocity and enthusiasm madness. When all the engines of war were completed
the attack was recommenced, and every soldier of the Christian army fought with a
vigour which the sense of private wrong invariably inspires. Every man had been
personally outraged, and the knights worked at the battering-rams with as much readiness
as the meanest soldiers. The Saracen arrows and balls of fire fell thick and fast among
them, but the tremendous rams still heaved against the walls, while the best marksmen of
the host were busily employed in the several floors of the moveable towers in dealing
death among the Turks upon the battlements. Godfrey, Raymond, Tancred, and Robert of

Normandy, each upon his tower, fought for hours with unwearied energy, often repulsed,
but ever ready to renew the struggle. The Turks, no longer despising the enemy, defended
themselves with the utmost skill and bravery till darkness brought a cessation of
hostilities. Short was the sleep that night in the. Christian camp. The priests offered up
solemn prayers in the midst of the attentive soldiery for the triumph of the Cross in this
last great struggle, and as soon as morning dawned every one was in readiness for the
affray. The women and children lent their aid, the latter running unconcerned to and fro
while the arrows fell fast around them, bearing water to the thirsty combatants. The saints
were believed to be aiding their efforts, and the army, impressed with this idea,
surmounted difficulties under which a force thrice as numerous, but without their faith,
would have quailed and been defeated. Raymond of Toulouse at last forced his way into
the city by escalade, while at the very same moment Tancred and Robert of Normandy
succeeded in bursting open one of the gates. The Turks flew to repair the mischief, and
Godfrey of Bouillon, seeing the battlements comparatively deserted, let down the
drawbridge of his moveable tower, and sprang forward, followed by all the knights of his
train. In an instant after, the banner of the Cross floated upon the walls of Jerusalem. The
crusaders, raising once more their redoubtable war-cry, rushed on from every side, and
the city was taken. The battle raged in the streets for several hours, and the Christians,
remembering their insulted faith, gave no quarter to young or old, male or female, sick or
strong. Not one of the leaders thought himself at liberty to issue orders for staying the
carnage, and if he had, he would not have been obeyed. The Saracens fled in great
numbers to the mosque of Soliman, but they had not time to fortify themselves within it
ere the Christians were upon them. Ten thousand persons are said to have perished in that
building alone.
Peter the Hermit, who had remained so long under the veil of neglect, was repaid that day
for all his zeal and all his sufferings. As soon as the battle was over, the Christians of
Jerusalem issued forth from their hiding-places to welcome their deliverers. They
instantly recognized the Hermit as the pilgrim who, years before, had spoken to them so
eloquently of the wrongs and insults they had endured, and promised to stir up the princes
and people of Europe in their behalf. They clung to the skirts of his garments in the
fervour of their gratitude, and vowed to remember him for ever in their prayers. Many of
them shed tears about his neck, and attributed the deliverance of Jerusalem solely to his
courage and perseverance. Peter afterwards held some ecclesiastical office in the Holy
City, but what it was, or what was his ultimate fate, history has forgotten to inform us.
Some say that he returned to France and founded a monastery, but the story does not rest
upon sufficient authority.
The grand object for which the popular swarms of Europe had forsaken their homes was
now accomplished. The Moslem mosques of Jerusalem were converted into churches for
a purer faith, and the mount of Calvary and the sepulchre of Christ were profaned no
longer by the presence or the power of the infidel. Popular frenzy had fulfilled its
mission, and, as a natural consequence, it began to subside from that time forth. The news
of the capture of Jerusalem brought numbers of pilgrims from Europe, and, among others,
Stephen Count of Chartres and Hugh of Vermandois, to atone for their desertion; but
nothing like the former enthusiasm existed among the nations.

Thus then ends the history of the first Crusade. For the better understanding of the
second, it will be necessary to describe the interval between them, and to enter into a
slight sketch of the history of Jerusalem under its Latin kings, the long and fruitless wars
they continued to wage with the unvanquished Saracens, and the poor and miserable
results which sprang from so vast an expenditure of zeal, and so deplorable a waste of
human life.
The necessity of having some recognized chief was soon felt by the crusaders, and
Godfrey de Bouillon, less ambitious than Bohemund, or Raymond of Toulouse, gave his
cold consent to wield a sceptre which the latter chiefs would have clutched with
eagerness. He was hardly invested with the royal mantle before the Saracens menaced his
capital. With much vigour and judgment he exerted himself to follow up the advantages
he had gained, and marching out to meet the enemy before they had time to besiege him
in Jerusalem, he gave them battle at Ascalon, and defeated them with great loss. He did
not, however, live long to enjoy his new dignity, being seized with a fatal illness when he
had only reigned nine months. To him succeeded his brother, Baldwin of Edessa. The
latter monarch did much to improve the condition of Jerusalem and to extend its territory,
but was not able to make a firm footing for his successors. For fifty years, in which the
history of Jerusalem is full of interest to the historical student, the crusaders were
exposed to fierce and constant hostilities, often gaining battles and territory, and as often
losing them, but becoming every day weaker and more divided, while the Saracens
became stronger and more united to harass and root them out. The battles of this period
were of the most chivalrous character, and deeds of heroism were done by the handful of
brave knights that remained in Syria, which have hardly their parallel in the annals of
war. In the course of time, however, the Christians could not avoid feeling some respect
for the courage, and admiration for the polished manners and advanced civilization of the
Saracens, so much superior to the rudeness and semi-barbarism of Europe at that day.
Difference of faith did not prevent them from forming alliances with the dark-eyed
maidens of the East. One of the first to set the example of taking a Paynim spouse was
King Baldwin himself, and these connexions in time became, not only frequent, but
almost universal, among such of the knights as had resolved to spend their lives in
Palestine. These Eastern ladies were obliged, however, to submit to the ceremony of
baptism before they could be received to the arms of a Christian lord. These, and their
offspring, naturally looked upon the Saracens with less hatred than did the zealots who
conquered Jerusalem, and who thought it a sin deserving the wrath of God to spare an
unbeliever. We find, in consequence, that the most obstinate battles waged during the
reigns of the later Kings of Jerusalem were fought by the new and raw levies who from
time to time arrived from Europe, lured by the hope of glory, or spurred by fanaticism.
The latter broke without scruple the truces established between the original settlers and
the Saracens, and drew down severe retaliation upon many thousands of their brethren in
the faith, whose prudence was stronger than their zeal, and whose chief desire was to live
in peace.
Things remained in this unsatisfactory state till the close of the year 1145, when Edessa,
the strong frontier town of the Christian kingdom, fell into the bauds of the Saracens. The

latter were commanded by Zenghi, a powerful and enterprising monarch, and, after his
death, by his son Nourheddin, as powerful and enterprising as his father. An unsuccessful
attempt was made by the Count of Edessa to regain the fortress, but Nourheddin, with a
large army, came to the rescue, and after defeating the Count with great slaughter,
marched into Edessa and caused its fortifications to be rased to the ground, that the town
might never more be a bulwark of defence for the kingdom of Jerusalem. The road to the
capital was now open, and consternation seized the hearts of the Christians. Nourheddin,
it was known, was only waiting for a favourable opportunity to advance upon Jerusalem,
and the armies of the Cross, weakened and divided, were not in a condition to make any
available resistance. The clergy were filled with grief and alarm, and wrote repeated
letters to the Pope and the sovereigns of Europe, urging the expediency of a new Crusade
for the relief of Jerusalem. By far the greater number of the priests of Palestine were
natives of France, and these naturally looked first to their own country. The solicitations
they sent to Louis the Seventh were urgent and oft repeated, and the chivalry of France
began to talk once more of arming in the defence of the birthplace of Jesus. The kings of
Europe, whose interest it had not been to take any part in the first Crusade, began to
bestir themselves in this; and a man appeared, eloquent as Peter the Hermit, to arouse the
people as he had done.
We find, however, that the enthusiasm of the second did not equal that of the first
Crusade: in fact, the mania had reached its climax in the time of Peter the Hermit, and
decreased regularly from that period. The third Crusade was less general than the second,
and the fourth than the third, and so on, until the public enthusiasm was quite extinct, and
Jerusalem returned at last to the dominion of its old masters without a convulsion in
Christendom. Various reasons have been assigned for this; and one very generally put
forward is, that Europe was wearied with continued struggles, and had become sick of
"precipitating itself upon Asia." M. Guizot, in his admirable lectures upon European
civilization, successfully combats this opinion, and offers one of his own, which is far
more satisfactory. He says, in his eighth lecture, "It has been often repeated, that Europe
was tired of continually invading Asia. This expression appears to me exceedingly
incorrect. It is not possible that human beings can be wearied with what they have not
done -- that the labours of their forefathers can fatigue them. Weariness is a personal, not
an inherited feeling. The men of the thirteenth century were not fatigued by the Crusades
of the twelfth. They were influenced by another cause. A great change had taken place in
ideas, sentiments, and social conditions. The same desires and the same wants were no
longer felt. The same things were no longer believed. The people refused to believe what
their ancestors were persuaded of."
This is, in fact, the secret of the change; and its truth becomes more apparent as we
advance in the history of the Crusades, and compare the state of the public mind at the
different periods when Godfrey of Bouillon, Louis VII. and Richard I. were chiefs and
leaders of the movement. The Crusades themselves were the means of operating a great
change in national ideas, and advancing the civilization of Europe. In the time of
Godfrey, the nobles were all-powerful and all-oppressive, and equally obnoxious to kings
and people. During their absence along with that portion of the community the deepest
sunk in ignorance and superstition, both kings and people fortified themselves against the

renewal of aristocratic tyranny, and in proportion as they became free, became civliized.
It was during this period that in France, the grand centre of the crusading madness, the
communes began to acquire strength, and the monarch to possess a tangible and not a
merely theoretic authority. Order and comfort began to take root, and, when the second
Crusade was preached, men were in consequence much less willing to abandon their
homes than they had been during the first. Such pilgrims as had returned from the Holy
Land came back with minds more liberal and expanded than when they set out. They had
come in contact with a people more civilized than themselves; they had seen something
more of the world, and had lost some portion, however small, of the prejudice and bigotry
of ignorance. The institution of chivalry had also exercised its humanizing influence, and
coming bright and fresh through the ordeal of the Crusades, had softened the character
and improved the hearts of the aristocratic order. The Trouveres and Troubadours,
singing of love and war in strains pleasing to every class of society, helped to root out the
gloomy superstitions which, at the first Crusade, filled the minds of all those who were
able to think. Men became in consequence less exclusively under the mental thraldom of
the priesthood, and lost much of the credulity which formerly distinguished them.
The Crusades appear never to have excited so much attention in England as on the
continent of Europe; not because the people were less fanatical than their neighbours, but
because they were occupied in matters of graver interest. The English were suffering too
severely from the recent successful invasion of their soil, to have much sympathy to
bestow upon the distresses of people so far away as the Christians of Palestine; and we
find that they took no part in the first Crusade, and very little in the second. Even then
those who engaged in it were chiefly Norman knights and their vassals, and not the Saxon
franklins and population, who no doubt thought, in their sorrow, as many wise men have
thought since, that charity should begin at home.
Germany was productive of more zeal in the cause, and her raw, uncivilized hordes
continued to issue forth under the banners of the Cross in numbers apparently
undiminished, when the enthusiasm had long been on the wane in other countries. They
were sunk at that time in a deeper slough of barbarism than the livelier nations around
them, and took, in consequence, a longer period to free themselves from their prejudices.
In fact, the second Crusade drew its chief supplies of men from that quarter, where alone
the expedition can be said to have retained any portion of popularity.
Such was the state of the mind of Europe when Pope Eugenius, moved by the reiterated
entreaties of the Christians of Syria, commissioned St. Bernard to preach a new crusade.
St. Bernard was a man eminently qualified for the mission. He was endowed with an
eloquence of the highest order, could move an auditory to tears, or laughter, or fury, as it
pleased him, and had led a life of such rigid and self-denying virtue, that not even
calumny could lift her finger and point it at him. He had renounced high prospects in the
church, and contented himself with the simple abbacy of Clairvaux, in order that he might
have the leisure he desired, to raise his powerful voice against abuses wherever he found
them. Vice met in him an austere and uncompromising reprover; no man was too high for
his reproach, and none too low for his sympathy. He was just as well suited for his age as
Peter the Hermit had been for the age preceding. He appealed more to the reason, his
