
T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[141]

depreciated net cost of these fixed assets was then added to
the net working capital requirements already calculated to
arrive at an estimate for tangible capital employed.

2. Earnings Yield

EBIT/Enterprise Value
Earnings yield was measured by calculating the ratio of
pre-tax operating earnings (EBIT) to enterprise value (market value of equity* + net interest-bearing debt). This ratio
was used rather than the more commonly used P/E ratio
(price/earnings ratio) or E/P ratio (earnings/price ratio) for
several reasons. The basic idea behind the concept of earnings yield is simply to figure out how much a business
earns relative to the purchase price of the business.
Enterprise value was used instead of merely the price of
equity (i.e., total market capitalization, share price multiplied
by shares outstanding) because enterprise value takes into
account both the price paid for an equity stake in a business
as well as the debt financing used by a company to help generate operating earnings. By using EBIT (which looks at
actual operating earnings before interest expense and taxes)
and comparing it to enterprise value, we can calculate the
*Including preferred equity.

[142]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

pre-tax earnings yield on the full purchase price of a business (i.e., pre-tax operating earnings relative to the price of
equity plus any debt assumed). This allows us to put companies with different levels of debt and different tax rates on
an equal footing when comparing earnings yields.
For example, in the case of an office building purchased
for $1 million with an $800,000 mortgage and $200,000 in
equity, the price of equity is $200,000 but the enterprise
value is $1 million. If the building generates EBIT (earnings
before interest and taxes) of $100,000, then EBIT/EV or
the pre-tax earnings yield would be 10 percent ($100,000/
$1,000,000). However, the use of debt can greatly skew
apparent returns from the purchase of these same assets
when only the price of equity is considered. Assuming an
interest rate of 6 percent on an $800,000 mortgage and a 40
percent corporate tax rate, the pre-tax earnings yield on our
equity purchase price of $200,000 would appear to be 26
percent.* As debt levels change, this pre-tax earnings yield
*$100,000 in EBIT less $48,000 in interest expense equals $52,000 in pretax
income. $52,000/$200,000 equals 26 percent. The E/P (earnings/price), or
after-tax earnings yield, would be 15.6 percent ($100,000 in EBIT less
$48,000 in interest less $20,800 in income tax equals $31,200 in after-tax
income; $31,200/$200,000 equals 15.6 percent). This 15.6 percent return
would be more comparable to looking at an EBIT/EV after-tax yield of 6 percent (i.e., looking at EBIT as if fully taxed, or net operating profit after tax
divided by EV; it is important to note that the fully taxed EBIT to enterprise value of
6 percent would be the earnings yield ratio used to measure investment alternatives versus the risk-free 10-year government bond yield, not the EBIT/EV ratio of 10 percent).

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[143]

on equity would keep changing, yet the $1 million cost of
the building and the $100,000 EBIT generated by that
building would remain unchanged. In other words, P/E and
E/P are greatly influenced by changes in debt levels and tax
rates, while EBIT/EV is not.

Consider two companies, Company A and Company
B. They are actually the same company (i.e., the
same sales, the same operating earnings, the same
everything) except that Company A has no debt and
Company B has $50 in debt (at a 10 percent interest
rate). All information is per share.
Company A

Company B

Sales

$100

$100

EBIT

10

10

Interest exp.

0

5

Pre-tax income

10

5

Taxes (@40%)

4

2

Net income

$6

$3

The price of Company A is $60 per share. The
price of Company B is $10 per share. Which is
cheaper?

[144]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

Let’s see. The P/E of Company A is 10 ($60/6 =
10). The P/E of Company B is 3.33 ($10/3). The E/P,
or earnings yield, of Company A is 10 percent (6/60),
while the earnings yield of Company B is 30 percent
(3/10). So which is cheaper? The answer is obvious.
Company B has a P/E of only 3.33 and an earnings
yield of 30 percent. That looks much cheaper than
Company A’s P/E of 10 and earnings yield of only 10
percent. So Company B is clearly cheaper, right?
Not so fast. Let’s look at EBIT/EV for both
companies. They are the same! To a buyer of the
whole company, would it matter whether you paid $10
per share for the company and owed another $50 per share
or you paid $60 and owed nothing? It is the same
thing! You would be buying $10 worth of EBIT for $60,
either way!*

Enterprise value

Company A

Company B

60 + 0 = $60

10 + 50 = $60

10

10

(price + debt)
EBIT

*For example, whether you pay $200,000 for a building and assume an
$800,000 mortgage or pay $1 million up front, it should be the same to you.
The building costs $1 million either way!

A Random Walk Spoiled

For many years, academics have debated whether it is
possible to find bargain-priced stocks other than by
chance. This notion, sometimes loosely referred to as
the random walk or efficient market theory, suggests that
for the most part, the stock market is very efficient at
taking in all publicly available information and setting
stock prices. That is, through the interaction of knowledgeable buyers and sellers, the market does a pretty
good job of pricing stocks at “fair” value. This theory,
along with the failure of most professional managers to
beat the market averages over the long term,* has
understandably led to the movement toward indexing, a
cost-effective strategy designed to merely match the
market’s return.
Of course, over the years, many studies have attempted
to identify strategies that can beat the market. But these
studies have often been criticized on numerous grounds.
*Both before and after management fees and expenses.

[146]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

These include:
1. The study beat the market because the data used to
select stocks weren’t really available to investors at
the time the selections took place (a.k.a. look-ahead
bias).
2. The study was biased because the database used in
the study had been “cleaned up” and excluded
companies that later went bankrupt, making the
study results look better than they really were
(a.k.a. survivorship bias).
3. The study included very small companies that
couldn’t have been purchased at the prices listed in
the database and uncovered companies too small
for professionals to buy.
4. The study did not outperform the market by a
significant amount after factoring in transaction
costs.
5. The study picked stocks that were in some way
“riskier” than the market, and that’s why performance was better.
6. The stock selection strategy was based on backtesting many different stock selection strategies
until one was found that worked (a.k.a. data mining).
7. The stock selection strategies used to beat the market included knowledge gained from previous
“market-beating” studies that was not available at

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[147]

the time the stock purchases were made in the
study.
Luckily, the magic formula study doesn’t appear to
have had any of these problems. A newly released database from Standard & Poor’s Compustat, called “Point in
Time,” was used. This database contains the exact information that was available to Compustat customers on each
date tested during the study period. The database goes
back 17 years, the time period selected for the magic formula study. By using only this special database, it was possible to ensure that no look-ahead or survivorship bias
took place.
Further, the magic formula worked for both smalland large-capitalization stocks, provided returns far superior to the market averages, and achieved those returns
while taking on much lower risk than the overall market (no
matter how that risk was measured). Consequently, small
size, high transaction costs, and added risk do not appear
to be reasonable grounds for questioning the validity of
the magic formula results. As for data mining and using
academic research not available at the time of stock selection, this did not take place, either. In fact, the two factors
used for the magic formula study were actually the first
two factors tested. Simply, a high earnings yield combined
with a high return on capital were the two factors we judged
to be most important when analyzing a company before the

[148]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

magic formula study was conducted. In sum, despite its
obvious simplicity and the usual objections, the magic formula appears to work. It works well even when compared
to much more sophisticated strategies used in some of the
best market-beating research completed to date.
Yet, in one sense, the success of the magic formula
strategy should not be a surprise. Simple methods for beating the market have been well known for quite some time.
Many studies over the years have confirmed that valueoriented strategies beat the market over longer time horizons. Several different measures of value have been shown
to work. These strategies include, but are not limited to,
selecting stocks based upon low ratios of price to book
value, price to earnings, price to cash flow, price to sales,
and/or price to dividends. Similar to the results found in the
magic formula study, these simple value strategies do not
always work. However, measured over longer periods, they
do. Though these strategies have been well documented
over many years, most individual and professional investors
do not have the patience to use them. Apparently, the long
periods of underperformance make them difficult—and, for
some professionals, impractical—to implement.
Another problem with these simple methods is that,
though they work well, they work far better with smallerand medium-capitalization stocks than with larger stocks.
This should not be surprising, either. Companies that are

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[149]

too small for professionals to buy and that are not large
enough to generate sufficient commission revenue to justify analyst coverage are more likely to be ignored or misunderstood. As a result, they are more likely to present
opportunities to find bargain-priced stocks. This was the
case in the magic formula study. The formula achieved
the greatest performance with the smallest-capitalization
stocks studied.
However, this good performance cannot be reasonably attributed to a small-cap effect because smallcapitalization stocks did not appreciably outperform large
caps during the study period. Dividing our universe of
stocks into deciles by market capitalization during the 17year study period, the smallest 10 percent of stocks provided returns of 12.1 percent, while the largest 10 percent
of stocks returned 11.9 percent. The next deciles were
similarly close: 12.2 percent for the next smallest and 11.9
percent for the next largest.
But the whole issue of whether small-capitalization
stocks outperform large-capitalization stocks is not particularly relevant. It seems clear that there is a greater
opportunity to find bargains (and overpriced stocks, for
that matter) in the small-cap arena both because there are
more stocks to choose from and because smaller stocks
are more likely to be lightly analyzed and, as a result,
more likely to be mispriced. In a sense, it is just easier for

[150]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

simple methods like price/book screens and the magic
formula to find bargain stocks among these smallercapitalization stocks.
However, where the magic formula parts ways with
previous market-beating studies, whether simple or sophisticated, is that for larger stocks (market caps over $1 billion) the results for the magic formula remain incredibly
robust. Other methods do not fare nearly as well. For
example, during our study period, the most widely used
measure to identify value and growth stocks, price to
book value, did not discriminate particularly strongly
between winners and losers for these larger stocks. The
best-ranked decile of low price/book stocks (cheapest 10
percent) beat the worst-ranked decile of high price/book
stocks (most expensive 10 percent) by only 2 percent per
year.*
In comparison, the magic formula strategy did much
better. The best-ranked decile of magic formula stocks
(cheapest 10 percent) beat the worst-ranked decile (most
expensive 10 percent) by over 14 percent per year on average during the 17-year study. The best decile returned
18.88 percent, the worst returned 4.66 percent, while the
market average for this universe of over $1 billion stocks
*This is 13.72 percent for the lowest price/book decile to 11.51 percent for
the highest price/book decile. The market average for this group was 11.64
percent.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[151]

was 11.7 percent. In truth, this is not surprising. While
having a low price relative to the historical cost of assets
may be an indication that a stock is cheap, high earnings relative to price and to the historical cost of assets are much
more direct measures of cheapness and should work better. Of course, these two factors are the ones used in the
magic formula study.
One of the most significant recent studies, conducted by Joseph Piotroski at the University of
Chicago,* took price/book analysis one step further.
Piotroski observed that while low price/book stocks beat
the market on average, less than half of the stocks
selected following this strategy actually outperformed
the market. By using simple and readily available
accounting metrics, Piotroski wondered whether he
could improve the results of a generic price/book strategy. Piotroski rated the top quintile of low price/book
stocks (i.e., the cheapest 20 percent) using nine different measures of financial health. These included measures of profitability, operating efficiency, and balance
sheet strength. The results over the 21-year study were
spectacular . . . with one exception.
For larger stocks, it didn’t really work. For the largest
*Piotroski, J. “Value Investing: The Use of Historical Financial Statements to Separate Winners from Losers,” Journal of Accounting Research,
vol. 38, supplement, 2000.

[152]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

one-third of stocks by market capitalization,* the highestranked stocks on Piotroski’s nine-point scale did not significantly outperform the average low price/book stock.†
This is not surprising, either. As already mentioned, it’s
just easier to find mispriced stocks among smaller- and
mid-capitalization issues.
But this relative inability for market-beating methods
to work with larger-cap stocks is not unique. Even very
sophisticated market-beating strategies, while showing
excellent results in general, do not fare nearly as well as
the relatively simple magic formula in the large-cap universe.‡ For example, some of the best work done to date
on sophisticated factor models was completed by Robert
Haugen and Nardin Baker.§ Professor Haugen actually
started an advisory business based on the excellent results
achieved in this groundbreaking paper.
Essentially, instead of the two factors used in the
magic formula strategy, Haugen developed a sophisticated model using 71 factors that supposedly help predict
*This is equivalent in the magic formula study to stocks with market capitalizations over approximately $700 million.
†
Though Piotroski’s “lowest”-ranked large-cap stocks did do poorly relative
to other low price/book stocks, his ranking system selected a total of only
34 low-ranked stocks over 21 years.
‡
Or in the small-cap universe.
§
Haugen, R., and N. Baker, “Commonality in the Determinants of
Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, Summer 1996.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[153]

how stocks will do in the future. These 71 factors evaluate
stocks based on “risk, liquidity, financial structure, profitability, price history and analysts’ estimates.” Based on a
complicated weighting of all of these different factors,
Haugen’s model predicts future returns for each stock.
Historical “expected returns” for the stocks in the 3,000+
stock universe evaluated by Haugen’s model have been
posted on his web site, covering the period from February
1994 through November 2004. We decided to test
Haugen’s model to see whether it worked for largecapitalization stocks (those with a market capitalization
over $1 billion in 2004 dollars).
It did. The results were quite spectacular. Over this
10+-year period, the market average for the large-cap universe tested returned 9.38 percent. But buying the highestranked stocks (best-ranked decile) based on Haugen’s
71-factor model returned +22.98 percent. The lowestranked stocks (worst-ranked decile) actually lost 6.91 percent. This amounts to a spread of almost 30 percent
between best and worst! This assumed that stocks were
held for only one month and then reranked at the end of
each month. Of course, though these results were great,
the magic formula did better!
Over the same 10+-year period, the highest-ranked
stocks (best-ranked decile) based on the magic formula
two-factor model returned +24.25 percent. The worstranked stocks (worst-ranked decile) lost 7.91 percent.

[154]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

This amounts to a spread from best to worst of over 32
percent! Though the results from the magic formula
strategy were somewhat better (and easier to achieve)
than the results from the 71-factor model used by Haugen, the performance of both methods was excellent
and quite comparable. But here’s the thing. Most people don’t (and shouldn’t) invest by buying stocks and
holding them for only one month. Besides the huge
amount of time, transaction costs, and tax expense
involved, this is essentially a trading strategy, not really
a practical long-term investment strategy. So what happens if we change our test and hold each portfolio for
one year?*
Actually, something very interesting occurs. Haugen’s 71-factor model still does well: the best-ranked
decile returns +12.55 percent (versus 9.38 percent for
the market) and the worst-ranked decile returns +6.92
percent. The spread from high to low is down to 5.63
percent. If we hadn’t just seen the one-month returns,
this would still look pretty good. But what happens with
the magic formula? The best-ranked decile returns
+18.43 percent and the worst-ranked decile returns
*Portfolios were purchased every month during the 10-year period, and
each portfolio was held for 1 year, so more than 120 separate portfolios
were tested for each strategy.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[155]

+1.49 percent—a spread of almost 17 percent between
best and worst! That’s pretty good no matter how you
look at it. Here’s something else that’s interesting. The
worst return during those 10+ years for following the
Haugen strategy for 36 months straight (with annual
turnover) was −43.1 percent. The worst 36-month
period for the magic formula was +14.3 percent. Not
only that, the magic formula used 69 fewer factors and a
lot less math!*
So, here’s the point. The magic formula appears to
perform very well. I think and hope it will continue to perform well in the future. I also hope that, just as Mark
Twain aptly referred to golf as “a good walk spoiled,” perhaps someday the random walk will finally be considered
spoiled as well.†

*Professor Haugen does not suggest buying the top 10% of his highest
rated stocks in one portfolio or holding stocks for one year. Also, the losses
for the worst 36 month return for the theoretical “top 10%” Haugen portfolio were similar to the overall market’s loss during that period. The statistics listed were compiled for comparison purposes with the magic formula
portfolio using only those stocks that were included in both the Haugen and
magic formula over $1 billion universe.
†
On second thought, who am I kidding? I hope it lives forever!

