also, Italians, Dalmatians, Athenians, Arabians, Jews -- ye will all follow my doctrines,
for I am the monarch of medicine!"
But he did not long enjoy the esteem of the good citizens of Basle. It is said that he
indulged in wine so freely, as not unfrequently to be seen in the streets in a state of
intoxication. This was ruinous for a physician, and his good fame decreased rapidly. His
ill fame increased in still greater proportion, especially when he assumed the airs of a
sorcerer. He boasted of the legions of spirits at his command; and of one especially,
which he kept imprisoned in the hilt of his sword. Wetterus, who lived twenty-seven
months in his service, relates that he often threatened to invoke a whole army of demons,
and show him the great authority which he could exercise over them. He let it be
believed, that the spirit in his sword had custody of the elixir of life, by means of which
he could make any one live to be as old as the antediluvians. He also boasted that he had
a spirit at his command, called "Azoth," whom he kept imprisoned in a jewel; and in
many of the old portraits he is represented with a jewel, inscribed with the word "Azoth,"
in his hand.
If a sober prophet has little honour in his own country, a drunken one has still less.
Paracelsus found it at last convenient to quit Basle, and establish himself at Strasbourg.
The immediate cause of this change of residence was as follows: -- A citizen lay at the
point of death, and was given over by all the physicians of the town. As a last resource
Paracelsus was called in, to whom the sick man promised a magnificent recompence, if
by his means he were cured. Paracelsus gave him two small pills, which the man took and
rapidly recovered. When he was quite well, Paracelsus sent for his fee; but the citizen had
no great opinion of the value of a cure which had been so speedily effected. He had no
notion of paying a handful of gold for two pills, although they had saved his life, and he
refused to pay more than the usual fee for a single visit. Paracelsus brought an action
against him, and lost it. This result so exasperated him, that he left Basle in high dudgeon.
He resumed his wandering life, and travelled in Germany and Hungary, supporting
himself as he went on the credulity and infatuation of all classes of society. He cast
nativities -- told fortunes -- aided those who had money to throw away upon the
experiment, to find the philosopher's stone -- prescribed remedies for cows and pigs, and
aided in the recovery of stolen goods. After residing successively at Nuremburg,
Augsburg, Vienna, and Mindelheim, he retired in the year 1541 to Saltzbourg, and died in
a state of abject poverty in the hospital of that town.
If this strange charlatan found hundreds of admirers during his life, he found thousands
after his death. A sect of Paracelsists sprang up in France and Germany, to perpetuate the
extravagant doctrines of their founder upon all the sciences, and upon alchymy in
particular. The chief leaders were Bodenstein and Dorneus. The following is a summary
of his doctrine, founded upon supposed existence of the philosopher's stone; it is worth
preserving from its very absurdity, and altogether unparalleled in the history of
philosophy:-- First of all, he maintained that the contemplation of the perfection of the
Deity sufficed to procure all wisdom and knowledge; that the Bible was the key to the
theory of all diseases, and that it was necessary to search into the Apocalypse to know the
signification of magic medicine. The man who blindly obeyed the will of God, and who

succeeded in identifying himself with the celestial intelligences, possessed the
philosopher's stone -- he could cure all diseases, and prolong life to as many centuries as
he pleased; it being by the very same means that Adam and the antediluvian patriarchs
prolonged theirs. Life was an emanation from the stars -- the sun governed the heart, and
the moon the brain. Jupiter governed the liver, Saturn the gall, Mercury the lungs, Mars
the bile, and Venus the loins. In the stomach of every human being there dwelt a demon,
or intelligence, that was a sort of alchymist in his way, and mixed, in their due
proportions, in his crucible, the various aliments that were sent into that grand laboratory
the belly.[See the article "Paracelsus," by the learned Renaudin, in the "Biographie
Universelle."] He was proud of the title of magician, and boasted that he kept up a regular
correspondence with Galen from hell; and that he often summoned Avicenna from the
same regions to dispute with him on the false notions he had promulgated respecting
alchymy, and especially regarding potable gold and the elixir of life. He imagined that
gold could cure ossification of the heart, and, in fact, all diseases, if it were gold which
had been transmuted from an inferior metal by means of the philosopher's stone, and if it
were applied under certain conjunctions of the planets. The mere list of the works in
which he advances these frantic imaginings, which he called a doctrine, would occupy
several pages.

GEORGE AGRICOLA.
This alchymist was born in the province of Misnia, in 1494. His real name was Bauer,
meaning a husbandman, which, in accordance with the common fashion of his age, he
Latinized into Agricola. From his early youth, he delighted in the visions of the hermetic
science. Ere he was sixteen, he longed for the great elixir which was to make him live for
seven hundred years, and for the stone which was to procure him wealth to cheer him in
his multiplicity of days. He published a small treatise upon the subject at Cologne, in
1531, which obtained him the patronage of the celebrated Maurice, Duke of Saxony.
After practising for some years as a physician at Joachimsthal, in Bohemia, he was
employed by Maurice as superintendent of the silver mines of Chemnitz. He led a happy
life among the miners, making various experiments in alchymy while deep in the bowels
of the earth. He acquired a great knowledge of metals, and gradually got rid of his
extravagant notions about the philosopher's stone. The miners had no faith in alchymy;
and they converted him to their way of thinking, not only in that but in other respects.
From their legends, he became firmly convinced that the bowels of the earth were
inhabited by good and evil spirits, and that firedamp and other explosions sprang from no
other causes than the mischievous propensities of the latter. He died in the year 1555,
leaving behind him the reputation of a very able and intelligent man.

DENIS ZACHAIRE.
Autobiography, written by a wise man who was once a fool, is not only the most
instructive, but the most delightful of reading. Denis Zachaire, an alchymist of the
sixteenth century, has performed this task, and left a record of his folly and infatuation in
pursuit of the philosopher's stone, which well repays perusal. He was born in the year
1510, of an ancient family in Guienne, and was early sent to the university of Bordeaux,
under the care of a tutor to direct his studies. Unfortunately, his tutor was a searcher for
the grand elixir, and soon rendered his pupil as mad as himself upon the subject. With
this introduction, we will allow Denis Zachaire to speak for himself, and continue his
narrative in his own words :--" I received from home," says he, "the sum of two hundred
crowns for the expenses of myself and master; but before the end of the year, all our
money went away in the smoke of our furnaces. My master, at the same time, died of a
fever, brought on by the parching heat of our laboratory, from which he seldom or never
stirred, and which was scarcely less hot than the arsenal of Venice. His death was the
more unfortunate for me, as my parents took the opportunity of reducing my allowance,
and sending me only sufficient for my board and lodging, instead of the sum I required to
continue my operations in alchymy.
"To meet this difficulty and get out of leading-strings, I returned home at the age of
twenty-five, and mortgaged part of my property for four hundred crowns. This sum was
necessary to perform an operation of the science, which had been communicated to me
by an Italian at Toulouse, and who, as he said, had proved its efficacy. I retained this man
in my service, that we might see the end of the experiment. I then, by means of strong
distillations, tried to calcinate gold and silver; but all my labour was in vain. The weight
of the gold I drew out of my furnace was diminished by one-half since I put it in, and my
four hundred crowns were very soon reduced to two hundred and thirty. I gave twenty of
these to my Italian, in order that he might travel to Milan, where the author of the receipt
resided, and ask him the explanation of some passages which we thought obscure. I
remained at Toulouse all the winter, in the hope of his return; but I might have remained
there till this day if I had waited for him, for I never saw his face again.
"In the succeeding summer there was a great plague, which forced me to quit the town. I
did not, however, lose sight of my work. I went to Cahors, where I remained six months,
and made the acquaintance of an old man, who was commonly known to the people as
'the Philosopher;' a name which, in country places, is often bestowed upon people whose
only merit is, that they are less ignorant than their neighbours. I showed him my
collection of alchymical receipts, and asked his opinion upon them. He picked out ten or
twelve of them, merely saying that they were better than the others. When the plague
ceased, I returned to Toulouse, and recommenced my experiments in search of the stone.
I worked to such effect that my four hundred crowns were reduced to one hundred and
seventy.
"That I might continue my work on a safer method, I made acquaintance, in 1537, with a
certain Abbe, who resided in the neighbourhood. He was smitten with the same mania as
myself, and told me that one of his friends, who had followed to Rome in the retinue of
the Cardinal d'Armagnac, had sent him from that city a new receipt, which could not fail

to transmute iron and copper, but which would cost two hundred crowns. I provided half
this money, and the Abbe the rest; and we began to operate at our joint expense. As we
required spirits of wine for our experiment, I bought a tun of excellent vin de Gaillac. I
extracted the spirit, and rectified it several times. We took a quantity of this, into which
we put four marks of silver, and one of gold, that had been undergoing the process of
calcination for a month. We put this mixture cleverly into a sort of horn-shaped vessel,
with another to serve as a retort; and placed the whole apparatus upon our furnace, to
produce congelation. This experiment lasted a year; but, not to remain idle, we amused
ourselves with many other less important operations. We drew quite as much profit from
these as from our great work.
The whole of the year 1537 passed over without producing any change whatever: in fact,
we might have waited till doomsday for the congelation of our spirits of wine. However,
we made a projection with it upon some heated quicksilver; but all was in vain. Judge of
our chagrin, especially of that of the Abbe, who had already boasted to all the monks of
his monastery, that they had only to bring the large pump which stood in a corner of the
cloister, and he would convert it into gold; but this ill luck did not prevent us from
persevering. I once more mortgaged my paternal lands for four hundred crowns, the
whole of which I determined to devote to a renewal of my search for the great secret. The
Abbe contributed the same sum; and, with these eight hundred crowns, I proceeded to
Paris, a city more abounding with alchymists than any other in the world, resolved never
to leave it until I had either found the philosopher's stone, or spent all my money. This
journey gave the greatest offence to all my relations and friends, who, imagining that I
was fitted to be a great lawyer, were anxious that I should establish myself in that
profession. For the sake of quietness, I pretended, at last, that such was my object.
"After travelling for fifteen days, I arrived in Paris, on the 9th of January 1539. I
remained for a month, almost unknown; but I had no sooner begun to frequent the
amateurs of the science, and visited the shops of the furnace-makers, than I had the
acquaintance of more than a hundred operative alchymists, each of whom had a different
theory and a different mode of working. Some of them preferred cementation; others
sought the universal alkahest, or dissolvent; and some of them boasted the great efficacy
of the essence of emery. Some of them endeavoured to extract mercury from other metals
to fix it afterwards; and, in order that each of us should be thoroughly acquainted with the
proceedings of the others, we agreed to meet somewhere every night, and report progress.
We met sometimes at the house of one, and sometimes in the garret of another; not only
on week days, but on Sundays, and the great festivals of the Church. 'Ah!' one used to
say, 'if I had the means of recommencing this experiment, I should do something.' ' Yes,'
said another, 'if my crucible had not cracked, I should have succeeded before now :' while
a third exclaimed, with a sigh, 'If I had but had a round copper vessel of sufficient
strength, I would have fixed mercury with silver.' There was not one among them who
had not some excuse for his failure; but I was deaf to all their speeches. I did not want to
part with my money to any of them, remembering how often I had been the dupe of such
promises.

"A Greek at last presented himself; and with him I worked a long time uselessly upon
nails, made of cinabar, or vermilion. I was also acquainted with a foreign gentleman
newly arrived in Paris, and often accompanied him to the shops of the goldsmiths, to sell
pieces of gold and silver, the produce, as he said, of his experiments. I stuck closely to
him for a long time, in the hope that he would impart his secret. He refused for a long
time, but acceded, at last, on my earnest entreaty, and I found that it was nothing more
than an ingenious trick. I did not fail to inform my friend, the Abbe, whom I had left at
Toulouse, of all my adventures; and sent him, among other matters, a relation of the trick
by which this gentleman pretended to turn lead into gold. The Abbe still imagined that I
should succeed at last, and advised me to remain another year in Paris, where I had made
so good a beginning. I remained there three years; but, notwithstanding all my efforts, I
had no more success than I had had elsewhere.
"I had just got to the end of my money, when I received a letter from the Abbe, telling me
to leave everything, and join him immediately at Toulouse. I went accordingly, and found
that he had received letters from the King of Navarre (grandfather of Henry IV). This
Prince was a great lover of philosophy, full of curiosity, and had written to the Abbe, that
I should visit him at Pau; and that he would give me three or four thousand crowns, if I
would communicate the secret I had learned from the foreign gentleman. The Abbe's ears
were so tickled with the four thousand crowns, that he let me have no peace, night or day,
until he had fairly seen me on the road to Pau. I arrived at that place in the month of May
1542. I worked away, and succeeded, according to the receipt I had obtained. When I had
finished, to the satisfaction of the King, he gave me the reward that I expected. Although
he was willing enough to do me further service, he was dissuaded from it by the lords of
his court; even by many of those who had been most anxious that I should come. He sent
me then about my business, with many thanks; saying, that if there was anything in his
kingdom which he could give me -- such as the produce of confiscations, or the like -- he
should be most happy. I thought I might stay long enough for these prospective
confiscations, and never get them at last; and I therefore determined to go back to my
friend, the Abbe.
"I learned, that on the road between Pau and Toulouse, there resided a monk, who was
very skilful in all matters of natural philosophy. On my return, I paid him a visit. He
pitied me very much, and advised me, with much warmth and kindness of expression, not
to amuse myself any longer with such experiments as these, which were all false and
sophistical; but that I should read the good books of the old philosophers, where I might
not only find the true matter of the science of alchymy, but learn also the exact order of
operations which ought to be followed. I very much approved of this wise advice; but,
before I acted upon it, I went back to my Abbe, of Toulouse, to give him an account of
the eight hundred crowns, which we had had in common; and, at the same time, share
with him such reward as I had received from the King of Navarre. If he was little satisfied
with the relation of my adventures since our first separation, he appeared still less
satisfied when I told him I had formed a resolution to renounce the search for the
philosopher's stone. The reason was, that he thought me a good artist. Of our eight
hundred crowns, there remained but one hundred and seventy-six. When I quitted the

Abbe, I went to my own house, with the intention of remaining there, till I had read all
the old philosophers, and of then proceeding to Paris.
"I arrived in Paris on the day after All Saints, of the year 1546, and devoted another year
to the assiduous study of great authors. Among others, the 'Turba Philosophorum' of the
'Good Trevisan,' ' The Remonstance of Nature to the wandering Alchymist,' by Jean de
Meung; and several others of the best books: but, as I had no right' principles, I did not
well know what course to follow.
"At last I left my solitude; not to see my former acquaintances, the adepts and operators,
but to frequent the society of true philosophers. Among them I fell into still greater
uncertainties; being, in fact, completely bewildered by the variety of operations which
they showed me. Spurred on, nevertheless, by a sort of frenzy or inspiration, I threw
myself into the works of Raymond Lulli and of Arnold de Villeneuve. The reading of
these, and the reflections I made upon them, occupied me for another year, when I finally
determined on the course I should adopt. I was obliged to wait, however, until I had
mortgaged another very considerable portion of my patrimony. This business was not
settled until the beginning of Lent, 1549, when I commenced my operations. I laid in a
stock of all that was necessary, and began to work the day after Easter. It was not,
however, without some disquietude and opposition from my friends who came about me;
one asking me what I was going to do, and whether I had not already spent money
enough upon such follies. Another assured me that, if I bought so much charcoal, I should
strengthen the suspicion already existing, that I was a coiner of base money. Another
advised me to purchase some place in the magistracy, as I was already a Doctor of Laws.
My relations spoke in terms still more annoying to me, and even threatened that, if I
continued to make such a fool of myself, they would send a posse of police-officers into
my house, and break all my furnaces and crucibles into atoms. I was wearied almost to
death by this continued persecution; but I found comfort in my work and in the progress
of my experiment, to which I was very attentive, and which went on bravely from day to
day. About this time, there was a dreadful plague in Paris, which interrupted all
intercourse between man and man, and left me as much to myself as I could desire. I soon
had the satisfaction to remark the progress and succession of the three colours which,
according to the philosophers, always prognosticate the approaching perfection of the
work. I observed them distinctly, one after the other; and next year, being Easter Sunday,
1550, I made the great trial. Some common quicksilver, which I put into a small crucible
on the fire, was, in less than an hour, converted into very good gold. You may judge how
great was my joy, but I took care not to boast of it. I returned thanks to God for the favour
he had shown me, and prayed that I might only be permitted to make such use of it as
would redound to his glory.
"On the following day, I went towards Toulouse to find the Abbe, in accordance with a
mutual promise that we should communicate our discoveries to each other. On my way, I
called in to see the sage monk who had assisted me with his counsels; but I had the
sorrow to learn that they were both dead. After this, I would not return to my own home,
but retired to another place, to await one of my relations whom I had left in charge of my
estate. I gave him orders to sell all that belonged to me, as well movable as immovable --

to pay my debts with the proceeds, and divide all the rest among those in any way related
to me who might stand in need of it, in order that they might enjoy some share of the
good fortune which had befallen me. There was a great deal of talk in the neighbourhood
about my precipitate retreat; the wisest of my acquaintance imagining that, broken down
and ruined by my mad expenses, I sold my little remaining property that I might go and
hide my shame in distant countries.
"My relative already spoken of rejoined me on the 1st of July, after having performed all
the business I had intrusted him with. We took our departure together, to seek a land of
liberty. We first retired to Lausanne, in Switzerland, when, after remaining there for some
time, we resolved to pass the remainder of our days in some of the most celebrated cities
of Germany, living quietly and without splendour."
Thus ends the story of Denis Zachaire, as written by himself. He has not been so candid
at its conclusion as at its commencement, and has left the world in doubt as to his real
motives for pretending that he had discovered the philosopher's stone. It seems probable
that the sentence he puts into the months of his wisest acquaintances was the true reason
of his retreat; that he was, in fact, reduced to poverty, and hid his shame in foreign
countries. Nothing further is known of his life, and his real name has never yet been
discovered. He wrote a work on alchymy, entitled "The true Natural Philosophy of
Metals."
DR. DEE and EDWARD KELLY.
John Dee and Edward Kelly claim to be mentioned together, having been so long
associated in the same pursuits, and undergone so many strange vicissitudes in each
other's society. Dee was altogether a wonderful man, and had he lived in an age when
folly and superstition were less rife, he would, with the same powers which he enjoyed,
have left behind him a bright and enduring reputation. He was born in London, in the
year 1527, and very early manifested a love for study. At the age of fifteen he was sent to
Cambridge, and delighted so much in his books, that he passed regularly eighteen hours
every day among them. Of the other six, he devoted four to sleep and two for
refreshment. Such intense application did not injure his health, and could not fail to make
him one of the first scholars of his time. Unfortunately, however, he quitted the
mathematics and the pursuits of true philosophy to indulge in the unprofitable reveries of
the occult sciences. He studied alchymy, astrology, and magic, and thereby rendered
himself obnoxious to the authorities at Cambridge. To avoid persecution, he was at last
obliged to retire to the university of Louvain; the rumours of sorcery that were current
respecting him rendering his longer stay in England not altogether without danger. He
found at Louvain many kindred spirits who had known Cornelius Agrippa while he
resided among them, and by whom he was constantly entertained with the wondrous
deeds of that great master of the hermetic mysteries. From their conversation he received
much encouragement to continue the search for the philosopher's stone, which soon
began to occupy nearly all his thoughts.
He did not long remain on the Continent, but returned to England in 1551, being at that
time in the twenty-fourth year of his age. By the influence of his friend, Sir John Cheek,
