
Reflexivity in the Stock Market

67

The new issue boom culminated in the second quarter of 1983.
When prices started to decline, fewer issues could be sold and
eventually venture capitalists became less venturesome. As fewer
companies were formed and the existing ones depleted their cash,
the market for technqlogy products softened. Competition intensified and profit margins deteriorated. The process started to feed
on itself and the low point has probably still not been reached.*
The venture capital boom was not the only cause of the subsequent shakeout-the strong dollar and the rise of Japanese competition were at least as important-but it is clear that stock
prices had an impact bn the "fundamentals" in both directions.
What distinguishes'the conglomeldie and mXT sequznces from
the venture capital boom is that in the first two cases the underlying trend itself was based on the exploitation of the investors'
bias while in the third it was not. In the case of conglomerates the
idea was to acquire other companies with inflated paper; in the
case of REITs the idea was equity leveraging. The idea behind the
latest generation of technology products had nothing to do with
the stock market.
To understand the ups and downs of technology stocks we
must know something about the underlying trends in technology;
in the case of conglomerates and mITs we need to know little
else than the theory of reflexivity.
It is important to realize, however, that knowing everything
about underlying trends in technology is not sufikient to explain
the ups and downs of technology stocks: the reflexive interaction
between underlying trends, prevailing biases, and stock prices
also needs to be understood. Combining the two kinds of understandifig is extremely difficult. Those who want to be familis
with technology must follow the industry closely and continuously; those who want to exploit the divergence between perception and reality must move from group to group. Most technology
experts are ignorant of reflexivity and tend to remain fully invested at all times. Their popularity and influence wax and wane
in a reflexive fashion. After the recent decline in technology
stocks, a new breed of analysts seems to be emerging who are
overly sensitive to the importance of investors' perceptions. After
a decent interval it may be once again profitable to go against the
prevailing bias and invest in technology stocks on the basis of
fundamental trends.
* P.S., February 1987: No longer true after the current explosive rally.

68
4

t

Theory

I have always had a lot of difficulty investing in technology
stocks because of the specialized knowledge required. Finally, I
managed to gain a good insight into the computer industry during
the 1975-1976 period and profited from the prevailing negative
bias. I held on to my positions for a few years but then I sold them
and lost my grip on the industry. In 1981 I made the mistake of
not participating in a venture capital fund operated by one of the
most successful venture capitalists of the period in the belief that
the boom could not last long enough to allow investors to exit in
time. In this, I was undoubtedly influenced by misgivings about
the larger picture. In any event, his investors realized a good profit
in 1963. By that time I was totally out of touch with technology
stocks and the boom passed me by.
Even the conglomerate and REIT sequences were not totally
self-contained. Extraneous developments, such as the level of
economic activity, regulation, or sGcific events (e.g., the attempted takeover of Chemical Bank), played a crucial role in the
conglomerate boom. In less "pure" sequences the importance of
outside influences is even peafer.
We are currently in the midst of another self-reinforcinglselfdefeating cycle that will go down in history as the mergermania
of the 1980s. Instead of inflated paper, it is cash that serves as the
currency. The scale of transactions already dwarfs the conglomerate boom. Mergermania is but an element in a much larger ongoing historical drama whose ramifications reach far beyond the
stock market and involve politics, exchange rates, monetary and
fiscal policies, quirks of taxation, international capital movements, and many other developments.
I shali m ~ k ean attempt at unraveling the ongoing historical
drama, but that is not as simple as analyzing a more or less selfcontained boombust sequence. The larger picture is full of reflexive interactions as well as nonreflexive fundamental trends. We
need a more complex model that allows for the transition from
one boombust sequence to another and for the coexistence of
several reflexive processes at the same time.
Before I embark on such an ambitious project, I want to examine another market that is characterized by vicious and benign
circles: the currency market.

REFLEXNITY IN THE CURRENCY
MARKET*
I

While reflexive interactions are intermittent in the stock market,
they are continuous in the market for currencies. I shall try to
show that freely floating exchange rates are inherently unstable;
moreover, the instability is cumulative so that the eventual breakdown of a freely floqting exchange rate system is virtually assured.
The traditional view of the currency market is that it tends
toward equilibrium. An overvalued exchange rat&courages imports and discourages exports until equilibrium is reestablished.
Similarly, an improvement in competitive position is reflected in
an appreciating exchange rate that reduces the trade surplus so
that equilibrium is again reestablished. Speculation cannot disrupt the trend toward equilibrium-if speculators anticipate the
future correctly, they accelerate the trend; if they misjudge it, they
will be penalized by the underlying trend that may be delayed
but will inexorably assert itself.
Experience since floating exchange rates were introduced in
1973 has disproved this view. Instead of fundamentals determining exchange rates, exchange rates have found a way of influencing the fundamentals. For instance, a strong exchange rate
discourages inflation: wages remain stable and the price of imports falls. When exports have a large import component, a country can remain competitive almost indefinitely in spite of a steady
* This chapter was written in AprillMay 1985 and revised in December 1986.

70
I

t

Theory

appreciation of its currency, as Germany demonstrated in the
1970s.
The fact is that the relationship between the domestic inflation
rate and the international exchange rate is not unidirectional but
circular. Changes in one may precede changes in the other, but it
does not make sense to describe one as the cause and the other as
the effect because they mutually reinforce each other. It is more
appropriate to speak of a vicious circle in which the currency
depreciates and inflation accelerates or of a benign circle where
the opposite happens.
Vicious and benign circles are a far cry from equilibrium.
NeverthePsss, they could produce a state of affairs akin to equilibrium if the reflexive, mutually self-reinforcing relationship
could be sustained indefinitely. But that is not the case. The
self-reinforcing process tends to become more vulnerable the
longer it lasts and eventually it is bound to reverse itself, setting
in motion a self-reinforcing process in the opposite direction.
A complete cycle is characterized by wide fluctuations not
only in the exchange rate but also in interest rates, inflation,
andlor the level of economic activity.
The participants' bias introduces an element of instability into
the system. If the system had an innate tendency toward equilibrium the participants' bias could not disrupt it; at worst, it could
introduce some random, short-term fluctuations. But when the
causal connections are reflexive, the participants' bias may engender, sustain, or destroy a vicious or benign circle. Moreover, the
prevailing bias takes on a life of its own as one of the constituent
parts in a circular relationship. It finds expression in spec~lative
capital movements that may serve as a counterweight to an imbalance in trade, allowing a trade surplus or deficit to exceed, both
in size and in duration, the level that could have been sustained
in its absence. When that happens speculation becomes a destabilizing influence.
International capital movements tend to follow a self-reinforcinglself-defeating pattern similar to the one we identified in the
stock market. But the model we used for stock price movements
cannot be applied to currency markets without substantial modifications. In the stock market we focused on the reflexive relationship between two variables: stock prices and a single underlying
trend. We were trying to build the simplest possible model and
we were willing to simplify a much more complex reality to serve

Reflexivity in the Currency Market

71

our purpose. In the currency market we cannot get by with two
variables; even the simplest model will need seven or eight. We
have selected four rates and four quantities, namely:
4

nominal exchange iate (number of foreign currency units for one
domestic currency unit; t e = strengthening)
nominal interest rake
domestic versus foreign price level ( p = increase in domestic
prices faster than in foreign prices and vice versa)
level of economic activity
nonspeculative capital. f l ~ w
= increased inflow
speculative capital flow
t = surplus
trade balance
5. = deficit
government budget

Our task is to establtsh how these variables relate to each other.
We shall not attempt to explore all the relationships but only
those that are necessary to build simple models. In other words,
we are not aiming at a general theory, only at a partial explanation
of currency movements. Our focus is the exchange rate and we
bring in the other variables only when we need them. We shall
not quantify any of the variables but only indicate direction
A
( , 5. ) or order of magnitude (>, <).
Before we start, two general observations can be made. One is
that relationships tend to be circular; that is, variables can serve
as both cause and effect in relation to other variables. We shall
denote the causal connection by 2 horizcntal =ow (+j. The other
point is that the relationship of .the variables need not be internally conastent; it is the inconsistencies that make that entire
situation move in a certain direction, creating vicious or benign
circles. Equilibrium would require internal consistency; historical change does not. Describing historical change in terms of vicious and benign circles is, of course, merely a figure of speech.
A circular movement between component parts when the entire
system is in motion could also be described as a spiral. Moreover,
what is benign and what is vicious are in the eye of the beholder.
Exchange rates are determined by the demand and supply of
currencies. For present purposes, we can group the various factors
that constitute demand and supply under three headings: trade,
nonspeculative capital transactions, and speculative capital

72
4

4

Theory

transactions. This gives us the simplest model of a freely floating
exchange rate system:

In other words, the sum of the currency transactions under the
three headings determines the direction of the exchange rate.
Our primary interest is in investigating the role that the participants' bias plays in exchange rate movements. To facilitate the
investigation, we shall assume that the bias finds expression only
in speculative capital transactions ( S ] , while LiSe (?f and nonspeculative capital flows (N) are independent of expectations:
they constitute the "fundamentals." In reality, the "fundamentals" are also influenced by the participants' expectations about
the future course of 'exchange rates. Trade figures are notoriously
distorted by leads and lags in payment, not to mention the effect
of expectations on the inventory policy of exporters and importers. As far as capital movements are concerned, perhaps the only
transaction that is totally independent of expectations is the payment of interest on accumulated debt; the reinvestment of interest
receipts already qualifies as a speculative transaction. The repatriation of bank debt from less developed countries is probably
best described as nonspeculative, although speculative considerations come into play if and when the assets are redeployed. What
about direct investment? If managements were interested only in
the total rate of return, it ought to be classified as speculative, but
often there are overriding industrial considerations. It can be seen
that there are many gradations betwee3 speculative and nonspeculative transactions; but we do not do any great violence to reality by putting them into these two broad categories.
We shall focus on speculative capital transactions because that
is where the participants' bias finds expression. Speculative capital moves in search of the highest total return. Total return has
three elements: the interest rate differential, the exchange rate
differential, and the capital appreciation in local currency. Since
the third element varies from case to case we can propose the
following general rule: speculative capital is attracted by rising
exchange rates and rising interest rates.

Reflexivity in the Currency Market

73

Of the two, exchange rates are by far the more important. It does
not take much of a decline in the currency to render the total
return negative. By the same.token, when an appreciating currency also offers an interest rate advantage, the total return exceeds anything that alholder of financial assets could expect in
the normal course of events.
That is not to say tbat interest rate differentials are unimportant; but much of their importance lies in their effect on exchange
rates and that depends on the participants' perceptions. There are
times when relative interest rates seem to be a major influence; at
other times they are totally disregarded. For instance, from 1982
to 1986 capital was artacted to the currency with the 2.-,i&est
interest rate, namely, the dollar, but in the late 1970s Switzerland
could not arrest the influx of capital even by imposing negative
interest rates. Moreover, perceptions about the importance of interest rates are often b o n g . For instance, until November 1984
the strength of the dollar was widely attributed to high interest
rates in the United States. When interest rates declined without
the dollar weakening this view was discredited and the dollar
went through the roof.
Expectations about' exchange rates play the same role in currency markets as expectations about stock prices do in the stock
market: they constitute the paramount consideration for those
who are motivated by the total rate of return. In the stock market
that covers practically all investors, in currency markets all speculative transactions.
In the stock market we used a model that focused on stock
prices and disregarded dividend income. No great distortion was
involved because in the kind of boom/"busf sequences we were
considering stock price movements far outweigh dividend income. Similar conditions prevail in currency markets: expectations about future exchange rates constitute the main motivation
in speculative capital transactions. .
The major difference between the stock market and the currency market seems to be the role played by the fundamentals.
We have seen that the "fundamentals" were rather nebulous even
in the case of stocks but at least we had no reason to doubt that
stock prices were somehow connected to the fundamentals. In the
case of currencies the trade balance is clearly the most important
fundamental factor, yet the dollar strengthened between 1982 and
1985 while the trade balance of the United States was deteriorat-

,

74
4

t

Theory

ing. It would seem that the fundamentals are even less relevant in
determining price trends than in the stock market. We do not
need to look far afield for an explanation: it is to be found in the
relative importance of speculative capital movements.
As we have seen, speculative capital is motivated primarily by
expectations about future exchange rates. To the extent that exchange rates are dominated by speculative capital transfers, they
are purely reflexive: expectations relate to expectations and the
prevailing bias can validate itself almost indefinitely. The situation is highly unstable: if the opposite bias prevailed, it could also
validate itself. The greater the relative importance of speculation,
+$hemore unstable the system becomes: the total rate of return can
flip-flop with every change in the prevailing bias.
In our discussion of the stock market we identified certain sequences such as the conglomerate boom where the prevailing bias
formed an important part of the underlying trend, but we concluded that such pure m p l e s of reflexivity are exceptional. By
contrast, in a system of freely fluctuating exchange rates reflexivity constitutes the rule. Of course, there is no such thing as a
purely reflexive situation. Speculation is only one of the factors
that determine exchange rates and the other factors must also be
taken into account in formulating one's expectations. Thus, expectations cannot be totally capricious: they must be rooted in
something other than themselves. How a prevailing bias becomes
established and, even more important, how it is reversed are the
most important questions confronting us.
There are no universally valid answers. Reflexive processes
tend to follow a certain pattern. In the early stages, the trend has
.to be self-reinforcing, otherwise the process aborts. As the trend
extends, it becomes increasingly vulnerable because the fundamentals such as trade and interest payments move against the
trend, in accordance with the precepts of classical analysis, and
the trend becomes increasingly dependent on the prevailing bias.
Eventually a turning point is reached and, in a full-fledged sequence, a self-reinforcingprocess starts operating in the opposite
direction.
Within this general pattern each sequence is unique. It is the
characteristic feature of a reflexive process that neither the participants' perceptions nor the situation to which they relate remain
unaffected by it. It follows that no sequence can repeat itself. Not
even the variables that interact in a circular fashion need be the

Reflexivity in the Currency Market

75

same; certainly they will not carry the same weight on different
occasions.
We have had two major reflexive moves in the dollar since the
breakdown of the Bretton Woods system and at least that many in
sterling. It it instructive to compare the two big moves in the
dollar because the interaction between the trade balance and capital movements was rqically different in the two instances.
In the late 1970s the dollar got progressively weaker, especially
against the continental currencies, while in the 1980s it got progressively stronger. We shall call the first move Carter's vicious
circle and the second Reagan's benign circle. We can build simple
models to show how differenithe two trends were.
In the case of Germany in the late 1970s, the German mark was
strong ( f e). Speculative purchases played a major role in making
it stronger ( J. S) and sustaining the benign circle. Germany started
with a trade surplus and the strength of the currency helped to
keep the price level down. Since exports had a large import content the real exchangq rate, as opposed to the nominal, remained
more or less stable (fep) and the effect on the trade balance was
negligible (IT). With +e speculative inflow predominating ( J. S >
fT), the benign circle was self-reinforcing:

The fact that the rate of currency appreciation exmded the interest rate differential made it very profitable to hold German marks,
so that the speculative inflow was both self-reinforcing and selfvalidating.
'What was a benign circle for Germany was a vicious circie for
the United States. As the exchange rate depreciated, inflation accelerated. Despite rising nominal interest rates, real rates remained very low, if not negative. Various measures were tried to
compensate for the outflow of capital, of which the issue of socalled Carter bonds denominated in German marks and Swiss
francs was the most dramatic, but nothing seemed to work until
the Federal Reserve embraced a strict monetarist policy. Then
came the election of Ronald Reagan to the presidency and the
dollar embarked on a sustained rise.
During Reagan's benign circle the strong dollar caused a sharp
deterioration in the trade balance of the United States. In contrast
to Germany in the late 1970s, the United States did not have a

I

trade surplus to start with. Moreover, the appreciation in the currency was not matched by inflation rate differentials. The inflation rate declined in the United States but it remained low in
other countries as well. As a consequence, the United States developed an unprecedented trade deficit as well as an unprecedented interest rate differential in favor of the dollar. It was
extremely attractive to hold dollars as long as the dollar remained
firm, and the dollar remained firm as long as the deficit on current
account was fully matched by a surplus on capital account. In our
notation:

The models are obviously oversimplified. We shall explore Reagan's benign circle in greater depth later. The point we are trying
to make here is that different sequences have totally different
structures. In the case of Germany in the late 1970s the appreciation of the currency was sustained by the inflation rate differential
and the balance of trade was largely unaffected. Reagan's benign
circle was sustained by a differential in interest rates rather than
inflation rates and there was an ever-growing trade deficit which
was matched by an ever-growing inflow of capital. While in the
first case it was possible to claim some kind of equilibrium, in the
second case the disequilibrium was palpable. The inflow of capital depended on a strong dollar and a strong dollar depended on
an ever-rising inflow of capital which carried with it ever-rising
interest and repayment obligations ( T N). It was obvious that the
benign circle could not be sustained indefinitely. Yet, while it
iasted, any cummcy speculator who dared to fight the trend had
to pay dearly for it. Speculation did not serve to reestablish equilibrium. On the contrary, it reinforced the trend and thereby increased the disequilibrium,
which would eventually have to be
.
corrected.
.
Although each self-reinforcing circle is unique, we can make
some universally valid generalizations about freely fluctuating
exchange rates. First, the relative importance of speculative transactions tends to increase during the lifetime of a self-reinforcing
trend. Second, the prevailing bias is a trend-following one and
the longer the trend persists, the stronger the bias becomes. The
third is simply that once a trend is established it tends to persist
and to run its full course; when the turn finally comes, it tends to
