BEYOND CANDLESTICKS

+Ef,Ei[EAL,
"Itarning is

a a a a a

Like Rowing Upstream;Not to Adaanceis to Fall Back"

a a o o a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a

a a a a a

BEYOND
CANDLESTICKS
New |apaneseCharting Techniques
Revealed

STEVENISON

IOHN WILEY & SONS, INC.
New York o Toronto

o Chichester o Brisbane . Singapore

WILEY FINANCE EDITIONS
The New Technical Trader / Chande and Kroll
Trading on the Edge / Deboeck
ForecastingFinancial and Economic Cycles / Niemira and Klein
Trader Vic II / Sperandeo
Genetic Algorithms and Investment Strategies / Bauer
Understanding Swaps / Marshall
Fractal Market Analysis / Peters
Trading Applications of ]apaneseCandlestick Charting / Wagner and
Matheny
Fixed-Income Arbitrage / Wong
Trading for a Living / Elder
The Day Trader's Manual / Eng
The Mathematics of Money Management / Vince
Intermarket Technical Analysis / Murphy
The Foreign Exchange and Money Markets Guide / Walmsley
Chaos and Order in the Financial Markets / Peters
Portfolio Management Formulas / Vince
Financial Statement Analysis / Fridson
Money Management Strategies for Futures Traders / Balsara
Dynamic Asset Allocation / Hammer
Relative Dividend Yield / Spare
Inside the Financial Futures Markets, 3rd Edition / Powers and
Castelino
Option Market Making / Baird
Fixed-Income Synthetic Assets / Beaumont
Selling Short / Walker
The New Technology of Financial Management / Chorafas
Managed Futures in the Institutional Portfolio / Epstein
Analyzing and Forecasting Futures Prices / Herbst
ForecastingFinancial Markets / Plummer
A Complete Guide to Convertible Securities Worldwide I ZubLake
Corporate Financial Risk Management / Wunnicke and Wilson
Investing in Intangible Assets / Parr
Treasury Operations and the Foreign Exchange Challenge / Chorafas
Trading and Investing in Bond Options / Wong

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
a a a o a a a a a a a a

=

a o r

a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a

a a a a a

a a o a a a a a a a

6NHTff.A MH

"You CnnnotClap With One Hand"

A J"p"r,"se book that I had translated said that: "|apanese charts are
frequently considered secretive. The number of people who know the
essentialsof these charts are few and reference material is scarce."l This
paucity of material was particularly true with some of the new techniques
revealed in the second part of this book. However, thanks to the help of
some important individuals, I was able to uncover many previously hidden aspectsof fapanese technical analysis.
Without the assistanceof the translating done by Richard Solberg, it
would have been almost impossible to write this book-or my first one!
Not only did Richard ably do the translating, but equally important was
his tenacity in finding and obtaining the japanese books I needed for my
basic research. Richard has been one of my most vital resources.
As with my first book, I had the help of knowledgeable fapanese
traders who helped refine my knowledge by sharing valuable insights
obtained from their years of experience.
Mr. Hiroshi Okamoto, Director at Nomura Investment Trust, Mr. Yasuhi Hayashi, Senior Trader at Sumitomo Life Insurance, Mr. Nori Hayashi, Investment Manager at Barclays Trust, and other members from
the Nippon Technical Analysts Association (NTAA) in |apan were all very
gracious. I am sure many of my questions may have seemed very rudimentary to them, but they were patient and open about sharing their
knowledge. Without their insights, this book would be much less detailed.
Mr. Kiyohiko Yoshizawa, vice president at Paine Webber, provided

vu

vlll

Acknniedgments

valuable new facts and insights about the candles during our numerous
meetings.
One of my most important contactswas Mr. Yoji Inata, a correspondent for Reuters. Mr. Inata's assistancewas critical f<lr the new tools
addressedin this book; we spent many hours together. Not only did he
take his valuable time to review some of the new techniques to make
sure I correctly understood the ideas, but he also took the extra step of
conferring with his ]apanesecolleagueson points about which he was
not 100o/o
sure. Mr. Inata said that he enjoyed our studying together. I
think he was being polite. Although I may have contributed to his knowledgein somerespects,for the most part I was the student. I was fortunate
to have had a gracious, knowledgeable, and friendly teacher.
Thanks again goes to my friend, Bruce Kamich. A true professional,
he continues to provide me with a stream of insightful and helpful ideas.
The editor of this book, Susan Barry, was also the editor of my first
book. Susan had the foresight to see how brightly the interest in the
candleswould burn. She was a major factor in my choice of ]ohn Wiley
& Sons to publish this book. I hope Susan does not decide to move to a
publishing firm in the Antarctic. If I ever do a third book, I would have
to follow her.
As an English poet said: "Where ignoranceis bliss, wisdom is folly."
Before writing my first book, I was blissfully ignorant of all the time and
effort that goes into such a project. That book, made me aware of how
difficult the processis. Becauseof this, I had no desire to go through it
all again. However, Dodge Dorland, Chief Investment Officer of Landor
Investment Management (New York, NY), gave me the push to do this
second book. Dodge uses candles to trade stocks on an intra-day basis
and has been one of the earliestproponents of candles.Anyone who has
dealt with Dodge can vouch for his amiability and for his knowledge.
Many of the charts in this book are from the MetaStock software by
EQUIS International (Salt Lake City, UT). Without their assistancein
providing me with the new software to draw the kagi, three-line break,
and renko charts, this book would be much less detailed. Their excellent
software, and helpful and knowledgeable staff makes MetaStock a pleasure to use. For those interested in finding out more about the MetaStock
software, there is a coupon included at the back of this book. The data
used for the Metastockcharts was from Dial-Data (Brooklyn, NY). I found
their data accurateand easily accessible.
I would like to thank Shahrokh Nikkhah whose early appreciation of
my work and desire to make available the many advantagesof candlestick
analysis to his clients brought about my joining his team where we offer
advisory and brokerage servicesat Daiwa Securities America. I would
also thank my colleague, Mark Tunkel for taking the time to help proof-

Acknowledgments

read this book.
In this, as in my first book, you will seemany CQG charts (Glenwood
Springs, CO). They are a real-time graphics charting service. CQG was
among the first servicesin the West to offer candle charts to their clients.
I have used their servicefor many years. The accuracyof their data and
their support personnel, such as Steve Onstad in New York, make this
a premier real-time charting service. Their excellent worldwide reputation
is well justified.
Reuters Ltd. (New York, London, and Tokyo) have also provided
charts for this project. Their RTA technical analysis real-time charting
product offers some unique capabilities. I have had the pleasure of giving
a seriesof seminars for them throughout Europe. The fact that Reuters
has gone through the time, effort, and expenseto send me to Europe for
these seminars shows how committed they are in meeting the educational
needs of their clients.
My first book, lapaneseCandlestickCharting Techniques,was written
around the sametime as the birth of my son, Evan. (At the time of Evan's
bkth, I frightened my wife, Bonnie, when I said I was going to name
him "Candlesticks Nison.") Evan is now four, and he enjoys "typing"
on my keyboard. I tell you this so that if there are typos, I now have an
excuse.My daughter, Rebecca,is eight and very bright. I have jokingly
said that I wanted this book easy enough for a child to understand, so I
think I'll ask her to proofread these pages (yet another excuseif you find
any mistakes!).Finally, there is my loving and patient wife, Bonnie, who
understands that it is great to have written, but most difficult to write.
Final thanks go to those who provided another incentive for writing
this book-the credit card companiesand the bank that has my mortgage.

Note
loyama, Kenji, p.51.

ix

CONTENTS
PART ONE: CANDLES
INTRODUCTION

Chapter 1

ovERvIEw

Chapter 2

rHE BAsrcs

13

History of the candle charts, L3
Evolution of the candle charts, L6
Construction of the candle line, L8
Real body and shadows, 20
The real body,20
Long white real bodies, 20
Long white at a low price level, 2L
Long white candle confirms support, 2L
Long white body breaks resistance,23
Long white real bodies as suPPort, 25
Long black real body at high price area,29
Long black confirms resistance,30
Long black breaks support, 31
Long black as resistance,33
Size and frequency of real bodies, 35
Opening compared to prior real body, 38
Spinning tops, 40

xl

Contents

Accumulation and distribution, 42
D o j i ,4 5
Shadows,50
High-wave candles, 52

a

Chapter J

THE PATTERNS

55

Single candle lines, 56
The hammer, 56
The hanging man, 59
The shooting star, 64
Dual candle lines, 68
Dark cloud cover, 58
The piercing pattern, 73
The engulfing patterns, 76
Last engulfing patterns, 84
Harami, 86
The window, 93
Three windows, 102
Two black gapping candles, 105
Gapping doji, 106
Three or more candle lines, 109
The evening star, L09
The morning star, LL7
Record sessions,1,21,

A
Chapter t

CANDLES AND THE OVERALL TECHNICAL PICTURE
Stops, 130
Risk/reward, L33
Trend, L37
Becoming a market chameleon, 142
Computers and candles, L44
The importance of where a candle appears, \M
The question of determining specific criteria for the pattern,
145
Placing the trade, 147
When to offset a trade, L48

129

Contents xiii

PART 2: THE DISPARITY INDEX AND NEW
PRICE CHARTS

Chapter5

INTRODUCTION

153

HOW THE IAPANESE USE MOVING AVERAGES

157

The golden and dead cross, L57
The disparity index, 159
Trading with the disparity index, 159
The divergence index, L64

Chapter6

THREE.LINE BREAK CHARTS

167

Construction of three-line break charts, L68
Trading with three-line break charts, l'74
lAlhite and black lines as buy & sell signals, 174
Three-line break charts and candle charts, 176
Three-line break charts and trend, 178
Other break charts, 181
Extra confirmation of a trend reversal, l'82
Black shoe, white and black suits, and a neck, 184
Record sessionsand three-line break charts, L86
Western patterns and three-line break charts, L87

CI

Chapter /

PRACTICESESSIONFOR THE THREE-LINEBREAK
CHART

197

RENKO CHARTS

r97

Construction of renko charts, L99
Trading techniques with renko charts, 203
PRACTICE SESSION FOR THE RENKO CHART

207

KAGI CHARTS

2!3

ar

Chapter d

Construction of kagi charts,215
Using percentagekagi charts, 2L9

xiv

Contents

Trading techniqueswith kagi charts,220
Buy on yang, sell on yin,220
Shoulders and waists, 221
Multi-level br eaks, 224
Length of yang and yin, 224
Where corrections stop within the prior kagi line, 226
Double windows, 227
Trendlines,2Sl
Tweezers, 232
Three-Buddhaand reverse three-Buddha, 233
Record sessions,235
PR,ACTICESESSION FOR THE KAGI CHART

241

CONCLUSION

247

GLOSSARY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX

275

a o o a a a a o a a a a a o a a o a o a o o o o o a a a o o o a o a o a a a o a a a

PART

CANDLES
a a a a a a o a a a a o o o a a a a a a o a a a o a a a a a a o o a o a a a o a a a

+ +@
"Let EaeryBird Sing its Own Song"

a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a o a a a a a a o a o a a a a a a a a a a a a t

a

INTRODUCTION
A chart is like a map, the more information each one provides, the better
the chance of reaching your destination safely. Candle charts display a
more detailed and accurate map of the market than do bar charts. A
"It is not an exaggerationto
Japanesebook that I had translated stated,
say that candlesticks are the best in the world and a very exquisite creation for charts."l This is because,as detailed below, candle charts oPen
new avenues of analysis and offer many advantages over bar charts:
1 . Candle charts will pictorially display the supply-demand situation by
showing who is winning the battle between the bulls and the bears.
Bar charts do not.
2 . Like bar charts, candle charts will show the trend of the market, but
candle charts add another dimension of analysis by revealing the force
behind the move.
3 . Bar chart techniques can often take weeks to transmit a reversal signal.
However, candle charts will often send out clues of imminent reversals
in one to three sessions.The result is that candle charts often provide
the opportunity for more timely trades.
These are just some reasonswhy the flames of interest in candle charts
grow ever brighter. In just a few years, candle charts have joined bar
charts and point and figure charts as a basic charting technique.
Candle charts are drawn using the same data as bar charts (the open,
high, low, and close), so they send all the same signals that can be found
ot but charts. Yet, as just discussed,the candles offer many advantages
over bar charts, so using candle charts instead of bar charts is a win-win
situation. When you use bar charts you only get bar chart signals. But,
with candle charts you get all the bar chart signals, plus you gain the

Candles

unique and powerful insights provided by the candles. so, why use a
bar chart?
Becausethe ]apaneseare major players in most of the world's markets, there is strong interest in how the |apaneseuse their technicalsto
trade. Candles are the most popular form of technical analysisin |apan.
The importance of the candles for the |apanese trading community is
illustrated in the following quote from the European magazine,Euroweek.
This article quotes an English trader who works at a Japanesebank. He
states:"All the |apanesetradershere-and that's in the foreign exchange,
futures and equities markets-use the candles. It might be difficult to
work out the billions of dollars traded in London on interpretations of
these charts each day, but the number would be significant."2
Think about it: Although billions are traded every day based on the
candle chart signals, until recently we had no knowledge of how the
]apaneseviewed the market with their technicals.This is hard to believe.
Knowing the candles and their other technical tools discussed in this
book may help answer the question, "What are the |apanesegoing to do
next?."
Yearsago, I met with the head of technical analysisfor one of fapan's
largest life insurance companies (this fapanese trader wanted to meet
with me to learn how I used western technicalsto trade). IzVhenhe walked
into my office, he saw I had candle charts on my desk. In a surprised
voice, he asked: "You know about the candles?." I responded that I did.
I then asked if he used them. He told me that his company's top managementwould meet eachMonday to discussthe world markets.At these
meetings, he would bring his candle charts to offer his technical views.
Then he pointed to my candle charts and asked: "How many other
Americans know about this?." I said no one (this was before the publication of my first book). He looked relieved. I then continued, "But I
will soon have a book out about it." "So, many others will know about
this?," he asked in a disappointed tone. The point of the story is that
the Japanesetrader came to me to learn about how we, in the West, use
technicals.The fapanesehave learned from us and they know almost all
of our technical methods. In most of the candlestickbooks and articlesI
have had translated from Japaneseto English, there was at least some
referenceto western technicaltechniques.A quote from one of the books
I had translated stated, "To understand stocks it is not enough to know
the |apanesechart methods . . . one must absorbthe best parts of western
technicals:and on top of that using the best parts of Japanesecharts to
make for a progressive outlook which is necessaryfor stock analysis."3
We can seefrom this statementhow the fapanesehave used our methods
to enhancetheir own. one of the purposes of this book is to do the same

lntroduction

for Western traders-to show how to use the techniques implemented
by the Japaneseto enhance our market knowledge.
An article about my work appeared in the lapan Economiclournal. Tn
"lapan, which has been in the position to learn
it, the reporter states:
many things from the West in the investments area, may be in the position to teach something."4 We now have accessto a wealth of technical
information refined by generations to use; we afe learning from the Japanese.
Chapter 2 shows how to draw the basic candle line, and delves into
some history of the candle charts. Later in that chapter, I show how a
single candle line can provide important market insights. Chapter 3 discussesthe basic candle patterns. With the detailed descriptionsof these
patterns, those new to candlesand candleexperts can discover new market perspectives.The last chapter in this section, Chapter 4 focuses on
how the overall technical picture is more important than a single candle
pattern.

Notes
lHoshii, Kazutaka,p. L8.
zEuroweek,
August 30, 199'1.
3Yasui,Taichi, p. 95.
aThe
lapan EconomicJoumal, ldy 23, 7991

CHAPTER1

OVERVIEW
)

{ t J , t)E ( ffi

n d-

"The Buddhais Complete,But the EyesAre Not in Yet"
(Thelob is Nof Yet Done)

THE EXPLOSIVE INTEREST IN THE CANDLES
"A clever hawk hides its claws." For over
L here is a Japanesesaying,
a century, the claws of Japanesetechnical analysis, that is candlestick
charts, were a secrethidden from the western world.
is
For those new to the exciting field of candlestickcharts, candlestick
the term used for Japan's most popular and oldest form of technical
analysis.They are older than Western point and figure and bar charts.
Amazingly, candlestickcharting techniques,used for generationsin the
Far East, were virtually unknown to the West until I revealed them in
ChartingTechniques.
my first book, lapaneseCandlestick
I am pleased and proud that my first book has been credited with
revolutionizing technical analysis by igniting the flames of interest in the
candles. Before its publication, few people in the West had ever heard
of a candle chart. Now, candle charting techniquesare among the most
discussedform of technical analysis in the world!
Interest in candle charts has become so intense that the World Bank
in Washington, DC asked me to addressthem on the subject.The worldwide interest in these previously secret techniques are reflected in the
financial headlines below:

FF

TradingSystem"
AncientJapanese
lnaestor-"Revealed!
lnstitutional
Light Traders'Path"
WallStreetloumal-"lapan's Candlesticks
ChartingComesof Age"
Euroweek-"Candlestick

Candles

Equitylnternational-"Candlestick
Charting-A New Languagefor the west"
Reuters-"Candlesticks
Light New Pathfor WesternChartists,,
For over 70 years, the standard charting tools in the west have been
bar charts and point and figure charts. Yet, within a short time, candle
charts have now joined these as a basic charting tool. The rapidity with
which this has happened is a direct reflection of the candle's popularity
and value.
The groundswell of interest in the candlestickcharting has becomea
topic in the media. A TV show, TechTalk, on the business news cable
station CNBC is hosted by the famous technician, fohn Murphy. john
told me that a viewer once called and asked him, "What are those charts
that look like hot dogs?" What an interestingand amusingidea, I thought,
to Americanize these charts by referring to them as hot dog charts. But
I guess the term "candle chart," thankfully, is here to stay.
I have had many wonderful compliments from famous traders and
analysts.However, the most endearing compliment came from a woman
who wrote, "lf you ever have a down day, just remember there's a nice
little grandmother in Missouri who's in awe of your accomplishments."
This letter, besidesbeing so gracious, illustrates the universal appeal of
candles-from traders at the World Bank to a grandmother in Missouri.
The reason for the popularity of candlestick analysis is easy to understand. They can be melded with any other form of technicalanalysis,
they are applicable to any of the markets to which technical analysis is
applied, and they provide market insights not availableanywhere else.
Why this book? A renowned 16th-centurysamurai swordsman stated
that "learning is the gate, not the house. You first have to go through
the gate to get to the house."
My other book, lapaneseCandlestickCharting Techniques,took you
to the gate. This book takes you to the house and has many new, exciting, and effective techniques to improve your trading, investing, or
hedging.
Japanesecharting was considereda secret.However, I have managed
to pry open the "secrets of the Orient" by exchangingideas with many
Japanesetraderswho use candlesand by having many hundreds of pages
translatedfrom ]apaneseinto English. Lin Yutang, a noted Chinesephilosopher, sagely noted that one gets a different flavor from reading the
same book at different stagesin life. Therefore, he says, all great books
can be read with profit and pleasurea second time; I have found this to
be true.
In the time since the publication of my first book, I have reread my
original candlestick documents and have gleaned new insights. In addition, I have obtained and translated new ]apanesematerial, have ex-

Overuiew

panded my dialogue with more fapanesetechnicians and, of course, have
continued to learn from my use of candles. I reveal these new and valuable insights in this book.
My first book focused on the futures markets. The candles have now
become so important that their popularity has spilled over from futures
into stock, bond, and foreign exchange markets from around the world.
As a result, this book will have many more of the charts than did my
other book.
At times, a single candle line can be important. The Japanesehave a
saying, "With the fall of one leaf we know that autumn has come to the
world." In this sense,a single candle line may be the first sign of a market
turn. In this book, I will show how to use individual candle lines to obtain
clues about the market's health.
It has been very exciting to see the intense interest sparked by the
candles. However, it is often forgotten that the emergenceof a candle
pattern is but one aspectof trading. Other aspects,such as the risk and
reward ratio of a potential trade and monitoring where the candle pattern
appearsin the overall technical picture, must also be considered.This is
so important that I have devoted a chapter to these aspects.
In my continuing studies of ]apanese trading techniques, I have uncovered three charting methods that are very PoPular in ]apan, yet are
unknown to the West. These charting techniques are called three-line
break charts, kagi charts, and renko charts. They are revealed in Part 2
of this book.
In the days of fur trading in the United States, there was a comPany
called the Hudson Bay Trading Company. Th"y were known for taking
risks and for careful preparation. Trading journeys were undertaken with
much excitement, but in casethe fur traders forgot anything, they would
camp out the first night just a few miles away from the company's headquarters. In other words, careful preparation spared the travelers potential difficulties.
In Chapters 2 and 3, I too provide careful preparation by providing a
primer on basic candle theory and patterns. For those new to candle
charts, these chapters will provide the groundwork for your candle chart
analysis.
Many of you are probably already familiar with the basics of candle
charts. With this in mind, Chapters 2 and 3 will also offer a deeper
knowledge of the candles by revealing new candle theories, techniques,
and tools. As a result, even those knowledgeable about candles will gain
new insights and pelspectives into the power of the candle charts. For
example, when I describe the candle patterns in Chapter 3, I will provide
a unique visual glossary of candle patterns. This method of drawing the
patterns will provide a dimension of candle pattern analysis that was
