
I have no special talents.
I am only passionately
curious.
Albert Einstein

One of my favorite examples of statistical thinking is very
simple. It is a case study regarding the birth ratio of boys and girls.
Consider that there are two hospitals. In the first one, 120
babies are born every day; in the other, there are only 12. On
average, the ratio of boys to girls born every day in each hospital is
50/50. However, one day, in one of those hospitals twice as many
girls are born as boys. In which hospital was it more likely to
happen? The answer is obvious for a good trader, but as research
shows, not so obvious for a lay person: It is much more likely to
happen in the small hospital. The reason for this is that technically
speaking, the probability of a random deviation of a particular size
(from the population mean) decreases with the increase in the
sample size.12
What do statistics about birth and gender have to do with trend
following trading? Take two traders who, on average, win 40 percent
of the time with their winners being three times as large as their
losers. One has a history of 1,000 trades and the other has a history
of 10 trades. Who has a better chance in the next 10 trades to have
only 10 percent of their total trades be winners (instead of the
typical 40 percent)? The one with the 10-trade history has the
better chance. Why? The more trades in a history, the greater
probability of adhering to the average. The less trades in a history,
the greater probability of deviation from the average.
Consider a friend who receives a stock tip and makes some
quick money. He tells everyone about his new found trading
prowess. You are impressed and think he must really know his
trading. You would be less impressed if you were a statistical
thinker because you would realize immediately that his
“population” of tips was extremely small. He could just as easily

Standard deviation
measures the uncertainty
in a random variable (in
this case, investment
returns). It measures the
degree of variation of
returns around the mean
(average) return. The
higher the volatility of the
investment returns, the
higher the standard
deviation will be.
National Institute of Standards
and Technology13

226

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

follow the next great stock tip and lose it all. One tip means nothing.
The sample is too small.
The difference between these two views is why great trend
followers have grown from one-man shops to hugely successful
firms that routinely beat the so-called Wall Street powerhouses.
Why did Wall Street sit by and allow trend traders to enter and then
dominate arenas they could, and perhaps should, have controlled?
The answer lies in Wall Street’s fascination with benchmarks. Wall
Street is after index-like performance (“benchmarks”), whereas
trend followers are after absolute performance not hinged to
benchmarks.

Mathematics and science
are two different notions,
two different disciplines.
By its nature, good
mathematics is quite
intuitive. Experimental
science doesn’t really
work that way. Intuition
is important. Making
guesses is important.
Thinking about the right
experiments is important.
But it’s a little more broad
and a little less deep, So
the mathematics we use
here can be sophisticated.
But that’s not really the
point. We don’t use very,
very deep stuff. Certain of
our statistical approaches
can be very sophisticated.
I’m not suggesting it’s
simple. I want a guy who
knows enough math so
that he can use those
tools effectively but has a
curiosity about how
things work and enough
imagination and tenacity
to dope it out.
Jim Simons15

Large, established Wall Street firms, many of which blew out in
2008 (unlike trend followers who made money in 2008), judge
success with measures of central tendency, not absolute return.
The large banks and brokerages view an average measure (mean)
and the variation from that average to determine whether they are
winning or losing. They are beholden to irrational desires of
investors. Thinking in terms of a trend following mindset would be
too hard.
Where do they all go wrong? Volatility around the mean
(standard deviation) is the standard Wall Street definition of risk
(see Chapters 3 and 4). Wall Street types, long-only types, aim for
consistency instead of absolute returns, and, as a result, Wall Street
returns are typically average. How do you free yourself from
averages? It is difficult. We are influenced heavily by standard
finance theory that revolves almost entirely around normal
distribution worship. Michael Mauboussin and Kristen Bartholdson
see clearly the state of affairs:
“Normal distributions are the bedrock of finance, including
the random walk, capital asset pricing, value-at-risk, and
Black-Scholes models. Value-at-risk (VaR) models, for
example, attempt to quantify how much loss a portfolio
may suffer with a given probability. While there are various
forms of VaR models, a basic version relies on standard
deviation as a measure of risk. Given a normal distribution,
it is relatively straightforward to measure standard
deviation, and hence risk. However, if price changes are not
normally distributed, standard deviation can be a very
misleading proxy for risk.”14

Chapter 8 • Science of Trading

The problem with using standard deviation as a risk
measurement can be seen with the example where two traders have
similar standard deviations, but might show entirely different
distribution of returns. One might look like the familiar normal
distribution, or bell curve. The other might show statistical
characteristics called kurtosis and skewness. In other words, the
historical pattern of returns does not resemble a normal
distribution.

227

Luck is largely
responsible for my
reputation for genius. I
don’t walk into the office
in the morning and say,
“Am I smart today?” I
walk in and wonder, “Am
I lucky today?”
Jim Simons16

Trend followers never have and never will produce returns that
exhibit a normal distribution. They never produce consistent
average returns that hit benchmarks quarter after quarter. When
trend followers hit home runs in the zero-sum game and win huge
profits from the likes of Barings Bank, Long-Term Capital
Management, and the 2008 market crash, they are targeting the
edges or those fat tails of our non-normally distributed world. Jerry
Parker, the most successful of Richard Dennis’ trained turtle
traders, states this outright:
“The way I describe it is that overlaying trend following on
top of markets produce a non-normal distribution of trades.
And that’s sort of our edge—in these outlier trades. I don’t
know if we have an inherent rate of return, but when you
place this trend following on top of markets, it can produce
this distribution—the world is non-normal.”17
Jean-Jacques Chenier, like Parker, believes that the markets are
far less linear and efficient than Wall Street does. We all forget this,
but not everyone in the market plays to win the game. Some might
be hedging, such as central banks commonly do. Chenier points out
that, as a result, they regularly lose:
“The Bank of Japan will intervene to push the yen lower…a
commercial bank in Japan will repatriate yen assets
overseas just to window dress its balance sheets for the end
of the fiscal year. These activities create liquidity but it is
inefficient liquidity that can be exploited.”18
To make accurate judgments about trend following and better
understand Parker’s words, it helps to break down the statistical
concepts of skew and kurtosis. Skew, nicely summarized by Larry
Swedroe of Buckingham Asset Management, measures the
statistical likelihood of a return in the tail of a distribution being

Investment manuals
suffer another deficiency,
which is that expert (and
I use the term advisedly)
opinion in the field tends
to be cyclical, not
cumulative. One would
not expect to see a homeimprovement volume
with the title The New
Reality of Plumbing. But
the science of investing,
at least as it is
propagated by financial
writers, undergoes a
seeming revolution every
couple of thousand points
on the Dow.19

228

Two lessons from the St.
Petersburg Paradox. The
risk-reducing formulas
behind portfolio theory
rely on a number of
demanding and
ultimately unfounded
premises. First, they
suggest that price
changes are statistically
independent from one
another…The second
assumption is that price
changes are distributed
in a pattern that
conforms to a standard
bell curve. Do financial
data neatly conform to
such assumptions? Of
course, they never do.
Benoit B. Mandelbrot20

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

higher or lower than that commonly associated with a normal
distribution. For example, a return series of –30 percent, 5 percent,
10 percent, and 15 percent has a mean of 0 percent. Only one
return is less than 0 percent, whereas three are higher but the one
that is negative is much farther from the mean (0 percent) than the
positive ones. This is called negative skewness. Negative skewness
occurs when the values to the left of (less than) the mean are fewer,
but farther from the mean than the values to the right of the mean.
Positive skewness occurs when the values to the right of (more
than) the mean are fewer, but farther from the mean than the
values to the left of the mean.21
Trend followers, as you might have guessed, exhibit a positive
skew return profile. Kurtosis, on the other hand, measures the
degree to which exceptional values, much larger or smaller than the
average, occur more frequently (high kurtosis) or less frequently
(low kurtosis) than in a normal (bell-shaped) distribution. High
kurtosis results in exceptional values called “fat tails.” Fat tails
indicate a higher percentage of very low and very high returns than
would be expected with a normal distribution.22
The president of John W. Henry and Co. clarified:

Skewness is a measure of
symmetry, or more
precisely, the lack of
symmetry. A distribution,
or data set, is symmetric
if it looks the same to the
left and right of the center
point.
National Institute of
Standards and Technology24

“Skew may be either positive or negative and affects
distribution symmetry. Positive skew means that there is a
higher probability for a significant positive return than for
a negative return the same distance from the mean. Skew
will measure the direction of surprises. Risk management
should minimize the number of negative surprises.
Outliers, or extremes in performance not normally
associated with a distribution, will clearly affect skewness.
The crash of 1987 is usually considered an extreme outlier.
For example, a positive outlier will stretch the right hand
tail of the distribution. Because JWH’s trading methodology
eliminates losing positions and holds profitable positions,
historically there has been a tendency for positive outliers
and a higher chance of positive returns. A negative skew
results in a higher probability of a significantly negative
event for the same distance from the mean.”23
As important as these concepts are to making money, they are
typically ignored by many. They are not as sexy as listening to Jim

229

Chapter 8 • Science of Trading

Cramer hoot and holler each night. Few people see the use for
statistical thinking in their trading. They either don’t understand or
dismiss skew, kurtosis, and upside/downside volatility (see Chapter
3, “Performance Data”). If you avoid these concepts, you will never
see the reality that great trend following traders see every day—the
reality of a nonlinear world.

Compounding
One of the first Wall Street books I read was Jim Rogers
Investment Biker. It had a huge influence on me because Rogers
brought so much passion and common sense to the table. Nearly 14
years later, in early 2008, I had the good fortune to interview Rogers
for my first documentary film (Broke: The New American Dream)
at his home in Singapore. Even though I had been up for nearly 48
hours straight (I did have to go around the world to see him) when
I did the interview, it was a fantastic experience. Rogers, who is not
a technical trend following trader, but who has made a fortune off
trading trends, put the importance of compounding at the top of his
list for anyone trying to make money:
“One of the biggest mistakes most investors make is
believing they’ve always got to be doing something…the
trick in investing is not to lose money…the losses will kill
you. They ruin your compounding rate; and compounding
is the magic of investing.”26
You can’t get rich overnight, but with compounding, you at least
have a chance to make big money. For example, if you manage to
make 50 percent a year in your trading, you can compound an
initial $20,000 account to over $616,000 in just seven years. Is 50
percent unrealistic? Perhaps! However, do the math again using 25
percent. In other words, compounding is essential. You can be a
trend follower, make 25 percent a year, and spend all your profit
each year. Or you can trend follow and compound your 25 percent
a year for 20 or more years and become rich.
Consider a hypothetical investment of $20,000 (see Chart 8.1):

Kurtosis is a measure of
whether the data are
peaked or flat relative to
a normal distribution.
That is, data sets with
high kurtosis tend to have
a distinct peak near the
mean, decline rather
rapidly, and have heavy
tails. Data sets with low
kurtosis tend to have a
flat top near the mean
rather than a sharp peak.
A uniform distribution
would be the extreme
case.
National Institute of
Standards and Technology25

For such a long time we
thought that most data
must have a normal
distribution and therefore
that the mean is
meaningful. With the
perfect vision of
hindsight, this is a bit
odd. Much of the world
around us is not
normal…The point is that
it is so difficult to see the
simplest things as they
really are. We become so
used to our assumptions
that we can no longer see
them or evidence against
them. Instead of
challenging our
assumptions, we spend
our time studying the
details, the colors of the
threads that we tear from
the tapestry of the world.
That is why science is
hard.27

230

Say goodbye to a nice,
steady, equilibrium
perspective, says
Professor Bak.
Equilibrium equals death.
Things do not rock along
smoothly, change in small
increments. Change is
catastrophic. We must
learn to adapt because
we cannot predict.28

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

CHART 8.1: Compounding Example

30%

40%

50%

Year 1

$26,897

$29,642

$32,641

Year 2

$36,174

$43,933

$53,274

Year 3

$48,650

$65,115

$86,949

Year 4

$65,429

$96,509

$141,909

Year 5

$87,995

$143,039

$231,609

Year 6

$118,344

$212,002

$378,008

Year 7

$159,160

$314,214

$616,944

Another great compounding example? In October 1997, David
Harding launched the Winton Futures Fund, which has provided
investors with annualized returns of over 21 percent per year. To
put that in context, if you had been the buyer of Vincent van Gogh’s
“Irises” in 1947, you would have paid $80,000. The next time it
changed hands, in 1987, it was bought for $53.9 million. This seems
like a huge increase in value, but mathematically it shows a
compound average annual growth rate of 17.7 percent, which is less
than the annualized returns from Harding’s fund.
Compounding is not easy to do in a society forever focused on
instant gratification. However, if some trend following traders can
thrive and flourish in a compounded world, we all can.

Key Points
• Defining risk in terms of number is critical. If you can’t think
in terms of numbers, don’t play the game.
• To be successful as a trader and to be successful in life, you
need to develop the ability to ask the right questions.
• Trend following strategies make money on the edges of the bell
curve.
• Act as a devil’s advocate. Question assumptions. Check your
inferences. Consider the improbable or the unpopular.
• People mistakenly see a regular event and think it rare. They
think chance will correct a series of rare events. They see a
rare event and think it regular.
• People tend to regard extremely probable events as certain and
extremely improbable events as impossible.

Holy Grails

9

“Jesse Livermore described Wall Street as a ‘giant whorehouse,’
where brokers were ‘pimps’ and stocks ‘whores,’ and
where customers queued to throw their money away.”
—The Economist1
“What is dangerous is for Americans not to be in the stock market.
We’re going to reach the point where stocks are correctly priced
and we think that’s 36,000…It’s not just a bubble.
Far from it. The stock market is undervalued.”
—James Glassman, Syndicated Columnist/Coauthor, Dow 36,0002

Most of Wall Street died in 2008. The big names, the brokerage
firms, the banks, and hedge funds were permanently exposed as con
artists. You say harsh language? Well, look at all of the fees Wall
Street collected for the last decade to deliver a performance that
was abysmal. How did this happen?
The single biggest mistake traders make is thinking that
investing and trading is “easy.” They allow themselves to fall for
advertisements promising, “You can get rich by trading” or “Earn all
the income you’ve ever dreamed of” or “Leave your day job forever
and live off your day-trading profits.” Wall Street compounds the
problem with analysts constantly screaming, “Buy” or with their
nearly fanatical pitching of buy and hold as a legitimate trading
231

Another psychological
aspect that drives me to
use timing techniques on
my portfolio is
understanding myself well
enough to know that I
could never sit in a buy
and hold strategy for two
years during 1973 and
1974, watch my portfolio
go down 48 percent and do
nothing, hoping it would
come back someday.
Tom Basso

232

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

strategy. It’s not legitimate. It’s a criminal, inane approach to trying
to make money.
In Buy and Hold: A Different Perspective, Richard Rudy
explains how we always seek simple solutions to intricate problems.
In response to the messy and frustrating reality, we often develop
“rules of thumb” that we use in our decision making. Whenever we
see evidence that our “rules” are even remotely correct, our sense
of security is boosted and our simplistic decision-making
mechanism is validated. If we are faced with evidence contrary to
our “rules,” we quickly rationalize it away.3
With the title alone
causing hysterics, placing
this on your coffee table
will elicit your guests to
share their best dot-com
horror story. How they
invested their $100,000
second mortgage in Cisco
Systems at $80 after
reading about it, waiting
for it to become $500 (as
predicted in this very
book) only to see it dive
to $17. Just the thought of
this book gives me the
chuckles.
Amazon.com Review of Dow 36,000 4

These simplistic, irrational “security blankets” are often
referred to as Holy Grails. Grail legends have their origins in Celtic
paganism, but they became increasingly more Christian in theme.
In medieval times, the Holy Grail was the cup used at the Last
Supper of Christ. Holy Grail stories are always filled with mystery
and hint at some secret that is never completely revealed. Although
the Grail itself, unimaginably precious, might be found, only the
holiest of holy can experience it, and they can never, ever bring it
back. The markets have always overflowed with Holy Grails—those
systems, strategies, secret formulas, and interpretations of
fundamentals that promise riches to whomever trades with them.
Today, in 2009, it is no different.

Buy and Hold
After the stock market bubble burst in spring 2000 and after the
crash of October and November 2008, the concept of buy and hold
as a trading strategy should have been shown as the failure it is once
and for all. Yet, I doubt that has happened. Investors still obey
mantras such as, “Buy and hold for the long term.” “Stay the
course.” “Buy the dips.” “Never surrender.” Buy-and-hold mantras
are junk because they never answer the basic questions: Buy how
much of what? Buy at what price? Hold for how long? Jerry Parker
gives a strong rationale for choosing trend following over buy and
hold:
“Trend following is [similar] to a democracy. Sometimes it
doesn’t look so good, but it’s better than anything else out
there. It’s a worse investment now, let’s say, than it was in
the ‘70s or ‘80s. But so what? What other choice do we

Chapter 9 • Holy Grails

233

have? Are we going to buy market breaks? Are we going to
rely on buy and hold? Buy and hope, that’s what I call it.
Are we going to double up when we lose money? Are we
going to do all these things that everyone else does?
Eventually people will come to understand that trend
following works in other markets, markets that produce
trends.”5
Consider the NASDAQ market crash of 1973–1974. The
NASDAQ reached its high peak in December 1972. It then dropped
by nearly 60 percent, hitting rock bottom in September 1974. We
did not see the NASDAQ break permanently free of the 1973–1974
bear market until April 1980. Buy and hold did nothing for
investors from December 1972 through March 1980. Investors
would have made more money during this period in a 3 percent
savings account. History repeated itself with the more recent 77
percent drop in the NASDAQ from 2000–2002. Now we have
October and November 2008, which makes the dot-com bubble
look like a picnic with Grandma.
Making matters worse is that a pure buy-and-hold strategy
during an extended drop in the market makes the recovery back to
breakeven difficult (if not impossible).
The “buy-and-hold” investor has been led to believe (perhaps
by an industry with a powerful conflict of interest) that if he has
tremendous patience and discipline and “stays with it,” he will
make a good long-term return. These investors fully expect that
they will make back most, if not all, of recent losses soon enough.
They believe that the best place for long-term capital is the stock
market and that if they give it 5 or 10 or 20 years they will surely
do very well. Such investors need to understand that they can go 5,
10, and 20 years and make no return at all and even lose money.6
To compound problems even more, buy-and-hold panders to a
kind of market revenge. Investors who bought and lost want their
money back. They think, “I lost my money in Sun Microsystems,
and I’m going to make my money back in Sun Microsystems come
hell or high water.” They can neither fathom the concept of sunk
costs nor admit that buy-and-hold might not work. So they buy and
hold no matter what happens in the mean time.
There is the old trading parable about fishing and revenge. You
are out at the fishing hole. The big one gets away, and you throw
