
Beware of Thin Markets
Caution! Beware of thinly traded stocks or markets. Candlestick signals are
much more reliable on stocks that trade adequate volume than they are on illiquid
issues. Volume will be discussed in Chapter 6.

JWBK100-ch04.qxd

2/21/08

9:01 AM

Page 90 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

JWBK100-ch05.qxd

2/21/08

11:37 AM

Page 91 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

5
Chapter

Tails
candlestick line’s upper and lower shadows represent the price extremes
(the high and low) of the trading session. Although the Japanese do put
a lot of emphasis on the candlestick’s real body, the shadows can also tell
us a lot about the psychology of market participants. Therefore, shadows play an
important role in chart analysis. The following discussion specifically addresses
the formation and implications of long shadows.
Long shadows are often called tails. As you learned in Chapter 3, there are
several reversal patterns that include tails in their formation, for example, the
hanging man and the shooting star. Not every candlestick line that forms a
long shadow will meet the criteria of a specific candlestick pattern. Regardless
of whether the formation has a name or not, it is important to understand the
message behind a tail.
Long upper shadows are bearish shadows (Figure 5.1). The presence of one
or more bearish shadows after a price advance demonstrates that the market is
reaching for a top. There is not enough demand at higher prices to continue to
propel the stock upward, at least for the short term. This is especially evident
near a resistance area or in an overbought condition. The tail(s) indicates that
the bulls are taking profits and bears are stepping into short positions.
The presence of long upper shadows on a standard bar chart can be deceiving. They might come across as bullish since price may still be making
higher highs and, in some cases, higher closes. The candlestick line makes it
easy to see, though, that price has closed well off its high. The inability of the
bulls to sustain the intraday rally and close nearer the high is actually a bearish
sign if it occurs after a price advance.
Long lower shadows are bullish shadows (Figure 5.2). The formation of
one or more bullish shadows after a price decline, especially near support or
in an oversold condition, shows us visually that the market is reaching for a
bottom. In this case, the tail(s) indicates that lower prices are being rejected.

A

91

JWBK100-ch05.qxd

2/21/08

11:37 AM

92

Page 92 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

FIGURE 5.1 Bearish shadows

FIGURE 5.2 Bullish Shadows

Source: TeleChart 2007®

Source: TeleChart 2007®

The bears are covering their short positions and bulls are stepping into long
positions.

Smart Investor Tip
Beware of bad data! The presence of an unusually long shadow on a
chart may be the result of bad data. When you observe such a shadow,
it is advisable to check the intraday data to see if the lower time
frames show the same extreme price level shown on the daily bar. Also
consider consulting a second charting source to make sure the long
shadow is not bad data. For example, if you use TeleChart or
MetaStock for charting, you may consult Stockcharts.com (a free online
service) to verify that the data appears the same in their platform.
Charting services are not infallible, and periodically a bad bar will slip
through.

Tails at Support and Resistance
The presence of one or more tails at, or near, an area of support (bullish shadows) or resistance (bearish shadows) is fairly common. Experienced traders pay
close attention to visible barriers on the chart and often execute trades near

JWBK100-ch05.qxd

2/21/08

11:37 AM

Page 93 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

93

Tails

those points. Support and resistance is discussed briefly here and is covered in
more detail in Part II.
When a stock that is rising encounters resistance, many traders use that
barrier as a target to exit long positions. In addition, bearish traders may enter
short positions near a resistance area in anticipation of a downside move.
(Once a decline begins, it may be more difficult for them to borrow the shares
to sell short.)
Price may retreat from resistance, leaving a single tail, or there may be two
or more tests of resistance in a short period of time. The tail indicates that the
bulls were able to rally price, pushing it up to resistance or even above it during
the session. However, they were not able to sustain the rally and the stock closed
well off its high.

Example
Figure 5.3 shows a daily chart of Con-Way Inc. (CNW). On April 25,
2007, a gravestone doji formed the April high (1). Price retreated and
then settled into a horizontal trading range for several weeks during
May. Price rallied up again at the end of May and tested the April
high. A bearish shadow formed on May 31, a shooting star (2a), and
another on June 1, a doji (2b), as resistance was tested. Higher highs
were made on those two days, which might appear to be bullish if
you were viewing a standard bar chart, and if you were not aware
that a prior peak (the April high) may act as resistance. On June 1 (2b)
price actually broke out just slightly above the April high intraday,
but closed below it, resulting in a failed breakout attempt. Price declined for several weeks during June. Another uptrend in July took
price back up to that visible resistance area where, once again, bearish shadows formed. On July 16 a bearish shadow formed (3a), and
back-to-back long-legged doji formed on July 18–19 (3b and 3c). On
July 18 (3b), price broke out above the resistance area intraday, but
again the bulls could not sustain the breakout and price closed well
off its high. These long-legged candles show the violent tug-of-war
that occurred intraday between the bulls and bears. The bulls ﬁnally
gave up, and price turned back down. A very strong and visible ceiling (dotted line) is now seen on the chart. At some point in the future
it may be broken, but until that time, you can bet that traders will
react every time price approaches that area.

(continues)

JWBK100-ch05.qxd

2/21/08

94

11:37 AM

Page 94 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

Example

(continued )

FIGURE 5.3 Bearish shadows formed at resistance
Source: TeleChart 2007®

triple top
A bearish
reversal pattern
that occurs
when three
prominent,
parallel (or
nearly parallel)
peaks form in
an uptrend. It is
a valid reversal
pattern when
price closes
below the
lowest point
between the
three peaks.

The three parallel peaks that formed the April,
June, and July tops on the chart of CNW in Figure 5.3
sets up a larger bearish Western triple top pattern. Long
before the triple top was known in the Western hemisphere, the Japanese had recognized it and named it the
three mountain top. If the center peak is noticeably
higher than the peaks on either side of it, the pattern is
called a head-and-shoulders top in Western analysis. The
Japanese name for a head-and-shoulders top is a three
Buddha top.
Whereas the candlestick reversal patterns discussed
in Chapter 3 provide primarily short-term signals, these
larger triple and head-and-shoulders tops have more
significant implications and may be followed by a trend
reversal.

JWBK100-ch05.qxd

2/21/08

11:37 AM

Page 95 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

Tails

95

Example

Figure 5.4 shows a daily chart of Coherent Inc. (COHR). An
intermediate-term uptrend that started from the March 2007 low ended
on April 17 with a bearish dark cloud cover pattern. Price then declined
back to the March low (dotted line) reversing the entire uptrend that
occurred during March–April. On May 16, as the March low was tested,
a bullish hammer formed. The hammer’s long tail shows us that the
bears used that visible support area to cover short positions, and the
bulls were willing to step into long positions. The bears were able to
drive price down intraday to near that support area again during the
three trading sessions following the hammer; however, the support held
up and a rally ensued.

FIGURE 5.4 Bullish shadows formed at support
Source: TeleChart 2007®

A single test of support may occur, leaving one bullish shadow, or
there may be more than one test of support. If there are several bullish
shadows, it shows that the bears are able to push the stock lower during the
day but the bulls step in each day at, or near, the support level and push the
price back up.

JWBK100-ch05.qxd

2/21/08

96

head-andshoulders
top
A variation of a
triple top
pattern in
which the
center peak is
noticeably
higher than
the two peaks
on either side.
It is a valid
reversal
pattern when
price closes
below the
neckline. The
neckline is a
support line
that connects
the swing lows
on both sides
of the head.
Head-andshoulders tops
are fairly
reliable
patterns, and
they form
more
frequently
than triple
tops.

11:37 AM

Page 96 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

Summary: At the end of a price advance or decline,
the emergence of one or more bearish shadows (advance)
or bullish shadows (decline) is an indication that the
stock is attempting to put in a top or a bottom. This action is often followed by a price reversal or a period of
consolidation.

Tails in Overbought or
Oversold Conditions
Although it is common to see tails form when price
approaches visible support and resistance areas, you’ll see
plenty of tails form where there is no visible barrier on
the chart. Price need not be near a strong ceiling or floor
for a tail to form. Price may simply have moved too far
too quickly in one direction, causing a short-term overbought (uptrend) or oversold (downtrend) condition.
Overbought and oversold conditions are discussed in
Part II.
Just remember that when you see a tail(s) form,
you should be prepared for price to move in the opposite
direction of the tail. Price may reverse the direction of
the trend or at least consolidate for a period of time.

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

2/21/08

11:38 AM

Page 97 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:

2
Part

East Meets West

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

2/21/08

11:38 AM

Page 98 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

2/21/08

11:38 AM

Page 99 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:

6
Chapter

Price, Volume, and
Volatility

earning to recognize and interpret the candlestick lines and patterns is the
first step, albeit an important one, on the path to putting candlesticks to
work. The knowledge you have already acquired in Part I should serve to
dramatically improve your chart analysis skills. There is plenty more to be
learned, though, in order to really master the power of candlestick charting. It
is time to blend them with Western technical analysis. After you finish reading
the next few chapters, you will have the additional tools you’ll need to evaluate
candlesticks in the context of the broader chart landscape, which can dramatically enhance their effectiveness.
In the introduction it was suggested that once you learn candlesticks, you
may look at a standard bar chart and feel that it is incomplete. The same is true
of combining Eastern candlestick charting with Western technical analysis.
Once you learn how to put the two together, you may find that trying to analyze candlesticks without the aid of the bigger picture feels incomplete.
An introduction to Western technical analysis begins with learning about
the roles of price, volume, and volatility. Understanding these elements is crucial to successful chart analysis, stock selection, and trade management. Advanced traders who are already familiar with these concepts may elect to skim
through this chapter or bypass it. However, traders who are developing their
Western technical analysis skills should be aware that each chapter in this book
builds upon the prior chapters, so it is best to read them in order and to spend
adequate time digesting each one.

L

99

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

100

2/21/08

11:38 AM

Page 100 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

Price
Price is the king of the chart. It is the purest measure of market sentiment. Price
action is a manifestation of the combined psychology of all market participants.
It tells us the perceived value of a security at a given time.
Price action provides the setups that we trade.
There are numerous price setups for traders to choose
from. For example, candlestick patterns provide setups,
setup
as do classic Western bar and chart patterns such as key
An identiﬁable
reversals and head-and-shoulders patterns.
price formation
A setup by itself cannot make you money; however, a
that presents a
strategy
for trading it can. A trader may achieve consistent
potentially
success by learning to recognize one or more price setups
proﬁtable
and devising a profitable strategy to trade the setup(s).
trading
A strategy should seek to enhance profits while limiting
opportunity.
risk.
Many novice traders get caught up in looking for the
perfect technical indicator and neglect to put sufficient emphasis on price. It is more effective to learn how to evaluate
strategy
the price action and use indicators as complementary
analysis tools. When an aspiring trader points out an indiA set of rules
cator signal to me, such as an overbought or oversold osciland conditions
lator, and asks if I would execute a trade, I respond, “It
that determine
depends on what is happening with price.” I do not enter
such factors as
or exit a trade based solely on a signal from an indicator.
what generates
Think of technical analysis as a big toolbox. Just as candlea signal and
stick charting is one tool, indicators are another type of
how to enter,
tool. Successful trading results from employing a set of
manage, and
tools rather than using each one in isolation.
exit the trade.
Many technical indicators are derived from price.
Moving averages are calculated by averaging the price of
a stock over a designated period of time, for example, 20 days. Oscillators are a
group of indicators that measure the momentum of price. These indicators are
discussed later in this book. Technical indicators can be very useful; however, it
is still the price action itself that confirms or invalidates an indicator’s signal.
Part I of this book was devoted almost entirely to the discussion of price.
The candlestick lines and patterns are formed from the open, high, low, and
closing prices during a trading period. The candlestick reversal patterns must
follow a directional price move in order for their signals to have significance.
There is still plenty more discussion to come on price movement as you’ll
see in chapters 7 through 9, which cover trend analysis, gaps, support, and resistance. But, first, let’s bring volume and volatility into the mix.

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

2/21/08

11:38 AM

Page 101 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Price, Volume, and Volatility

101

Volume
Volume is second in importance only to price as a technical analysis tool. Volume’s role in chart analysis will be referenced many times throughout this book.
So far, you have seen how it may play a role in the formation of certain candlestick patterns, as discussed in Chapter 3.
Volume provides a measure of the level of activity
by market participants in a specific stock or trading involume
strument. Every share of stock that changes hands between buyers and sellers serves to increase the volume for
The number of
that trading period. The most commonly quoted time
shares or conperiod for volume is daily; but it is also tracked for
tracts that are
higher time frames, such as weekly, as well as for each intraded during a
traday time frame.
speciﬁed period
In addition to being tallied for individual stocks,
of time.
volume is also measured for entire markets, such as the
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). In the futures and
options markets, volume is represented in the number of contracts traded rather
than in shares.
Displaying Volume on the Chart

In addition to price data, vendors of charting software also supply volume, and
they may offer various ways to display it. I use the following displays of volume
in the TeleChart platform (see Figure 6.1).
Volume in Shares A field that displays the bar volume is inserted in the data
line above the chart. The bar volume indicates the number of shares traded for a
given period of time, for instance, during a daily trading session. In most
charting programs, volume is displayed in hundreds, so you’ll need to mentally
add two zeros to the end of the number.
Example

Figure 6.1 shows 2,807 shares traded on August 21, 2007, for Advent
Software Inc. (ADVS). Add two zeros to the end and you can see that
280,700 shares were traded that day.

Average Daily Volume A field is also inserted in the data line showing a
percentile ranking for average daily volume over the last 90 days. This ranking

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

2/21/08

11:38 AM

102

Page 102 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

FIGURE 6.1 Volume may be displayed in various ways
Source: TeleChart 2007®

provides a quick gauge of the stock’s liquidity over the past few months by
indicating how heavily the stock is traded compared to all other stocks listed on
the major U.S. exchanges. The lower the average daily volume, the more thinly
traded the stock.

Example

In Figure 6.1, the number 62 in the data line indicates that Advent
Software currently trades more volume than 62 percent of stocks. Most
of the stocks that I trade rank in the 50 to 99 percentile, which equates
to about 125,000 shares per day or higher. Novice traders may elect to
start with more heavily traded stocks to avoid problems with order fills
and excessive slippage. For instance, stocks in the 70 to 99 percentile
trade a minimum of about half a million shares per day.

Volume Bars Volume can be plotted as a histogram (a bar graph) that
provides a visual representation of each trading period’s volume. The histogram
allows a trader to quickly analyze the pattern or trend of volume. The volume

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

2/21/08

11:38 AM

Page 103 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Price, Volume, and Volatility

103

bars are colored red or green, which corresponds to the current time period’s
closing price. A red volume bar indicates a lower close than the prior trading
period, and a green bar indicates a higher close. Figure 6.1 shows the volume
bars plotted in the panel below the chart window.

Smart Investor Tip
It is a common practice to plot a moving average over an indicator in
order to smooth the data. I was ﬁrst introduced to the idea of plotting
a moving average of volume in John Bollinger’s book Bollinger on
Bollinger Bands (McGraw-Hill, 2002). Mr. Bollinger referenced using a
50-period simple moving average, but I prefer a shorter 30-period as
demonstrated in Figure 6.1. The moving average is overlaid on the
volume histogram in the panel below the chart window. This technique
makes it very easy to see when volume is above or below average
compared to the last 30 days. Experiment with different settings if
you’d like; however, I would not suggest using a length of fewer than
20 periods for this purpose.

Analyzing Volume Patterns and Trends

The amount of volume that transpires during one or more trading periods can
tell a story about the force behind the price movement. Consider the following
examples:
• If heavy volume accompanies the formation of a bullish candlestick
pattern, such as a hammer or a bullish engulfing pattern, it helps confirm that the stock may be putting in a bottom.
• An upside breakout after a period of consolidation is usually accompanied by heavy volume. In fact, the breakout is suspect if not and may be
a false breakout. Volume attracts more buyers and is needed to propel
the stock higher. Heavy volume may also accompany a downside break;
however, it is not as significant because the market can continue to fall
under its own weight.
• After an upward move, if price pulls back or consolidates on diminishing volume, it is usually an indication that short-term traders are taking
profits after a directional move rather than a large number of market
participants exiting the stock. Another upside move often follows in
such cases.

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

104

2/21/08

11:38 AM

Page 104 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

These are just a few of the many instances where utilizing volume can
provide insight into the psychology of traders. Incorporating volume in the examination of price movement can dramatically improve your stock selection
and chart analysis skills.
The preceding examples are instances where fairly short-term events are
analyzed. It is important to distinguish between analyzing a short-term volume pattern and a longer-term volume pattern or trend. If you are examining
the volume pattern over the past several trading periods, volume can be analyzed from one bar to the next, providing a short-term picture. For instance,
if after an upward move price pulls back on diminishing volume, in such a
case you are looking at the price-volume relationship from one bar to the next
as price pulls back. By my definition, diminishing volume occurs when most
of the volume bars during the period being analyzed either drop below the
moving average of volume or decline in a downward stepping pattern (see
Figure 6.2, left).
There may also be times when you wish to evaluate the volume pattern
over a longer period of time. For example, you may need to gauge the
strength of the longer trend, or analyze the price-volume relationship of a
large chart pattern. In cases where the bigger picture of volume is to be evaluated, look beyond the past few volume bars and instead look at the volume
peaks (see Figure 6.2, right).
Short-Term Analysis Figure 6.3 shows a daily chart of Calgon Carbon Corp.
(CCC). Price was in an uptrend for several weeks during May–June 2007. The
dotted lines correspond to the volume patterns during pullbacks within the
trend. Each time price pulled back for a few days, volume declined with it.
After a directional move, when price pulls back or consolidates accompanied
by diminishing volume, it may offer traders an opportunity to get aboard a

FIGURE 6.2 Analysis of volume bars vs. volume peaks

JWBK100-Ch06.qxd

2/21/08

11:38 AM

Page 105 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File
