
172

PSYC HOLOGIC AL FAC TOR S

Another aspect of overconfidence is that people tend to make judgments
in uncertain situations by looking for familiar patterns and assuming that
future patterns will resemble past ones, often without sufficient consideration
of the reasons for the pattern or the probability of the pattern repeating itself.
This anomaly of human judgment, called the representativeness heuristic, was
demonstrated in a number of experiments by behavioral economists Tversky
and Kahneman.
For example, these researchers asked people to guess the occupation, from
a list of occupations, of people with a given personality description. If the
description given was that the person was artistic and sensitive, they tended to
choose conductor or sculptress, rather than laborer or secretary, disregarding
entirely the fact that the former occupations are extremely rare and thus that
the answers are much less likely to be right.18 It would be wiser, in answering
such questions, almost never to guess the occupation conductor or sculptress,
since the base rate probabilities are so low. But people look for the best‑fit
occupation, disregarding the base rate probabilities.19
Overconfidence, however generated, appears to be a fundamental factor promoting the high volume of trade we observe in speculative markets. Without
such overconfidence, one would think that there would be little trading in
financial markets. If people were completely rational, then, roughly speaking,
half the investors should think that they are below average in their trading
ability and should therefore be unwilling to do speculative trades with the
other half, who they think will probably dominate them in trading. Thus, the
above‑average half would have no one to trade with, and there should ideally
be no trading for speculative reasons.20
Overconfidence in judgments can at times influence people to believe that
they know when a market move will take place, even if they generally believe
as an intellectual matter that stock prices are not forecastable. In the survey
that I conducted with investors right after the crash of October 19, 1987, I asked,
“Did you think at any point on October 19, 1987, that you had a pretty good idea
when a rebound was to occur?” Of individual investors who had bought on
that day, 47.1% said yes; of institutional investors, 47.9% said yes. Thus, nearly
half of those trading that day thought they knew what the market would do
that day. I find this remarkable. Even among all individual investors, most of
whom did not buy or sell at all on that day, 29.2% answered yes to this question; among all institutional investors, 28.0% answered yes.
Why would anyone think that they knew what the market would do on
any given day, and especially on such a tumultuous day? The idea that one
would know such things stands contrary to the most elementary observations
about markets’ forecastability, and contrary to the conventional wisdom that
accurate market timing is very difficult. Quite a few people apparently do not
consistently believe that the market is never very forecastable.

PSY C H O L O G I C A L AN CH O RS F O R TH E MARKE T

173

The next question on the questionnaire was, “If yes, what made you think
you knew when a rebound would occur?” There was a striking absence of
solid grounding for the answers. References were made to “intuition,” “gut
feeling,” “historical evidence and common sense,” or “market psychology.”
Mentions of concrete facts or references to explicit theories were rare, even
among the institutional investors.
These intuitive feelings about the future course of the market were extremely
important for the course of the stock market crash, for apparently it was these
intuitive judgments that set the anchors that stopped the price decline. To
understand speculative bubbles, positive or negative, we must appreciate that
overconfidence in one’s own intuitive judgments plays a fundamental role.

The Fragility of Anchors: Difficulty Thinking Ahead
to Contingent Future Decisions
The anchors discussed here account for the stability of the market from day
to day, but we must also account for the ability of these anchors to let loose
occasionally—sometimes suddenly. Markets do make dramatic shifts. Part
of the reason for the surprises the market hands us from time to time is that
news events have an effect on people’s reasons that even they could not have
expected.
Psychologists Eldar Shafir and Amos Tversky have described a phenomenon
they call nonconsequentialist reasoning: reasoning that is characterized by an
inability to think through the elementary conclusions one would draw in the
future if hypothetical events were to occur. According to Shafir and Tversky,
people cannot decide until the events actually occur. When we learn to play
games of logic (chess, for example), we must practice thinking ahead to the
decisions we will make in the future in response to the other player’s decisions. One learns to think, “If I move here, then she might move either here
or there, and if she moves here I will be fine, but if she moves there I will be
faced with a difficult situation. . . .” That is, one learns to think through the
ramifications of all relevant branches of a decision tree. In everyday life, we to
some extent practice the same modes of thinking that we learned in playing
these games. But real‑world decisions are clouded by emotions and a lack of
clearly defined objectives, and people do not generally behave as if they have
thought things through well in advance.
Shafir and Tversky give an example of students’ decision making about
whether to take a vacation in Hawaii after learning whether they had passed
or failed an important exam. Faced with such a choice, they look into their own
minds for their feelings about the choice. Some students who have passed the
exam will think, “I should take the vacation as a celebration and a reward.”
Some students who have failed the exam will think, “I should take the vacation

174

PSYC HOLOGIC AL FAC TOR S

as a consolation, to improve my mood after having failed.” Some students will
decide to take a vacation whether or not they pass the exam. Those students
who would take the vacation in either case should be able, if they were fully
logical, to book the vacation well in advance of the exam, knowing that the
information about the outcome of the exam is not really relevant to their decision. But these people sometimes have great difficulty making such a choice
before they know the outcome of the exam. Before the exam, they cannot fully
anticipate the emotional reason for taking the vacation, and so they cannot
feel good about committing themselves to it.21
Although this example presents a situation in which the difficulty people
face is in deciding how they themselves will feel in the future, rather than in
deciding on questions of simple fact as in the game of chess, in reality decisions
about investments are likely to have as much of an emotional component as
decisions about whether to go on a vacation.
For this reason, the effects of news stories on the stock market sometimes
have more to do with discovery of how we feel about the news than with any
logical reaction to the news. We can make decisions then that would have
been impossible before the news was known. It is partly for this reason that
the breaking off of a psychological anchor can be so unpredictable: people
discover things about themselves, about their own emotions and inclinations,
only after price changes occur.
Psychological anchors for the market hook themselves on the strangest
things along the muddy bottom of our consciousness. The anchor can skip
and drag, only to snag again on some object whose strength would surprise
us if we saw it at the surface. We have considered in this chapter some of the
psychological factors that explain the nature of such anchors. But the anchors
can have significance for the market as a whole only if the same thoughts enter
the minds of many. In the next chapter, we turn to the social basis of thinking:
the tendencies toward herd behavior and the contagion of ideas.

Ten

Herd Behavior and Epidemics

A

fundamental observation about human
society is that people who communicate
regularly with one another think similarly. There is at any place and in any
time a zeitgeist, a spirit of the times. It is important to understand the origins
of this similar thinking, so that we can judge the plausibility of theories of
speculative fluctuations that ascribe price changes to faulty thinking. If the
millions of people who invest were all truly independent of one another, any
faulty thinking would tend to average out, and such thinking would have no
effect on prices. But if less‑than‑mechanistic or irrational thinking is in fact
similar over large numbers of people, then such thinking can indeed be the
source of stock market booms and busts.
Part of the reason people’s judgments are similar at similar times is that
they are reacting to the same information—the information that was publicly
available at that time. But, as we shall see in this chapter, rational response
to public information is not the only reason that people think similarly, nor
is the use of that public information always appropriate or well reasoned.

Social Influence and Information
Acclaimed social psychologist Solomon Asch reported an experiment in
1952 that he interpreted—and that was widely interpreted by others—as
showing the immense power of social pressure on individual judgment. His
paper was published at a time of widespread public concern with the effects
of communist propaganda, alarm at the apparently successful brainwashing
175

176

PSYC HOLOGIC AL FAC TOR S

techniques of Chinese communists, and continuing puzzlement over the ability of the Nazis in Germany to obtain an obedient response when ordering
mass exterminations of Jews and other “undesirables.” Asch’s findings were
widely cited in the media as providing a scientific basis for claims that people
do not have fully independent judgment. His results are still cited today; those
who found serious flaws in his interpretation of those results are not nearly
as well remembered.
In his famous experiment, Asch placed the subject in a group of seven to
nine other people who were, unbeknownst to the subject, confederates who
had been coached by Asch. The entire group was asked to answer a sequence
of twelve questions about the lengths of line segments shown to them on cards,
and the subject would hear most of the others’ answers before giving his own
answer before the group. The correct answers to the questions were obvious,
but the confederates deliberately gave wrong answers to seven of the twelve
questions. Faced with a group of people who were unanimously giving what
seemed to be obviously wrong answers to the questions, a third of the time
the subjects caved in and gave the same wrong answers as had been given by
the confederates. Furthermore, the subjects often showed signs of anxiety or
distress, suggesting that fear of being seen as different or foolish before the
group had swayed their judgment.1
Asch explained his results as due to social pressure. There is probably
some validity to this interpretation, but it turns out that the subjects’ wrong
answers were not primarily due to such pressure. Three years after Asch
published his findings, psychologists Morton Deutsch and Harold Gerard
reported a variant of Asch’s experiment in which the subjects were told that
they had been placed anonymously into a group of people, people that they
never saw and never would see, and whose answers they could observe only
indirectly through an electronic signal. (In fact there was really no group at
all.) Subjects could give their answers to the questions merely by pressing a
button, unobserved by others, so that there was no need to stand up to a group
face to face. Otherwise, the experiment proceeded as it had under Asch—and
the subjects gave nearly as many wrong answers as they had before.2
Deutsch and Gerard concluded that the wrong answers in the Asch experiment had been given in large part because people simply thought that all the
other people could not be wrong. They were reacting to the information that a
large group of people had reached a judgment different from theirs, rather than merely
the fear of expressing a contrary opinion in front of a group. This behavior
is a matter of rational calculation: in everyday living, we have learned that
when a large group of people is unanimous in its judgment on a question of
simple fact, the members of that group are almost certainly right. The anxiety
and distress that Asch’s subjects expressed may have come partly from their
conclusion that their own senses were somehow not reliable.

HER D B E H AV I O R A ND E P ID E MICS

177

Another widely cited series of experiments relevant to herd behavior is
Stanley Milgram’s investigations of the power of authority. In Milgram’s
experiments, the subject was asked to administer electric shocks to another
person sitting close by, who was, again unbeknownst to the subject, a con­
federate. There really were no electric shocks, but the confederate pretended
to be experiencing them, feigning pain and suffering. The confederate
asserted that he was in great distress and asked that the experiment be
stopped. But when the experimenter told the subjects to continue administering the shocks, insisting that the shocks would cause no permanent tissue
damage, many did so.3
These results were widely interpreted as demonstrating the enormous
power of authority over the human mind. Indeed, the results may be understood partly on those terms. But there is another interpretation: that people
have learned that when experts tell them something is all right, it probably
is, even if it does not seem so. (In fact, it is worth noting that in this case
the experimenter was indeed correct: it was all right to continue giving the
“shocks”—even though most of the subjects did not suspect the reason.) Thus,
the results of Milgram’s experiment can also be interpreted as springing from
people’s past learning about the reliability of authorities.4
Asch’s and Milgram’s studies are as interesting as ever when viewed from
the standpoint of this information‑based interpretation. The experiments
demonstrate that people are ready to believe the majority view or to believe
authorities even when they plainly contradict matter‑of‑fact judgment. And
their behavior is in fact largely rational and intelligent. Most people have
had many prior experiences of making errors when they contradicted the
judgments of a larger group or of an authority figure, and they have learned
from these experiences. Thus, the Asch and Milgram experiments give us a
different perspective on the overconfidence phenomenon: people are respectful of authorities in formulating the opinions about which they will later be
so overconfident, transferring their confidence in authorities to their own
judgments based upon them.
Given the kind of behavior observed by Asch and Milgram, it is not at all
surprising that many people are accepting of the perceived authority of others
on such matters as stock market valuation. Most must certainly trust their
own judgment in this area even less than the experimental subjects trusted
the evidence of their own eyes about the lengths of lines on cards or the pain
and suffering that a person sitting next to them was experiencing.

Economic Theories of Herd Behavior and Information Cascades
Even completely rational people can participate in herd behavior when they
take into account the judgments of others, and even if they know that everyone

178

PSYC HOLOGIC AL FAC TOR S

else is behaving in a herd-like manner. The behavior, although individually
rational, produces group behavior that is, in a well‑defined sense, irrational.
This herd-like behavior is said to arise from an information cascade.5
A simple story will illustrate how such an information cascade could get
started. Suppose two restaurants open next door to each other. Each potential
customer must choose between the two. Would‑be customers may be able to
make some judgments about the quality of each of the restaurants when viewing it through the front window, but such judgments will not be very accurate.
The first customer who arrives must choose based only on viewing the two
empty restaurants and makes a choice. However, the next potential customer
can rely not only on his or her own information, based on the appearance of
the restaurants, but also—by seeing the first customer eating in one or the
other of the restaurants—on information about the choice made by the first
customer. If the second customer chooses to go to the same restaurant as the
first, the third customer will see two people eating in that restaurant. The end
result may be that all customers wind up eating at the same restaurant—and
it could well be the poorer restaurant, since there was no real consideration of
the combined evidence inherent in all their observations about the two restaurants. If all of them had been able to pool their first impressions and discuss
these as a group, they might have been able to deduce which restaurant was
likely to be the better one. But in this scenario, they cannot make use of each
other’s information, since they do not reveal their own information to others
when they merely follow them.
The restaurant story, and the economic theory that underlies it, is not in
itself a theory of stock market bubbles. However, it has clear relevance to
stock market behavior, and it can provide a foundation for a theory about how
rational investors may be led astray.6 According to such a theory, the popular
notion that the level of market prices is the outcome of a sort of vote by all
investors about the true value of the market is just plain wrong. Hardly anyone
is really voting. Instead people are rationally choosing not to, as they see it,
waste their time and effort in exercising their judgment about the market, and
thus choosing not to exert any independent impact on the market. Ultimately,
all such information cascade theories are theories of the failure of information
about true fundamental value to be disseminated and evaluated.
It is important to emphasize that this failure to disseminate information
to others can be modeled in economic theory in terms of purely rational
behavior with no limitations of intelligence, only limitations of revealed
information. But to achieve a better understanding of the issues relevant to
financial market mispricing, one must also understand some parameters of
human behavior, of limitations of human information processing, that are
relevant to the transmission of information and the potential for speculative bubbles.

HER D B E H AV I O R A ND E P ID E MICS

179

Human Information Processing and Word of Mouth
The human mind is the product of evolution almost entirely in the absence of
the printed word, e‑mail, the Internet, or any other artificial means of communication. Human society has been able to conquer almost all habitats of
this planet primarily because of its own innate information processing ability.
A fundamental component of this information processing ability is effective
communication of important facts from one person to another.
This superior ability to communicate knowledge has been made possible
over the past few million years by evolutionary changes in the human brain
that have optimized the channels of communication and created an emotional
drive to communicate effectively. It is because of this emotional drive that most
people’s favorite activity is conversation. Look around you. Everywhere you
go, when two or more people are not working or playing or sleeping (and, in
some cases, even when they are doing these things), they are talking. The in­­
cessant exchange of information is a fundamental characteristic of our species.
The information that tends to flow most rapidly is the kind that would have
helped society in centuries past in its everyday living: information about such
things as food sources, dangers, or other members of society.
For this reason, in modern society there is likely to be rapidly spreading
conversation about a buying opportunity for a hot stock, or about immediate
threats to personal wealth, or about the story of the people who run a company.
These topics resemble the kinds of things our ancestors have talked about
since time immemorial. But conversation seems to flow less well about abstract
topics, such as the mathematics of finance, or statistics about asset returns, or
optimal levels of saving for retirement. Transmission of such knowledge is of
course effortful, infrequent, and imperfect.

Face‑to‑Face Communications versus Media Communications
The conventional media—print media, television, and radio—have a profound
capability for spreading ideas, but their ability to generate active behaviors
is still limited. Interpersonal and interactive communications, particularly
face‑to‑face or word‑of‑mouth communications, still have the most powerful
impact on our behavior.
In a 1986 study of individual investors, John Pound and I sought to
determine how their attention was first drawn to a stock. We mailed a
questionnaire to a random sample of individual investors and asked them
to consider the company whose stock they had purchased most recently. We
asked, “What first drew your attention to the company?” Only 6% specified
periodicals or newspapers. The majority of the answers named sources that
would involve direct interpersonal communication.7 Even if people read a

180

PSYC HOLOGIC AL FAC TOR S

lot, their attention and actions appear to be more stimulated by interpersonal
communications.
The power of interpersonal, word‑of‑mouth communication about investments has been amply illustrated by the work of the market surveillance units
at the exchanges and in the Securities and Exchange Commission. Their brief
is to detect insider trading, and to that end they carefully follow the trail of
communications among individual investors. Court documents reveal, for
example, that a sequence of word‑of‑mouth communications was touched
off in May 1995, when a secretary at IBM was asked to photocopy documents
that included references to IBM’s top‑secret takeover of Lotus Development
Corporation, a deal scheduled to be announced on June 5 of that year. She
apparently told only her husband, a beeper salesman. On June 2, he told
another person, a co‑worker, who bought shares eighteen minutes later, and
another friend, a computer technician, who initiated a sequence of phone
calls. By the time of the June 5 announcement, twenty‑five people connected
to this core group had spent half a million dollars on the investment based on
this tip. They included a pizza chef, an electrical engineer, a bank executive,
a dairy wholesaler, a former schoolteacher, a gynecologist, an attorney, and
four stockbrokers.8 Clearly word‑of‑mouth communication can proceed with
great speed and across disparate social groups.
Word‑of‑mouth transmission of ideas appears to be an important contributor to day‑to‑day or hour‑to‑hour stock market fluctuations, even though
direct word‑of‑mouth transmission cannot proceed across the nation quite
as fast as markets move. In the questionnaire survey of investors that I sent
out during the week of the stock market crash of 1987 (described in detail
in Chapter 6), I asked them about word‑of‑mouth communications. Of the
individual investor respondents, 81.6% said that they had learned of the
crash before 5 p.m. on the same day. Thus, they had learned of the crash from
sources other than the next day’s morning newspaper or that day’s evening
news. The average time of day that these investors heard of the crash was
1:56 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time (EDT). For institutional investors, the average
