book_a01ffirs.qxd

12/20/06

3:12 PM

Page vi

book_a01ffirs.qxd

12/20/06

3:12 PM

Page i

Adventures
of a
Currency
Trader

book_a01ffirs.qxd

12/20/06

3:12 PM

Page ii

Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing
company in the United States. With offices in North America, Europe, Australia, and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and marketing
print and electronic products and services for our customers’ professional
and personal knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived
the market’s ever changing temperament and have prospered—some by
reinventing systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether you are a
novice trader, professional, or somewhere in-between, these books will
provide the advice and strategies needed to prosper today and well into the
future.
For a list of available titles, visit our web site at www.WileyFinance.com.

book_a01ffirs.qxd

12/20/06

3:12 PM

Page iii

Adventures
of a
Currency
Trader
A Fable about Trading,
Courage, and
Doing the Right Thing

ROB BOOKER

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

book_a01ffirs.qxd

12/20/06

3:12 PM

Page iv

Copyright © 2007 by Rob Booker. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
Wiley Bicentennial logo: Richard J. Pacifico.
Financial charts throughout this book created using TradeStation software. Copyright ©
TradeStation Technologies, Inc., 1992–2006.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at
www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030,
(201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect
to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any
implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may
be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and
strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a
professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss
of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental,
consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please
contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside
the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears
in print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley
products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Booker, Rob, 1971–
Adventures of a currency trader : a fable about trading, courage,
and doing the right thing / Rob Booker.
p. cm.— (Wiley trading series)
Includes index.
ISBN-13 978-0-470-04948-8 (cloth)
1. Foreign exchange market. 2. Foreign exchange futures.
3. Speculation. I. Title.
HG3851.B62 2007
332.4'5--dc22
2006029332
Printed in the United States of America.
10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

book_a01ffirs.qxd

12/20/06

3:12 PM

Page v

For Kris
Thank you for telling me to go upstairs and write my book.

book_a01ffirs.qxd

12/20/06

3:12 PM

Page vi

book_a02ftoc.qxd

12/20/06

1:45 PM

Page vii

Contents

Foreword

ix

Preface

xi

Acknowledgments

xiii

About the Author

xv

Introduction

1

Chapter 1

In Search of Amazing Profits

3

Chapter 2

The Future Looks Bright

11

Chapter 3

A Trip to the Thirty-First Floor

16

Chapter 4

Two Promising Conversations

28

Chapter 5

Lessons Learned

33

Chapter 6

A Turn for the Worse

45

Chapter 7

Trying to Awake from the Nightmare

57

Chapter 8

Charlie Flank Goes to U.S. National Bank

63

Chapter 9

Mapping Out a New Career

73
vii

book_a02ftoc.qxd

12/20/06

1:45 PM

Page viii

viii

CONTENTS

Chapter 10

Charlie Flank Meets His Match

79

Chapter 11

Coming Clean

94

Chapter 12

Looks Can Be Deceiving

104

Chapter 13

The Story of George Sisler

114

Chapter 14

Back to Square One

122

Chapter 15

Breakfast with Harvey

133

Chapter 16

Back to Where It All Began

149

Chapter 17

Testing

164

Chapter 18

Homework

175

Chapter 19

Team Banes Begins Anew

183

Chapter 20

Presenting Our Findings

189

Chapter 21

Back in the Game

194

Chapter 22

Return to the Thirty-First Floor

197

Chapter 23

Settling My Tab

200

Epilogue

203

Appendix A: The Retail Carry Trade

207

Appendix B: How I Got Six Hundred Pips

211

Index

215

book_a03fbetw.qxd

12/20/06

1:38 PM

Page ix

Foreword

rading technology has made exponential advances over the past
decade. It is no longer necessary to work at a bank to trade currency, nor is it necessary to have a broker talk your ear off about
why Pfizer should be taking off, when all you wanted to do was buy some
Intel. These days you can do it all from home on your computer. It is this
idea of independence and freedom that is attracting so many of us to the
trading marketplace.
That old statistic about 90 percent of traders going belly-up within
the first year . . . yeah that still applies, give or take a few percent. But
Rob Booker has made it a personal mission to prove that it needn’t always be the case. He has built a network of trading students all over the
world and helped them to realize that focus and discipline are all that
make a successful trader. Systems are a dime a dozen (or sometimes
$3,000 each), but only the disciplined trader who denies distraction will
make any money from them.
The market is overrun with books, courses, lectures, seminars, and
webinars designed to teach us all how to trade for a living and perhaps acquire a sense of freedom by doing so. The problem is that each expert who
presents such an offering is out to prove that it is the best and maybe the
only good trading system out there. Rob will tell you that the system is not
the most important piece of the trading puzzle. It is the ability to know exactly what you are looking for, wait patiently (or frantically, as long as you
really wait) for it to happen, and then jump on it. And repeat. And repeat.
Trading can become boring and redundant. But it is about making
money, not about excitement. It is about making money, not about being
right or smart. And well . . . trading isn’t even about the act of trading; it is
just about making money, to afford the freedom that we all desire. This
freedom is where the excitement really comes in. Freedom is the end. Hard
work, discipline, and focus are the means. It sounds lame, played out, and
cliché, but it is still true. When we lose sight of that truth and start feeling
like genius traders, we start screwing up. Many people give up along the

T

ix

book_a03fbetw.qxd

12/20/06

x

1:38 PM

Page x

FOREWORD

way, perhaps like the fabled gold miner who gives up digging just one inch
away from the vein of gold.
One of the top five most important things Rob ever helped me with,
was to not give up when I was losing and my financial situation was nearly
demanding that I focus elsewhere. He helped me dust myself off, reassess
my commitment to becoming a successful trader, and start over with a
proper foundation for success over the long haul. (Thanks Dude.)
In Adventures of a Currency Trader, Rob explores—through the story
of Harry Banes—the ups and downs of being a trader, the struggles many
of us must face to obtain the freedom that we are reaching for, and the liberating sense of finally making it.
This book, which is unique in its format, gives traders deep ideas to
think about: It presents a foundation to trade by and an example we can relate to.
MAXWELL FOX, currency trader
South Pacific
August 2006

book_a04fpref.qxd

12/20/06

1:48 PM

Page xi

Preface

rading can bring you independence. Trading currency has brought
that to me, and I hope that it can do the same for you.
It’s not easy. It takes time and discipline.
It’s an adventure. But you can do it.
I will show you how, with the help of my friend Harry Banes.
The story you are holding in your hands is told through his eyes—he is
Every Trader. There’s a little bit of each one of us in Harry. And as you read,
you’ll follow Harry as he learns from some of the best traders in the world,
alongside his friend and mentor.
As you get to know Harry, I think you will like him. He doesn’t start
trading with a huge sum of money, and his ambition is larger than his ability. Knowing where Harry came from can help us appreciate how we all
begin our trading careers: nervous, excited, unskilled, and unproven. His
financial situation, his day job, his life as a new trader, and his relationships with those around him, are much like mine were, or maybe yours are
right now. His challenges and obstacles might remind you of the struggles
you are facing right now. But he is determined to become a trader no matter what gets in the way.
Even the humblest among us can go on to become great traders. Even
the chump traders can become champions. Even the indebted can become
financially independent.
Harry admits early on that he’s a rookie trader, which doesn’t adequately prepare you for how bad he is. He’s the worst trader I’ve ever
known. But we’ll stand next to Harry as he picks himself up from the sidewalk on Wall Street and begins to implement the wise counsel of an experienced trader who agrees to mentor him. From Harry’s experiences, you’ll
learn how to recover from disastrous losses, how to set yourself up as a
full-time trader, how to talk to your loved ones about what you’re doing.
But that’s not all.
You’ll learn with Harry how some of his mentor’s best and worst former students set up their charts, do their analysis, and take their trades.

T

xi

book_a04fpref.qxd

12/20/06

1:48 PM

xii

Page xii

PREFACE

What is more important, you’ll learn how Harry eventually uses similar
techniques to become a profitable trader and reach financial freedom. And
most important of all, you’ll learn not only how he made those profits, but
how he was able to keep them.
I need to stress two more things: Every character in this book is fictional, although you might see a bit of yourself in some of them. For more
details about Harry, his mentor, their friends, and everything else about the
book, check out Harry’s web site at www.HarryBanes.com.
I now invite you to go on an adventure with Harry.
Read on.
ROB BOOKER
Wheeling, West Virginia
December 2006

book_a05flast.qxd

12/20/06

1:50 PM

Page xiii

Acknowledgments

his book took me 20 years to write. Well, not this specific book. But
just the act of finishing a book and getting it to a publisher. While I
trade for a living, I have dreamed of being a writer since I was 10
years old and sat in the back of Mrs. Holmes’s fifth-grade class in La Verne,
California. But just because I had the dream didn’t mean that I made it easy
for myself. In the past two decades, I have allowed some people and experiences to get in the way of my dreams.
Other people have helped me clear away those obstacles. I want to
thank them.
Mrs. Holmes was my first and greatest inspiration. I would never have
put pencil to paper in my small yellow notebook if not for her. She encouraged me and started me on the path to writing; without her, I could never
have believed in myself. Many times during the writing of this book, I
thought of the faith that she had in me when I was still so young, and I was
able to write another sentence or page. I owe more to her than I have ever
repaid.
I met Maxwell Fox in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, at the first seminar I
ever did. He is the best trading friend I have ever had; he has helped me
overcome plot difficulties and name characters (including Harry); and he
was the first person to read the entire manuscript. I am a better person
for knowing Max. He leaves people better than he found them. He is also
the single greatest trader I’ve ever taught, hands down. He is disciplined,
he is dedicated to the science of backtesting, and he wrote the funniest
ebook on chart patterns you’ve ever seen. You can get that ebook at
http://www.HarryBanes.com.
Eric Beutler helped in a moment of need. At just the right moment, in
fact. And then he helped again and again and again.
I could have dedicated this book to David Murphy. He has been by my
side for more than 20 years, to help me at every major point in my life. He
has endured my ego, my mistakes, my weaknesses, far more than I could
ever repay.

T

xiii

book_a05flast.qxd

xiv

12/20/06

1:50 PM

Page xiv

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Emilie Herman and Kevin Commins at Wiley were patient with me and
helped me every step of the way. Kathy Lien and Boris Schlossberg introduced me to Kevin and generally cheered me on when they didn’t even
know that I needed it. Jesse Torres introduced me to Betsy from Deutsche
Bank, who kindly showed me a trading floor.
I have been honored to work with some of the finest currency traders
in the world. I would stand any of these people up to any other traders on
the planet: I can’t name all of them, but here are some from the past few
years: Craig Taylor, David Elliott, Scott Kush, Derek McGuire, Roman
Jakubas, Beth McNabb, Nina Hernandez, Louis Cooper, Angela Nitkin, Ben
McDonald, Andy Eastabrook, Dan Ziembienski, John Law, Gary Young,
Chris Ennico, Thomas Gibbs, Marie-Sophie Blanchet, Todd Bryant, Nona
Bates, Nader, Alex Semaan, Elaine Sequeira, Jonathan Warr, Jeff Politis,
Irene Beregszaszi, Stephen Nieri, Chuck Smalley, Joseph Burgos, Johnny
Ream, Darin Carlyle, Matt Forsyth, George Roy, Damodar Patlolla, Greg
Walker, Guita Al-Boudoor, Napaporn Nozawa, Darryl Martins, Chris Pyor,
Carlos Angel, Steve and Dave Trehan, the Pip Brothers Szymon and Jerry,
Gene Miller, Craig Brinton, Wasyl Szeremeta, Phranq, Paul Kurtz . . .
I could go on for a long time. But these are among the best people I
know. I am lucky to know them. They all helped me to write this book.
Any success I have in life is possible because I married my best friend.
Kris is the best example of courage in the face of opposition and trial that I
know. And she has supported me more than I have ever been able to support her. Thank you for putting me through law school, and for helping me
quit a legal career and follow my dreams.
And last of all, I want to thank my son Isaac. You found me at the brink
of emotional disaster and you reached out and saved me. You came to us in
the very moment when we needed you most. I wrote this book for you, too,
even though you are too young to read.
R. B.

book_a05flast.qxd

12/20/06

1:50 PM

Page xv

About the Author

ob Booker is an active proprietary forex trader and forex educator.
Mr. Booker has trained hundreds of forex traders around the
world. He speaks about currency trading at conferences, expos,
street corners, first class and coach seats, weddings, funerals, mornings,
evenings, and pretty much whenever anyone will or will not listen to him.
Rob focuses on helping traders deal with the mental, psychological, and
discipline issues related to trading. Mr. Booker has authored a number
of ebooks, including Strategy:10, which has been downloaded over
200,000 times.
Rob can be reached at rob@robbooker.com.

R

xv

book_a05flast.qxd

12/20/06

1:50 PM

Page xvi

book_a05flast.qxd

12/20/06

1:50 PM

Page xvii

Adventures
of a
Currency
Trader

book_a05flast.qxd

12/20/06

1:50 PM

Page xviii

book_cintro.qxd

12/20/06

2:42 PM

Page 1

Introduction

y name is Harry Banes. I used to be the worst trader in the world.
A real chump. I bought when I should have sold, and sold when I
should have stayed out of the market completely. Ever do that? Of
course not.
I was an expert at exiting my trades at just the exact moment when
they would go from staggering loss to hugely profitable. Convinced that
the trading gods wanted me to suffer, I nearly gave up on many occasions.
When I say that I was a chump trader, I mean Super Chump. I lost thousands of dollars that my wife and I could not afford to lose.
It’s a good thing that I never gave up. With the help of an amazing
friend that you are going to meet in this book, I became a superprofitable
trader. I traded my way out of the mess I was in.
If it were not for trading, I’d still be working in the filing room of the
law firm Wakeman, Butterman, and Bailey, on 59th Street in Manhattan.
That was the crummiest job I’ve ever had in my whole life. For 11 years, I
worked there like a dog on a leash. Two years ago, I broke the leash and
walked away, and I became human again.
You see, I reached my trading Independence Day. And I have never
looked back.
I want you to do the same. That’s why I am writing this book.

M

1

book_cintro.qxd

12/20/06

2:42 PM

Page 2

book_c01.qxd

12/20/06

1:50 PM

Page 3

CHAPTER 1

In Search of
Amazing Profits

started trading because I saw a commercial on television about how
simple it was to make money trading currency. A company called Amazing Forex Profits, supposedly based in New York City, the financial
capital of the world, had agreed to unleash the powerful secrets of professional traders to the common man (me) for an unbelievable price. Making
the decision to buy the software was easy: I needed money fast, and the advertisement seemed to promise that all I had to do was buy an easy system
for making loads of cash every day. I called the toll-free number and right
there, in the middle of the night, I spent $2,000 on that software. Now I only
had to wait for the package to come in the mail. The road to riches was
lined with profits from the forex (foreign exchange) market, and I was on it.
I didn’t say a thing about this to my wife. I knew that the best way to
handle this situation would be to get the software, have Scott, my assistant, install it on my computer at work, and start making a boatload of
money; then I would buy something really nice for my wife and announce
that I was going to be a full-time forex trader, a millionaire, and a hero to
our family. The plan was foolproof!
Waiting for the software was agonizing. At the age of 35, I found myself
racing home to see what had come in the mail that day. (Why had I not
opted to spend an extra $49.95 for expedited shipping? The kind sales operator from India had insisted I would want to get started as soon as possible, so why didn’t I listen?) It seemed as if an eternity passed before the
package arrived, but arrive it did. So eager was I to start (and having
learned from the infomercial that the forex market was open 24 hours a

I

3

book_c01.qxd

4

12/20/06

1:50 PM

Page 4

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

day), I called Scott and asked him to meet me downtown that very evening.
I told my wife that I had some important matters to discuss at the office,
kissed her and my kids goodbye, and hopped on the subway to 59th Street.
Everything seemed to be coming together. Although we had a lot of
debt, I figured that with this new trading venture, I could make some serious profits. Some of the people on the commercial were making thousands
of dollars a day—and this was not some fraudulent get-rich-quick scheme.
I had met people who day-traded the stock market. They did their homework, they treated it like a job, and they were making real money. Some of
them had made a lot of money in the late 1990s and although the market
had fallen, they were still in the game. I liked the thought that I was going
to join the ranks of people who could make money for a few moments of
work per day.
When I arrived at the office, it was past 9:00 P.M. and everyone had
long since gone home. Waiting at my cubicle was Scott Needleway, a junior filing clerk who had attended the same high school that I did (only he
graduated seven years after me). He had long hair. He was brilliant with
technology. He also won the “most likely to go to jail” award in his high
school yearbook.
“So what’re we doin’ tonight?” he asked. I could tell that he had either
been drinking or smoking something stronger than cigarettes. His days at
the firm were numbered already, so I let it pass. Especially considering that
I needed his help that night.
“I’ve got the software. I need you to show me how to get it running.”
Scott had essentially run my computer for me for the past five years.
Thank goodness, my job didn’t require much work on the computer, and an
attorney who needed to contact me would simply e-mail Scott. He, in turn,
would tell me what was going on. Now I was excited to do some of my own
computer work.
He took the CDs and quickly installed the software without a hitch. As
promised on the commercial, the software was fairly straightforward. It
was like a news feed—with headlines popping up on the screen, telling me
to either buy or sell a particular currency pair. On another section of the
screen, it showed all the current open positions. Most were colored green,
showing me that they were making money.
All this had only taken 10 minutes, but I could tell that Scott wanted to
go home, or go wherever he went when he wasn’t at the office. I told him
that I would see him tomorrow and he darted out of the office without another word. He hadn’t even asked what the software did! Right there, he
had walked away from an opportunity to improve his financial situation.
Well, he could stay and work at Wakeman, Butterman, and Bailey for the
rest of his life. Not me.
Instead of going home, I dove right into the software. I took my time
getting used to clicking around the screens. I read the help manual twice,
