
excited so much attention about the middle of the seventeenth century. The following was
the recipe given by Paracelsus for the cure of any wounds inflicted by a sharp weapon,
except such as had penetrated the heart, the brain, or the arteries. "Take of moss growing
on the head of a thief who has been hanged and left in the air; of real mummy; of human
blood, still warm -- of each, one ounce; of human suet, two ounces; of linseed oil,
turpentine, and Armenian bole -- of each, two drachms. Mix all well in a mortar, and
keep the salve in an oblong, narrow urn." With this salve the weapon, after being dipped
in the blood from the wound, was to be carefully anointed, and then laid by in a cool
place. In the mean time, the wound was to be duly washed with fair clean water, covered
with a clean, soft, linen rag, and opened once a day to cleanse off purulent or other
matter. Of the success of this treatment, says the writer of the able article on Animal
Magnetism, in the twelfth volume of the "Foreign Quarterly Review," there cannot be the
least doubt; "for surgeons at this moment follow exactly the same method, except
anointing the weapon!
The weapon salve continued to be much spoken of on the Continent, and many eager
claimants appeared for the honour of the invention. Dr. Fludd, or A Fluctibus, the
Rosicrucian, who has been already mentioned in a previous part of this volume, was very
zealous in introducing it into England. He tried it with great success in several cases; and
no wonder; for, while he kept up the spirits of his patients by boasting of the great
efficacy of the salve, he never neglected those common, but much more important
remedies, of washing, bandaging, &c. which the experience of all ages had declared
sufficient for the purpose. Fludd, moreover, declared, that the magnet was a remedy for
all diseases, if properly applied; but that man having, like the earth, a north and a south
pole, magnetism could only take place when his body was in a boreal position! In the
midst of his popularity, an attack was made upon him and his favourite remedy, the salve;
which, however, did little or nothing to diminish the belief in its efficacy. One "Parson
Foster" wrote a pamphlet, entitled "Hyplocrisma Spongus; or, a Spunge to wipe away the
Weapon-Salve ;" in which he declared, that it was as bad as witchcraft to use or
recommend such an unguent; that it was invented by the devil, who, at the last day,
would seize upon every person who had given it the slightest encouragement. "In fact,"
said Parson Foster, "the devil himself gave it to Paracelsus; Paracelsus to the Emperor;
the Emperor to the courtier; the courtier to Baptista Porta; and Baptista Porta to Dr.
Fludd, a doctor of physic, yet living and practising in the famous city of London, who
now stands tooth and nail for it." Dr. Fludd, thus assailed, took up the pen in defence of
his unguent, in a reply called "The Squeezing of Parson Foster's Spunge; wherein the
Spunge-Bearer's immodest Carriage and Behaviour towards his Brethren is detected; the
bitter Flames of his slanderous Reports are, by the sharp Vinegar of Truth, corrected and
quite extinguished; and, lastly, the virtuous Validity of his Spunge in wiping away the
Weapon-Salve, is crushed out and clean abolished."
Shortly after this dispute a more distinguished believer in the weapon-salve made his
appearance, in the person of Sir Kenelm Digby, the son of Sir Everard Digby, who was
executed for his participation in the Gunpowder Plot. This gentleman, who, in other
respects, was an accomplished scholar and an able man, was imbued with all the
extravagant notions of the alchymists. He believed in the philosopher's stone, and wished

to engage Descartes to devote his energies to the discovery of the elixir of life, or some
other means by which the existence of man might be prolonged to an indefinite period.
He gave his wife, the beautiful Venetia Anastasia Stanley, a dish of capons, fed upon
vipers, according to the plan supposed to have been laid down by Arnold of Villeneuve,
in the hope that she might thereby preserve her loveliness for a century. If such a man
once took up the idea of the weapon-salve, it was to be expected that he would make the
most of it. In his hands, however, it was changed from an unguent into a powder, and was
called the powder of sympathy. He pretended that he had acquired the knowledge of it
from a Carmelite friar, who had learned it in Persia or Armenia, from an oriental
philosopher of great renown. King James, the Prince of Wales, the Duke of Buckingham,
and many other noble personages, believed in its efficacy. The following remarkable
instance of his mode of cure was read by Sir Kenelm to a society of learned men at
Montpellier. Mr. James Howell, the well-known author of the "Dendrologia," and of
various letters, coming by chance as two of his best friends were fighting a duel, rushed
between them, and endeavoured to part them. He seized the sword of one of the
combatants by the hilt, while, at the same time, he grasped the other by the blade. Being
transported with fury one against the other, they struggled to rid themselves of the
hindrance caused by their friend; and in so doing, the one whose sword was held by the
blade by Mr. Howell, drew it away roughly, and nearly cut his hand off, severing the
nerves and muscles, and penetrating to the bone. The other, almost at the same instant,
disengaged his sword, and aimed a blow at the head of his antagonist, which Mr. Howell
observing, raised his wounded hand with the rapidity of thought, to prevent the blow. The
sword fell on the back of his already wounded hand, and cut it severely. "It seemed," said
Sir Kenelm Digby, "as if some unlucky star raged over them, that they should have both
shed the blood of that dear friend, for whose life they would have given their own, if they
had been in their proper mind at the time." Seeing Mr. Howell's face all besmeared with
blood from his wounded hand, they both threw down their swords and embraced him, and
bound up his hand with a garter, to close the veins, which were cut, and bled profusely.
They then conveyed him home, and sent for a surgeon. King James, who was much
attached to Mr. Howell, afterwards sent his own surgeon to attend him. We must continue
the narrative in the words of Sir Kenelm Digby:- "It was my chance," says he, "to be
lodged hard by him: and, four or five days after, as I was making myself ready, he came
to my house, and prayed me to view his wounds; 'for I understand,' said he, 'that you have
extraordinary remedies on such occasions; and my surgeons apprehend some fear, that it
may grow to a gangrene, and so the hand must be cut off.' In effect, his countenance
discovered that he was in much pain, which, he said, was insupportable, in regard of the
extreme inflammation. I told him I would willingly serve him; but if, haply, he knew the
manner how I could cure him, without touching or seeing him, it might be that he would
not expose himself to my manner of curing; because he would think it, peradventure,
either ineffectual or superstitious. He replied, 'The many wonderful things which people
have related unto me of your way of medicinement, makes me nothing doubt at all of its
efficacy; and all that I have to say unto you is comprehended in the Spanish proverb,
Hagase el milagro y hagalo Mahoma -- Let the miracle be done, though Mahomet do it.'
"I asked him then for anything that had the blood upon it: so he presently sent for his
garter, wherewith his hand was first bound; and, as I called for a basin of water, as if I

would wash my hands, I took a handful of powder of vitriol, which I had in my study,
and presently dissolved it. As soon as the bloody garter was brought me, I put it in the
basin, observing, in the interim, what Mr. Howell did, who stood talking with a
gentleman in a corner of my chamber, not regarding at all what I was doing. He started
suddenly, as if he had found some strange alteration in himself. I asked him what he
ailed? 'I know not what ails me; but I find that I feel no more pain. Methinks that a
pleasing kind of freshness, as it were a wet cold napkin, did spread over my hand, which
hath taken away the inflammation that tormented me before.' I replied, 'Since, then, you
feel already so much good of my medicament, I advise you to cast away all your plasters;
only keep the wound clean, and in a moderate temper, betwixt heat and cold.' This was
presently reported to the Duke of Buckingham, and a little after, to the King, who were
both very curious to know the circumstances of the business; which was, that after dinner,
I took the garter out of the water, and put it to dry before a great fire. It was scarce dry
before Mr. Howell's servant came running, and saying that his master felt as much
burning as ever he had done, if not more; for the heat was such as if his hand were
betwixt coals of fire. I answered, that although that had happened at present, yet he
should find ease in a short time; for I knew the reason of this new accident, and would
provide accordingly; for his master should be free from that inflammation, it might be,
before he could possibly return to him: but, in case he found no ease, I wished him to
come presently back again; if not, he might forbear coming. Thereupon he went; and, at
the instant, I did put the garter again into the water; thereupon he found his master
without any pain at all. To be brief, there was no sense of pain afterwards; but within five
or six days, the wounds were cicatrised and entirely healed."
Such is the marvellous story of Sir Kenelm Digby. Other practitioners of that age were
not behind him in absurdity. It was not always necessary to use either the powder of
sympathy, or the weapon-salve, to effect a cure. It was sufficient to magnetise the sword
with the hand (the first faint dawn of the animal theory), to relieve any pain the same
weapon had caused. They pretended, that if they stroked the sword upwards with their
fingers, the wounded person would feel immediate relief; but if they stroked it
downwards, he would feel intolerable pain.[Reginald Scott, quoted by Sir Walter Scott, in
the notes to the "Lay of the Last Minstrel," c. iii. v. xxiii.]
Another very strange notion of the power and capabilities of magnetism was entertained
at the same time. It was believed that a sympathetic alphabet could be made on the flesh,
by means of which persons could correspond with each other, and communicate all their
ideas with the rapidity of volition, although thousands of miles apart. From the arms of
two persons a piece of flesh was cut, and mutually transplanted, while still warm and
bleeding. The piece so severed grew to the new arm on which it was placed; but still
retained so close a sympathy with its native limb, that its old possessor was always
sensible of any injury done to it. Upon these transplanted pieces were tattooed the letters
of the alphabet; so that, when a communication was to be made, either of the persons,
though the wide Atlantic rolled between them, had only to prick his arm with a magnetic
needle, and straightway his friend received intimation that the telegraph was at work.
Whatever letter he pricked on his own arm pained the same letter on the arm of his
correspondent. ["Foreign Quarterly Review," vol. xii. p. 417.] Who knows but this

system, if it had received proper encouragement, might not have rendered the Post-Office
unnecessary, and even obviated much of the necessity for railroads? Let modern
magnetisers try and bring it to perfection. It is not more preposterous than many of their
present notions; and, if carried into effect, with the improvement of some stenographical
expedient for diminishing the number of punctures, would be much more useful than
their plan of causing persons to read with their great toes, [Wirth's "Theorie des
Somnambulismes," p. 79.] or seeing, with their eyes shut, into other people's bodies, and
counting the number of arteries therein. ["Report of the Academic Royale de Medicine," - case of Mademoiselle Celine Sauvage, p. 186.]
Contemporary with Sir Kenelm Digby, was the no less famous Mr. Valentine Greatraks
who, without mentioning magnetism, or laying claim to any theory, practised upon
himself and others a deception much more akin to the animal magnetism of the present
day, than the mineral magnetism it was then so much the fashion to study. He was the son
of an Irish gentleman, of good education and property, in the county of Cork. He fell, at
an early age, into a sort of melancholy derangement. After some time, he had an impulse,
or strange persuasion in his mind, which continued to present itself, whether he were
sleeping or waking, that God had given him the power of curing the king's evil. He
mentioned this persuasion to his wife, who very candidly told him that he was a fool! He
was not quite sure of this, notwithstanding the high authority from which it came, and
determined to make trial of the power that was in him. A few days afterwards, he went to
one William Maher, of Saltersbridge, in the parish of Lismore, who was grievously
afflicted with the king's evil in his eyes, cheek, and throat. Upon this man, who was of
abundant faith, he laid his hands, stroked him, and prayed fervently. He had the
satisfaction to see him heal considerably in the course of a few days; and, finally, with the
aid of other remedies, to be quite cured. This success encouraged him in the belief that he
had a divine mission. Day after day he had further impulses from on high, that he was
called upon to cure the ague also. In the course of time he extended his powers to the
curing of epilepsy, ulcers, aches, and lameness. All the county of Cork was in a
commotion to see this extraordinary physician, who certainly operated some very great
benefit in cases where the disease was heightened by hypochondria and depression of
spirits. According to his own account, [Greatraks' Account of himself, in a letter to the
Honourable Robert Boyle.] such great multitudes resorted to him from divers places, that
he had no time to follow his own business, or enjoy the company of his family and
friends. He was obliged to set aside three days in the week, from six in the morning till
six at night, during which time only he laid hands upon all that came. Still the crowds
which thronged around him were so great, that the neighbouring towns were not able to
accommodate them. He thereupon left his house in the country, and went to Youghal,
where the resort of sick people, not only from all parts of Ireland, but from England,
continued so great, that the magistrates were afraid they would infect the place by their
diseases. Several of these poor credulous people no sooner saw him than they fell into
fits, and he restored them by waving his hand in their faces, and praying over them. Nay,
he affirmed, that the touch of his glove had driven pains away, and, on one occasion, cast
out from a woman several devils, or evil spirits, who tormented her day and night. "Every
one of these devils," says Greatraks, "was like to choke her, when it came up into her
throat." It is evident, from this, that the woman's complaint was nothing but hysteria.

The clergy of the diocese of Lismore, who seem to have had much clearer notions of
Greatraks' pretensions than their parishioners, set their faces against the new prophet and
worker of miracles. He was cited to appear in the Dean's Court, and prohibited from
laying on his hands for the future: but he cared nothing for the church. He imagined that
he derived his powers direct from Heaven, and continued to throw people into fits, and
bring them to their senses again, as usual, almost exactly after the fashion of modern
magnetisers. His reputation became, at last, so great, that Lord Conway sent to him from
London, begging-that he would come over immediately, to cure a grievous head-ache
which his lady had suffered for several years, and which the principal physicians of
England had been unable to relieve.
Greatraks accepted the invitation, and tried his manipulations and prayers upon Lady
Conway. He failed, however, in affording any relief. The poor lady's head-ache was
excited by causes too serious to allow her any help, even from faith and a lively
imagination. He lived for some months in Lord Conway's house, at Ragley, in
Warwickshire, operating cures similar to those he had performed in Ireland. He
afterwards removed to London, and took a house in Lincoln's Inn Fields, which soon
became the daily resort of all the nervous and credulous women of the metropolis. A very
amusing account of Greatraks at this time (1665), is given in the second volume of the
"Miscellanies of St. Evremond," under the title of the Irish prophet. It is the most graphic
sketch ever made of this early magnetiser. Whether his pretensions were more or less
absurd than those of some of his successors, who have lately made their appearance
among us, would be hard to say.
"When M. de Comminges," says St. Evremond, "was ambassador from his most Christian
Majesty to the King of Great Britain, there came to London an Irish prophet, who passed
himself off as a great worker of miracles. Some persons of quality having begged M. de
Comminges to invite him to his house, that they might be witnesses of some of his
miracles, the ambassador promised to satisfy them, as much from his own curiosity as
from courtesy to his friends; and gave notice to Greatraks that he would be glad to see
him.
"A rumour of the prophet's coming soon spread all over the town, and the hotel of M. de
Comminges was crowded by sick persons, who came full of confidence in their speedy
cure. The Irishman made them wait a considerable time for him, but came at last, in the
midst of their impatience, with a grave and simple countenance, that showed no signs of
his being a cheat. Monsieur de Comminges prepared to question him strictly, hoping to
discourse with him on the matters that he had read of in Van Helmont and Bodinus; but
he was not able to do so, much to his regret, for the crowd became so great, and cripples
and others pressed around so impatiently to be the first cured, that the servants were
obliged to use threats, and even force, before they could establish order among them, or
place them in proper ranks.
"The prophet affirmed that all diseases were caused by evil spirits. Every infirmity was
with him a case of diabolical possession. The first that was presented to him was a man

suffering from gout and rheumatism, and so severely that the physicians had been unable
to cure him. 'Ah,' said the miracle-worker, 'I have seen a good deal of this sort of spirits
when I was in Ireland. They are watery spirits, who bring on cold shivering, and excite an
overflow of aqueous humours in our poor bodies.' Then addressing the man, he said, 'Evil
spirit, who hast quitted thy dwelling in the waters to come and afflict this miserable body,
I command thee to quit thy new abode, and to return to thine ancient habitation!' This
said, the sick man was ordered to withdraw, and another was brought forward in his
place. This new comer said he was tormented by the melancholy vapours. In fact, he
looked like a hypochondriac; one of those persons diseased in imagination, and who but
too often become so in reality. 'Aerial spirit,' said the Irishman, 'return, I command thee,
into the air! -- exercise thy natural vocation of raising tempests, and do not excite any
more wind in this sad unlucky body!' This man was immediately turned away to make
room for a third patient, who, in the Irishman's opinion, was only tormented by a little bit
of a sprite, who could not withstand his command for an instant. He Pretended that he
recognized this sprite by some marks which were invisible to the company, to whom he
turned with a smile, and said, 'This sort of spirit does not often do much harm, and is
always very diverting.' To hear him talk, one would have imagined that he knew all about
spirits -- their names, their rank, their numbers, their employment, and all the functions
they were destined to; and he boasted of being much better acquainted with the intrigues
of demons than he was with the affairs of men. You can hardly imagine what a reputation
he gained in a short time. Catholics and Protestants visited him from every part, all
believing that power from Heaven was in his hands."
After relating a rather equivocal adventure of a husband and wife, who implored
Greatraks to cast out the devil of dissension which had crept in between them, St.
Evremond thus sums up the effect he produced on the popular mind: -- "So great was the
confidence in him, that the blind fancied they saw the light which they did not see -- the
deaf imagined that they heard -- the lame that they walked straight, and the paralytic that
they had recovered the use of their limbs. An idea of health made the sick forget for a
while their maladies; and imagination, which was not less active in those merely drawn
by curiosity than in the sick, gave a false view to the one class, from the desire of seeing,
as it operated a false cure on the other from the strong desire of being healed. Such was
the power of the Irishman over the mind, and such was the influence of the mind upon the
body. Nothing was spoken of in London but his prodigies; and these prodigies were
supported by such great authorities, that the bewildered multitude believed them almost
without examination, while more enlightened people did not dare to reject them from
their own knowledge. The public opinion, timid and enslaved, respected this imperious
and, apparently, well-authenticated error. Those who saw through the delusion kept their
opinion to themselves, knowing how useless it was to declare their disbelief to a people
filled with prejudice and admiration."
About the same time that Valentine Greatraks was thus magnetising the people of
London, an Italian enthusiast, named Francisco Bagnone, was performing the same tricks
in Italy, and with as great success. He had only to touch weak women with his hands, or
sometimes (for the sake of working more effectively upon their fanaticism)with a relic, to
make them fall into fits and manifest all the symptoms of magnetism.

Besides these, several learned men, in different parts of Europe, directed their attention to
the study of the magnet, believing it might he rendered efficacious in many diseases. Van
Helmont, in particular, published a work on the effects of magnetism on the human
frame; and Balthazar Gracian, a Spaniard, rendered himself famous for the boldness of
his views on the subject. "The magnet," said the latter, "attracts iron; iron is found
everywhere; everything, therefore, is under the influence of magnetism. It is only a
modification of the general principle, which establishes harmony or foments divisions
among men. It is the same agent which gives rise to sympathy, antipathy, and the
passions." ["Introduction to the Study of Animal Magnetism," by Baron Dupotet de
Sennevoy, p. 315.]
Magnetisers - 2
Baptista Porta, who, in the whimsical genealogy of the weapon-salve, given by Parson
Foster in his attack upon Dr. a Fluctibus, is mentioned as one of its fathers, had also great
faith in the efficacy of the magnet, and operated upon the imagination of his patients in a
manner which was then considered so extraordinary that he was accused of being a
magician, and prohibited from practising by the Court of Rome. Among others who
distinguished themselves by their faith in magnetism, Sebastian Wirdig and William
Maxwell claim especial notice. Wirdig was professor of medicine at the University of
Rostock in Mecklenburgh, and wrote a treatise called "The New Medicine of the Spirits,"
which he presented to the Royal Society of London. An edition of this work was printed
in 1673, in which the author maintained that a magnetic influence took place, not only
between the celestial and terrestrial bodies, but between all living things. The whole
world, he said, was under the influence of magnetism: life was preserved by magnetism;
death was the consequence of magnetism!
Maxwell, the other enthusiast, was an admiring disciple of Paracelsus, and boasted that
he had irradiated the obscurity in which too many of the wonder-working recipes of that
great philosopher were enveloped. His works were printed at Frankfort, in 1679. It would
seem, from the following passage, that he was aware of the great influence of
imagination, as well in the production as in the cure of diseases. "If you wish to work
prodigies," says he, "abstract from the materiality of beings -- increase the sum of
spirituality in bodies -- rouse the spirit from its slumbers. Unless you do one or other of
these things -- unless you can bind the idea, you can never perform anything good or
great." Here, in fact, lies the whole secret of magnetism, and all delusions of a similar
kind: increase the spirituality -- rouse the spirit from its slumbers, or in other words, work
upon the imagination -- induce belief and blind confidence, and you may do anything.
This passage, which is quoted with approbation by M. Dupotet in a recent work
["Introduction to the Study of Animal Magnetism," p. 318.] as strongly corroborative of
the theory now advanced by the animal-magnetists, is just the reverse. If they believe
they can work all their wonders by the means so dimly shadowed forth by Maxwell, what
becomes of the universal fluid pervading all nature, and which they pretend to pour into
weak and diseased bodies from the tips of their fingers?
