
There is one other risk often mentioned when the topic of short-selling
arises, and that is how potential losses are infinite. In other words, if a
person pays $10 a share for a stock, the most he is risking is $10 per share,
because a stock can never be worth less than zero. However, if a person is
short a stock and pledges to buy it back, there is no limit to how high the
stock can go, and thus a person’s theoretical risk is unlimited.
I think this argument has a point, but in general it’s pretty silly. I remember when I was learning to scuba dive that some people would get
completely unhinged at the vastness of the ocean. The ocean is gigantic,
it can be miles deep in places, and even in a normal dive spot, there is a
hundred feet of uninterrupted water beneath you. Yes, that’s all true, but

470

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

you’re buoyant, and it’s a bit preposterous to equate being a hundred feet
above the sea floor with being a hundred feet in the air.
By the same token, although one’s potential risk of loss is indeed unlimited, there are a few basic risk-management tools that can render this
point virtually moot:

r Position Size—There’s no reason any particular position has to constitute a large percentage of your portfolio. I personally tend to have a
very large number of positions, so even if I get a nasty surprise in one
stock, it has a very minor effect on my overall portfolio.
r Stop-Losses—If a person has no stop-loss order and is content to let a
stock he has sold short rise forever, then, yes, he can lose much more
than the sum of his original investment. But that would be foolish; you
should always have a stop-loss order on all your positions, if you want
to remain prudent.
r Price Ranges—The simple fact of the matter is that, even with an
earnings blowout or a corporate takeover, it is very rare that a stock
(unless it is a penny stock) pushes up hundreds of percent in value
overnight. Even if a short position moves against you, the percentage
loss is usually going to be quite modest. I try to keep my risk to less
than 10 percent for any one position, which is far enough away from
“unlimited” to make me comfortable.

EXCHANGE-TRADED FUNDS
Prior to 1993, there was no such thing as an exchange-traded fund (ETF),
but as of this writing, there are more than 1,500 of them. These are financial
instruments that trade very much like stocks but can represent a wide variety of slices of the financial world, including sectors, countries, and inverse
funds (which are of interest to us in this chapter).
Prior to their creation, the function of ETFs was largely covered by
mutual funds, but mutual funds have some pretty big disadvantages for
active traders, not the least of which is that they can be bought or sold only
at the end of the trading day. On the other hand, ETFs trade through the
day (and, for the most popular issues, after hours as well), and some ETFs
are among the most popular investment vehicles in the world.
For those looking to take on bearish positions, there is an added benefit: because of the existence of inverse funds, one can take on a long position while actually being short the market. This was useful to me, for
instance, in 2008, because I had money in a 401(k) that I wanted to use on
the short side, but the custodian forbade anything except long positions. I

For Bears Only

471

took advantage of inverse funds to produce an extremely substantial gain
that year. (Regrettably, in extending its mission of apparently protecting investors from themselves, the same custodian went so far as to ban trading
of ETFs altogether in 2009.)
A number of firms offer inverse funds, a couple of which are Rydex
and ProShares. With a regular brokerage account, you should be able to
buy and sell pretty much any ETF, and even if you are required to have
only long positions, you can still be short the market.
There are many ways to take on bearish positions by using ETFs. While
new ETFs are being created all the time, listed here are several of the existing categories:

r Index ETFs—These were the first ETFs ever created, with SPY being
the original back in 1993: SPY, for example, follows the movement of
the S&P 500, QQQQ follows the NASDAQ 100, and IWM follows the
Russell 2000. Most index ETFs are extremely heavily traded and thus
very liquid, and these represent the most direct way to short an entire
market. You could sell short the SPY, for instance, to be short the S&P
500 index.
r Sector ETFs—These cover entire sectors, such as semiconductors,
consumer staples, and so forth. These represent a good way (for bulls
and bears alike) to take a position on an entire industry as opposed to
a single stock or a whole index.
r Commodity ETFs—Most stock traders aren’t interested in getting directly involved in the commodities market by opening a futures account; these ETFs allow you to take advantage of price swings in gold,
silver, agricultural commodities, or a variety of other baskets. If you
wanted to take a bearish position on gold, for instance, the symbols
GLD and GDX are both very heavily traded gold ETFs.
r Inverse ETFs—These are similar to other ETFs, except that they go
up when the underlying instruments go down. For example, the symbol DOG is the inverse of the Dow 30 index, so if on a given day
the Dow 30 goes down by 2 percent, then DOG would climb about
4 percent.
r Leveraged ETFs—Finally, leveraged ETFs are supercharged versions
of regular ETFs, since they move more than 100 percent of the direction of the underlying instrument. Various coefficients are available,
such as 1.5 times, 2 times, 3 times, and even 4 times. For instance,
the symbol TWM is a double inverse fund on the Russell 2000, so if
on a given day the Russell went down 1.5 percent, meaning its ETF the
IWM would also be down 1.5 percent, then the TWM would be up about
3 percent, since the movement is doubled. Likewise, if the Russell went
up 1.5 percent, the TWM would go down 3 percent.

472

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

Now let’s take a moment to review a very important point about leveraged ETFs. There is a very insidious reality about leveraged ETFs that it
seems a lot of people do not understand, which is that unless a given index
or sector (on which the ETF is based) moves very consistently in the direction you desire, the value of your ETF will probably suffer even if, over the
long haul, the direction you want it to move is realized.
Let’s take an oversimplified example: let’s suppose you had a doubleinverse ETF on a given index, and let’s give it the value of $100. On a Monday, the index goes up 5 percent, meaning your ETF goes down to $90.
On Tuesday, to your relief, the index goes down 5 percent. Are you back to
where you started, since the index has moved in your direction by precisely
the same amount it moved against you the prior day? No, because your $90
ETF goes up 10 percent in value, which is $99. So you are down 1 percent,
even though, over the course of those two days, the index hasn’t budged.
Now imagine this process repeated over and over, and you will soon
realize that the value of the ETF can wither away, even if the market is
generally moving in your direction. If the index kept wiggling up and down,
day after day, the ETF would be down 40 percent in 100 trading days (and
this isn’t even taking into account fund expenses and other slippage, which
would damage the fund even more).
A surprising number of supposedly sophisticated investors didn’t
realize this when they bought into ultra ETFs, because both bullish- and
bearish-oriented leveraged funds tended to suffer unless their movement
was relatively consistent in the intended direction. Late in 2008, two new
instruments based on financial stocks were introduced; their symbols
were FAS (triple-bullish) and FAZ (triple-bearish). The extraordinary thing
is that both funds lost most of their value even though they are opposites.
Amateur observers would have assumed that one would prosper while
the other suffered, but both of them did poorly (and very savvy traders
shorted as much of both of them as they could when they were initially
brought to market).

PUTS FOR LEVERAGED PROFITS
If you are not well acquainted with options, here is a simple explanation:
options give you the right (but not the obligation) to buy (in the case of
a call option) or sell (in the case of a put option) a particular financial instrument at a particular price within a certain amount of time. Options are
derivative instruments, meaning they are based on something else (which
might be an index, a stock, a commodity, or the like).
An option’s price is crudely composed of two components: intrinsic
value and time premium. Let’s take the example of a call option on Apple

For Bears Only

473

Computer that expires in June of a certain year (for the purpose of this example, let’s say that it is currently April) and gives you the right to buy 100
shares of Apple at $200 per share. Let’s further assume that Apple is currently trading at $210 and the option in question has a value of $15. In this
instance, the intrinsic value of the call is $10 (because it is worth $10 to pay
$200 for a stock which has a market price of $210), and its time premium
is $5 (because there is uncertainty about what the price will do between
April and June, and people are willing to pay a premium for that uncertainty). The option itself, by the way, would cost $1,500, since it controls
100 shares, not just one.
A put option is similar, except it gives you the right to sell something
at a given price (which is known as the strike price). Let’s use the Apple
example again, only this time we’re dealing with a put instead of a call, and
let’s suppose the price of the option is $5. In this case, there is no intrinsic
value, since having the right to sell Apple at $200 when the market price is
$210 isn’t of interest to any economically rational person. In fact, there is
negative intrinsic value of $10, which means the time premium is $15.
As you might guess, one of the appealing things about options is the
leverage they provide. And, generally speaking, the calmer a market is, the
greater the leverage. The reason for this is that time premiums will be much
higher in volatile markets because people are scared and willing to pay a
high premium. It’s not much different than the cost of hurricane insurance
in Florida versus Iowa—the premiums are going to be vastly different.
So let’s return to Apple again and assume that we thought the stock
was going to fall. Let’s further suppose that the market has been extremely
benign, and faith in Apple’s upward price trajectory is deeply embedded
among investors, so a June put option with a strike at $200 is selling for
just 10 cents (the stock price, as with the earlier incarnation of this example, is still $210). An option priced at 10 cents means each contract (which
controls 100 shares) is $10, so let’s say you took an aggressively bearish
position and bought 1,000 of these contracts for a total cost of $10,000.
The next morning, Apple announces something very bad for its stock
price, and it plunges $20 to $190 per share. You have put options with
a $20 strike, and these now have an intrinsic value of $10 each. In addition, because people are suddenly very nervous about Apple, there is a $5
time premium, making the price $15. You are now the (ecstatic) owner of
$1.5 million in Apple puts, which you promptly sell for a breathtaking profit.
Later that day, you buy everyone in your town the latest iPod.
Now, this is a bit of a silly example, but it shows you the power of
leverage. If you took the same $10,000 and shorted 48 shares of Apple
(which is what you could do in a cash account at $210 per share), even
with the $20 plunge, you would have netted $960—a far cry from a million
and a half dollars. Of course, the reality is that your $10,000 in options will

474

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

in all likelihood expire worth $0, netting a $10,000 loss if you hold on to
them until the very end, but sometimes options holders can experience
astronomical gains.
If you do decide to give options a try, here are several words of advice:

r Don’t get stars in your eyes—Stories like this one are compelling, but
so is reading about lottery winners. The vast majority of the time, those
purchasing high-risk options wind up losing the entire investment. It’s
better to start small and aim low.
r Avoid out-of-the-money options—Try to get options with some intrinsic value. Buying cheap out-of-the-money options makes for hypothetically higher percentage returns, but the odds are stacked much more
heavily against you, and the time premium you will be paying will be
much greater. Buying in-the-money options is safer and more conservative, and (at least at the time of purchase) it gives you the assurance
that you are purchasing something that has worth.
r Avoid nearby expiration dates—As with out-of-the-money options,
options that expire relatively soon are going to be very cheap and
tempting to beginning traders. There is a phenomenon in options pricing known as theta burn, which essentially is the rate at which a time
premium decays as the expiration date nears. The decay looks like a
plunging roller coaster as the final weeks of an option’s lifespan take
place, so it is best to get an option that is at least a couple months out
to give your position a reasonable chance of working out.
Buying in-the-money, far-out options is duller than getting out-of-themoney options that expire in a week, but it’s radically safer. You might miss
a “hit it out of the ballpark” trade now and then, but you will probably avoid
a lot of losses, too. The bottom line is that leverage is a two-edged sword,
and the same power that makes breathtaking returns possible is also able
to provide you 100 percent losses.

GOOD AND EVIL
The nature, definition, and manifestation of good and evil are subjects I
have pondered many times in my life. All cultures, philosophies, and religions have their own views on these subjects. Some of them dismiss the
idea that evil even exists. I disagree.
The best definition of evil I remember reading was this: “That which
destroys life and liveliness.”

For Bears Only

475

But how does one comprehend goodness? Do we simply invert the
aforementioned definition, yielding “That which creates life and liveliness”?
I think that is a step in the right direction. But the thought of goodness conjures up, for me, a variety of other properties. In no particular
order—and this list is far from complete—goodness is:

r Balance
r Harmony
r Order
r Love
r Faith
r Compassion
r Generosity
r Kindness
r Honesty
r Bravery
r Moderation
None of this is terribly controversial. But there are some subtleties in
human nature and behavior that make the topic less simple.

Self-Perception
The mass of individuals on Earth don’t align themselves to a standard yardstick of principles and behaviors in order to present themselves as being
on a particular point on the continuum of good and evil. People are, in my
view, self-interested creatures; it’s tempting to consider another person evil
simply because he is different (or has a different worldview). I seriously
doubt Osama bin Laden stares at his fragment of a mirror hanging in the
cave, cackles mischievously to himself, and declares, “Oh, what a fine life
it is to be evil. I shall crush all those goody-two shoes that oppose me!”
Nor do I think the likes of Hitler or Stalin considered themselves to be evil.
They were consumed with their own motives, and those in opposition to
those motives were going to either get out of the way or be destroyed.
I think the vast majority of humanity would agree that such individuals
were, in fact, evil. But what’s required to make this sort of assertion is some
perspective.

Is Heroism Chosen?
What constitutes a hero?
On a regular basis, newspapers and television shows have stories of
individuals who, in the face of danger to themselves or loved ones, decided

476

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

to act with remarkable courage and strength in order to achieve a positive
outcome. A man runs into a burning building to save the life of a stranger; a
woman dives into a frozen lake to rescue someone who fell in; a dog drags
an injured dog off a road to prevent it from being killed.
These are all heartwarming, and as sentimental as I am, I’m probably
even more affected and moved by these stories than most others. But do
heroes choose to be good, or are they simply wired that way? And if they
are wired that way, are they any more deserving of our praise than anyone
else blessed by other genetic dispositions, such as having blond hair or a
nice singing voice?
In the end, I don’t think anyone really cares if it was a person’s conscious choice to behave heroically. The fact is that they did, and the action itself gives that person heroic attributes. It is all the more alluring and
praiseworthy to the public that these decisions are usually made in a split
second, because deep inside we’re all wondering if we would have done
the same thing; we ponder, no matter what our self-image, if we have that
goodness within us that we so admire in others.

What Does This Have to Do with Trading?
The reason I bring this subject up in a book about trading is that I believe
there is a big misunderstanding about the actions of traders and what those
actions represent: specifically, the notion that buying stocks (and being
bullish) is good whereas selling or shorting stocks (and being bearish)
is bad.
Let’s start with a few basic suppositions:

r Unless one’s trading size is so gigantic compared to a given security’s
volume that you are going to push the market substantially up or down,
your actions are immaterial to the market as a whole.
r Unless you are actively and effectively spreading malicious untruths
about a given organization or security, you are trading morally.
r Your participation in an aftermarket does nothing to help or hinder a
public company.
Let’s focus on that last point. If you buy 5,000 shares of Apple (AAPL),
the company Apple doesn’t care. You’re not helping them, their employees,
their sales, their customers, or their management of expenses. If you short
5,000 shares of AAPL, likewise, the company doesn’t care.
Now, if it were 1976, and Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak came to
you for start-up funding, and you gave it to them, Apple would care
very much—because you are providing them what they need to create a

For Bears Only

477

business. And if, in 1980, you as an investment bank agree to underwrite
their public offering, Apple again cares, because you are providing them
with a source of financing that will help them grow as a business.
But once a company’s public, your actions as a trader really have nothing to do with them. Sure, a company (and, more particularly, its shareholding employees) like to have a stock bid up to higher prices. But your
actions as a trader aren’t creating any good (or evil) for that organization.
You are operating in a realm outside the bounds of that enterprise.

Creation and Destruction
Some people get the idea that bears are malicious, nasty, grubby creatures
that relish the thought of destruction and collapse. I can’t speak for all
bearish traders, but I would say for myself—and I would think most sane
people—that this notion is absolute junk.
An objective technical trader does the following:
1. Examines a chart.
2. Reaches a conclusion.
3. Acts upon that conclusion.

There is nothing malevolent in the list. Nothing. If I believe the stock
BIDU is going to fall, and I short it, then I am taking actions that I hope will
be profitable for me. I am taking a risk. Yes, I am hoping the stock will fall,
because that benefits me and aligns with my analysis. It feels good to be
right, and it feels good to take a profit. But this hope has nothing to do with
wishing ill on others; it is simply a supposition made based on analysis.
Others might say bears want America to fail, or that they hate America.
Again: nonsense. I love this country. I built a business here, creating employment, products, and profits—and I sold it to a much bigger firm. I raise
my family here. There is, on the whole, no other place I’d rather live.
But my perception that this country is going very bad places doesn’t
make me un-American. If anything, my willingness to perceive and talk
about these concerns makes me that much more of an American. I would
like to see this country come out on the other side of this mess in one piece.
I would say blind optimists who figure things will get better just because
they ought to get better are unpatriotic by way of their apathy.
As for corporations: if you really want to destroy a company—if that’s
your fondest wish—then create a better competitor! Who do you think
had a more destructive effect on Yahoo!: short-sellers or the founders
of Google? I think even a million short-sellers couldn’t even approach
the damage that the two co-founders of Google created. So Joseph
Schumpeter’s notion of Creative Destruction wins the day.

478

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

The Amorality of Trading
For 99.9 percent of traders out there, trading is an amoral act. You’re not
good for buying; you’re not evil for selling; you’re not virtuous by being
bullish; you’re not malevolent by being bearish.
What about the circumstance where you actually make a profit as a
direct result of the suffering of others?
Let’s suppose that, on September 10, 2001, you were strongly of the
opinion that airlines were going to go down in price, so you put all of your
trading capital into puts on American Airlines, United Airlines, and the like.
September 11 happens and when the market finally reopens on the 17th,
your puts soar in value hundreds of percent (I do not know what the options actually did during that month, but I am guessing this is close to the
truth).
Was there evil intent in your trade? Did you contribute to an evil cause?
Did you assist the terrorists? No, of course not.
Did you (unwittingly) profit because of a terrorist act? Yes. Does this
make you evil? Based on hypothetical circumstances I have described, I
would say the answer is no.
Now, it certainly might feel unseemly if you were in this position (and
we won’t even go into a potential visit from federal authorities, curious
about your prescient timing). Your profits might feel like blood money to
you—you might even donate all the profits to the Red Cross, since it would
seem like the right thing to do.
I propose that you have no sin you need purge, although I do agree it
might be fitting, and erase a perceived stain on your soul, to surrender the
profits, since the circumstance would be profoundly unusual.
But, let’s face it, 9,999 times out of 10,000, a profitable short sale or put
position doesn’t do well because of an event that causes human suffering.
But I think the wise bear keeps his mouth shut about profiting from a company’s troubles. No matter how morally neutral a trade might be, there is
still room in this world for decorum and common sense.
The bottom line, for me, can be expressed simply as this: you simply
are, your trading is, and the markets are. These things are neutral, and it
is your relationship to the market that will dictate your profits and losses.
Outside of those boundaries, nothing matters, and no one need care.
