
Swing traders must evaluate many price restraints beyond simple floors and ceilings. These lesserknown pivots provide superb entry and exit when located. The crowd often misinterprets price
action at these levels and triggers opportunity on the other side of the trade. As noted earlier,
common knowledge tends to undermine the dependability of technical setups. Alternatively, the
markets reward original vision and strategy. Consider the substantial benefits when classic S/R
mechanics combine with contrary entry.
Trending markets emit their own S/R fingerprint. Rising or falling moving averages routinely mark
significant boundaries. Popular settings for these versatile indicators have found their way into the
financial press, technical analysis manuals and charting programs. The most common calculations
draw lines at the 20-day, 50-day, and 200-day moving averages. These three derivative plots have
wide acceptance as natural boundaries for price pullbacks. Two important forces empower these
classic averages. First, they define levels where profit and loss taking will ebb following strong
price movement. Second, their common recognition draws a crowd that perpetrates a self-fulfilling
event whenever price approaches.
FIGURE 2.1
Swing traders scan the charting landscape to identify horizontal support-resistance and major moving averages that
uncover natural reversal levels. While this process appears simple, price action generates many complex variations that
baffle execution planning. Try to combine as many forms of price convergence as possible to pick out high-odds setups.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

The S/R character of moving averages changes as they flatten and roll over. The turn of a specific
average toward horizontal signifies a loss of momentum for that time frame. This increases the odds
of a major line break. But don’t confuse this condition with an extended sideways market in which
several averages flatline and draw close to each other. In this dead market, price will most likely
swivel back and forth repeatedly across their axis in a noisy pattern. Swing traders find few
opportunities in this type of environment.
TABLE 2.1
Moving Average Settings and Related Trends
Trend
Moving Average
20-day
Short-term
50-day
Intermediate-term
200-day
Long-term
Trendlines and channels signal major S/R in active markets. A useful charting line prints from any
vector drawn across two relative highs or lows. But these simple features have little staying power.
Look for three or more points to intersect in a straight line. Then extend out that trendline to locate
important boundaries for price development. As with other landscape features, long-term lines have
greater persistence than shorter ones. Strong trendlines may even last for decades without violation.
Draw valid lines above three or more highs and below three or more lows, regardless of whether the
market prints an uptrend or downtrend. Two or more sets of trendlines that lie parallel to each other
form price channels. Their construction requires at least four points: two at support and two at
resistance. Aggressive participants can build price channel projections with only three points and
extend out estimated lines for the missing plots. But use these extensions only to predict turning
points and be very reluctant to wager the account solely on their results.
Many swing traders assume that violation of a trendline or channel signifies the start of a new trend.
This is not true and leads to inappropriate strategies. Trendline breaks signal the end of a prior trend
and beginning of a sideways (range-bound) phase. A market can easily resume a former trend after
it returns to stability. Shock events that combine with line breaks can start immediate trends in the
opposite direction, but these happen infrequently. Hole-in-the-wall gaps (see Chapter 11) provide a
powerful example of this phenomenon.
Trendline and channel breaks should induce immediate price expansion toward the next barrier.
When this thrust does not occur, it can signal a false breakout that forces price to jump back across
the line and trap the crowd. Whipsaws and pattern failures characterize modern markets. As
common knowledge of technical analysis grows, insiders routinely push price past S/R just to
trigger stops and volume. These gunning exercises end only after the fuel runs out and induces price
to drop quietly back into its former location.
Mathematical statistics of central tendency study the esoteric realm of divergence from a central
price axis. Analysts use these calculations every day as they explore standard deviation of market
price from an expected value and its eventual
FIGURE 2.2
Trendlines and parallel price channels print throughout the charting landscape. Note how Cisco’s 60-minute
candlesticks set up multiple channels over this short 9-day segment. Channels often generate harmonic levels that
invoke additional parallel lines between major boundaries.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

regression back to the mean. Broad concepts of overbought and oversold conditions rely on proper
measurement of these complex variables. Swing traders depend on this arcane science to identify
powerful standard deviation resistance through Bollinger Bands and other central tendency tools.
Each market leaves a fingerprint of its historical volatility as it swings back and forth. Central
tendency defines how far price action should carry before an elastic effect draws it back toward the
evolving center. Like a rubber band that stretches to its limit, price should spring back sharply when
expanding force releases. These unique tools also measure flat markets better than any other
method. As price change contracts to the low end of its expected range, values often converge
toward a single point that triggers a violent move, which raises volatility back toward its expected
mean.
Central tendency provides excellent trading opportunities but take the time to understand its
mechanics. Extreme conditions often last well beyond expectations and shake out contrary
positions. They may trigger trend relativity errors when elastic extremes don’t line up through
different time frames. This powerful tool supplements other classic pattern and S/R measurements
but doesn’t replace them. Use central tendency to uncover ripe trading conditions but then shift to
other indicators to identify low-risk entry levels and proper timing.

Volume establishes important S/R boundaries. When markets print very high volume, they undergo
significant ownership change that exerts lasting influence on price development. The frantic event
may occur in a single bar or last for several sessions. The volume action must rise well above that
issue’s historical average in either case. These power spikes invoke special characteristics that may
yield frequent trading opportunities. But the event will leave a long-lasting mark on the charting
landscape whether or not it produces an immediate profit.
Crowd accumulation and distribution (acc-dis) define hidden volume boundaries. Buying or selling
pressure often leads price development. When acc-dis diverges sharply in either direction, price will
routinely thrust forward to resolve the conflict. Divergence itself induces the S/R mechanics. For
example, a stock may drop sharply but remain under strong accumulation as it falls. The buying
behavior not only slows the decline but also signals that the issue will likely print major support and
bounce quickly.
Few swing traders understood Fibonacci retracement S/R before modern charting programs offered
simple tools for this fascinating study. Fib math calculates how far a rally or decline will likely pull
back before reversing. Retracement analysis intimidates many participants. Some even believe that
it represents a form of market voodoo rather than science. And others just can’t understand why
stocks stop falling for no reason at apparently random levels.
Fibonacci math works through crowd behavior. A rally builds a common structure of participation.
When it finally ends and starts to unwind, shareholders try to predict how far price might fall before
the underlying trend resumes. The unconscious mind first sees the proportional one-third
retracement as a good reversal point. New buyers do emerge here, but the subsequent bounce often
fails and the issue falls through the prior intermediate low. This terminates the crowd’s greed phase
and begins a period of reason. The concerned eye now sees the halfway retracement as support and
the issue again bounces on schedule.
Pullbacks can strike diverse S/R boundaries at any time and shift direction. But corrections
routinely retrace at least one-third to one-half before support begins a new rally phase. Many active
trends pull back all the way to two-thirds before the primary direction reasserts itself. These deep
dips have a strong effect on the crowd. The break of halfway support terminates reason and
awakens fear. The threat that the prior trend will completely reverse triggers sharp selling through
this last level until a final shakeout ends the decline.
Downtrends work through emotional mechanics similar to those of rallies. The math and
proportional elements remain identical. However, pullbacks from selloffs begin with fear that
evolves into a period of reason at the same retracement levels.
This gives way to hope if the retracement pushes toward the two-thirds barrier. Gravity also
influences how these bear rallies turn back toward the primary down-trend. Rollovers often occur
violently here after price reaches an important resistance target.
Modern markets hide boundaries more esoteric in nature than retracement science. Round numbers
affect trend development through all time frames. S/R intensity increases as zeros add onto price.
For example, stocks that approach 100 face more significant resistance than those that reach under
10. Whole number S/R tends to peak according to multiples of 10. In other words, 10, 20, 30, etc.
represent natural barriers. And look for further S/R at divisors of 10 such as 5, 15, and 25.
FIGURE 2.3
Central tendency tools respond to short-term shifts in volatility and direction. They also signal when price movement
exceeds historical boundaries. These 13-period, 2 std dev Bollinger Bands accurately track Qualcomm’s progress

through a sharp rally and topping reversal on the 5-minute chart. Always pay close attention to changing band angles as
bars approach. Horizontal bands point to hidden resistance that can quickly reverse price movement.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Market participants deal with whole number phenomena every day. Investors spent months
watching the Dow battle 10,000 for the first time. Many position traders take profits as stocks
approach 50 or 100. Day traders exercise scalping strategies as the Level II screen bids teenies back
and forth across a single number. This fascinating S/R builds from the buy and sell orders that
congregate at round numbers. Both investors and traders tend to focus execution targets and stop
orders at these lazy levels.

FIGURE 2.4
High-volume events often deplete the available crowd supply and trigger important reversals. Good news ignited a
stampede into new WebMD positions during a dramatic 25-million-share day. Just 3 days later, the stock printed a
major top that eventually rolled over into a painful bear market.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

CROSS-VERIFICATION
The complex interplay between different chart elements baffles many swing traders. They fail to
evaluate all of the important S/R influences that predict directional price movement. The rational
mind naturally rebels against detailed analysis as it reduces incoming data into manageable pieces.
This works against the swing trader’s interest and may contribute to poor preparation. A lazy mind
can catch a single S/R level but miss a minefield of obstacles that a new position must face.
Cross-verification searches the charting landscape to locate the primary sign-posts of trading
opportunity. Common sense dictates that multiple crowd influences favor certain price levels over
others. Swing traders can identify these setup intersections when they uncover those points where
different S/R types and time frames converge with each other. For example, a single level that
points to a major high, a 50% retracement of a larger trend, and the 50-day moving average strongly
implies that certain important events will occur when price strikes that point.
FIGURE 2.5
Price pullbacks through this dynamic JDS Uniphase rally mask an underlying Fibonacci order. Note how the dips
end at classic retracement levels before igniting into new trend legs. The middle Fib range between 38% and 62%
often exhibits congested price movement and sharp swings as the crowd shifts through emotional barriers.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Prepare for the market day through a complete S/R analysis that looks for convergence at specific
price levels. The more elements that intersect through a single boundary, the higher the probability
that this chart feature will support or resist price change. Four or more cross-verification points may
appear at a single S/R intersection and signal an excellent profit opportunity. But don’t let fewer
cross-points discard promising trades. Many good setups exhibit less convergence but display one
significant entry with few barriers or points of interest in between.
Trade execution at or near new highs raises special S/R considerations. The high itself presents the
only resistance barrier within the larger time frame. If shorter charting periods don’t reveal smaller
obstacles, the only required strategy decides whether to buy, sell, or maintain an active position on a
test of that high. Of course, analysis of risk must also locate an easy escape route if the trade turns
sour.
Focus trade preparation on cross-verification to locate promising setups and measure reward:risk.
Look for price close to substantial support to identify low-risk long trades. Look for price close to
substantial resistance to find low-risk short sales. Measure the distance between the entry and the
next barrier within the holding period for the trade. This points to the intended exit and reasonable
profit target (PT). Measure the distance between the entry and the price that confirms that the setup
was wrong. This points to the unintended exit and reasonable failure target (FT). Execute only those
trades with high PT and low FT distance.

3D CHARTING
Successful swing trading begins with original tactics and accurate prediction. Excellent timing then
enters a position just before bar expansion and exits as the crowd loses control. Careful planning
guides the enterprise through every phase and plans an escape route just in case things go sour.
Trade time, price, and safety. Profits will quickly follow.
FIGURE 2.6
Multiples of 10 measure Seibel’s progress as it pushes toward 100. These classic round numbers elicit common S/R
behavior with price breaking through resistance but then pulling back to test new support. Also note how price bars
expand sharply as they pierce the horizontal barriers for the first time.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Accurate forecasting requires the ability to see price movement in more than one dimension.
Investors and institutions can often accomplish this task with a single price chart. Swing traders
need more information and must watch the mar kets using 3D charting techniques. Identify three
time frames that correspond to the chosen holding period. Find one segment above and one below
the position focus. For example, many intraday traders rely on 1-minute, 5-minute, and 60-minute
charts while many position traders manipulate 60-minute, daily, and weekly combinations.

FIGURE 2.7
Cross-verification finds promising setups at key intersections of price and time. Notice how chart elements converge to
produce an excellent Broadvision short sale: 1. Price falls through support of the prior high at 65. 2. The same bar
breaks the 2-month trendline. 3. The same bar also breaks the 50-day moving average. 4. Price gaps below support, the
trendline and the moving average. 5. The bottom Bollinger Band expands to suggest lower prices ahead.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Not sure how long to maintain a position? Most swing traders should choose a specific holding
period that reflects their lifestyle and not change it until thoughtful planning presents an alternate
strategy. The rational mind will turn poorly defined time frames into major losses. Trades become
investments and ex-traders become humbled investors. As strategies evolve, slowly experiment
with different time frames. During these phases, prepare to answer the time question clearly before
each trade execution. Write it down and stick to it or success will not come easily.

THE CHARTING LANDSCAPE
Greed resists adequate trade planning and precise time execution. But consistent discipline pulls
attention back to center as it marks the divide between success and failure. A neophyte may build
false confidence by throwing money at hot stocks and flipping nice gains. Guess what? Short
phases of the broad Pattern Cycle allow this strategy to work. But their reckless approach fails
quickly as soon as momentum fades and swing traders empty their pockets with powerful 3D
charting techniques.

Three-dimensional charting forces the swing trader to recognize trends through different time
frames and evaluate how their interaction will affect price movement. Landscapes of support and
resistance reveal hidden swing levels ripe for profitable trade entry. 3D charts pack layers of
complex information into very small spaces to reveal these hot spots quickly. Through visual
analysis, the trader finds where moving averages, retracements, price bands, bar patterns, and
trendlines cross or converge with each other. These isolated time/price zones provide the
playground for profitable entry.
Each element of the charting landscape has a distinct appearance. Take time to learn the special
message that each one displays as these diverse forces interact with each other. Also become
sharply aware of their limitations. The most memorable trades come when an indicator’s message
can be confidently ignored and informed instinct guides position management.
TABLE 2.2
Holding Period and Chart Correlation
Holding Period
Trade Type
Scalpers
Seconds to minutes
Day traders
Minutes to hours
Position traders
Hours to days
Investors
Days to weeks
Institutions
Weeks to years

3D Chart Combination
1-minute 5-minute 15-minute
1-minute 5-minute 60-minute
60-minute daily weekly
Daily weekly monthly
Weekly monthly yearly

Toggle between arithmetic (linear) and logarithmic (geometric) charts frequently. Log charts
examine percentage growth. The visual length between increments decreases as prices move higher.
Linear charts examine price growth. The visual length between increments remains constant as
prices move higher. Trendlines can form on either log or linear charts. If uncertain which view will
yield the best information, apply this helpful rule for quick analysis: stick with log charts for lowpriced stocks or stocks that experience significant price change over short periods of time, and rely
on linear charts for higher-priced or slower-moving stocks.
Information panes below price bars serve a single purpose: to assist the investigation of the top
pane. Use indicators to support the pattern analysis and not the other way around. Many market
participants search so hard for mathematical perfection that they lose their ability to see. Above all
else, technical analysis is a visual art. Always start trade preparation with a peek at the price bars
first. If something catches your eye, then check the lower pane to find out whether it confirms or
refutes the observation. Less-experienced players must cast out opportunities when lower-pane
measurements don’t support objective observations. But after experience grows with lower-pane
indicators, judiciously ignore them when the pattern tells a different story.

BUILDING THE ROAD MAP
Markets give away their secrets to swing traders who take the time to look carefully. Building a
detailed landscape on each chart reveals trend and pattern powerpoints where important crowd
forces will converge. These focused time/price zones target the hidden points primed for reversals
and breakouts. When the participant has a clearly defined plan of what to do when price hits one of
these hot spots, they’ve learned the art of swing trading.
Watch these points in real time whenever possible to decide whether or not the tape action supports
the message of the pattern. Pull the trigger at or near the predetermined low-risk entry price after
confirmation. The path to perfect trade entry is reached by thoroughly understanding each
component of the 3D road map. Every convergence event triggers a different physical reaction.

Experienced technicians measure the relative impact of each individual force and make consistently
accurate predictions of subsequent price movement.
Develop precise visual skills and don’t rely on a toolbox of complex math-based indicators. Swing
trading teaches discretionary execution based on convergence of time and price but does not require
mechanical models or systems. Realize that most indicators arise from very simple building blocks.
Learn these basic components well and hone that needed edge over the skilled competition.
Pay attention to new forces at work within the charting landscape. Markets evolve to close off
opportunities as quickly as they appear, and dependable S/R levels will fail as new dynamics work
to defeat the majority. Long-term profit requires quick adaptation to new conditions as old methods
fail. Use the power of Pattern Cycles to identify and test fresh strategies that respond to major
market changes.

MOVING AVERAGE RIBBONS
Build the charting landscape with moving averages (MAs). These classic momentum tools define
both trend and natural pullback levels. Use them in all charts through all time frames. MAs respond
to specialized settings that reflect the prevailing crowd within any holding period. So take great care
to choose appropriate values. Averages must align with the current swing trading strategy or they
will generate poorly timed executions.
Moving averages provide highly visual information as they interact directly with price. Indicators
that fit into a separate lower pane force the eye to filter out large quantities of noise to manage
information. Unfortunately, the filtering process also discards important data. Moving averages
emit continuous signal without noise because they plot within the price pane. They print real-time
patterns that interact with other S/R features to reveal profitable convergence levels.
Identify convergence-divergence between price and MAs. Because price always moves toward or
away from an underlying average, each new bar or candle uncovers characteristics of momentum,
trend, and time. This same process works just as well in relationships between two or more MAs.
For example, the classic MACD (Moving Average Convergence-Divergence) indicator applies this
technique to measure trending markets.
Use exponential moving averages (EMAs) for longer time frames but shift down to simple moving
averages (SMAs) for shorter ones. EMAs speed and smooth the action as they give more weight to
recent price change. SMAs view each data point equally. While intraday markets trigger bursts of
meaningless data, SMAs allow the swing trader to spy on other participants. Most keep their
settings at these simple levels because they don’t recognize the advantage of EMAs. Good intraday
signals rely more on understanding how the competition thinks than they do on the technicals of the
moment.
Swing traders access a powerful information tool when they add multiple MAs into 3D charts and
build a complete multi-time frame trend system. Tie these MA ribbons (MARs) together through a
mathematical relationship that mimics time. One classic combination for a daily chart utilizes 20,
50, and 200 periods. Notice how each segment approximates three to four times the preceding one.
These ratios tend to narrow in the shorter intraday averages, but the purpose remains the same. They
provide an effective framework to investigate and trade three distinct periods of trend: short,
intermediate, and long-term.
MA ribbons emit continuous trend feedback. For example, they signal a bear market when they flip
over on the daily and the 200-day MA stands on top. The bull reawakens when the shorter averages
