
139

140

Chapter 6 | Technical Analysis

Figure 6-5. Open interest in the New Zealand dollar, relative to NZD/USD spot price (Source:
CFTC)

Trend Analysis
“The trend is your friend” is one of the oldest adages in technical analysis.
Without trends, technical analysis would be meaningless and trades would be
random. The goal is to determine whether a currency pair is currently caught
in an uptrend, downtrend, or sideways trend. Profits accrue to those that are
able to anticipate the beginnings and ends of trends and trade accordingly.
The most basic level of trend analysis involves a visual inspection of the
chart. Those with well-trained eyes will immediately notice any trends. It can
also be helpful to draw lines (which most charting software packages enable)
directly onto the chart. You can see from the chart in Figure 6-6, for
example, that there are a handful of trends that seem to both dictate and
delimit movement in the EUR/CHF. Over one and a half years, there were
several medium-term trends apparent to the naked eye. Sometimes, the trends
were so robust that even after sudden upside or downside aberrations, the
original trend was restored. This was the case in September 2011. Other
times, the pair is prevented from falling or rising by support or resistance
lines, respectively. Recall from Chapter 3 that while somewhat arbitrary,
these levels often represent real barriers to momentum in one or both
directions. They tend to form at round numbers, and their existence can be

Forex for Beginners
confirmed when rates (repeatedly) “bounce” off of them upon contact. When
there is both support and resistance, the pair is said to be trading in a channel.
The breaching of the channel walls signals the potential start of a significant
uptrend or downtrend. This phenomenon is known as a breakout.

Figure 6-6. Trend spotting in the EUR/CHF

There are also a handful of shapes and chart patterns that provide guidance
for spotting trend continuations and reversals. Double tops, double bottoms,
head and shoulders, and other patterns are grounded in the notion that before
a trend reverses, it will usually hesitate and do a slight about-face (or two).
As can be seen in Figure 6-7, the change in the AUD/JPY from long-term
uptrend to long-term downtrend was heralded by a double top. Other times,
trends will reverse suddenly and squeeze those that are caught on the wrong
side of the trade. These sudden reversals are usually accompanied by a surge
in volume and indicated by a V-formation on the chart. Triangles, wedges,
and pennants, on the other hand, usually imply trend continuation. These
formations are caused when positions are consolidated in the midst of a
strong trend, causing price gyrations to get smaller and smaller until a
continuation becomes inevitable. In this case, we should expect the

141

142

Chapter 6 | Technical Analysis
AUD/JPY to resume its downward trend following the triangular
consolidation.

Figure 6-7. Trend reversal and continuation patterns in the AUD/JPY

Admittedly, spotting trends is more of an art than a science; hindsight is
20/20. To be sure, drawing crude shapes onto charts may seem a little silly.
Still, the ideas of trends, support, and resistance have strong underpinnings in
human psychology. For example, the crowd mentality and dealer complicity
can turn slight directional momentum into veritable trends. Remember also
that correlations within the financial markets are strengthening, and investor
risk appetite is becoming the dominant driver of asset prices. Frequent
changes in risk appetite are causing prices to slide up and down in
movements that most observers would call “trends.” Finally, support and
resistance can become self-fulfilling, as certain levels become
psychologically important and trigger sudden surges in buying and selling. In
this case, the goal is not to outsmart the market but to simply ride the wave
that others may be creating.

Forex for Beginners

Pivot Points
Pivot points represent the starting point for trend forecasting. A pivot point is
simply the average of a currency pair’s high, low, and closing prices for a
given period of time (typically one 24-hour trading session). From this one
number, three separate support and resistance levels can be calculated using
standardized methods and then plotted directly onto a forex chart. The idea is
that in the following trading session, the currency pair should meet support
and/or resistance at these pre-defined levels. If a pair moves easily through
these levels, it probably signifies particularly bullish or bearish sentiment.
Traders prize pivot points for their simplicity and, as a result, many
professional analysts include them in the daily technical reports that they
make public. In addition, since pivot points are calculated objectively, they
will appear the same on all charts and may thus become self-fulfilling.
Therefore, it shouldn’t come as a surprise if a currency actually meets
support or resistance at the levels “predicted” by the pivot points. Sure
enough,
it
is
at “Support 2” that the USD/CHF depicted in Figure 6-8 encounters
resistance.

143

144

Chapter 6 | Technical Analysis

Figure 6-8. Pivot Points in the USD/CHF

Elliot Wave Principle
Elliot Wave Principle (EWP) attempts to bring something akin to a scientific
perspective to charting. Trend spotters are content with simply identifying
trends, so they are liable to take them at face value. For Ralph Elliot who
formulated EWP, this was not enough. After years spent analyzing stock
market gyrations, he concluded that asset prices move in smooth waves.
Ranging from multi-century “grand supercycle” waves to “subminuette”
waves that last mere minutes, these fluctuations are theoretically caused by
the swing of investor energy between optimism and pessimism.
EWP holds that all waves follow a predictable pattern, which can be seen in
Figure 6-9. In the first upward swing of a bullish, dominant trend (1),
investors remain hesitant, and the asset price will soon hit resistance and
move back downward. Due to declining bearishness, opportunistic investors
will enter the market (2), and the price will find support above the uptrend’s
initial starting point. Here, a surge in bullish sentiment and the recognition of

Forex for Beginners
an uptrend (3) will carry the asset price to a new high. At some point it will
meet resistance and trend sideways or downward (4), sometimes for quite a
while. However, bullish investors will continue to pile in and the asset price
will once again surge upward (5). At this point, it’s not uncommon for
bearish investors to begin sounding the alarm, setting the stage for the end of
the uptrend. After peaking, the asset price will retrace downwards (A), the
first move in the corrective trend. Fragments of bullishness will prevent the
asset price from falling indefinitely; after finding support, it will turn right
around (B). However, the corrective trend has already started to form, and
the asset price will now trend downward in five separate waves (C).

Figure 6-9. Elliot Wave Principle in action.

EWP has plenty of critics, which is perhaps why it remained unknown for
more than three decades after it was initially developed. Many financial
economists have argued that there is no evidence of it in financial markets
and that its appearance is purely coincidental. In addition, EWP was initially
developed for the stock market, which rises over the long term. It’s unclear

145

146

Chapter 6 | Technical Analysis
whether it is compatible with the forex market where every bull market must
be offset by a bear market.
On the other hand, the theory makes intuitive sense, and there are many forex
traders that swear by it. There are hundreds of websites and newsletters
devoted exclusively to EWP, and it has given rise to many unique trading
strategies.

Fibonacci Analysis
EWP is consistent with and commonly used with a mathematical
phenomenon known as the Fibonacci sequence. Named after the Italian
mathematician that popularized it, this idea is quite simple. The first two
numbers are 0 and 1, and every number that follows is merely the sum of the
previous two, as follows: 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, and so on. It
turns out that this mundane sequence has some interesting properties.
Namely, when you take it out far enough, the relationship between all of the
numbers converges toward hard ratios. For instance, any number in the
sequence divided by the number that precedes it is always 1.618 (e.g., 55/34)
while any number divided by the one that follows it is always .618 (e.g.,
34/55). Any number divided by the second number that follows is always
.382 (e.g., 34/89), and so on. As a result, mathemeticians have developed a
handful of golden ratios: 23.6%, 38.2%, 50%, 61.8% and 100%.
While this may seem irrelevant, it turns out that these ratios appear
frequently in biology and explain everything from the way that branches
form on trees to the mating habits of certain animals. It should come as no
surprise then that somebody (none other than Ralph Elliot!) thought to apply
it to the fluctuation of asset prices.
Elliot observed that the second wave in the dominant trend of EWP should
retrace less than 61.8% from the peak of wave 1. Wave 3, meanwhile, should
extend 1.618% from the bottom of wave 2, and wave 4 (you guessed it) often
retraces 38.2% from the top of wave 3. Similar patterns appear in the A, B, C
waves of the corrective trend in Figure 6-9. Sure enough, you can see from
Figure 6-10 (the same one I used in Figure 6-9 to diagram the main wave
formation) that the EUR/USD appears to bump up against several of the
support/resistance lines predicted by the Fibonacci sequence and EWP.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 6-10. Application of Fibonacci retracement and extension to EUR/USD chart

The application of the Fibonacci sequence to the financial markets has
become a staple of technical analysis. Both Fibonacci retracements and
Fibonacci extensions can easily be layered onto charts with the mere click of
a button using the most basic charting software. In this case, you can see that
the EUR/USD finds resistance in wave 2 at exactly the 50% level and meets
support at the 100% level at wave 3. For practitioners of Fibonacci analysis
and subscribers to EWP, these levels represent obvious points to buy and
sell, respectively.
Of course, the identification of specific waves and the overlay of Fibonacci
lines still require some guesswork. Some technical analysts thus grow
immediately frustrated with the inherent subjectivity of charting. Fortunately,
there are numerous quantitative indicators that can be used to enhance or
supplement visual analysis.

147

148

Chapter 6 | Technical Analysis

Moving Averages
The most basic quantitative indicator is the moving average (MA). Just like it
sounds, an MA shows how the average price of a security (or in this case, a
currency pair) changes over time. As a technical tool, it is useful for a few
key reasons. First of all, it smooths price data. Because it is an average
calculation, significant fluctuations in the underlying exchange rate generate
smaller fluctuations in the moving average. By eliminating noise, an MA
may provide a clearer picture of a trend than a plain price chart. Secondly,
MAs can guide position entry and exit. When compared to the underlying
currency pair (or to other MAs) it may confirm the start of a bullish or
bearish trend. Of course, it’s important to understand that an MA is
intrinsically a following indicator. That means that it will only generate
trading signals after potential trends have already begun to take shape.
There are a handful of different types of MAs. While conceptually the same,
they are calculated using slightly different methods in order to satisfy
different objectives. The simple moving average (SMA) is an arithmetic
average of prices. Since all prices in the series are given equal weight, an
SMA line is usually the smoothest type of MA. On the other hand, since old
prices are treated the same as new prices, SMAs take longer to register
sudden changes in underlying prices. Indeed, you can see from Figure 6-11
that it takes longer for the SMA (represented by the blue line) to reflect the
start of both the uptrend and the downtrend in the EUR/USD.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 6-11. Comparison of SMA, EMA, and SMMA

In contrast, a weighted moving average (WMA) assigns the greatest
importance to the most recent price and incrementally decreases the weight
to every point thereafter, such that the oldest prices receive the least weight.
An exponential moving average (EMA) takes a similar approach, but
weightings decrease exponentially rather than in even increments. EMAs
register shifts in trends almost immediately. This hypersensitivity can be a
strength—because it enables traders to profit from trends at their
inception—but also a weakness, in the form of false signals. Finally,
smoothed moving averages (SMMAs) aim to further eliminate noise
(aberrant price spikes) so that only the raw trend remains. Of the three main
types of MAs, SMMAs are the smoothest but are also the slowest at
registering trends.
Most charting software is programmed to calculate MAs based on closing
prices, though some can be rejiggered to incorporate high/low price data as
well. The only parameter that these programs will ask traders to supply is the
duration/number of prices. Including more points will result in a flatter MA.

149

150

Chapter 6 | Technical Analysis
This is immediately apparent in Figure 6-12, which shows 5-day, 20-day, and
60-day MAs for the same underlying currency pair.

Figure 6-12. Altering the number of prices affects the moving average’s appearance

MAs can be calculated for any interval of time. Changing the chart’s time
unit (from five minutes to one day, for example) will naturally produce a
different MA. As I explained in the previous section, you should focus on a
length of time that is consistent with your trading time horizon. Even if it
produces stronger signals, an MA based on five-minute data will not really
help you if you are planning to hold positions for a month. As for the ideal
number of price points that should be included in the moving average, there
is no right answer. Some forex gurus swear by the set of 4, 9, and 18. Others
prefer 7, 21, and 90. What’s most important is that when looking at multiple
MAs, the different periods should be spaced out so that they can produce
clear signals.
In fact, the best way to utilize the MA as a trading tool is to look at multiple
time periods simultaneously. Figure 6-12 shows how the EUR/USD was

Forex for Beginners
range bound for several months before it dropped precipitously. If I had
developed a rule to sell whenever the short-term MA (5 days) dips below the
long-term MA (60 days), I would have received an excellent signal just as
the EUR/USD had begun to drop. On the other hand, this rule also produced
two false signals and would have basically prevented me from capturing any
part of the massive 1000 PIP upside correction that followed! While it might
be possible to tweak the number of days in each MA to improve robustness,
this example shows that there is no such thing as a surefire technical trading
rule.

Moving Average Envelopes
and Bollinger Bands
There are a handful of other technical indicators that are derived from the
MA. The MA envelope, for example, is grounded in the idea that MAs can
be used to identify points of support and resistance. The theory is that asset
prices will never stray too far from a trend, designated in this case by the MA
itself. When a currency pair rises too far above or falls too far below its MA,
it could be an indication that a reversal is imminent. In addition, when a pair
completely breaches the walls of the envelope, it could signal a breakout.
To plot an MA envelope, the first step is to plot the MA itself. In Figure
6-13, I used a 10-day SMA. Next, select the percentage above and percentage
below the MA that will form your envelope. The exact percentage will
depend on your investing horizon and the volatility in the currency pair that
you are observing and will most likely be arrived at through trial and error.
(There are no golden numbers for MA envelopes that apply universally to all
currencies.)
Of course, you need to select percentages that are meaningful. If the pair
bumps up against the envelope too frequently, you will receive false signals.
If the envelope is too wide, however, the currency pair will never breach it,
and you won’t receive any signals at all. I solved this problem by plotting
two envelopes in Figure 6-13. The blue (inner) envelope is 1.5% above and
below the 10-day moving average while the red (outer) lines delimit a 2%
envelope.

151

152

Chapter 6 | Technical Analysis

Figure 6-13. AUD / USD with 10-day MA envelopes

Based on this configuration, the MA envelopes produce an abundance of sell
signals. For the first two months, when the pair is range bound, the
AUD/USD moves through the 1.5% resistance but bounces off the 2%
resistance. For whatever reason, the lower envelope doesn’t provide such
strong support. Then the pair completely smashes through this support on
two separate occasions, providing two good opportunities to sell. On the way
back up, it smashes through the resistance the first time around but bumps up
against it the second time.
Bollinger bands take the idea of the MA envelope one step further. Since the
upper and lower bounds of an MA envelope are fixed in percentage terms,
the width never changes. Bollinger bands, in contrast, narrow and expand in
synch with actual market conditions. That’s because they are configured as a
function of volatility. When a pair is range bound, the Bollinger bands form a
tight envelope around it. When a sudden upside or downside move takes
place, the Bollinger bands widen proportionately.

Forex for Beginners
This unique characteristic of Bollinger bands is reflected in Figure 6-14,
which depicts the same AUD/USD pair as in Figure 6-13. When the pair is
range bound, the Bollinger bands provide the same support and resistance as
the MA envelopes in Figure 6-13. In Figure 6-14, however, the breakouts are
accompanied by a widening of the band (due to an increase in volatility),
underscoring the momentum that has coalesced around the new trend.
Bollinger bands, then, are especially useful for forecasting breakouts. In
general, the steeper the expansion of the band, the stronger the trend.
Bollinger bands can be adjusted just like MA envelopes. Instead of keying in
a percentage, however, you need to select the number of standard deviations
(also known as volatility) away from the mean that will form the upper and
lower bounds of the band. As with MA envelopes, establishing a golden
number may take some trial and error.
Despite their overall effectiveness, MA envelopes and Bollinger bands are
not without weaknesses. Namely, they are basically useless when trends
change suddenly. You may have noticed that the breakouts depicted in
Figure 6-13 and Figure 6-14 actually started to take place before they were
picked up by the Bollinger bands. On the one hand, the trend reversal that I
have pointed out in Figure 6-14 below caused the MA to turn upward almost
immediately.

153

154

Chapter 6 | Technical Analysis

Figure 6-14. Bollinger bands of 1.5, 2, and 2.5 standard deviations

At the same time, it wasn’t until the pair had exhausted most of its upward
momentum that it finally crashed through the upward bound of the yellow
Bollinger band. By this point, most of the profit potential had disappeared.

Parabolic Stop and Reverse
The Parabolic Stop and Reverse (Parabolic SAR) is one of the easiest
technical tools to understand and interpret, but it is also among the least
reliable. It is based on the notion that once trends form, they need to build
momentum rapidly. Otherwise, investors will lose interest, and the trend will
peter out just as quickly as it started. The indicator uses a complex formula to
predict the beginnings and ends of trends, both of which are represented by a
series of red dots that appear directly on the price chart. Buy at the beginning
of an uptrend, where the red dots are below the actual price and rising, and
sell when the Parabolic SAR switches to downtrend, where the red dots are
above the price point and falling. To build in a margin of error, perhaps you

Forex for Beginners
might consider waiting until the trend has reached three periods (three dots)
before acting.
If only it were that simple. In Figure 6-15, the Parabolic SAR has identified
seven discrete trends, each of which is separated by vertical lines. As can be
seen by the actual and predicted trends (represented by the blue and black
lines that I painted on for illustrative purposes), the Parabolic SAR was
ultimately more often wrong than it was right!

Figure 6-15. Example of the Parabolic SAR

Oscillators
Oscillators represent a distinct category of technical indicators—one that is
more complex and potentially more profound. Oscillators work by
normalizing asset price data to a scale (of 0 to 100, for example) so that
overbought and oversold conditions can easily be identified. Most charting
software will enable you to view multiple oscillators simultaneously by
plotting individual oscillators below the main price chart.

155

156

Chapter 6 | Technical Analysis
There are a handful of ways in which readings from oscillators can be
interpreted and utilized. First, when a value reaches an extreme level, it is
supposed to indicate that investor sentiment has also reached an extreme
level and that a correction is imminent. Second, when an oscillator crosses
over from positive territory into negative territory (and vice versa), it
suggests that a trend is about to reverse. Finally, divergences between
oscillators and the underlying currency pairs may signal that a trend is about
to come to an end. There may also be additional interpretations, but these
three are most common.
As for which approach is best, it depends not only on the specific oscillator,
the asset in question (in this case forex), and prevailing market conditions,
but also on the person that is performing the analysis. Some experts harp on
crossovers, while others insist that divergences provide the best signals. Still
others may promote the use of oscillators in combination with other
indicators. As with other technical analysis indicators, there is no singular or
correct way to incorporate oscillators into one’s trading strategy.
With all of this in mind, let’s look at a few of the most popular oscillators.
