
appreciated it. There was no fear that such a judge would use undue severity; his heart
was with the people; he understood their language and their manners, and would make
allowances for the temptations which drove them into crime. So thought many of the
prisoners, if we may infer it from the fact, that the learned judge suddenly acquired an
immense increase of popularity. The praise of his wit was in every mouth, and "Who are
you?" renewed its lease, and remained in possession of public favour for another term in
consequence.
But it must not be supposed that there were no interregni between the dominion of one
slang phrase and another. They did not arise in one long line of unbroken succession, but
shared with song the possession of popular favour. Thus, when the people were in the
mood for music, slang advanced its claims to no purpose, and, when they were inclined
for slang, the sweet voice of music wooed them in vain. About twenty years ago London
resounded with one chorus, with the love of which everybody seemed to be smitten. Girls
and boys, young men and old, maidens and wives, and widows, were all alike musical.
There was an absolute mania for singing, and the worst of it was, that, like good Father
Philip, in the romance of "The Monastery," they seemed utterly unable to change their
tune. "Cherry ripe!" "Cherry ripe!" was the universal cry of all the idle in the town. Every
unmelodious voice gave utterance to it; every crazy fiddle, every cracked flute, every
wheezy pipe, every street organ was heard in the same strain, until studious and quiet
men stopped their ears in desperation, or fled miles away into the fields or woodlands, to
be at peace. This plague lasted for a twelvemonth, until the very name of cherries became
an abomination in the land. At last the excitement wore itself away, and the tide of favour
set in a new direction. Whether it was another song or a slang phrase, is difficult to
determine at this distance of time; but certain it is, that very shortly afterwards, people
went mad upon a dramatic subject, and nothing was to be heard of but "Tom and Jerry."
Verbal wit had amused the multitude long enough, and they became more practical in
their recreation. Every youth on the town was seized with the fierce desire of
distinguishing himself, by knocking down the "charlies," being locked up all night in a
watchhouse, or kicking up a row among loose women and blackguard men in the low
dens of St. Giles's. Imitative boys vied with their elders in similar exploits, until this
unworthy passion, for such it was, had lasted, like other follies, its appointed time, and
the town became merry after another fashion. It was next thought the height of vulgar wit
to answer all questions by placing the point of the thumb upon the tip of the nose, and
twirling the fingers in the air. If one man wished to insult or annoy another, he had only
to make use of this cabalistic sign in his face, and his object was accomplished. At every
street corner where a group was assem- bled, the spectator who was curious enough to
observe their movements, would be sure to see the fingers of some of them at their noses,
either as a mark of incredulity, surprise, refusal, or mockery, before he had watched two
minutes. There is some remnant of this absurd custom to be seen to this day; but it is
thought low, even among the vulgar.
About six years ago, London became again most preposterously musical. The vox populi
wore itself hoarse by singing the praises of "The Sea, the Sea!" If a stranger (and a
philosopher) had walked through London, and listened to the universal chorus, he might
have constructed a very pretty theory upon the love of the English for the sea-service, and

our acknowledged superiority over all other nations upon that element. "No wonder," he
might have said, "that this people is invincible upon the ocean. The love of it mixes with
their daily thoughts: they celebrate it even in the market-place: their street-minstrels
excite charity by it; and high and low, young and old, male and female, chant Io paeans in
its praise. Love is not honoured in the national songs of this warlike race -- Bacchus is no
god to them; they are men of sterner mould, and think only of 'the Sea, the Sea!' and the
means of conquering upon it."
Such would, doubtless, have been his impression if he had taken the evidence only of his
ears. Alas! in those days for the refined ears that were musical! great was their torture
when discord, with its thousand diversities of tone, struck up this appalling anthem -there was no escape from it. The migratory minstrels of Savoy caught the strain, and
pealed it down the long vistas of quiet streets, till their innermost and snuggest
apartments re-echoed with the sound. Men were obliged to endure this crying evil for full
six months, wearied to desperation, and made sea-sick on the dry land.
Several other songs sprang up in due succession afterwards, but none of them, with the
exception of one, entitled "All round my Hat," enjoyed any extraordinary share of favour,
until an American actor introduced a vile song called "Jim Crow." The singer sang his
verses in appropriate costume, with grotesque gesticulations, and a sudden whirl of his
body at the close of each verse. It took the taste of the town immediately, and for months
the ears of orderly people were stunned by the senseless chorus"Turn about and wheel about, And do just so-- Turn about and wheel about, And jump,
Jim Crow!"
Street-minstrels blackened their faces in order to give proper effect to the verses; and
fatherless urchins, who had to choose between thieving and singing for their livelihood,
took the latter course, as likely to be the more profitable, as long as the public taste
remained in that direction. The uncouth dance, its accompaniment, might be seen in its
full perfection on market nights in any great thoroughfare; and the words of the song
might be heard, piercing above all the din and buzz of the ever-moving multitude. He, the
calm observer, who during the hey-day popularity of this doggrel,
"Sate beside the public way, Thick strewn with summer dust, and saw the stream Of
people there was hurrying to and fro, Numerous as gnats upon the evening gleam,"
might have exclaimed with Shelley, whose fine lines we quote, that
"The million, with fierce song and maniac dance, Did rage around."
The philosophic theorist we have already supposed soliloquising upon the English
character, and forming his opinion of it from their exceeding love for a sea-song, might,
if he had again dropped suddenly into London, have formed another very plausible theory
to account for our unremitting efforts for the abolition of the Slave Trade. "Benevolent
people!" he might have said, "how unbounded are your sympathies! Your unhappy

brethren of Africa, differing from you only in the colour of their skins, are so dear to you,
and you begrudge so little the twenty millions you have paid on their behalf, that you
love to have a memento of them continually in your sight. Jim Crow is the representative
of that injured race, and as such is the idol of your populace! See how they all sing his
praises! -- how they imitate his peculiarities! -- how they repeat his name in their
moments of leisure and relaxation! They even carve images of him to adorn their hearths,
that his cause and his sufferings may never be forgotten ! Oh, philanthropic England! -oh, vanguard of civilization!"
Such are a few of the peculiarities of the London multitude, when no riot, no execution,
no murder, no balloon, disturbs the even current of their thoughts. These are the
whimseys of the mass - the harmless follies by which they unconsciously endeavour to
lighten the load of care which presses upon their existence. The wise man, even though
he smile at them, will not altogether withhold his sympathy, and will say, "Let them
enjoy their slang phrases and their choruses if they will; and if they cannot be happy, at
least let them be merry." To the Englishman, as well as to the Frenchman of whom
Beranger sings, there may be some comfort in so small a thing as a song, and we may,
own with him that
"Au peuple attriste Ce qui rendra la gaite, C'est la GAUDRIOLE! O gue! C'est la
GAUDRIOLE!"

THE O.P. MANIA.
And these things bred a great combustion in the town. Wagstaffe's "Apparition of Mother
Haggis."
The acrimonious warfare carried on for a length of time by the playgoers of London
against the proprietors of Covent-Garden Theatre, is one of the most singular instances
upon record of the small folly which will sometimes pervade a multitude of intelligent
men. Carried on at first from mere obstinacy by a few, and afterwards for mingled
obstinacy and frolic by a greater number, it increased at last to such a height, that the
sober dwellers in the provinces held up their hands in astonishment, and wondered that
the people of London should be such fools. As much firmness and perseverance
displayed in a better cause, might have achieved important triumphs; and we cannot but
feel regret, in recording this matter, that so much good and wholesome energy should
have been thrown away on so unworthy an object. But we will begin with the beginning,
and trace the O. P. mania from its source.
On the night of the 20th of September, 1808, the old theatre of Covent-Garden was
totally destroyed by fire. Preparations were immediately made for the erection of a more
splendid edifice, and the managers, Harris and the celebrated John Philip Kemble,
announced that the new theatre should be without a rival in Europe. In less than three
months, the rubbish of the old building was cleared away, and the foundation-stone of the
new one laid with all due ceremony by the Duke of Sussex. With so much celerity were
the works carried on that, in nine months more, the edifice was completed, both without
and within. The opening night was announced for the 18th of September 1809, within
two days of a twelvemonth since the destruction of the original building.
But the undertaking had proved more expensive than the Committee anticipated. To
render the pit entrance more commodious, it had been deemed advisable to remove a low
public-house that stood in the way. This turned out a matter of no little difficulty, for the
proprietor was a man well skilled in driving a hard bargain. The more eager the
Committee showed themselves to come to terms with him for his miserable pot-house,
the more grasping he became in his demands for compensation. They were ultimately
obliged to pay him an exorbitant sum. Added to this, the interior decorations were on the
most costly scale; and Mrs. Siddons, and other members of the Kemble family, together
with the celebrated Italian singer, Madame Catalani, had been engaged at very high
salaries. As the night of opening drew near, the Committee found that they had gone a
little beyond their means; and they issued a notice, stating that, in consequence of the
great expense they had been at in building the theatre, and the large salaries they had
agreed to pay, to secure the services of the most eminent actors, they were under the
necessity of fixing the prices of admission at seven shillings to the boxes and four
shillings to the pit, instead of six shillings and three and sixpence, as heretofore.
This announcement created the greatest dissatisfaction. The boxes might have borne the
oppression, but the dignity of the pit was wounded. A war-cry was raised immediately.
For some weeks previous to the opening, a continual clatter was kept up in clubs and
coffee-rooms, against what was considered a most unconstitutional aggression on the

rights of play-going man. The newspapers assiduously kept up the excitement, and
represented, day after day, to the managers the impolicy of the proposed advance. The
bitter politics of the time were disregarded, and Kemble and Covent-Garden became as
great sources of interest as Napoleon and France. Public attention was the more fixed
upon the proceedings at Covent-Garden, since it was the only patent theatre then in
existence, Drury-Lane theatre having also been destroyed by fire in the month of
February previous. But great as was the indignation of the lovers of the drama at that
time, no one could have anticipated the extraordinary lengths to which opposition would
be carried.
First Night, September 20th. -- The performances announced were the tragedy of
"Macbeth" and the afterpiece of "The Quaker." The house was excessively crowded (the
pit especially) with persons who had gone for no other purpose than to make a
disturbance. They soon discovered another grievance to add to the list. The whole of the
lower, and three-fourths of the upper tier of boxes, were let out for the season; so that
those who had paid at the door for a seat in the boxes, were obliged to mount to a level
with the gallery. Here they were stowed into boxes which, from their size and shape,
received the contemptuous, and not inappropriate designation of pigeon-holes. This was
considered in the light of a new aggression upon established rights; and long before the
curtain drew up, the managers might have heard in their green-room the indignant shouts
of "Down with the pigeon-holes!" -- " Old prices for ever!" Amid this din the curtain
rose, and Mr. Kemble stood forward to deliver a poetical address in honour of the
occasion. The riot now began in earnest; not a word of the address was audible, from the
stamping and groaning of the people in the pit. This continued, almost without
intermission, through the five acts of the tragedy. Now and then, the sublime acting of
Mrs. Siddons, as "the awful woman," hushed the noisy multitude into silence, in spite of
themselves: but it was only for a moment; the recollection of their fancied wrongs made
them ashamed of their admiration, and they shouted and hooted again more vigorously
than before. The comedy of Munden in the afterpiece met with no better reception; not a
word was listened to, and the curtain fell amid still increasing uproar and shouts of "Old
prices!" Some magistrates, who happened to be present, zealously came to the rescue,
and appeared on the stage with copies of the Riot Act. This ill-judged proceeding made
the matter worse. The men of the pit were exasperated by the indignity, and strained their
lungs to express how deeply they felt it. Thus remained the war till long after midnight,
when the belligerents withdrew from sheer exhaustion.
Second Night. -- The crowd was not so great; all those who had gone on the previous
evening to listen to the performances, now stayed away, and the rioters had it nearly all to
themselves. With the latter, "the play was not the thing," and Macheath and Polly sang in
"The Beggar's Opera" in vain. The actors and the public appeared to have changed sides - the audience acted, and the actors listened. A new feature of this night's proceedings
was the introduction of placards. Several were displayed from the pit and boxes,
inscribed in large letters with the words, "Old prices." With a view of striking terror, the
constables who had been plentifully introduced into the house, attacked the placardbearers, and succeeded, after several severe battles, in dragging off a few of them to the
neighbouring watch-house, in Bow Street. Confusion now became worse and worse

confounded. The pitites screamed themselves hoarse; while, to increase the uproar, some
mischievous frequenters of the upper regions squeaked through dozens of cat-calls, till
the combined noise was enough to blister every tympanum in the house.
Third Night.--The appearance of several gentlemen in the morning at the bar of the Bow
Street police office, to answer for their riotous conduct, had been indignantly commented
upon during the day. All augured ill for the quiet of the night. The performances
announced were "Richard the Third" and "The Poor Soldier," but the popularity of the
tragedy could not obtain it a hearing. The pitites seemed to be drawn into closer union by
the attacks made upon them, and to act more in concert than on the previous nights. The
placards were, also, more numerous; not only the pit, but the boxes and galleries
exhibited them. Among the most conspicuous, was one inscribed, "John Bull against John
Kemble. -- Who'll win?" Another bore "King George for ever! but no King Kemble." A
third was levelled against Madame Catalani, whose large salary was supposed to be one
of the causes of the increased prices, and was inscribed "No foreigners to tax us -- we're
taxed enough already." This last was a double-barrelled one, expressing both dramatic
and political discontent, and was received with loud cheers by the pitites.
The tragedy and afterpiece were concluded full two hours before their regular time; and
the cries for Mr. Kemble became so loud, that the manager thought proper to obey the
summons. Amid all these scenes of uproar he preserved his equanimity, and was never
once betrayed into any expression of petulance or anger. With some difficulty he
obtained a hearing. He entered into a detail of the affairs of the theatre, assuring the
audience at the same time of the solicitude of the proprietors to accommodate themselves
to the public wish. This was received with some applause, as it was thought at first to
manifest a willingness to come back to the old prices, and the pit eagerly waited for the
next sentence, that was to confirm their hopes. That sentence was never uttered, for Mr.
Kemble, folding his arms majestically, added, in his deep tragic voice, "Ladies and
Gentlemen, I wait here to know what you want!" Immediately the uproar was renewed,
and became so tremendous and so deafening, that the manager, seeing the uselessness of
further parley, made his bow and retired.
A gentleman then rose in the boxes and requested a hearing. He obtained it without
difficulty. He began by inveighing in severe terms against the pretended ignorance of Mr.
Kemble, in asking them so offensively what they wanted, and concluded by exhorting the
people never to cease their opposition until they brought down the prices to their old
level. The speaker, whose name was understood to be Leigh, then requested a cheer for
the actors, to show that no disrespect was intended them. The cheer was given
immediately.
A barrister of the name of Smythe then rose to crave another hearing for Mr. Kemble.
The manager stood forth again, calm, unmoved, and severe. "Ladies and gentlemen," said
he, "I wait here to know your wishes." Mr. Leigh, who took upon himself, "for that night
only," the character of popular leader, said, the only reply he could give was one in three
words, "the old prices." Hereat the shouts of applause again rose, till the building rang.
Still serene amid the storm, the manager endeavoured to enter into explanations. The men

of the pit would hear nothing of the sort. They wanted entire and absolute acquiescence.
Less would not satisfy them; and, as Mr. Kemble only wished to explain, they would not
hear a word. He finally withdrew amid a noise to which Babel must have been
comparatively silent.
Fourth night. -- The rioters were more obstinate than ever. The noises were increased by
the addition of whistles, bugle-horns, and watchmen's rattles, sniffling, snorting, and
clattering from all parts of the house. Human lungs were taxed to the uttermost, and the
stamping on the floor raised such a dust as to render all objects but dimly visible. In
placards, too, there was greater variety. The loose wits of the town had all day been
straining their ingenuity to invent new ones. Among them were, "Come forth, O Kemble!
come forth and tremble!" "Foolish John Kemble, we'll make you tremble!" and "No cats!
no Catalani! English actors for ever!"
Those who wish to oppose a mob successfully, should never lose their temper. It is a
proof of weakness which masses of people at once perceive, and never fail to take
advantage of. Thus, when the managers unwisely resolved to fight the mob with their
own weapons, it only increased the opposition it was intended to allay. A dozen pugilists,
commanded by a notorious boxer of the day, were introduced into the pit, to use the
argumentum ad hominem to the rioters. Continual scuffles ensued: but the invincible
resolution of the playgoers would not allow them to quail; it rather aroused them to
renewed opposition, and a determination never to submit or yield. It also strengthened
their cause, by affording them further ground of complaint against the managers.
The performances announced on the bills were the opera of "Love in a Village," and
"Who wins?" but the bills had it all to themselves, for neither actors nor public were
much burthened with them. The latter, indeed, afforded some sport. The title was too apt
to the occasion to escape notice, and shouts of "Who wins? who wins?" displaced for a
time the accustomed cry of old prices.
After the fall of the curtain, Mr. Leigh, with another gentleman, again spoke, complaining
bitterly of the introduction of the prize-fighters, and exhorting the public never to give in.
Mr. Kemble was again called forward; but when he came, the full tide of discord ran so
strongly against him that, being totally unable to stem it, he withdrew. Each man seemed
to shout as if he had been a Stentor; and when his lungs were wearied, took to his feet and
stamped, till all the black coats in his vicinity became grey with dust. At last the audience
were tired out, and the theatre was closed before eleven o'clock.
Fifth night. -- The play was Coleman's amusing comedy of" John Bull." There was no
diminution of the uproar. Every note on the diapason of discord was run through. The
prize-fighters, or hitites as they were called, mustered in considerable numbers, and the
battles between them and the pitites were fierce and many. It was now, for the first time,
that the letters O.P. came into general use as an abbreviation of the accustomed
watchword of old prices. Several placards were thus inscribed; and, as brevity is so
desirable in shouting, the mob adopted the emendation. As usual, the manager was called
for. After some delay he came forward, and was listened to with considerable patience.

He repeated, in respectful terms, the great loss that would be occasioned to the
proprietors by a return to the old prices, and offered to submit a statement of their
accounts to the eminent lawyers, Sir Vicary Gibbs and Sir Thomas Plumer; the eminent
merchants, Sir Francis Baring and Mr. Angerstein; and Mr. Whitmore, the Governor of
the Bank of England. By their decision as to the possibility of carrying on the theatre at
the old prices, he would consent to be governed, and he hoped the public would do the
same. This reasonable proposition was scouted immediately. Not even the high and
reputable names he had mentioned were thought to afford any guarantee for impartiality.
The pitites were too wrong-headed to abate one iota of their pretensions; and they had
been too much insulted by the prize-fighters in the manager's pay, to show any
consideration for him, or agree to any terms he might propose. They wanted full
acquiescence, and nothing less. Thus the conference broke off, and the manager retired
amid a storm of hisses.
An Irish gentleman, named O'Reilly, then stood up in one of the boxes. With true Irish
gallantry, he came to the rescue of an ill-used lady. He said he was disgusted at the
attacks made upon Madame Catalani, the finest singer in the world, and a lady
inestimable in private life. It was unjust, unmanly, and un-English to make the innocent
suffer for the guilty; and he hoped this blot would be no longer allowed to stain a fair
cause. As to the quarrel with the manager, he recommended them to persevere. They
were not only wronged by his increased prices, but insulted by his boxers, and he hoped,
that before they had done with him, they would teach him a lesson he would not soon
forget. The gallant Hibernian soon became a favourite, and sat down amid loud cheers.
Sixth night. - No signs of a cessation of hostilities on the one side, or of a return to the old
prices on the other. The playgoers seemed to grow more united as the managers grew
more obstinate. The actors had by far the best time of it; for they were spared nearly all
the labour of their parts, and merely strutted on the stage to see how matters went on, and
then strutted off again. Notwithstanding the remonstrance of Mr. O'Reilly on the previous
night, numerous placards reflecting upon Madame Catalani were exhibited. One was
inscribed with the following doggrel :"Seventeen thousand a-year goes pat, To Kemble, his sister, and Madame Cat."
On another was displayed, in large letters, "No compromise, old prices, and native
talent!" Some of these were stuck against the front of the boxes, and others were hoisted
from the pit on long poles. The following specimens will suffice to show the spirit of
them; wit they had none, or humour either, although when they were successively
exhibited, they elicited roars of laughter:-"John Kemble alone is the cause of this riot; When he lowers his prices, John Bull will be
quiet."
"John Kemble be damn'd, We will not be cramm'd."
"Squire Kemble Begins to tremble."
