
14

Inside the Currency Market

The major questions answered by these reports are where should resources
be allocated, how should portfolios be adjusted, and what are the risks? Is a
certain nation’s currency overbought or oversold, is a certain region overbought or oversold, and will past strategies work in the future? For example,
of the seven major widely traded currencies, three are considered commodity
currencies, Australia, Canada, and New Zealand. If all three had long runs
based on prior reports and their respective natural resources sold well, will
those same strategies work in the future?
Conclusion

Traders and market professionals must understand the constant attention
paid to overall industry changes in these reports by consummate market professionals who look at forward changes and market developments through
reports, statistics, and market studies. Volumes are just one side of the overall
equation. Yet we know from past volume histories that the spot transaction
is the dominant instrument traded yesterday, and chances are good that spot
will dominate foreign currency transactions long into the future.
Professional market reports provide an insight, an intelligence of a market that may undergo changes in design, structure, or some feature that may
enhance or limit a market’s overall ability. Yet reports can answer questions
as to present strategies and possible tactical changes. Reports serve as market
guides, a road map that can hint at direction of a currency pair, highlight
an overbought region, gain insight into a new trading instrument, and even
provide insight into a government position on tax and ﬁscal policies. Many
reports exist nation to nation and all are released at various times throughout
any given year. Because of the forward nature of various reports, much can be
gained due to the depth and detail professionals devote to every issue.

Inside the Currency Market: Mechanics, Valuation, and Strategies
by Brian Twomey
Copyright © 2012 Brian Twomey

CHAPTER 2

Currency Trading
Beyond the Basics
This chapter will address the many foundations and theories of money and
exchange rates as well as the histories behind those theories. The chapter begins
with concepts of the currency market, participants, and foundations that comprise currency pairs. The belief is that understanding currency pairs must equate
to an understanding of how other nations view their own currencies and how
those currencies are traded in their respective markets. Concepts such as margin, rollover interest, and how that interest is debited and credited to accounts is
important to denote amounts of revenue that may be earned or lost. All is highlighted from a nation-to-nation perspective. Histories of economic formations are
addressed as they relate to an economic structure, and concepts such as interest
rates that hold economies together are detailed. Purchasing Power Parity is a turnof-the-century concept that still has relevance today, so it was addressed in detail.
All concepts have relevance to not only understand the currency markets but to
understand the markets in relation to gaining proﬁts.
One common theme that should be stated, promoted, and understood
throughout this text is that currency trading is about money, the cost of
money, the demand and supply of it, and the price in relation to the various
currency pairs and assets it mimics. How much does money cost and can
demand meet supply or supply meet demand are just a few questions that
will be answered. These answers can only be determined in the interbank
market through interest rates and ﬁnancial instruments associated with interest. Interest-rate formulas have as their foundation:
Simple Interest  Principal  Rate  Time
From nation to nation, central bank to central bank, the answers are
different because cost factors and funding needs are distinct. A commodity
15

16

Inside the Currency Market

currency has different cost and funding needs as opposed to a manufacturing
currency nation and economic situations allow various pairs to move differently from each other. Larger nations are different than smaller nations.
Export nations are distinct from import nations. Cross pairs and U.S. dollar
pairs are quite different in movement and cost structure. Each economy varies
in size, shape, cost, and ﬁnance needs. Yet these factors are aligned as currency
pairs. Historic currency pair terminology referred to pairs as commodity/
terms and terms/commodity. To bring these factors into balance and understanding, I explore the numerous factors involved to answer these questions,
because not all currency pairs are the same. All have a distinctness, a purpose,
a reason for existence, and a reason for movement. And many have a market
interest in these factors.
Banks, governments, central banks, major companies throughout the
world, importers and exporters, traders, speculators, hedge funds, pension
funds, cross-currency investors, traders and speculators, carry traders, organizations, and tourists, to name a few, are all involved in this market on a daily
basis. A trading indicator won’t necessarily help to understand this answer
because it looks at these factors in the short term and from the inside out
without a look at the whole picture of a nation and its particular pair.
The important answer to understand is what makes a currency turn to
strength or a sell and what are factors that force market weakness—a long.
A currency price is based on the cost factor, the price of money, and the price
that others are willing to buy or sell for in terms of an interest rate. Any market
implications that hamper a currency pair’s funding or cost structure means that
that pair will be sold to reﬂect the new cost and funding structure. Inversely, a
pair will be bought if funding and cost aren’t hindered. From a single-nation
perspective, internal funding is conducted through sales of bonds, notes, and
bills and it connects to external factors of foreign exchange such as Spots,
swaps, and forwards. Failure to connect can hamper the overall structure.
For example, a spot trader in Great Britain would want the British
pound/U.S. dollar pair to trend toward weakness, to trend upward. This
means England’s economy must have strong economic output, rising wages,
rising consumer prices, rising producer prices, rising exports, and rising interest rates. In this instance, the cost and funding structure is cheap and the
Bank of England can easily meet these funding needs while its nation’s manufacturers and consumers enjoy good economic times. Any problems along
this journey and the British pound/U.S. dollar pair will be sold as the cost of
money rises and funding needs can’t be met.
Most important is the idea that a currency pair is a two-sided equation
that must be understood from a two-nation perspective in terms of price,

Currency Trading Beyond the Basics

17

cost, funding structures, and reasons when, how, and why pairs move. To
understand is to proﬁt.
Pips and Lots

Spot-currency trading is conducted through pips. A pip is a percentage interest point. A 100 pip move up or down in any currency pair equates to one
penny, a common occurrence on any given trading day. The market term for
a 100 pip move is a Big Figure, slang is big ﬁg. Just like a Milliard is equal to
one billion units of currency, the market term is Yard to equal a billion units.
The value of a pip depends on the type of lot traded. A standard lot equates
to control of 100,000 currencies; it is one one-hundredth of a point, one basis
point, or $10 per pip. For most pairs, this is found in the fourth decimal place,
second decimal place for the Japanese yen. For example, British pound/U.S.
dollar is the British pound sterling versus the United States dollar. So British
pound/U.S. dollar is equal to 0.0001 multiplied by 100,000 and equals
$10.00. A mini lot is British pound/U.S. dollar is equal to 0.0001  10,000
and equals $1.00. A standard lot is $10.00 per pip, two lots are $20.00 per
pip, three lots are $30.00 per pip. No dollar limits exist on the amount of lots
to buy or sell. A mini lot is 10,000 trades at $1.00 per pip, two lots is $2.00
per pip, three lots is $3.00 per pip. There are no limits to dollar amounts or
number of lots to buy or sell. The advantage of a mini lot is that one can buy
or sell 15 mini lots or one standard lot and a half. One standard lot is equal to
10 mini lots. It is perfect for a small trader with limited funds.
Micro Lots are equal to 0.10. Each lot trades at 1 cent a pip. Quotes
here are in U.S. dollars because the base currency is in U.S. dollars. Suppose
we have U.S. dollar/Swiss franc. How much does each pip earn? Divide
by the exchange rate. For example, U.S. dollar/Swiss franc exchange rate is
1.0570, equal to $10.00 divided by 1.0570, so it is $9.46 per pip based on
one standard lot. How much does a lot cost? The price of a lot is different from market to market and it depends on which market to trade, how
much liquidity is available, how much bids and offers cost, and the amount
of narrowing or widening of the spreads.
Bid/Ask—The Difference Is in the Spread!

All traders once paid a per-lot price, but recent changes now stipulate traders
pay a spread between the bid and ask. Currencies are now quoted in bid/ask

18

Inside the Currency Market

thanks to retail brokers that sell currencies back to the interbank market. Bid/
ask can also be viewed in the context of bid/offer, buy/sell, borrow/lend, and
even deposit/lend where deposit rates create a ﬂoor and lend rates create a
ceiling. The difference is the spread.
The bid appears on the left side of a currency pair and that is the quote
to sell while the ask is the price to buy and appears on the right. The ask
always exceeds the bid. Ask minus bid equals the cost of a trade per one lot.
The price of a spread depends on liquidity of the market and the particular
currency pair. Fast markets and high volatility will see small spreads generally.
Illiquid currency pairs or illiquid markets will see higher spreads.
Some pairs such as the British pound/Japanese yen or U.S. dollar/South
African Rand may see higher spreads due to wide-ranging movements. The
U.S. dollar/South African Rand can cost as much as 200 to 300 pips for
the spread and as little as 70 pips depending on volatility. Trading the majors
against the U.S. dollar and even the cross pairs should cost between 2 and
10 pips, as a general range in the United States and Canada, double easily in
Switzerland and the vast majority in Europe and Hong Kong. Japanese broker pip spreads are as competitive as the United States.
To determine percentage terms Ask Rate – Bid divided by the Ask rate.
Directional determinations of spot prices based on smaller bid/ask spreads
are not as easily determined today. With recent changes from a per-lot
price to a spread, it is hard to answer because it is not an area of great interest to researchers presently. Recent studies focused on volatility in relation to
spreads, so general assumptions can only be rendered presently. One aspect
widely employed in the past to determine direction was to calculate bid/ask
spreads in terms of arithmetic means, but because the spreads are so minuscule the best answer would be to employ percents. The analytical eye would
also determine direction as a bid or ask price would be supported on any price
divergences. Sometimes an indicator may hint at direction but the overall
market may have other purposes and it shows within the bid/ask spread.
Punishing the United States with Margins

Most margins in the United States allows for a 100 to 1 leverage and a 1 percent
margin. One standard lot to control 100,000 currencies requires traders to
maintain the 1 percent margin. To fall below will mean a trader must add
money to the account or the broker will sell out the position by a margin
call and a trader will suffer the loss. A current proposal by the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) to limit margins is underway as this is

Currency Trading Beyond the Basics

19

written. And this has happened yet again as the war against currency markets
continues. Leverage is now 50:1 with a 2 percent margin, 20:1 leverage with
a 5 percent margin for exotic pairs such as U.S. dollar/South African Rand
and U.S. dollar/Turkish Lira. Taking this into account, the United States is
the most punished nation in the world.
Mrs. Wantanabe and the Margin Japan

About 120 currency brokers exist in Japan, down from 500 in 2005 and all
offer leverage that can be as high as 400 to 1. Japanese accounts traded $302.5
billion a day according to the 2007 Triennial Report. The Japanese have a
long, long history of active trading and the modern day is no different. Yet
the governing arm of the currency markets, the Financial Services Authority
in Japan is currently proposing to limit margins to 50 to 1 in 2010 and 25 to
1 in 2011. The Bank of Japan released a report in 2008 and found that one
tenth of all spot trades were transacted by margin traders, so the trading public is ﬁrmly against these proposals almost by a 70 to 30 margin according to
recent polls. The most famous person in Japan is Mrs. Wantanabe, a ﬁctitious
person representative of a vast group of everyday traders who comprise a vast
majority of the Japanese public. The idea is as Mr. Wantanabe works during
the day, Mrs. Wantanabe is helping earn income by trading.
Margin: Europe, Switzerland, England, Australia,
Hong Kong, and Canada

Spreads are higher through European brokers compared to the U.S. but leverage is 100 to 1 with a 1 percent margin in some nations. Generally brokers
apply automatically a 5 percent margin that can be changed higher at the
request of the trader. This equates to a 50-to-1 margin. The British pound/
Japanese yen will cost easily a set nine-pip spread and higher throughout any
trading day, 70 pips for U.S. dollar/South African Rand.
Switzerland is no different in set spread prices, yet some Swiss brokers
also charge a volume commission. Traders pay the least amount of these three
categories: volume according to net deposit, volume based on equity, or volume based on traded volume. The price paid is based in U.S. dollars, not
Swiss francs. The higher the equity and the more volume of trades, the less
a trader pays. Another way to view this is in terms of volume versus price
quotes.

20

Inside the Currency Market

If a foreign currency is the quote (bottom) and the local currency is the
terms (top), this is called a price quote. The foreign currency is priced in
terms of the local currency. If a foreign currency is the terms (bottom) and
the local currency is the quote (top), this is called a volume quote. Other
ﬁrms offer spreads without a commission but the spreads are higher than the
United States. The competitiveness may be derived because the Swiss tout
their low capital-gain rates.
England is by far the best throughout the world in all categories, including pip spreads, taxes, hedging, rollovers, and margin. London is the home of
currency trading and it lives up to its reputation. Australia encourages traders
as well and offers a decent system for traders.
Canada offers a 25-to-1 leverage with a 4 percent margin. Pip spreads are
slightly higher than the United States, but still competitive.
Hong Kong sets margin at 20 to 1, 5 percent of open positions, 3 percent
to maintain, and below 1 percent means the position will be liquidated for
a loss. These rules are set by the Securities and Futures Commission. Some
nations help and encourage traders and markets, others punish.
Rollovers

In the United States, rollover interest is debited or credited to accounts at
5:00 p.m. eastern time for positions held overnight. This process began in
1994 to settle spot prices so a standard system of exchange rates could be
established to settle old contracts and enter into new agreements. The prior
time was 4:00 p.m. in conjunction with the New York Stock Exchange close,
but changed to 5:00 p.m. in later years.
At 5:01, the opportunity to gain interest is lost until the next trading day
at 5:01 p.m. Rollover interest works based on interest rates, short and long
term. Suppose a trader is long Australian dollar/U.S. dollar, meaning a trader
bought the Australian dollar and sold the U.S. dollar pair. The interest rate in
Australia is currently 4.25, and the interest rate is 0.25 in the United States.
Based on the formula to calculate interest, a positive account will receive
the difference of 4.25 minus 0.25, so 4 percent. Four percent multiplied by
100,000 for one standard lot equals $4,000. $4,000 divided by 365 days is
equal to $10.95. This interest amount is credited to the account, per lot, on
a daily basis as long as the position remains open.
Suppose a trader sold British pound/Australian dollar. Here a trader
sells the Australian dollar and buys the British pound. England’s interest
rate is 0.50 and Australia’s is 4.25. This account will always receive a

Currency Trading Beyond the Basics

21

negative rollover due to negative interest. Monies will be debited daily on a
per lot basis.
There is one caveat to this interest-rate trading strategy. During the course
of any trading day, short-term interest rates ebb and ﬂow based on market
events such as news announcements, volatility, and liquidity. The quoted rollover on the Australian dollar/U.S. dollar position is based on a per-annum
basis. It is the benchmark interest rate between two nations and used by many
brokers as accepted and legal practice. But rates will ebb and ﬂow throughout
the day. If for some market reason U.S. dollar rates traded higher, Australian
dollars would receive less interest for the day. It is the factor, how each broker
debits and credits rollover.
Rollover Rates and LIBOR

Rates are factored based on the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR),
which is released by the British Bankers Association every day at about
11:30 a.m. London time, about 5:00 a.m. eastern time. It is the reference
rate for the following currencies: Swiss franc, British pound, U.S. dollar,
Canadian dollar, Australian and New Zealand dollars, Japanese yen, euro,
Danish krone, and Swedish krona. The majority of the world’s trading
nations follow these rates, but this is just the start of rates as the New York
markets begin. Where these unsecured borrowed LIBOR will go based on
the course of any trading day can at times be unpredictable. This is due to
the factors of the LIBOR.
LIBOR is the offered rate, a rate at which banks will lend unsecured
funds. LIBID is the bid rate, the rate at which banks wish to borrow unsecured funds, and LIMEAN is the average rate of LIBOR and LIBID. What
usually transpires is a rate based on an arithmetic mean or a rate agreed, plus
or minus the spread. Normally the highest and lowest bids and offers are
discarded and the middle rates are averaged to derive the day’s LIBOR. The
question for rollover and trading purposes is how much does money cost on
that day and from nation to nation, because all nations have different cost
structures and liquidity needs.
The most notable effect for residents of these nations is LIBOR are connected to residential housing ﬁnance, especially in Singapore. With every new
day, rates change as ﬁnance needs change with a top LIBOR and a lower
LIBID rate, a ceiling and ﬂoor. See Exhibit 2.1, overnight LIBOR.
The U.S. dollar rates traded higher one day and lower the next. Notice
further how Australian dollar rates edged up in the yesterday column

22

Inside the Currency Market

EXHIBIT 2.1 LIBOR Charts

Current

Yesterday

U.S. dollar

0.250250

0.249000

British pound

0.541250

0.540630

Euro

0.278130

0.278130

Japanese yen

0.117500

0.117500

Swiss franc

0.046670

0.046670

Australian dollar

4.320000

4.332500

Canadian dollar

0.250000

0.250830

New Zealand dollar

2.737500

2.750000

as the U.S. dollar rates traded down. Further notice overnight LIBOR in
Exhibit 2.1 and notice how far the U.S. dollar rates dropped against their
Australian dollar counterpart.
Australian dollar LIBOR continues to trade at a premium to its benchmark rate and may be a sign of either the market anticipating a further rate
hike because borrowing costs are higher or the rate is overbought. Liquidity
and funding needs will determine the answer. For rollover purposes, this represents continued positive interest payments. Some brokers, particularly in
Europe and Asia, will use swap points instead of the benchmark interest rate
between central banks to determine rollover.
Swap Points and Rollover

Swap points, or forward points, are the bid/ask prices of forward contracts
traded in the interbank market and must be viewed as an interest rate. But
foreign exhange (FX) swaps, particularly interest rate swaps, also incorporate swap points in their terminology and trade in the interbank market.
The formal deﬁnition of swap points is the difference between interest
rates on currencies. All currency pairs have different swap rates due to the
differences in interest rates between pairs. Swap points are also termed forward points, FX points, or spot points. Positive forward points are added to
the spot rate while negative points are deducted. Forward points equate
to basis points by multiplying by 100 or 1000. If a swap point appears as
0.0084 and is positive, basis-point terms are already derived. The multiplication determines how much. The Czechoslovakian central bank factors
forward points by dividing forward points by 1000 and adding the result

Currency Trading Beyond the Basics

23

to the spot rate. Future spot prices and future interest is factored based on
forward implied rates.
The formula:
(1  r)#days/12  [(1  Spot)month/12]  [(1 y)p/12]
where
p  number of periods in the implied period.
A last method to look at forward points is by forward margin.
Forward margin is derived from forward rates and expressed as the
future value of a currency pair in terms of the terms and quote. Forward
margin equals the forward rate minus the spot rate and is expressed as
swap or forward points. The reason to employ forward points in rollover
accounts is to debit or credit actual market rates rather than benchmark
interest rates.
For example, Europe debits and credits rollover accounts based on swap
points. Swap points are derived from euro LIBOR, a LIBOR rate released
by the British Bankers Association (BBA) at 6:00 a.m. exclusively for the
European markets. euro LIBOR is used because it is the basis of swap contracts, the basis of interest rates, and the basis of unsecured borrowing for the
trading day in the European interbank market traded in London and overseas.
It is the interest rate more closely aligned to the overall market.
Beside euro LIBOR, the British Bankers Association releases LIBOR for
10 different currency markets with 15 various maturities ranging from overnight to one year.
