
on the basis of a chart, then, as dumb as it made you feel, it made sense
to look at that chart; perhaps it would enable you to place your bet first
and get in front of the coming wave. Many of our French and English
speculators, however, honestly believed the charts contained the secrets
of the market. They are aboriginal chartists. They would have used the
charts even if no one else did. They communed with their charts as if
they were Ouija boards. The charts were speaking to them.
Now I admit, even for a geek, it was a little embarrassing to let investors
believe their white magic. But as long as the chartists placed their bets
with me, my jungle guide explained, the reasoning of our customers was
not for me to question. Just the opposite. Only days after landing in my
new job I found myself praising such statements from investors as "I
was looking at the ten-day moving average last night, and it is a perfect
reverse duck tail and pheasant. Let's bet the ranch." At this juncture my
role was only to shout encouragement: Yeah! Do it!
In need of a euphemism for what we did with other people's money, we
called it arbitrage, which was just plain obfuscation. Arbitrage means
"trading risklessly for profit." Our investors always took risk; high-wire
act would have been more accurate than arbitrage. In spite of the
responsibility implied by my job, I was ignorant and malleable when I
advised my first customers. I was an amateur pharmacologist,
prescribing drugs without a license. The people who suffered as a result
were, of course, my customers.
I couldn't help noticing that they were different from the customers of
established salesmen. Mine were small institutional investors, defined as
those with less than one hundred million dollars each who, on each trade,
would commit only a few million. The other three salesmen in my unit
were speaking almost exclusively to insurance companies, money
managers, and European central banks (including the Russians. There are,
in fact, little bald men who sit in an office in Moscow and start market
rumors, not to undermine capitalism but to make their bets come right)
that could, if they liked a trade idea, commit fifty to a hundred million
dollars in a matter of seconds. The largest of these controlled perhaps
twenty billion dollars in investable funds.
There was an excellent reason my jungle guide-manager didn't let
me lay my hands on the larger investors. He knew that soft-brained as I
was, I was dangerous. His plan was for me to learn on the small clients so

that if disaster struck, the effect on overall business of Salomon
Brothers would be negligible. It was assumed that I might well put a
customer or two out of business. That was part of being a geek. There
was a quaint expression when a customer went under. He was said to have
been "blown up." Once I'd learned to do my job, once I'd stopped blowing
up customers, I would be permitted to advise the big investors.
A few days after I'd arrived, I was told by saiid jungle guide to start
smiling and dialing. Cold calling, as I have pointed out, was not my idea of
fun. I discovered immediately I was temperamentally unsuited to it; it
made me feel like too much of a pest to do it well. And when he saw I was
having no success, my jungle guide fimally gave up the ghost and told me
to phone a man named Herman at the London branch of an Austrian bank.
This was convenient for everyorae. Herman wanted to be sold to by
Salomon Brothers. Because he had only a few million dollars to play with,
no one else at Salomon Brothers wanted to sell to Herman. And in order
to eat, I needed customers..
Poor Herman never knew what hit him. I proposed lunch, and he accepted.
He was a tall, gruff German with an incredibly deep voice and the
distinct impression that he was born to trade. He thought he was very,
very smart. It was my job to encourage him in this view, since the
smarter he felt, the more he traded, and the more he traded, the more
business he could give me. His bank had given him authority to risk
twenty million dollars.
In spite of his cunning, Herman didn't know/ a geek when he saw one. I
explained to him how with this twenty million dollars the two of us could
make a fortune. Salomon Brothers was fuill of shrewd, knowing people, I
said, and we would draw from their reservoir of ideas. I allowed how I
myself was known to have an idea or two. And my advice was greatly
valued by certain large European investors. At the end of the lunch,
during which we examined lots of Salomon's scientific graphs about
bonds, talked a bit about head and shoulders patterns, and drank a bottle
of wine, he decided he could do busine&s with me. "But, Michael,
remember," he said several times, "we need gut ideas."
A large corporate bond trader was waiting for me, like an unfed house
pet, when I returned to the office. He was glad to hear the lunch had
gone well. And as it happened, he had a great idea for rne and my
i

new customer. He had been watching the Eurobond market all day and
had noticed that AT&T's thirty-year bonds had really become cheap, as
measured against the benchmark thirty-year U.S. treasury bond. The
$650 billion Eurobond market, it should be said, was one of the main
reasons for Salomon Brothers' presence overseas. A Eurobond is a bond
issued in Europe and bought mainly by Europeans. Many large American
companies issued Eurobonds, usually because they could borrow money
more cheaply from Europeans than from Americans, but occasionally to
advertise their names abroad. Salomon, with its network of contacts in
corporate America, was a leader in the market.
Anyway, the trader said the Street, meaning other Wall Street and
London traders, was undervaluing AT&Ts. He knew where he could put his
hands on a few AT&Ts. What I should tell my new client to do, he said,
was to buy the AT&Ts and at the same time sell short thirty-year U.S.
treasury bonds. The trick, he explained, was to avoid being long or short
the bond market. Instead we would be making the esoteric bet that
AT&T bonds would outperform U.S. treasury bonds. It sounded
complicated. I wanted to be careful. I asked if the strategy was risky.
"Don't worry," he said, "your guy will make money."
"I haf nefer done dis ding before, but it sounds like a gut idea," said the
still-tipsy Herman when I told him. "Do tree million."
My first order. I felt thrilled and immediately called the U.S. treasury
trader in New York and sold him three million dollars' worth of treasury
bonds. Then I shouted over to the London corporate bond trader, "You
can do three million of the ATTs," trying, of course, to sound as if it
really weren't that big a deal, just another trade, like going for a walk in
the park.
There was in every office of Salomon a systemwide loudspeaker, called
the hoot and holler or just the hoot. Apart from money, success at
Salomon meant having your name shouted over the hoot. The AT&T
trader's voice came loudly over the hoot: "Mike Lewis has just sold three
million of our AT and Ts for us, a great trade for the desk, thank you
very much, Mike."
I was flushed with pride. Flushed with pride, you understand. But
something didn't quite fit. What did he mean, "Our AT and Ts"? I hadn't
realized the AT&T bonds had been on Salomon's trading books. I had
thought my trader friend had snapped them up from stupid dealers at

other firms. If the bonds were ours to begin with . . .
Dash was staring at me, disbelieving. "You sold those bonds? Why?" he
asked.
"Because the trader said it was a great trade," I said.
"Nooooooo." Dash put his head in his hands, as if in pain. I could see he
was smiling. No, laughing. "What else is a trader going to say?" he said.
"He's been sitting on that position for months. It's underwater. He's
been dying to get rid of it. Don'ttellhimI told you this, but you're going
to get fucked."
"How can I get fucked?" I said. "The trader made me a promise."
"You are going to get fucked," Dash said again. "That's all right because
you're just a geek. Geeks were born to be fucked." He meant this in a
nice way, to absolve me, as it were. He then replaced his pen in the
corner of his mouth, gave it a thoughtful twist or two, and began to work
the phones like a jockey.
"What iss dee price of dee ATT bonds?" a familiar voice was shouting at
me the next morning. No longer was he cool and self-assured. Herman
had apparently been enlightened by some other trader in London.
Everyone in London but Herman and I, it seemed, knew that Salomon
Brothers owned AT&Ts and had been desperate to unload them. Herman
was beginning to sense that he was going to get fucked.
I held out hope. Not much. But I did think that if I went and stood over
the trader, told him how upset my new customer was, told him that this
did not bode well for our new relationship, showed him how awful I felt
that he might buy the AT&T bonds back from my customer at the same
price he had sold them to him the previous day.
"They aren't doing real well," said the trader when I asked him the price.
"But they'll come around."
"What's the price?" I asked again.
"I'll have to get back to you on that," he said.
"No way," I said. "I've got a boiling German on hold. I've got to know."
The trader pretended to shuffle through some complicated-looking
sheets, to punch a few numbers into his Quotron machine. This, I
learned, was standard practice when a customer was about to be
sacrificed for the greater good of Salomon. The trader tried to transfer
the blame to some impersonal, scientific force. It's the numbers, don't
you see? I can't do anything for you. It was painfully apparent the AT&T

trader was stalling. Something was very wrong.
"I could bid you ninety-five for them," he finally said.
"You can't do that," I said. "You sold the things to me at ninety-seven
yesterday, and the market hasn't moved. The treasuries are the same
price. I can't go tell my customer his AT and Ts have gone into a twopoint free fall overnight. He's out of pocket sixty thousand bucks."
"I told you they weren't doing very vpell," he said.
"What do you mean? . . . You lied to me!" I started to shout.
"Look," he said, losing his patience, "who do you work for, this guy or
Salomon Brothers?"
Who do you work for? That question haunted salesmen. Whenever a
trader screwed a customer and the salesman became upset, the trader
would ask the salesman, "Who do you work for anyway?" The message
was clear: You work for Salomon Brothers. You work for me. I pay your
bonus at the end of the year. So just shut up, you geek. All of which was
true, as far as it went. But if you stood back and looked at our business,
this was a ridiculous attitude. A policy of screwing investors could lead to
ruin. If they ever caught on, we'd have no investors. Without investors,
we'd have no business raising money.
The only justification-if you can call it that-I ever heard for our policy
came unwittingly from our president, Tom Strauss, himself a former
salesman of government bonds. At a lunch with one of my customers,
apropos of nothing and everything, he offered this opinion: "Customers
have very short memories." If that was the guiding principle of Salomon
Brothers in the department of customer relations, then all was suddenly
clear. Screw 'em, they'll eventually forget about it! Right.
However, you had to admire Strauss's frankness. It was one thing to
screw a customer. It was another to tell him in advance you were going
to. The difference in style between the AT&T trader and Strauss was
the same as between a sucker punch and a duel. Still, neither was great
for business. One thing my customer never forgot was that Salomon
Brothers thought he had a short memory.
I had made the mistake of trusting a Salomon Brothers trader. He had
drawn on the pooled ignorance of me and my first customer to unload one
of his mistakes. He had saved himself, and our firm, sixty thousand
dollars. I was at once furious and disillusioned. But that didn't solve the
problem. Bellyaching to the trader wasn't going to get me anywhere.

That much was clear. He'd just dock my bonus at the end of the year.
Bellyaching would also make me look like a fool, as if I
actually had thought the customer was going to make money on the
AT&Ts. How could anyone be so stupid as to trust a trader? The best
thing I could do was pretend to others at Salomon that I had meant to
screw the customer. People would respect that. That was called jamming.
I had just jammed bonds, albeit unknowingly, for the first time. I had
lost my innocence.
But what did I tell Herman the German? "Don't let your sixty-thousanddollar loss bother you too much, you have a short memory, and you'll soon
forget? . . . Sorry, I'm new at this, and guess what, ha-ha, you've just
been had!"
"Hi, sorry to take so long, it's really busy here," I said. Rifling through
the range of tones I might adopt, I was unable to find anything exactly
appropriate to the occasion and settled on sounding cheerful. I must
have managed an expression halfway between a brave smile and the grin
of an idiot. Dash was watching the charade and laughing. Now that was
unnecessary. I flipped him the finger. I was more embarrassed for
myself than I was concerned for Herman.
"I just spoke with the trader," I said to my new customer, "and he said
that the AT and Ts didn't do very well overnight, but they'll definitely
come around soon."
"What is dee price?" he asked again.
"Oh ... let me see . . . about . . . well . . . about . . . ninety-five," I said and
felt my face wince.
"Aaaaaaaaahhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh," he shouted, as if he had been stabbed
with a knife. He had lost all ability to articulate his feelings. His primal
Teutonic scream captured for all time the collective pain felt by the
valued customers of Salomon Brothers. What I didn't know but soon
learned was that he never imagined in his whole life losing sixty thousand
dollars. His bank had given him twenty million dollars to trade but would
not let him lose sixty thousand of it. If it knew he was down that much
money, it'd fire him. Actually his story was more gruesome than that. He
had a baby, a pregnant wife, and a new house in London with a large
mortgage. This emerged only later, however. At the moment of impact all
he could do was make noises. The agony. The horror.
"Uuuuuhhhhhhhhh," he continued, in a slightly different key. He began to

hyperventilate into the phone.
And you want to know how I felt? I should have felt guilty, of course, but
guilt was not the first identifiable sensation to emerge from
my exploding brain. Relief was. I had told him the news. He was shouting
and moaning. And that was it. That was all he could do. Shout and moan.
That was the beauty of being a middleman, which I did not appreciate
until that moment. The customer suffered. I didn't. He wasn't going to
kill me. He wasn't even going to sue me. I wasn't going to lose my job. On
the contrary, I was a minor hero at Salomon for dumping a sixtythousand-dollar loss into someone else's pocket.
There was a convenient way of looking at this situation. My customer did
not like hi s loss, but it was just as much his own fault as mine. The law of
the bond market is: Caveat emptor. That's Latin for "buyer beware."
(The bond markets lapse into Latin after a couple of drinks. Meum dictum
pactum was another Latin phase I used to hear, but that was just a joke.
It means "My word is my bond.") I mean, he didn't have to believe me
when I told him AT&T bonds were a good idea.
Anyway, who was hurt besides my German? It is an important question,
because it accounts for the detachment with which disasters were
viewed at Salomon. The German's bank had lost sixty thousand dollars.
The bank's shareholders, the Austrian government, were therefore the
losers. To take it one step farther, the Austrian taxpayer was the loser.
But compared with the assets of the nation as a whole, sixty thousand
dollars was a ridiculously small sum. In other words, it was hard to
generate sympathy for anyone but the man who had done the trade. And
he was partly responsible.
He shouldn't blame me entirely, I might have thought had my capacity
for rationalization been that of a man rather than a geek. But oh, how he
did. For that is the customer's privilege and the bond salesman's burden.
And he didn't just blame me once. He blamed me hundreds of times. For
having made the first mistake of doing the trade, we promptly made the
second of holding on to it. Each morning and each afternoon for the next
few weeks I awaited his bitterly sarcastic phone calls in a frozen state
of dread. A thick German voice on the other end of the line would say,
"Dis bond iss a really great idea, Michael. Haf you any more great ideas
up your sleef ?" As a matter of fact . . . Herman gave up hoping he would
survive intact; he gave up hope that Salomon would restore his losses; his

sole reason for calling was to shower abuse upon me.
Till death did they part, my customer and his bonds. AT&T's bonds got
cheaper and cheaper. Finally, about a month after the ordeal had
begun, my customer's boss inquired into his activities. A loss of about
$140,000 dutifully raised its hoary head, and my German was fired.
Kaboom! He got another job, and as far as I know, his children are well
provided for.
It was not an auspicious start to my career. Within a month I'd blown up
my first and only customer. There were, thankfully, plenty more where
he came from. All met the two requirements to speak with a geek: first,
that they be small investors and, second, that they be so awed by
Salomon Brothers as to assume anything they were told was good advice.
I passed a period of a few months on the phone with dozens of the least
desirable clients in Europe. Among them there was a cotton trader in
Beirut ("You may think times are not good down here, but they are, they
are"), an Irish insurance company with a taste for speculating in currency
options, and an American pizza mogul living in Monte Carlo. I blew up the
insurance company, this time in an act of stupidity unassisted by traders.
I was told not to do business with the man from Beirut by the Salomon
Brothers credit committee, for fear that he might blow us up before I
blew him up. And I lost the Monte Carlo pizza mogul when he decided to
give up bonds and return to pizza, but not before he delivered for
posterity the memorable line "The casinos down here are dull compared
to the shit we do." That was true.
Perhaps my favorite encounter during these first couple of months,
however, was with the head of an English brokerage firm. This man of
minor distinction in the City of London somehow got my name and called
me at Salomon. He said he wanted to hear all about options and futures,
and for that purpose I should visit him in his office. The company he
managed was one of hundreds of small European financial institutions
that were competing with Salomon but at the same time had money to
play with. They often masqueraded as potential customers in order to
get information. They thought Salomon Brothers knew something other
firms did not. I could have declined to meet him on the ground he might
well use what information he gleaned from me to expand his business at
the expense of mine. But he did have some funds to invest, and I was
curious about old English moneyrnen. And anyway, at that point what I

knew about options and futures was more likely to bankrupt than to help
him.
He was a portly, middle-aged figure in an ill-fitted suit, scuffed black
shoes, and the sort of sagging thin black socks I came to recognize
as a symbol of Britain's long economic decline. There were other
features incongruous with his station in life. Cowlicks standing high on
the back of his head took on lives of their own; his clothes were as
rumpled as if he had slept in them. He was the boss of an operation of
several hundred people, and he looked like a bum or as if he had just
awakened from a long nap.
We sat in his poorly lit office surrounded by more unfinished work than
I've ever seen in one place and talked for an hour. More accurately, he
talked for an hour about world events. I listened. Finally he tired and
called a car to take us to lunch. But before leaving his office, he paged
through his Times with a sharp pencil in his hand and said, "I must make
a bet." He dialed what I gathered to be his bookie and placed two bets
of five pounds each on horses racing that day. As he put down the phone,
he said, "I view the bond market as an extension of horse racing, you
know." I didn't, of course. I got the feeling I was supposed to be
impressed. I didn't have the heart to tell him that the boys on my
trading floor would have laughed him out of the casino at the suggestion
of a bet as small as five pounds. And I couldn't help remembering a snide
remark made by a seasoned trader to one of my fellow trainees while we
were in the classroom. The trainee had tried to impress the trader and
failed. The trader had said, "You are proof that some people are born to
be customers." Born to be customers, the back row had thought it was
the funniest thing they had heard all day.
Anyway, we then took one of those two-hour lunches for which the
London office was fairly renowned in New York. Again he talked. Again I
listened, about how the bond market rally was overdone, about how
absurdly diligent he felt American bankers were, and about how his small
firm was going to cope with giants like Salomon invading the City of
London. He disapproved of workdays longer than eight hours because, he
said, "you then arrive at the office in the morning with the same
thoughts you left with late the night before."
On the heels of a few drinks, this sounded wise enough to note on a

napkin. We ordered a second bottle of white wine to go with the fish. At
the end of the lunch, as our speech slurred and the blood rushed from
our brains to our stomachs, he remembered why he'd asked me out. He
said, "We haven't had the chance to discuss options and futures. We'll
have to do this again sometime." Before that could happen, however, his
firm, like so many small English financial firms, was bought by an
American bank for an enviably large sum of money. He bailed out at just
the right time and floated the short distance to earth in a golden
parachute. I never heard from him again.
It was all new, all fresh. Early on I made my first business trip to Paris.
Once I'd escaped the trading floor, I was no longer a geek, or at least no
one needed to know that I was a geek. I was an investment banker, with
an investment banker's expense account. For four hundred dollars a
night I stayed in the finest hotel in Paris, the Bristol. This was not an
unusual extravagance on my part. All traveling Salomon salesmen stayed
at the Bristol. I would have had to plead for cheaper lodging with
Salomon's secretaries to prevent the expense. And when I first passed
through the Bristol's gold doors, onto its long marble floor, and glimpsed
the Pater pastoral scenes and Gobelin tapestries; when I saw the
pharmacy of toiletries in my bathroom and the gilded luxury of my suite,
I was glad that I had just taken what was my due. If Willy Loman had
only had it so good, his kids might have turned out better.
None of my activities in the first couple of months made so much as a
dent on the bottom line of Salomon Brothers, but all were highly
entertaining. What was more important than immediate results, I
figured, was my education. I was niggled during those first few months
by the feeling of being a charlatan. I kept blowing people up. I didn't
know anything. I had never managed money. I had never made any real
money. I didn't even know anyone who had made any real money, only a
few heirs. Yet I was holding myself out as a great expert on matters of
finance. I was telling people what to do with millions of dollars when the
largest financial complication I had ever encountered was a $325
overdraft in my account at the Chase Manhattan Bank. The only thing
that saved me in meeting after meeting in the early days at Salomon was
that the people I dealt with knew even less. London is, or was, a great
refuge for hacks.
It was only a matter of time before I embarrassed myself horribly. I
