
bonds could be sold and greed at the thought of the profit he would
make if they were. He was making promises, but he was thinking profits.
I didn't trust him. I changed my mind. I decided not to sell the bonds.
But it was already too late. Just making a simple inquiry about the bonds
caused the Salomon empire to leap into action. Traders hung around my
desk instinctually, like dogs trying to get at a bitch in heat. Over the
next twenty-four hours I got cal Is from half a dozen salespeople in New
York, Chicago, and Tokyo. They all said the same thing as the traders:
C'mon pleeeease. . . . Do it and you'II be a hero. Salomon Brothers was
speaking with one voice, and it was loud. None of these people, however,
was in a position to make me the assurance I felt I needed. Then the
phone rang at my desk. I picked it up. The voice on the other end of the
line was vaguely familiar. It said, "Hey, slugger, how the fuck are you?
You think you got a fuckin' chance with these fuckin' bonds?" It was the
grand master of Fuckspeak, the Human Piranha.
It was the first time we had spoken, and it turned out that responsibility
for getting rid of the Olympia and York bonds fell ultimately to him. He
promised that he would make sure my customer didn't get hurt,
and as meaningless as that would sound coming from others, from him it
mattered. I knew him by having watched him and by his reputation. He
was, as much as was possible in a world where the buck was almighty, a
man of his word. He knew the bond markets better than any man at
Salomon Brothers. I trusted him. I called Alexander and told him that I
was about to sell the bonds. He quickly placed bets with managing
directors on the forty-first floor that I would sell the bonds. He got
odds of 10:1. This was insider trading at its most respectable.
I then called my Frenchman and told him how a panicked Arab (dubbed
"the camel jockey" by the Human Piranha) wanted to dump eighty-six
million dollars' worth of bonds cheaply; how the bonds were out of
fashion and undervalued compared with other similar bonds in the
marketplace; and how if he bought them and held them for a few months,
a buyer in America might emerge. There was nothing spectacular about
my sales pitch except the language in which it was couched. I used the
language of the speculator. Most bond salesmen use the language of
investment, analyzing the company and its prospects. I was vaguely aware
that Olympia & York was involved in property. I was keenly aware that

the whole world was lined up against its bonds. They were so out of
fashion, I argued, they must be cheap.
It was language my Frenchman understood. I knew that he, unlike most
investors, would envision eighty-six million dollars' worth of bonds as a
quick trade. I considered him my best customer; he was easily my
favorite. He trusted me, I think, even though we had known each other
for only four months. And here I was, selling him something I probably
wouldn't touch with a barge pole if there hadn't been such glory in it for
me. I knew it was awful. But I feel much worse about it now than I did at
the time. After thinking it over for maybe a minute, he bought the
eighty-six million dollars' worth of Olympia & Yorks.
For two days messages of congratulations arrived from distant points in
the Salomon Brothers system. Most of the bigwigs in the firm called to
say how happy they were my Frenchman had bought eighty-six million
dollars of O&Ys, and how bright my future was at Salomon Brothers.
Strauss, Massey, Ranieri, Meriwether, and Voute each called separately,
right on top of each other. I happened to be away from my seat. Dash
Riprock fielded the calls and fumed, in a good-natured way, that they
weren't for him.
But there was a trace of seriousness to his response. I was being
blessed by the gods. Dash had done well, but he had never been blessed
by the gods. I saw this ritual enacted several times in my time at
Salomon Brothers, but never taken to such a ridiculous extreme as when
I sold those godforsaken bonds. As a rule, the greater the praise
lavished upon a salesman within Salomon, the greater the eventual
suffering of the customer. I was delighted by the bits of sticky yellow
notepaper on my desk that said, "Tom Strauss called to say great job,"
but in the back of my mind I feared for my Frenchman.
Finally, the sweetness of the moment dulled the pain of knowing I had
just placed my most cherished customer in jeopardy. The most important
call of all came. It was from the Human Piranha. "I heard you sold a few
bonds," he said. I tried to sound calm about the whole thing. He didn't.
He shouted into the phone, "That is fuckin' awesome. I mean fuckin'
awesome. I fuckin' mean fucking awesome. You are one Big Swinging Dick,
and don't ever let anybody tell you different." It brought tears to my
eyes to hear it, to be called a Big Swinging Dick by the man who, years
ago, had given birth to the distinction and in my mind had the greatest

right to confer it upon me.
Chapter Nine
The Art of War
The supreme art of war is to subdue the enemy without fighting. -Suntzu
I'M YELLING at the top of my lungs at the bellhop in my room at the
Bristol Hotel in Paris: "What do you mean there is no bathrobe in my
suite?" He's backing toward the door shrugging his shoulders, as if he
can't do anything about it, the little shit. Then I notice. No fruit bowl.
Where's that bowl of apples and bananas that's supposed to come with
the suite? And hey, wait a minute. They've forgotten to fold the first
tissue on the roll of toilet paper into a little triangle. I mean, can you
believe this crap? "Goddammit," I shout, "get me the manager. Now. Do
you know what I'm paying to stay here? Do you?"
Then I wake up. "It's all right," my wife is saying, "you were just having
another hotel nightmare." But it's not just a hotel nightmare, and it's not
all right. Sometimes I dream I have been downgraded by British Airways
from Club class to economy; other times it is even worse. The London
restaurant Tante Claire has permitted someone else to sit at my favorite
table. Or the driver is late in the morning. The things I go through.
Investment banking nightmares have haunted me ever since I sold the
Olympia & York bonds: spoiled rotten by a combination of too much
luxury and the awesome stature of Big Swinging Dickdom. Imagine. No
fruit bowl. Anyway, it's over. And it's 6:00 A.M. Time for work.
Or is it? This day in August 1986 is special. I am about to have my first
encounter with the sort of backstabbing and intrigue for which
investment bankers are justifiably renowned. There are two kinds of
friction within Salomon Brothers. The first is generated by people
fighting to pin blame upon one another when money is lost. The second is
generated by people fighting to claim credit when money is made. My
first battle on the trading floor will be caused by profits rather than
losses; this is good. I will win it; that is also good.
There are no copyright laws in investment banking and no way to patent a
good idea. Pride of authorship is superseded by pride of profits. If
Salomon Brothers creates a new kind of bond or stock, within twentyfour hours Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs, and the rest will have
figured out how it worked and will be trying to make one just like it. I

understand this as part of the game. I recall that one of the first
investment bankers I met taught me a poem.
God gave you eyes, plagiarize.
A handy ditty when competing with other firms. What I was about to
learn, however, is that the poem was equally handy when competing within
Salomon Brothers.
At 10:00 A.M. that day in London, Alexander telephoned. He, of course,
was in New York, where it was 5:00 A.M. He had been sleeping in his
study, beside his Reuters machine, and rousing himself every hour to
check prices. He wanted to know why the dollar was plunging. When the
dollar moved, it was usually because some other central banker or
politician somewhere had made a statement. (The markets would be far
more peaceful if politicians kept their views on the future path of the
dollar to themselves. In view of the high percentage of times they end up
apologizing for, or modifying, their remarks, it is a wonder they don't
stifle themselves.) But there was no such news. I told Alexander that
several Arabs had sold massive holdings of gold, for which they received
dollars. They were selling those dollars for marks and thereby driving
the dollar lower.
I spent much of my working life inventing logical lies like this. Most of
the time when markets move, no one has any idea why. A man who can tell
a good story can make a good living as a broker. It was the job of people
like me to make up reasons, to spin a plausible yarn. And it's amazing
what people will believe. Heavy selling out of the Middle East was an old
standby. Since no one ever had any clue what the Arabs were
doing with their money or why, no story involving Arabs could ever be
refuted. So if you didn't know why the dollar was falling, you shouted out
something about Arabs Alexander, of course, had a keen sense of the
value of my commentary. He just laughed.
There was a more pressing matter to discuss. One of my customers was
certain that the German bond market was due for a rise. He wanted to
make a big bet on it. This Alexander found more interesting. If one
investor felt strongly about German bonds, perhaps others did, too, and
would drive that market higher. There are lots of ways to make the same
bet. Up to that point my customer had simply bought hundreds of millions
of deutschmarks' worth of German government bonds. I wondered if
there wasn't a more daring play to be made in the market; this is a

typical thought for a person who has becoming overly accustomed to
betting other people's money. Alexander aid I sorted out my jumbled
thoughts. And in the process we stumbled across a great idea, an entirely
new security.
My client loved risk. Risk, I had learned, was a commodity in itself. Risk
could be canned and sold like tomatoes. Different investors place
different prices on risk. If you are able, as it were, to buy risk from one
investor cheaply and sell it to another investor dearly, you can make
money without taking any risk yourself. And this is what we did.
My client wanted to take a big risk by wagering a large sum of money on
German bonds rising. He was therefore the "buyer" of risk. Alexander
and I created a security, called a warrant or a call option, which was a
means of transferring risk from one party to another. In buying our
warrant, risk-averse investors from around the world (meaning most
investors) would be, in effect, selling us risk. Many of these investors
would not know they wanted to sell risk on the German bond market until
we suggested it to them with our new warrant, just as most people didn't
know they wanted to plug their ears all day and listen to Pink Floyd until
Sony produced the Walkman. Part of our job was to fill needs that
investors never knew they had. We'd rely on Salomon's sales force to
generate demand for our new product, which, because it was unique, was
pretty sure to succeed. The difference between what we paid cautious
investors for the risk and what we sold it to my customer for would be
our profits. We estimated these would come to about seven hundred
thousand dollars.
The idea was a dream. Salomon Brothers, which sat in the middle
of this transfer of risk, would take no risk whatsoever. Seven hundred
thousand risk-free dollars was a refreshing sight for Salomon
management. But even more important, as far as Salomon was concerned,
was the novelty of our deal. A warrant on German interest rates was new.
The publicity of being the first investment bank ever to issue them was
the sort of thing that drives investment bankers mad with desire.
As we hashed out the deal, people on the trading floor began to grow
curious. A vice-president from another area of the trading floor, a
salesman usually responsible for talking with large corporations, started
to sniff around. I'll call this man the opportunist. He decided that it was
his mission to play a part in our deal. I voiced no objection. He had

worked at Salomon for six years, twice as long as Alexander and I
combined, and we could use his experience. The opportunist, for his part,
had nothing else to do. Bonus time was fast approaching. He desperately
wanted to distinguish himself and saw our deal as his chance.
To be fair, the opportunist was not entirely without purpose. We had
overlooked the need to obtain the approval of the German government,
and the opportunist saved us from embarrassment. The German
government had no say in the Euromarkets. The beauty of the
Euromarket was that it fell under no government's jurisdiction. We
could, in theory, have ignored the Germans. But we had to be polite.
Salomon Brothers hoped to open an office in Frankfurt, and the last
thing the firm needed was angry German politicians.
So the opportunist became our emissary to the German Finance Ministry.
He persuaded the authorities that our deal would neither undermine
their ability to control their money supply (true) nor encourage
speculation in German interest rates (false; the whole point was to
facilitate speculation). You had to give him credit for playing to the
sensibilities of his audience. He wisely wore camouflage on his trips to
Frankfurt: long-term investor brown. Brown suits, brown shoes, and
brown ties. No red suspenders with gold dollar signs. No gold cuff links.
Playing his part of a sober burgher, he won the confidence of senior
officials at the ministry, right up, I believe, to the minister of finance
himself.
In several weeks of talks there were only small hiccups. In one of the
meetings, it was reported, the Germans were upset at the media
attention the deal might attract. Not fully understanding all the
implications of our warrant, they feared having their good name too
closely
associated with it. We said we would keep publicity to a minimum. They
asked about the tombstone, the public announcement that would appear
in the financial press at the end of the deal. We said that we wanted a
tombstone (just as a souvenir) but that we wouldn't advertise it in the
press. They agreed to let us have our tombstone on the condition that we
didn't print upon it the symbol of the Federal Republic of Germany, the
eagle. We jokingly suggested a swastika as a substitute. Apparently they
didn't find that as funny as I did. That was our one break with sobriety.
When the deal finally went through, it was a smashing success. Salomon

Brothers and my customer made out like bandits. It was clear that
Alexander and I were in for a bit of local fame. The opportunist, too,
deserved applause. Then the trouble began. The afternoon on which the
deal was launched, a memo was circulated in London and New York,
describing how the deal had been done (the novel structure was regarded
as clever and therefore a boasting matter). No mention of the memo was
made of Alexander, my client, or myself. The memo was signed: the
opportunist.
It was a subtle but effective stunt. As incredible as it may sound to
those unfamiliar with the business, none of the bosses in either New
York or London fully understood what we had done. Anyone who has been
in the business knows that this is the norm. And by explaining the deal to
senior management, the opportunist made it seem as if he were entirely
responsible for it.
It was so clearly unjust, so wildly deceitful (how did he think he was
going to get away with it? I still wonder) that I should have laughed. At
the time, however, it didn't seem funny. I headed toward his desk to do
him violence. Throwing phones was OK. Shouting abuse was OK. Pounding
a colleague to mush was not OK. I hoped I wouldn't hit him, but if I did,
I hoped he'd hit me back. Then we'd both be fired.
The opportunist, it turned out, was one step ahead of me. He had raced
to catch the first Concorde to New York the moment his memo hit the
Xerox machine. Not that he was trying to avoid me. I don't think it ever
crossed his mind to worry about me. As far as he knew, I didn't know
anybody in the firm important enough to interfere with his fun. Anyway,
if he were simply trying to disappear, a first-class ticket on a standard
commercial airline would have done.
At the very moment I was staring at his empty chair on the London
r, ine opponunist was doing what Alexander aptly described as a "victory
lap" around the forty-first floor in New York. On his jog around 41, he
stopped and told people like Strauss and Gutfreund how well the deal had
gone. Of course, he didn't say, "I did the deal, and I am truly deserving
of a large bonus when the time comes," although that is what he meant.
He had no need to be so blatant. His memo had preceded him. That he
did the deal was implicit in his return to New York to tell everyone about
it and that he mentioned no other name but his own.
Probably everyone knows how infuriating it is to be robbed by another

person. But you don't know bitterness until you've been screwed by an
entire system. And that was happening. No senior person seemed to know
the truth. The chairman of Salomon Brothers International passed by my
desk holding the evil memo. "I just want to thank you for your help," he
said. "The opportunist couldn't have done his deal without your
relationship with your customer."
His deal? "You moron," I wanted to scream, "you have been duped." I
smiled and said thank you.
People in New York, Alexander told me, were saying how smart the
opportunist was. Alexander had every right to be at least as angry as I.
He was philosophical. "Don't worry," he said. "He's done it before. It
happens." At least I had been credited with a minor assist. Alexander
wasn't even that fortunate. His contribution to Salomon financial history
had been completely ignored. We had a choice, Alexander and I. We
could either get mad or get even. I put the matter to Alexander for
consideration. We were both in a position to scream bloody murder What
was the point of being a Big Swinging Dick if you stood stoically as sand
was kicked in your face by scumbag vice-presidents? But screaming in a
corporation, even in a corporation as Neanderthalish as Salomon, was
counterproductive. We might have had the opportunist's head, but at a
cost. He was a member of the Voute family. We were members of the
Strauss family. If we made a stink, it would smell all the way to high
heaven, or at least to the office of the chairman. The issue would be
obscured by family loyalties. Mafia wars were messy. So how did we nail
the opportunist without resorting to high-level warfare? How did we zap
the cancer without killing healthy cells?
Alexander listened to my tirade and decided, instead, to be an adult and
ignore the whole thing Alexander's view was that a man doesn't
progress in a corporation by stepping on top of others; if the opportunist
had stepped on us;, we should wipe ourselves off and forget about it. He
was right no doubt. But I broke ranks with him. I decided to be a child
and get even. I was in the jungle now and developing a taste for guerrilla
warfare.
My degree in art history finally served my career. I knew all about
frauds. Ask yourself: What would a painter do if a rival stole his work
and put his name con it? He'd paint a replica and issue a challenge for
the rival to do the same. And that's what I did. The analogy obviously

isn't perfect because for most people a warrant is easier to fake than a
Rembrandt, or even ai Jackson Pollock. But I didn't need to prove him a
complete fraud; I jjust had to cast doubt on his assertions. The
opportunist had represented himself as the sole source of warrant
wisdom, and if that could be disapproved, he would, to an extent, be
discredited. We (for I enjoyed Alexander's mischievous support, if not
his approval) conceived another deal, similar enough to the first as to be
unmistakably from the same hamd. It involved government bonds of
Japan, not Germany, and had a islightly different underlying structure,
the details of which, for my pressent purposes, are irrelevant.
With the deal sstructured, I didn't go to the opportunist and ask him to
play emissary Uo the relevant government. The opportunist was told what
he deserved to know: nothing. Then, before the deal came off, I did my
own lap off the forty-first floor of New York. Call it a warm-up lap. A
warm-up lajp, unlike a victory lap, could be done by telephone.
I made several calls. The opportunist, though he liked to claim that he
reported directlly to John Gutfreund, had a boss. His boss sat on the
forty-first floor and! was still basking in the reflected glory of his
minion. Suddenly the boss found himself in an awkward situation. Several
men of his rank ribbed Ihim about the new Japanese deal, saying in
effect, "It seems that the braiins of this operation may have been
somewhere other than in the head off your employee." The opportunist's
boss called the opportunist to ask why he (the boss) hadn't been
informed of this new deal. The opportunist did not know about the deal
either, nor did he convincingly demonstrate that he understood it. My
phone bombs had found their target.
I was willing tto stop being a pig and leave the matter at that. He wasn't.
About an hour after I had completed my warm-up lap, the opportunist
was stamding over me, glaring. I was surprised by how huffy
he was. It was all I could do to stifle a chuckle. He looked the way I felt
when I first read his memo. He had convinced himself, I think, that the
German warrant had been his idea all along. I gave him the closest I
could manage to a smile, which I'm afraid must have seemed like a
cheese-eating grin.
"Come with me for a minute," he said.
"Sorry, I'm busy," I lied, "we'll have to do it another time."
"I'll be here at eight o'clock tonight. You should be, too," he said.

I would have skipped out, but as it happened, I was required to be in my
seat at eight o'clock that night for other reasons. So, unfortunately, we
met.
"Come into Charlie's office," said the opportunist at precisely eight
o'clock. Charlie was our chairman. One of the opportunist's more
charming habits was that, though he was but a mere dime-a-dozen vicepresident, he used the office of our chairman as if it were his own. As
expected, he took the seat behind the desk. I took the chair on the
other side and felt like a schoolboy about to be scolded. He was the
thief, I reminded myself.
Perhaps I give Salomon Brothers too much credit, and myself too little,
but I think that what crossed my mind next would never have done so
before I set foot on the trading floor. In short, I decided to do him in.
For the purpose, I found Machiavellian resources I hadn't known I
possessed, which is saying something. The joy of having the upper hand
swept over me. Instead of being uneasy or anxious or angry, I suddenly
relished the thought of calculated confrontation. It was clear how to do
maximum damage: to say as little as possible and give him the chance to
say something he shouldn't.
The opportunist had had a chance to calm down. He was painfully
deliberate as he began to speak. He was sane in every respect but one,
and that was his stratospheric sense of self-importance. He was smart,
I'll give him that. What he didn't realize was that everybody else was
smart, too. He had one foot up on the desk and was looking down at an
object-a pen, I think-he held in his hand. He jiggled the object in his
palm, Queeg-like. He wouldn't look me in the eye.
"I gave you more credit," he said. "Most of the people around here are
stupid. I thought you were smarter than that."
Most of the people around Salomon were distinctly not stupid, but it was
the sort of thing he would say. "What do you mean?" I asked.
"I got a call from [his boss], and he said you've been spreading the word
about a Japanese warrant," he said.
"So what?" I asked.
"So why didn't you tell me? What do you think you're doing?" he asked.
He paused for a moment, then continued. "You can't do a deal without my
help. I can stop your deal from happening with a single phone call. . . ."He
then listed several billion dollars'worth of deals in the past that were or
