
Burniske 01.indd 7

9/9/17 1:12 PM

8 CRYPTOASSETS

Then Satoshi went quiet for a couple months as Wall Street continued to
crumble. The Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 had done little
to ameliorate the meltdown that ensued after Lehman’s bankruptcy. Passed by
Congress and signed by President George W. Bush on October 3, the emergency act had established the $700 billion TARP. As a result of TARP, the U.S.
government acquired preferred stock in hundreds of banks as well as massive
companies such as AIG, General Motors, and Chrysler. The stock didn’t come
for free, though. It took $550 billion in investments to stabilize those teetering
mammoths.26
In the opening moments of Bitcoin’s life as a public network, Satoshi made
clear he was attuned to the failings of the global financial system. In the first
instance of recording information on Bitcoin’s blockchain, Satoshi inscribed:
“The Times 03/Jan/2009 Chancellor on brink of second bailout of banks,”27 in
reference to an article that appeared in the British publication The Times on
the U.K.’s likely need to assist more banks in staying afloat.28 Many years later
people would realize that one of the most powerful use cases of blockchain
technology was to inscribe immutable and transparent information that could
never be wiped from the face of digital history and that was free for all to see.
Satoshi’s choice first to employ this functionality by inscribing a note about
bank bailouts made it clear he was keen on never letting us forget the failings
of the 2008 financial crisis.

AN ALTERNATIVE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
Nine days after this poignant inscription, the first ever transaction using bitcoin took place between Satoshi Nakamoto and Hal Finney, an early advocate
and Bitcoin developer. Nine months later the first exchange rate would be set
for bitcoin, valuing it at eight one-hundredths of a cent per coin, or 1,309 bitcoin to the dollar.29 A dollar invested then would be worth over $1 million by
the start of 2017, underscoring the viral growth that the innovation was poised
to enjoy.
Diving deeper into Satoshi’s writings around the time, it becomes more
apparent that he was fixated on providing an alternative financial system, if
not a replacement entirely. After the network had been up and running for
over a month, Satoshi wrote of Bitcoin, “It’s completely decentralized, with no
central server or trusted parties, because everything is based on crypto proof
instead of trust . . . I think this is the first time we’re trying a decentralized,
non-trust-based system.”30

Burniske 01.indd 8

9/9/17 1:12 PM

Bitcoin and the Financial Crisis of 2008

9

On December 5, 2010, Satoshi showed an unnervingly human side, pleading that WikiLeaks not accept bitcoin as a means of payment after major credit
card networks had blocked users from supporting the site. Satoshi wrote, “No,
don’t ‘bring it on’. The project needs to grow gradually so the software can be
strengthened along the way. I make this appeal to WikiLeaks not to try to use
Bitcoin. Bitcoin is a small beta community in its infancy. You would not stand
to get more than pocket change, and the heat you would bring would likely
destroy us at this stage.”31
Shortly thereafter, Satoshi vanished. Some speculate it was for the good of
Bitcoin. After all, being the creator of a technology that has the potential to
replace much of the current financial system is bound eventually to invoke
the wrath of powerful government and private sector forces. By disappearing
into the ether, Satoshi removed the head of Bitcoin, and with it a single point
of failure. In his wake stands a network with thousands of access points and
millions of users.
Wall Street, on the other hand, suffered from many points of failure. When
the dust settled, the U.S. government had spent well beyond the $700 billion
initially secured for TARP. In all, $2.5 trillion was injected into the system, not
to mention $12.2 trillion committed to reinstall faith in the fidelity of financial
institutions.32
While Wall Street as we knew it was experiencing an expensive death,
Bitcoin’s birth cost the world nothing. It was born as an open-source technology and quickly abandoned like a motherless babe in the world. Perhaps, if
the global financial system had been healthier, there would have been less of
a community to support Bitcoin, which ultimately allowed it to grow into the
robust and cantankerous toddler that it currently is.

WELCOME TO THE WORLD THAT BITCOIN CREATED
Since Satoshi disappeared, Bitcoin has unleashed a tidal wave of disruption
and rethinking of global financial and technological systems. Countless derivations of Bitcoin have been created—systems such as Ethereum, Litecoin,
Monero, and Zcash—all of which rely on blockchain technology, Satoshi’s gift
to the world. At the same time, many financial and technological incumbents
have moved to embrace the technology, creating confusion around all the
innovation unfolding and what is most relevant to the innovative investor. The
next chapter will involve solidifying understanding of blockchain technology,
Bitcoin, bitcoin, cryptoassets, and where the investment opportunities await.

Burniske 01.indd 9

9/9/17 1:12 PM

This page intentionally left blank

Burniske 01.indd 10

9/9/17 1:12 PM

Chapter 2
The Basics of Bitcoin and
Blockchain Technology

I

t’s time to crystallize the difference between Bitcoin, Bitcoin’s blockchain,
bitcoin with a lowercase b, blockchain technology, and other related but
distinct concepts. At first blush, this space appears jargon heavy, deterring
many from even attempting to understand it. In reality, there are only a few foreign concepts, encapsulated in recently invented words, which unfortunately
keep people out. Since these words are used frequently when people talk about
different applications of Bitcoin or blockchain technology, the space appears
impenetrable—but it’s not. All that’s required is a concerted effort to nail down
the key concepts, which then become the mental scaffolding that will support
understanding of the many applications of blockchain technology.
Bitcoin with an uppercase B refers to the software that facilitates the transfer and custody of bitcoin the currency, which starts with a lowercase b.
•
•

Bitcoin equals software.
bitcoin equals currency.

Much of this book will use Bitcoin (with a capital B) as the starting point.
Bitcoin is the genesis of the blockchain movement. It is common to compare
newly created blockchains with Bitcoin’s because Bitcoin’s blockchain is the
longest standing point of reference. Therefore, understanding the basics of
Bitcoin is critical.
However, to truly understand Bitcoin, one has to move beyond thinking of it as some digital Ponzi scheme or shadowy system used by criminals.
11

Burniske 01.indd 11

9/9/17 1:12 PM

12 CRYPTOASSETS

Those are stale stories that continue to tumble through the media mill. In
July 2016, researchers from the London School of Economics and Political
Science, Deutsche Bundesbank (Germany’s central bank), and the University
of Wisconsin at Madison released the paper “The Evolution of the Bitcoin
Economy.” Three reputable institutions would not waste their time, nor jeopardize their reputations, on a nefarious currency with no growth potential.
In that paper, the researchers describe an extensive analysis they performed
on Bitcoin’s blockchain and the transactions therein. Below is a summary of
what they found:
In this paper, we gather together the minimum units of Bitcoin
identity (the individual addresses), and group them into approximations of business entities, what we call “super clusters.”
While these clusters can remain largely anonymous, we are able
to ascribe many of them to particular business categories by analyzing some of their specific transaction patterns, as observed
during the period from 2009–2015. We are then able to extract
and create a map of the network of payment relationships among
them, and analyze transaction behavior found in each business
category. We conclude by identifying three marked regimes that
have evolved as the Bitcoin economy has grown and matured:
from an early prototype stage; to a second growth stage populated in large part with “sin” enterprise (i.e., gambling, black
markets); to a third stage marked by a sharp progression away
from “sin” and toward legitimate enterprises.1

Certainly, some of the earliest adopters of Bitcoin were criminals. But the same
goes for most revolutionary technologies, as new technologies are often useful
tools for those looking to outwit the law. We’ll get into the specific risks associated
with cryptoassets, including Bitcoin, in a later chapter, but it’s clear that the story
of bitcoin as a currency has evolved beyond being solely a means of payment for
illegal goods and services. Over 100 media articles have jumped at the opportunity to declare bitcoin dead,2 and each time they have been proven wrong.
When one considers Bitcoin neutrally in the context of a broader theme
of technological evolution, it sits in the sweet spot of key technology trends.
For example, the world is increasingly real-time, with people connecting in
peer-to-peer manners, empowering and connecting individuals regardless of
geographic or socioeconomic birth. Bitcoin fits these thematic molds. It allows

Burniske 01.indd 12

9/9/17 1:12 PM

The Basics of Bitcoin and Blockchain Technology

13

a global transaction to be settled in an hour as opposed to a couple of days. It
operates in a peer-to-peer manner, the same movement that has driven Uber,
Airbnb, and LendingClub to be multibillion-dollar companies in their own
realms. Bitcoin lets anyone be their own bank, putting control in the hands of
a grassroots movement and empowering the globally unbanked.
However, Bitcoin has done something arguably more impressive than Uber,
Airbnb, and LendingClub. Those companies decentralized services that were
easily understandable and had precedent for being peer-to-peer. Everyone has
had a friend drive them to the airport, or stayed with a relative in another
country, or borrowed money from their parents. Decentralizing a currency,
without a top-down authority, requires coordinated global acceptance of a
shared means of payment and store of value.
Currency originally came about to facilitate trade, allowing society to move
past barter and the double coincidence of wants. It has evolved over time to be
more convenient, resulting in its present paper state. Inherently, that paper
has little value other than the fact that everyone else thinks it has value and
the government requires it be accepted to fulfill financial obligations. In that
sense, it is a usefully shared representation of value. The libertarians in the
room would say it’s a usefully shared illusion of value, going back to the idea the
paper itself is worth little. Bitcoin is a similarly shared representation of value,
except it has no physical manifestation and no top-down authority to protect
it. Despite these hurdles, the elegance of the mathematics that allow it to function has also allowed it to grow and store billions in value.

THE INNER WORKINGS OF BITCOIN’S BLOCKCHAIN
Part of the Bitcoin software involves the building of Bitcoin’s blockchain,
which can be thought of as a digital ledger that keeps track of user balances via
debits and credits. In this sense, Bitcoin’s blockchain is a database that records
the flow of its native currency, bitcoin. What makes this digital ledger special?
Bitcoin’s blockchain is a distributed, cryptographic, and immutable database that uses proof-of-work to keep the ecosystem in sync. Technobabble?
Sure. But impenetrable technobabble? No.

Distributed
Distributed refers to the way in which computers access and maintain Bitcoin’s
blockchain. Unlike most databases that rigidly control who can access the

Burniske 01.indd 13

9/9/17 1:12 PM

14 CRYPTOASSETS

information within, any computer in the world can access Bitcoin’s blockchain. This feature of Bitcoin’s blockchain is integral to bitcoin as a global
currency. Since anyone anywhere can tap into Bitcoin’s blockchain to see the
record of debits and credits between different accounts, it creates a system of
global trust. Everything is transparent, so everyone is on a level playing field.
WHAT IS CRYPTOGRAPHY?
Initially a scary word, cryptography is the science of secure communication.
It involves taking information and scrambling it in such a way that only the
intended recipient can understand and use that information for its intended
purpose. The process of scrambling the message is encryption, and unscrambling it is decryption, performed through complex mathematical techniques.
Cryptography is the battlefield on which those trying to transmit information
securely combat those attempting to decrypt or manipulate the information.
More recently, cryptography has evolved to include applications like proving
the ownership of information to a broader set of actors—such as public key
cryptography—which is a large part of how cryptography is used within Bitcoin.
Encryption techniques have been employed for centuries. Julius Caesar
used a simple method of encryption during times of war to inform his generals of his plans. He would send messages using letters that were three letters
after the letter they were supposed to represent. For instance, instead of using
the letters ABC in his message, he would write them as DEF and his generals
would decrypt them to understand his intended message. Understandably,
this form of encryption did not remain secure for long.3
A more recent example that was the subject of the movie The Imitation
Game was the effort during World War II of a group of English cryptographers
to decode the messages of Nazi Germany, which were encrypted by a coding
device called the Enigma machine. Alan Turing, a luminary in machine learning and artificial intelligence, was a major player on the team whose efforts to
break the Enigma code ultimately had a debilitating impact on German war
strategies and helped to end the war.
Cryptography has become a vital part of our lives. Every time we type in a
password, pay with a credit card, or use WhatsApp, we are enjoying the benefits of cryptography. Without cryptography, it would be easy for bad actors to
steal sensitive information and use it against us. Cryptography makes sure the
information can only be used by those for whom it is intended.

Burniske 01.indd 14

9/9/17 1:12 PM

The Basics of Bitcoin and Blockchain Technology

15

Cryptographic
Every transaction recorded in Bitcoin’s blockchain must be cryptographically
verified to ensure that people trying to send bitcoin actually own the bitcoin
they’re trying to send. Cryptography also applies to how groups of transactions are added to Bitcoin’s blockchain. Transactions are not added one at a
time, but instead in “blocks” that are “chained” together, hence the term blockchain. We will go deeper into the specifics of the process in the proof-of-work
section that follows, but for now here’s the takeaway: cryptography allows the
computers building Bitcoin’s blockchain to collaborate in an automated system
of mathematical trust. There is no subjectivity as to whether a transaction is
confirmed in Bitcoin’s blockchain: it’s just math. For a deep dive on cryptography, we highly recommend The Code Book: The Science of Secrecy from Ancient
Egypt to Quantum Cryptography by Simon Singh.

Immutable
The combination of globally distributed computers that can cryptographically
verify transactions and the building of Bitcoin’s blockchain leads to an immutable database, meaning the computers building Bitcoin’s blockchain can only
do so in an append only fashion. Append only means that information can
only be added to Bitcoin’s blockchain over time but cannot be deleted—an
audit trail etched in digital granite. Once information is confirmed in Bitcoin’s
blockchain, it’s permanent and cannot be erased. Immutability is a rare feature
in a digital world where things can easily be erased, and it will likely become
an increasingly valuable attribute for Bitcoin over time.

Proof-of-Work
While the previous three attributes are valuable, none of them is inherently new.
Proof-of-work (PoW) ties together the concepts of a distributed, cryptographic,
and immutable database, and is how the distributed computers agree on which
group of transactions will be appended to Bitcoin’s blockchain next. Put another
way, PoW specifically deals with how transactions are grouped in blocks, and
how those blocks are chained together, to make Bitcoin’s blockchain.
The computers—or miners as they’re called—use PoW to compete with one
another to get the privilege to add blocks of transactions to Bitcoin’s blockchain, which is how transactions are confirmed. Each time miners add a block,

Burniske 01.indd 15

9/9/17 1:12 PM

16 CRYPTOASSETS

they get paid in bitcoin for doing so, which is why they choose to compete in
the first place.
Competition for a financial reward is also what keeps Bitcoin’s blockchain
secure. If any ill-motivated actors wanted to change Bitcoin’s blockchain, they
would need to compete with all the other miners distributed globally who have
in total invested hundreds of millions of dollars into the machinery necessary
to perform PoW. The miners compete by searching for the solution to a cryptographic puzzle that will allow them to add a block of transactions to Bitcoin’s
blockchain.
The solution to this cryptographic puzzle involves combining four variables: the time, a summary of the proposed transactions, the identity of the
previous block, and a variable called the nonce.
The nonce is a random number that when combined with the other three
variables via what is called a cryptographic hash function results in an output
that fits a difficult criteria. The difficulty of meeting this criteria is defined by
a parameter that is adjusted dynamically so that one miner finds a solution
to this mathematical puzzle roughly every 10 minutes. If all of this seems like
drinking water out of a fire hose, that’s okay—it’s that way for everyone at the
outset. We’ll cover this process in greater detail in Chapter 4, and then go even
deeper in Chapter 14.
The most important part of the PoW process is that one of the four variables
is the identity of the previous block, which includes when that block was created, its set of transactions, the identity of the block before that, and the block’s
nonce. If innovative investors keep following this logic, they will realize that
this links every single block in Bitcoin’s blockchain together. As a result, no
information in any past block, even if it was created years ago, can be changed
without changing all of the blocks after it. Such a change would be rejected by
the distributed set of miners, and this property is what makes Bitcoin’s blockchain and the transactions therein immutable.
Miners are economically rewarded for creating a new block with a transaction that grants them newly minted bitcoin, called a coinbase transaction, as
well as fees for each transaction. The coinbase transaction is also what slowly
releases new bitcoin into the money supply, but more on that later.

A USEFUL ANALOGY FOR BITCOIN’S ECOSYSTEM
To tie everything together using an analogy that will prepare us for a discussion of the applications of blockchain technology in Chapter 3 (see Figure 2.1).

Burniske 01.indd 16

9/9/17 1:12 PM

The Basics of Bitcoin and Blockchain Technology

17

End Users
Applications
Bitcoin Software = Operating System
Miners = Hardware

Figure 2.1 n Bitcoin as a stack of hardware, OS, applications, and end users

It’s helpful to think of the concepts as a stack of hardware, software, applications, and users in relation to a personal computer.
The miners that build Bitcoin’s blockchain with the PoW process are the
hardware, just as a MacBook Pro provides the hardware for a personal computer. That hardware runs an operating system (OS); in the case of Bitcoin,
the operating system is the open-source software that facilitates everything
described earlier. This software is developed by a volunteer group of developers,
just as Linux, the operating system that underlies much of the cloud, is maintained by a volunteer group of developers. On top of this hardware and operating system combination are applications, just as Safari is an application that
runs on an Apple operating system. The applications interface with the Bitcoin
operating system, which pushes and pulls information to and from Bitcoin’s
blockchain as needed. Lastly, there are the end users that interface with the
applications, and someday may have no concept of the hardware or software
underneath because all they need to know is how to navigate the applications.

PRIVATE VERSUS PUBLIC BLOCKCHAINS
Broadly, there are two types of entities that can own the hardware supporting blockchains: public and private. The difference between public and private
blockchains is similar to that between the Internet and intranets. The Internet
is a public resource. Anyone can tap into it; there’s no gatekeeper. Intranets,
on the other hand, are walled gardens used by companies or consortiums to
transmit private information. Public blockchains are analogous to the Internet,
whereas private blockchains are like intranets. While both are useful today,
there’s little debate that the Internet has created orders of magnitude more
value than intranets. This is despite vociferous proclamations by incumbents

Burniske 01.indd 17

9/9/17 1:12 PM

18 CRYPTOASSETS

in the 1980s and 1990s that the public Internet could never be trusted. History
is on the side of public networks, and while history doesn’t repeat, it does often
rhyme.4
The important distinction boils down to how the entities get access to the
network. Remember, a blockchain is created by a distributed system of computers that uses cryptography and a consensus process to keep the members of
the community in sync. A blockchain is useless in isolation; one might as well
use a centralized database. The community of computers building a blockchain can either be public or private, commonly referred to as permissionless
or permissioned.
Public systems are ones like Bitcoin, where anyone with the right hardware
and software can connect to the network and access the information therein.
There is no bouncer checking IDs at the door. Rather, participation in the network forms an economic equilibrium in which entities will buy more hardware to take part in building Bitcoin’s blockchain if they feel they can make
money doing so. Other examples of public blockchains include Ethereum,
Litecoin, Monero, Zcash, and so on, which will be discussed in more detail in
Chapters 4 and 5.
Private systems, on the other hand, employ a bouncer at the door. Only entities that have the proper permissions can become part of the network. These
private systems came about after Bitcoin did, when enterprises and businesses
realized they liked the utility of Bitcoin’s blockchain, but weren’t comfortable
or legally allowed to be as open with the information propagated among public
entities.
These private blockchains have thus far been most widely embraced by the
financial services as a means to update IT architecture that hasn’t had a major
facelift since preparation for the Y2K bug. Within financial services, these private blockchains are largely solutions by incumbents in a fight to remain incumbents. While there is merit to many of these solutions, some claim the greatest
revolution has been getting large and secretive entities to work together, sharing
information and best practices, which will ultimately lower the cost of services
to the end consumer.5 We believe that over time the implementation of private
blockchains will erode the position held by centralized powerhouses because of
the tendency toward open networks. In other words, it’s a foot in the door for
further decentralization and the use of public blockchains.
The potential applications of private blockchains extend far beyond the
financial services industry. Banks and other monetary intermediaries have
most quickly moved to adopt the technology because the use cases are most
