
THE FIRST STEPS

43

select polling techniques. Price patterns on our computer screens
reveal crowd behavior. Technical analysis is applied social psychology,
the craft of analyzing mass behavior for profit.
Many beginners, overwhelmed by the sheer volume of data, fall into
the trap of automatic trading systems. Their vendors claim to have
backtested the best technical tools and put them together into winning
systems. Whenever an excited beginner tells me he is planning to buy
an automatic system, I ask him what he does for a living and what
would happen if I came to compete with him after buying an automatic
decision-making system in his field. People want to believe in magic,
and if that magic can also save them from working and thinking, they
gladly pay good money for it.
Successful trading is based on the 3 M’s—Mind, Method, Money.
Technical analysis, no matter how clever, is responsible for only onethird of your success. You also need to have sound trading psychology
and proper money management, as you’ll see later in this book.
WHERE DO I GO FROM HERE? Technical Analysis of Stock Trends by
Edwards and Magee, written in the first half of the twentieth century,
is considered the definitive book on classical charting. Get any edition
after 1955, because that was the last major revision of the book.
Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets by John Murphy offers the
most thorough review of modern as well as classical technical analysis. My first book, Trading for a Living, has large sections on both classical and modern technical analysis.

When to Buy and Sell
The secret of trading is that there is no secret. There is no magic password to profits. Beginners keep looking for a gimmick, and plenty of
crafty vendors sell them. In truth, trading is about work—and a bit of
flair. It is no different from any other field of human endeavor. Whether
you do surgery, teach calculus, or fly an airplane, it all boils down to
knowing the rules, having the discipline, putting in the work, and having a bit of flair.
An intelligent trader pays attention to fundamentals. He is aware of
the key forces in the economy. He spends most of his analytic time
on technical analysis, working to identify trends and reversals. Later
in this book we will review key technical tools and put together a
trading plan.

44

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

Markets keep changing, and flexibility is the name of the game. A
brilliant programmer told me recently that he kept losing money but
whoever was buying off of his stops must have been profitable because
his stops kept nailing the bottoms of declines. I asked why he didn’t
start placing his buy orders where he now placed stops. He wouldn’t
do it because he was too rigid, and for him buy orders were buy orders
and stops were stops. A high level of education can be a handicap in
trading. Brian Monieson, a noted Chicago trader, once said in an interview, “I have a Ph.D. in mathematics and a background in cybernetics,
but I was able to overcome those disadvantages and make money.”
Many professional people are preoccupied with being right. Engineers
believe that everything can be calculated, and doctors believe that if
they run enough tests, they’ll come up with the right diagnosis and
treatment. Curing a patient involves a lot more than precision. It is a
running joke how many doctors and lawyers lose money in the markets. Why? Certainly not for lack of intelligence, but for lack of humility and flexibility.
Markets operate in an atmosphere of uncertainty. Trading signals are
clear in the middle of the chart, but as you get closer to the right edge,
you find yourself in what John Keegan, the great military historian,
called “the fog of war.” There is no certainty, only odds. Here you have
two goals—to make money and to learn. Win or lose, you have to gain
knowledge from a trade in order to be a better trader tomorrow. Scan
your fundamental information, read technical signals, implement your
rules of money management and risk control. Now you are ready to
pull the trigger. Go!

P A R T
T W O

THE THREE M’S
OF SUCCESSFUL
TRADING
B

uy low, sell high. Short high, cover low. Traders are like surfers,
trying to catch good waves, only their beach is rocky, not sandy.
Professionals wait for opportunities but amateurs jump in, driven by
emotions—they keep buying strength and selling weakness, bleeding
their equity into the markets. Buy low, sell high sounds like a simple
rule, but greed and fear can override the best intentions.
A professional waits for familiar patterns to emerge from the market.
He may notice a new trend with rising momentum, indicating higher
prices ahead. Or he may detect the feebleness of momentum during a
rally, indicating weakness. Once he recognizes a pattern, he puts on
a trade. He has a clear notion of how he’ll get in, where he’ll take profits, and where he’ll accept a loss if the market turns against him.
A trade is a bet on a price change, but there is a paradox. Each price
reflects the latest consensus of value of market participants. Putting on
a trade challenges that consensus. A buyer disagrees with the collective
wisdom by saying the market is underpriced. A seller disagrees with the
wisdom of the entire group, believing the market is overpriced. Both
the buyer and the seller expect the consensus to change, but meanwhile
they defy the market. That market includes some of the most brilliant
minds and some of the deepest pockets on Earth. Arguing with this
group is dangerous business, and it has to be done very cautiously.
An intelligent trader looks for holes in the efficient market theory.
He scans the market for brief periods of inefficiency. When the crowd
is gripped by greed, the newcomers jump in and load up on stocks.

46

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

When falling prices squeeze the fingers of thousands of buyers, they
dump their holdings in a panic, disregarding fundamental values. Those
episodes of emotional behavior dilute the cold efficiency of the market, creating opportunities for disciplined traders. When markets are
calm and efficient, trading becomes a crapshoot, with commissions and
slippage worsening the odds.
Crowd mentality changes slowly, and price patterns recur, albeit
with variations. Emotional swings provide trading opportunities, while
efficient markets chop up and down, offering no edge to traders, only
piling up their costs. Technical analysis tools will work for you only if
you have the discipline to wait for patterns to emerge. Professionals
trade only when markets offer them special advantages.
According to chaos theory, many processes—the flow of water in a
river, the movement of clouds in the sky, the changes of prices in the
cotton markets—are chaotic, with transient islands of order, called fractals. Those fractals look similar from any distance, whether through a
telescope or a microscope. The coast of Maine looks just as jagged
from a space shuttle as it does when you drop down on your hands
and knees and look at it through a magnifying glass. In most financial markets, the long-term weekly charts and the short-term 5-minute
charts look so similar, you cannot tell them apart without markings.
Engineers have realized that they can achieve better control over many
processes if they accept them as chaotic and try to capitalize on temporary fractals, the islands of order. That’s exactly what a good trader
does. He recognizes the market as chaotic and unpredictable much of
the time, but expects to find islands of order. He trains himself to buy
and sell without quibbling when he finds those patterns.
Successful trading depends on the 3 M’s—Mind, Method, and Money.
Beginners focus on analysis, but professionals operate in a threedimensional space. They are aware of trading psychology—their own
feelings and the mass psychology of the markets. Each trader needs to
have a method for choosing specific stocks, options, or futures as well
as firm rules for pulling the trigger—deciding when to buy and sell.
Money refers to how you manage your trading capital.
Mind, Method, Money—trading psychology, trading method, and
money management—people sometimes ask me which of the three
is more important. It is like asking which leg of a three-legged stool is
the most important. Take them away one at a time and then try to sit
down. In Part 2 we focus on those three foundations of market success.

C H A P T E R
F O U R

MIND—
THE DISCIPLINED TRADER*

T

raders come to the markets with great expectations, but few make
profits and most wash out. The industry hides good statistics from
the public, while promoting its Big Lie that money lost by losers goes
to winners. In fact, winners collect only a fraction of the money lost by
losers. The bulk of losses goes to the trading industry as the cost of
doing business—commissions, slippage, and expenses—by both winners and losers. A successful trader must hop over several high hurdles—and keep hopping. Being better than average is not good
enough—you have to be head and shoulders above the crowd. You
can win only if you have both knowledge and discipline.
Most amateurs come to the markets with half-baked trading plans,
clueless about psychology or money management. Most get hurt and
quit after a few painful hits. Others find more cash and return to trading. We do not have to call people who keep dropping money in the
markets losers because they do get something in return. What they get
is fantastic entertainment value.
Markets are the most entertaining places on the face of the Earth.
They are like a card game, a chess game, and a horse race all rolled
into one. The game goes on at all hours—you can always find action.
An acquaintance of mine had a terrible home life. He avoided his
wife by staying late in the office, but the building closed on weekends,
pushing him into the bosom of his family. By Sunday mornings he
could take no more “family togetherness” and escaped to the basement
of his house. There he had set up a trading apparatus, using the equipment loaned to him by another loser in exchange for a share of future
*Thanks to Mark Douglas, the title of whose book I borrowed to name this chapter.

47

48

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

profits. What can you trade on a Sunday morning in suburban Boston?
It turned out that the gold markets were open in the Middle East. My
acquaintance used to turn on his quote screen, get on the phone (this
was in the pre-Internet days), and trade gold in Abu Dhabi!
He never asked himself what his edge was over local traders. What
has he got, sitting in a bucolic suburb of Boston, that they haven’t got
in Abu Dhabi? Why should locals send him money? Every professional
knows his edge, but ask an amateur and he’ll draw a blank. A person
who doesn’t know his edge does not have it and will lose money.
Warren Buffett, one of the richest investors on Earth, says that when
you sit down to a game of poker, you must know within 15 minutes who
is going to supply the winnings, and if you don’t know the answer, that
person is you. My Boston buddy wound up losing his house in a bankruptcy, which put a whole new spin on his marital problems, even
though he no longer traded gold in Abu Dhabi.
Many people, whether rich or poor, feel trapped and bored. As
Henry David Thoreau wrote almost two centuries ago, “The mass of
men lead lives of quiet desperation.”
We wake up in the same bed each morning, eat the same breakfast,
and drive to work down the same road. We see the same dull faces in
the office and shuffle papers on our old desks. We drive home, watch
the same dumb shows on TV, have a beer, and go to sleep in the same
bed. We repeat this routine day after day, month after month, year after
year. It feels like a life sentence without parole. What is there to look
forward to? Perhaps a brief vacation next year? We’ll buy a package
deal, fly to Paris, get on a bus with the rest of the group, and spend
15 minutes in front of the Triumphal Arch and half an hour going up
the Eiffel Tower. Then back home, back to the old routine.
Most people live in a deep invisible groove—no need to think,
make decisions, feel the raw edge of life. The routine does feel comfortable—but deathly boring.
Even amusements stop being fun. How many Hollywood movies
can you watch on a weekend until they all become a blur? How many trips
to Disneyland can you take before all the rides in plastic soap dishes
feel like one endless ride to nowhere? To quote Thoreau again, “A
stereotyped but unconscious despair is concealed even under what are
called games and amusements of mankind. There is no play in them.”
And then you open a trading account and punch in an order to buy
500 shares of Intel. Anyone with a few thousand dollars can escape the
routine and find excitement in the markets.

MIND—THE DISCIPLINED TRADER

49

Suddenly, the world is in living color! Intel ticks up half a point—
you check quotes, run out for a newspaper, and tune in for the latest
updates. If you have a computer at work, you set up a little quote window to keep an eye on your stock. Before the Internet, people used
to buy pocket FM receivers for market quotes and hide them in halfopen desk drawers. Their antennae, sticking out of desks of middleaged men, looked like beams of light shining into prison cells.
Intel is up a point! Should you sell and take profits? Buy more and
double up? Your heart is pounding—you feel alive! Now it’s up three
points. You multiply that by the number of shares you have and realize
that your profits after just a few hours are close to your weekly salary.
You start calculating percentage returns—if you continue trading like
that for the rest of the year, what a fortune you’ll have by Christmas!
Suddenly you raise your eyes from the calculator to see that Intel has
dropped two points. Your stomach is tied in a knot, your face pushes
into the screen, you hunch over, compressing your lungs, reducing the
flow of blood to the brain, which is a terrible position for making decisions. You are flooded with anxiety, like a trapped animal. You are
hurting—but you are alive!
Trading is the most exciting activity that a person can do with
their clothes on. Trouble is, you cannot feel excited and make money
at the same time. Think of a casino, where amateurs celebrate over free
drinks, while professional card-counters coldly play game after game,
folding most of the time, and pressing their advantage when the card
count gives them a slight edge over the house. To be a successful trader,
you have to develop iron discipline (Mind), acquire an edge over the
markets (Method), and control risks in your trading account (Money).

SLEEPWALKING THROUGH THE MARKETS
There is only one rational reason to trade—to make money. Money
attracts us to the markets, but in the excitement of the new game we
often lose sight of that goal. We start trading for entertainment, as an
escape, to show off in front of our family and friends, and so on. Once
a trader loses his focus on money, his goose is cooked.
It is easy to feel cool, calm, and collected reading a book or looking at your charts on a weekend. It’s easy to be rational when the markets are closed—but what happens after 30 minutes in front of a live
screen? Does your pulse begin to race? Do upticks and downticks
hypnotize you? Traders get an adrenaline rush from the market, and

50

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

the excitement clouds their judgment. Calm resolutions made on a
weekend fly out the window during rallies or declines. “This time is
different . . . It’s an exception . . . I won’t put in a stop now, the market is too volatile” are the giveaway phrases of emotional traders.
Many intelligent people sleepwalk through the markets. Their eyes
are open, but their minds are shut. They are driven by emotions and
keep repeating their mistakes. It is OK to make mistakes but not OK
to repeat them. When you make a mistake for the first time, it shows
that you are alive, searching, experimenting. Repeating a mistake is a
neurotic symptom.
Losers come in all genders, ages, and colors, but several stock
phrases give them away. Let us review some of the common excuses.
If you recognize yourself, use that as a sign to start learning a new approach to the markets.

Blame the Broker
A trader hears his broker’s voice at the most important and tense
moments—when placing buy or sell orders or requesting information
that may lead to an order. The broker is close to the market, and many
of us assume that he knows more than we do. We try to read our
broker’s voice and figure out whether he approves or disapproves of
our actions.
Is listening to your broker’s voice a part of your trading system? Does
it say to buy when the weekly moving average is up, daily Force Index
is down, and the broker sounds enthused? Or does it simply say to buy
when such and such indicators reach such and such parameters?
Trying to read your broker’s voice is a sign of insecurity, a common
state for beginners. Markets are huge and volatile, and their rallies and
declines can feel overpowering. Frightened people look for someone
strong and wise to lead them out of the wilderness. Can your broker
lead you? Probably not, but if you lose money, you’ll have a great
excuse—it was your broker who put you into that stupid trade.
A lawyer who was shopping for an expert witness recently called
me. His client, a university professor, had shorted Dell at 20 several
years ago, before the splits, after his broker told him it “could not go
any higher.” That stock became the darling of the bull market, went
through the roof, and a year later the professor covered at 80, wiping
out his million-dollar account, which represented his life savings. That

MIND—THE DISCIPLINED TRADER

51

man was smart enough to earn a Ph.D. and save a million dollars but
emotional enough to follow his broker while his life savings were
doing a slow burn. Few people sue their brokers, but almost all beginners blame them.
Traders’ feelings towards brokers are similar to patients’ feelings
towards psychoanalysts. A patient lies on the couch, and the analyst’s
voice, emerging at important moments, seems to carry deeper psychological truths than the patient could have possibly discovered himself. In reality, a good broker is a craftsman who can sometimes help
you get better fills and dig up information you requested. He is your
helper—not your advisor. Looking to a broker for guidance is a sign of
insecurity, which is not conducive to trading success.
Most people start trading more actively after switching to electronic
brokers. Low commissions are a factor, but the psychological change
is more important. People are less self-conscious when they don’t have
to deal with a live person. All of us occasionally make stupid trades,
and electronic brokers allow us to make them in private. We are less
ashamed hitting a key than calling a broker.
Some traders manage to transfer their anxieties and fears onto electronic brokers. They complain that electronic brokers do not do what
they want, such as accept certain types of orders. Why don’t you transfer your account, I ask—and see fear in their faces. It is the fear of
change, of upsetting the cart.
To be a successful trader, you must accept total responsibility for
your decisions and actions.

Blame the Guru
A beginner entering the markets soon finds himself surrounded by a colorful crowd of gurus—experts who sell trading advice. Most charge fees,
but some give advice for free to drum up business for their brokerage
firms. Gurus publish newsletters, are quoted in the media, and many
would kill to get on TV. Masses are hungry for clarity, and gurus are
there to feed that hunger. Most are failed traders, but being a guru is not
that easy. Their mortality rate is high, and few stay around for more than
two years. The novelty wears off, customers do not renew subscriptions,
and a guru finds it easier to earn a living selling aluminum siding than
drawing trendlines. My chapter on the guru business in Trading for a
Living drew more howls and threats than any other in that book.

52

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Traders go through three stages in their attitudes towards gurus. In
the beginning, they drink in their advice, expecting to make money
from it. At the second stage, traders start avoiding gurus like the
plague, viewing them as distractions from their own decision-making
process. Finally, some successful traders start paying attention to a few
gurus who alert them to new opportunities.
Some losing traders go looking for a trainer, a teacher, or a therapist.
Very few people are experts in both psychology and trading. I’ve met
several gurus who couldn’t trade their way out of a paper bag but
claimed that their alleged expertise in psychology qualified them to
train traders. Stop for a moment and compare this to sex therapy. If I
had a sexual problem, I might see a psychiatrist, a psychologist, a sex
therapist, or even a pastoral counselor, but I would never go to a
Catholic priest, even if I were Catholic. That priest has no practical
knowledge of the problem—and if he does, you want to run, not walk
away. A teacher who does not trade is highly suspect.
Traders go through several stages in their attitudes towards tips.
Beginners love them, those who are more serious insist on doing their
own homework, while advanced traders may listen to tips but always
drop them into their own trading systems to see whether that advice
will hold up. Whenever I hear a trading tip, I run it through my own
computerized screens. The decision to buy, go short, or stand aside is
mine alone, with an average yield of one tip accepted out of every 20
heard. Tips draw my attention to opportunities I might have overlooked, but there are no shortcuts to sweating your own trades.
A greenhorn who has gotten burned may ask for a guru’s track
record. Years ago I used to publish a newsletter and noticed how frighteningly easy it was for gurus to massage and slant their records, even
if they were tracked by independent rating services.
I’ve never met a trader who took all the recommendations of his
guru, even if he paid him a lot of money. If a guru has 200 subscribers,
they’ll choose different recommendations, trade them differently, and
most will lose money, each in his own way. There is a rule in the advisory business: “If you make forecasts for a living, make a lot of them.”
Gurus offer convenient excuses to sleepwalking traders who need a
scapegoat for their losses.
Whether or not you listen to a guru, you’re 100% responsible for the
outcome of your trades. The next time you get a hot tip, drop it into
your trading system to see whether it gives you a buy or sell signal.
You are responsible for the consequences of taking or rejecting advice.
