
What about brokerage research? Is that also something you never
use?
I will look at analysts' earnings estimates because part of my job is to
find out whether a company is doing better or worse than people perceive. But I have never called a sell-side analyst to ask for an opinion.
Don't get me wrong; there are some great analysts out there. But it
really comes down to my philosophy: It's much more valuable to do
your own research so that you can make your own decisions about

when to get in and out.
If I buy a company because of an analyst's recommendation, and
the stock suddenly drops 20 percent, I'm going to be dependent on

STifl W A T S O N

that analyst for information. If I call the analyst and he says, "Everything is fine," and then try to call the CFO of the company, he may
well not return my call because he doesn't know who I am. In the
meantime, he's talking to ten other people with whom he has built a
relationship. If I was the guy who built the relationship with the company, maybe I would be the first person the CFO called back.
Another aspect is that sell-side research tends to be biased; it is
driven by investment banking relationships. If a brokerage firm earns
several million dollars doing an underwriting for a stock, it is very difficult for an analyst of that firm to issue anything other than a buy rating, even if he believes the company has significant problems. Some
of my research analysts have good friends who are sell-side analysts
and have seen them pressured to recommend stocks they didn't like.
Let's say a stock is trading in the 8 to 12 P/E range and you like
the fundamentals. How do you decide when to buy it? Obviously,
you're not using any technical analysis for timing, since you don't
even look at charts.
You need a catalyst that will make the stock go higher.
Give me an example of a catalyst that prompted you to buy a
stock.
A current example is Amerigon. Two weeks ago, they put out a press
release announcing a five-year agreement with Ford Motors to manufacture ventilated car seats. The press release didn't contain much
information about the size of the contract. But by talking not only to
the company but also to someone at Ford, we know the contract is
huge. We also know that they're working on similar agreements with
the other car manufactures.
What is another example of a catalyst?
A change that will lead to a dynamic improvement in margins.
Another one of our long positions is Windmere, which is a manufacturer of personal care products, such as hair dryers. Last year, they
bought a division of Black & Decker and overpaid for it. The high
operating costs of the acquired division acted as a drag on their earnings. We bought the stock recently when we learned that the company planned to close down some of these unprofitable facilities—an

action that will bring their costs down and lead to better-thanexpected earnings in coming quarters.
Any other examples of a catalyst?
Sometimes the catalyst can be a new product. One of our biggest
winners last year was LTXX, a semiconductor company. They had
come out with a new product, and by talking to their customers, we
knew the sales were going to be very good. Wall Street didn't know
about it because the sales of this new product hadn't shown up in
earnings reports. When the earnings starting showing up above
expectations, the stock took off.
If you buy a stock and it moves higher, when do you decide to liquidate the position?
Too early [he laughs}. We are always rotating our stocks. If we buy a
stock at ten times earnings and it goes up, usually by the time it gets
to twenty times earnings, we are out of it. We will rotate the money
down to another stock with similar qualities so that we can keep the
risk/reward of the portfolio as low as possible. LTXX is a good example. We started buying the stock around $5 and got out when it went
up to $15, even though our earnings projections for the stock were
still positive. Today the stock is trading at $45. That's fairly typical.
But that same trait of liquidating stocks too early has also helped us
during market declines because we're not long the stocks with the
high price/earnings ratios that get hit hardest in a market correction.
If you buy a stock and it just sits there, at what point do you
decide to get out?
If it looks like dead money and what I originally thought would happen is not happening, then it's probably better to just move on.
In other words, you liquidate once it becomes clear that the reasons you went in are no longer valid?
Or because I have a better idea. We're working with a finite amount of
money. Consequently, it's important to stay invested in your best ideas.
How many positions do you have at one time?
Over a hundred. We won't let any single position get very large. Our
largest holding will be about 3 percent of assets, and even that is rare.
For shorts, our maximum position will be half that large.

DIALING FOR DOLLARS

What is your balance between long and short positions?
Our total exposure will normally range between about 20 and 50 percent net long, although it could be even lower if 1 get very bearish on
the market. Right now we're about 80 percent long and 40 percent
short, which is fairly typical. We've always kept a pretty good-size
short position and will continue to do so. Part of the reason for that is
that I am a perennial bear.
A perennial bear in the greatest bull market in history—that
doesn't like a beneficial trait. Why do you have a bearish bias?
Thank goodness we've been able to make money anyway. I have felt
this way for a while, but certainly now [March 2000], I think we are
seeing a mania in certain sectors, such as the Internet and technology.
Valuations are up there in the ozone layer. It is no different from the
market manias we've seen in the past: the Russian market a few years
ago, the Japanese market during the 1980s, the real estate market in
the 1970s, even the Dutch tulip craze in the seventeenth century.
Right now, when everyone's golf buddy is making money buying these
stocks, there's a lot of peer pressure to follow the group. You have a
locomotive while prices are going up, but the problem is, what happens
when the locomotive stops and reverses direction, as it invariably will.
Are we near a top or will the top form three years from now? I
can't answer that question. All I can do is control the factors over
which I have an influence. I can control the number of CFOs and
customers we talk to each day, but I can't determine what the market
is going to do.
Isn't it difficult to talk to the CFOs of companies you are shorting? I imagine they wouldn't be too eager to talk to managers
who are selling their stock.
We don't really talk to CFOs on the short side anymore.
Because of the access problem?
No, because we got talked out of some of our best short positions. In
earlier years, there were a number of times when I changed my mind
about selling a stock because a CFO assured me that everything was
fine, and then the stock tanked. If we are considering a stock on the
short side, we spend a lot of time talking to customers, suppliers, and
competitors.

HOW do you select your short positions?
We certainly look for the higher-priced stocks—companies trading at
thirty to forty times earnings, or stocks that have no earnings. Within
that group, we seek to identify those companies with a flawed business plan.
Give me an example of a flawed business plan.
My favorite theme for a short is a one-product company because if
that product fails, they have nothing else to fall back on. It's also
much easier to check out sales for a one-product company. A perfect
example is Milestone Scientific. The company manufactured a product that was supposed to be a painless alternative to dental novocaine
shots. It sounded like a great idea, and originally we started looking at
the stock as a buy prospect. One of our analysts went to a dentistry
trade show and collected a bunch of business cards from attending
dentists. The primary Wall Street analyst covering the stock assumed
every dental office would be buying five of these instruments, and he
projected unbelievably huge earnings.
I visited the company in New Jersey. There were three people sitting in rented offices who were outsourcing everything. We started calling dentists and found the product didn't work as well as advertised; it
wasn't entirely painless, and it also took longer than novocaine to take
effect. Another crucial element was that the company sold the product
with a money-back guarantee. They booked all their shipments as revenues and left themselves out on a limb in terms of product returns.
We also talked to the manufacturer to whom the company was
outsourcing their production and found out the number of units actually shipped as well as their future production plans. We could see
that the orders were slowing down dramatically on the manufacturing
side. The differences between reality and the Wall Street research
report were about as far apart as I have ever seen.
What ultimately happened to the stock?
It went down below one dollar.
Wasn't it difficult to get the manufacturer to talk to you in that
type of situation, let alone give you all that detailed information?
If you call, there's at least a chance the person will talk to you. One of
things I tell my analysts is, "Make the calls. Maybe they won't talk to

STEVE WATSON

you, but I guarantee that if you don't call, they won't talk to you." In
this case, the manufacturer was very helpful at the start, but then
they wised up to what we were doing and stopped taking our calls.
But by then, we had all the information we needed.
What do you say when you call a manufacturer in this type of
situation?
I tell him the truth. I tell him that I am a fund manager and am doing
research on the company and the industry. In some cases, when we
call a company, we ask them to provide us with the names of some of
their top customers to help us evaluate their product.
Does giving you this information sometimes work against the
company because their customers don't like them as much as
they believe?
When I first started doing this I thought that contacting customers
supplied by a company would be like talking to references on a
resume—they would only say complimentary things. I was amazed
when this frequently proved not to be the case. I have often wondered whether a company had any idea what their customers really
thought about them. Sometimes we have found our best information
this way.
Any other examples of how you pick your short positions?
A good example is Balance Bars. You could walk into any GNC store
and see shelves loaded with competitive products and the price of
Balance Bar items marked down. Yet the stock was trading at a multiple of thirty-five times earnings; it should have been trading at ten
times earnings.
That sounds a lot like Peter Lynch talking about getting trading
ideas by going to the mall with his family.
Peter Lynch has probably inspired me more than anyone else. I read his
book One Up on Wall Street at least ten times. One question I ask people I interview is whether they've read his book. If they haven't, it tells
me they are not as serious about the stock market as they claim to be.

What aspect of the book do you personally find so valuable?
The message that it is critical to do your own research rather than
depending on Wall Street research.

DIALING FOR DOLLARS

What type of research?
Talking to companies and customers.
But the ordinary investor can't call up companies.
The ordinary investor may not be able to call up the company CFO,
but as Lynch advises, the nonprofessional can call the investor relations office and still get valuable information by asking the right questions. The gist of Lynch's advice to the ordinary investor is: Invest in
what you know—the company you work for (assuming it is doing
well), companies in the same industry, or companies that make a
product you can touch and feel. His point is that people would be
much better off investing in companies they understand than listening to their broker and investing in companies they know nothing
about. One part of Peter Lynch's philosophy is that if you can't summarize the reasons why you own a stock in four sentences, you probably shouldn't own it.
Did you ever meet Peter Lynch?
I never met him, but I interviewed at Fidelity on several occasions. I
was obsessed with getting a job there because I wanted to be the next
Peter Lynch and eventually run the Magellan fund. The last time I
interviewed with Fidelity, which was right before I took the job at
Friess Associates, I got as far as meeting with Jeff Vinik [Lynch's initial successor as manager of the Magellan fund]. He asked me only
two questions, which will stick in my mind forever. First, he asked,
"What is the bond rate?" I was a stock guy who never paid attention to
the bond market. I subsequently learned that Vinik pays very close
attention to interest rates because he trades a lot of bonds. His second question was, "You're twenty-nine years old; what took you so
long?" The interview was over in less than five minutes.
Do you, like Peter Lynch, get trading ideas by going to the mall?
All the time. I love going to malls. Investing is not as complicated as
people make it out to be. Sometimes it just requires common sense.
Anyone can go to the mall and see that a store like Bombay is empty
and the Gap is filled with people. If you go to four or five malls and
see the same thing, there is a reason for it. Bombay hasn't had the
right products to make people want to buy their stuff for years,

D I A L I N G F O R DOLLARS-ilS

whereas the Gap is continually changing with the times and getting in
fresh inventories that meet their customers' needs.
Does that imply that you bought the Gap and shorted Bombay?
We don't trade the Gap because we only trade small cap stocks. We
have been short Bombay from time to time.
What are examples of trades that were largely inspired by mall
visits?
Last Christmas I went to Men's Wearhouse because I needed a suit. I
hated the clothes, and I noticed the store was virtually empty. We did
some additional research to confirm the trade, but we ended up
shorting the stock.
How about on the long side?
One stock we bought is Claire's. I noticed that the store always
seemed to be mobbed with teenagers. We also liked their financials
and found their management very forthcoming.
We were talking about companies with flawed business plans.
Any other examples?
Enamalon. The company's single product was a toothpaste that supposedly did a better job of whitening teeth. If they didn't spend a lot
of money on promotion and advertising, they would never get a toehold in the highly competitive toothpaste market. On the other
hand, if they did spend enough to get widespread consumer recognition, they would burn through most of their capital. It was a nowin situation from the start. The other problem was that the
product cost a lot more than ordinary toothpaste but didn't work any
better. We had everyone in our office try it, and only one person
liked it.
You said the name of the company was Enamalon? I never heard
of the toothpaste.
Exactly, that's my point.
What happened to the stock?
The last time I checked, it was trading for one dollar.
It sounds like an important element in your decision to short this
stock was to have everyone in the office sample their product.
Any other examples of short ideas that were derived by "consumer research"?

[He searches his memory and then laughs.] One of our shorts was
Ultrafem. It was a one-product company that was trading at over a
$100 million capitalization. The product was a substitute for feminine pads that used what the company termed "a soft cup technology." The company had put out press releases trumpeting the
superiority of their product to conventional alternatives. I called the
manufacturer and got them to send me five free samples, which 1
gave to five women friends. After they tried it, they all came back to
me with virtually the same response: "You've got to be kidding!" I
shorted the stock. The stock was trading in the twenties when I conducted my "market research;" it's now trading at three cents with a
market capitalization of $260,000.
Where did you get out?
We covered our position recently.
You held it all the way down!
This was probably my number one short pick of all time, but unfortunately we had very few shares on the way down because we were
bought in on a lot of our stock.
By "bought in" do you mean that the stock you borrowed was
called back? [In order to short a stock, the seller must borrow
the shares he sells. If the lender of those shares requests their
return, the short seller must either borrow the shares elsewhere,
which may not be possible, or else buy back the shares in the
market.]
Exactly, and the stock was fully locked up [there weren't any shares
available to be borrowed]. That's when I learned that the short game
is very relationship dependent. If there is a scarcity of stock available
for borrowing and I'm competing with a large fund manager who
does more business with the brokerage firm than I do, guess who's
going to get those shares. This occurred back in 1997; we were a lot
smaller then.
Why would loaned shares be called back?
Because the investor requests the stock certificate in his name.
[Unless an investor specifically requests the stock certificate, the
stock will be held by the brokerage firm ("in the Street name") and
loanable.]

D I A L I N G FOR D O L L A R S

Why would an investor suddenly request receipt of his stock

short positions that we closed out because they went against us and

certificate?
Companies whose stock price is very vulnerable because of weak fundamentals will often attract a lot of short selling. Sometimes these
companies will encourage their investors to request their stock certificates in their name, in the hopes of forcing shorts to cover their positions when the loaned stock is recalled. Sometimes a few firms will
buy up a large portion of the shares in a stock with a heavy short
interest and then call in the shares, forcing the shorts to cover at a
higher price. Then they will liquidate the stock for a quick profit.
Are you implying that large fund managers will sometimes get
together to squeeze the shorts?
It is illegal for portfolio managers to get together to push the price up
or down—that's considered market manipulation. Does it happen
anyway? Sure, it happens all the time. During the past five months,
just about every stock with a heavy short interest got squeezed at one
time or another.

that later on collapsed. But we are much more concerned about
avoiding a large loss than missing a profit opportunity.

Do most stocks that are squeezed eventually come down?
I am a firm believer that if a stock is heavily shorted, there is usually a
good fundamental reason. Most of the time, those stocks will end up
much lower. In the interim, however, even a near-valueless stock can
go up sharply due to an artificial scarcity of loanable shares.
How do you time your shorts? Certainly there are a lot of over-

priced stocks that just get more overpriced.
The timing is definitely the tough part. That is why we spread our
short position across so many stocks and use rigorous risk control on
our shorts. I don't mind if 1 have a long position that goes down 40
percent, as long as 1 still believe that the fundamentals are sound. If a
short goes 20 to 30 percent against us, however, we will start to cover,
even if my analysis of the stock is completely unchanged. In fact, I
will cover even if I am convinced that the company will ultimately go
bankrupt. I have seen too many instances of companies where everything is in place for the stock to go to zero in a year, but it first quintupled because the company made some announcement and the
shorts got squeezed. If that stock is a 1 percent short in our portfolio,
I'm not going to let it turn into a 5 percent loss. We've had a lot of

The discussion of the inherent danger of being short a stock that is subject to
a squeeze leads to a conversation about Watson's childhood experience -with
•poisonous snakes, which was described at this chapter's opening.

Did you feel any fear while you were holding those snakes?
No, I would describe the feeling as closer to excitement. I was a
pretty hyperactive kid.
Is there anything that you are afraid of?
I'm going skydiving next week—that scares me.
Why is that?
I thought about that. I realized what scares me—things I can't control. When I held those snakes, I had control. I'm planning to learn
race car driving in Italy this year, and that doesn't scare me because I'll
have control of the car. But I have no control over the parachute. I just
hope that the person who prepares my chute doesn't have a bad day.
Why are you going skydiving if you have no control?
I just had my birthday this past Saturday; it was one of my gifts. I
don't have any choice. Maybe the person who gave me the present
will forget—but I doubt it [he laughs].
What do you look for when you hire an analyst?
For a number of reasons, everyone I hire is in their twenties. First,
they will work eighty to a hundred hours a week. Second, they haven't
made so much money that they will sit back and relax. Third, they
won't think twice about calling up a CFO, distributor, or customer. I
also hire people who want to win.
Picking stocks is as much an art as a science. There are some people who no matter how hard they work, how much research they do,
or how many companies they call, will not succeed because they
don't have the knack of figuring out what is and isn't going to work.
Did you ever hire anyone who didn't work out?
The first person I hired. He was one of the smartest people I have
ever known. The problem was that he didn't have any intuition, and

he didn't get the risk side. For example, he would say, "We have to
short Yahoo at 10 because it is worth zero." He didn't have any

instinctive feel for what was going on in the market.
So much of your approach seems to be tied to speaking to company management. If tomorrow you awoke in the financial Twilight Zone and found yourself to be an ordinary investor instead
of a fund manager with hundreds of millions in assets, how
would you alter your approach?
Well, first of all I would still have a telephone. I might not be able to
call the CFO, but I could call other employees of the company, as
well as consumers and distributors of their products. Also, the Internet today allows you to get a tremendous amount of information without speaking to anyone. You can get the company's 10-Qs and 10-Ks
[the quarterly and annual company reports required to be filed by the
SEC], company press releases, insider trading statistics, and lots of
other valuable information. Also, I could still go to the mall and check
out a company's product, which is a big part of what we do.
