
Example 2.6 (Continued)
hedge ratio. For brevity, we will just assume EWA to be independent,
and run the CADF test.
results=cadf(y, x, 0, 1);
% Print out results
prt(results);
% Output:
% Augmented DF test for co-integration variables:
% variable
1,variable
2
% CADF t-statistic

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

AR(1) estimate

-3.64346635

1

-0.020411

%

1% Crit Value

5% Crit Value

10% Crit Value

%

-3.880

-3.359

-3.038

%

-3.880

-3.359

-3.038

We find that the ADF test statistic is about –3.64, certainly more
negative than the critical value at the 95 percent level of –3.359. So
we can reject the null hypothesis that λ is zero. In other words, EWA
and EWC are cointegrating with 95 percent certainty.

Johansen Test
In order to test for cointegration of more than two variables, we need to
use the Johansen test. To understand this test, let’s generalize Equation 2.1
to the case where the price variable y(t) are actually vectors representing
multiple price series, and the coefficients λ and α are actually matrices.
(Because I do not think it is practical to allow for a constant drift in the
price of a stationary portfolio, we will assume βt = 0 for simplicity.) Using
English and Greek capital letters to represent vectors and matrices respectively, we can rewrite Equation 2.1 as
ΔY(t) = ΛY(t − 1) + M + A1ΔY(t − 1) + … + Ak ΔY(t − k) + t
∋

54

# of lags

%
%

(2.7)

Just as in the univariate case, if Λ = 0, we do not have cointegration.
(Recall that if the next move of Y doesn’t depend on the current price level,
there can be no mean reversion.) Let’s denote the rank (remember this

quaint linear algebraic term?) of Λ as r, and the number of price series n.
The number of independent portfolios that can be formed by various linear
combinations of the cointegrating price series is equal to r. The Johansen test
will calculate r for us in two different ways, both based on eigenvector decomposition of Λ. One test produces the so-called trace statistic, and other
produces the eigen statistic. (A good exposition can be found in Sorensen,
2005.) We need not worry what they are exactly, since the jplv7 package
will provide critical values for each statistic to allow us to test whether we
can reject the null hypotheses that r = 0 (no cointegrating relationship),
r ≤ 1, …, up to r ≤ n – 1. If all these hypotheses are rejected, then clearly
we have r = n. As a useful by-product, the eigenvectors found can be used
as our hedge ratios for the individual price series to form a stationary portfolio. We show how to run this test on the EWA-EWC pair in Example 2.7,
where we find that the Johansen test confirms the CADF test’s conclusion
that this pair is cointegrating. But, more interestingly, we add another ETF
to the mix: IGE, an ETF consisting of natural resource stocks. We will see
how many cointegrating relations can be found from these three price series.We also use the eigenvectors to form a stationary portfolio, and find out
its half-life for mean reversion.
55

We take the EWA and EWC price series that we used in Example
2.6 and apply the Johansen test to them. There are three inputs to
the johansen function of the jplv7 package: y, p, and k. y is the input
matrix, with each column vector representing one price series. As in
the ADF and CADF tests, we set p = 0 to allow the Equation 2.7 to
have a constant offset (M ≠ 0), but not a constant drift term (β = 0).
The input k is the number of lags, which we again set to 1. (This code
fragment is part of cointegrationTests.m.)
% Combine the two time series into a matrix y2 for input
% into Johansen test
y2=[y, x];
results=johansen(y2, 0, 1);
% Print out results
prt(results);

(Continued )

THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION

Example 2.7: Using the Johansen Test for Cointegration

Example 2.7 (Continued)
% Output:
Johansen MLE estimates
NULL:

Crit 90%

Crit 95%

Crit 99%

r <= 0

variable 1

19.983

13.429

15.494

19.935

r <= 1

variable 2

3.983

2.705

3.841

6.635

Eigen Statistic

NULL:

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

56

Trace Statistic

Crit 90%

Crit 95%

Crit 99%

r <= 0

variable 1

16.000

12.297

14.264

18.520

r <= 1

variable 2

3.983

2.705

3.841

6.635

We see that for the Trace Statistic test, the hypothesis r = 0 is
rejected at the 99% level, and r ≤ 1 is rejected at the 95 percent
level. The Eigen Statistic test concludes that hypothesis r = 0
is rejected at the 95 percent level, and r ≤ 1 is rejected at the
95 percent as well. This means that from both tests, we conclude
that there are two cointegrating relationships between EWA and
EWC.
What does it mean to have two cointegrating relations when
we have only two price series? Isn’t there just one hedge ratio that
will allocate capital between EWA and EWC to form a stationary
portfolio? Actually, no. Remember when we discussed the CADF
test, we pointed out that it is order dependent. If we switched the
role of the EWA from the independent to dependent variable, we
may get a different conclusion. Similarly, when we use EWA as
the dependent variable in a regression against EWC, we will get a
different hedge ratio than when we use EWA as the independent
variable. These two different hedge ratios, which are not necessarily
reciprocal of each other, allow us to form two independent stationary
portfolios. With the Johansen test, we do not need to run the
regression two times to get those portfolios: Running it once will
generate all the independent cointegrating relations that exist. The
Johansen test, in other words, is independent of the order of the
price series.
Now let us introduce another ETF to the portfolio: IGE, which
consists of natural resource stocks. Assuming that its price series is
contained in an array z, we will run the Johansen test on all three
price series to find out how many cointegrating relationships we can
get out of this trio.

Example 2.7 (Continued)
y3=[y2, z];
results=johansen(y3, 0, 1);
% Print out results
prt(results);
% Output:
%

Johansen MLE estimates

% NULL:

Trace Statistic

Crit 90%

Crit 95%

Crit 99%

% r <= 0

variable 1

34.429

27.067

29.796

35.463

% r <= 1

variable 2

17.532

13.429

15.494

19.935

% r <= 2

variable 3

4.471

2.705

3.841

6.635

Eigen Statistic

%
% NULL:

Crit 90%

Crit 95%

Crit 99%

% r <= 0

variable 1

16.897

18.893

21.131

25.865

% r <= 1

variable 2

13.061

12.297

14.264

18.520

% r <= 2

variable 3

4.471

2.705

3.841

6.635

results.eig % Display the eigenvalues
% ans =
%
%

0.0112

%

0.0087

%

0.0030

results.evec % Display the eigenvectors
% ans =
%
%

-1.0460

-0.5797

-0.2647

%

0.7600

-0.1120

-0.0790

%

0.2233

0.5316

0.0952

Notice that the eigenvectors (represented as column vectors in
results.evec) are ordered in decreasing order of their corresponding
eigenvalues. So we should expect the first cointegrating relation to be
(Continued )

57
THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION

Both Trace statistic and Eigen statistic tests conclude that we should
have three cointegrating relations with 95 percent certainty.
The eigenvalues and eigenvectors are contained in the arrays
results.eig and results.evec, respectively.

Example 2.7 (Continued)
the “strongest”; that is, have the shortest half-life for mean reversion.
Naturally, we pick this eigenvector to form our stationary portfolio
(the eigenvector determines the shares of each ETF), and we can find
its half-life by the same method as before when we were dealing with
a stationary price series. The only difference is that we now have to
compute the T × 1 array yport, which represents the net market value
(price) of the portfolio, which is equal to the number of shares of
each ETF multiplied by the share price of each ETF, then summed
over all ETFs. yport takes the role of y in Example 2.4.
yport=smartsum(repmat(results.evec(:, 1)’, [size(y3, 1) ...
1]).*y3, 2);
% Find value of lambda and thus the half-life of mean
% reversion by linear regression fit
ylag=lag(yport, 1); % lag is a function in the jplv7
% (spatial-econometrics.com) package.
deltaY=yport-ylag;
deltaY(1)=[]; % Regression functions cannot handle the NaN
% in the first bar of the time series.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

58

ylag(1)=[];
regress_results=ols(deltaY, [ylag ones(size(ylag))]);
halflife=-log(2)/regress_results.beta(1);

The half-life of 23 days is considerably shorter than the 115 days for
USD.CAD, so we expect a mean reversion trading strategy to work
better for this triplet.

Linear Mean-Reverting Trading on a Portfolio
In Example 2.7 we determined that the EWA-EWC-IGE portfolio formed
with the “best” eigenvector from the Johansen test has a short half-life. We
can now confidently proceed to backtest our simple linear mean-reverting
strategy on this portfolio. The idea is the same as before when we own a
number of units in USD.CAD proportional to their negative normalized deviation from its moving average (i.e., its Z-Score). Here, we also accumulate
units of the portfolio proportional to the negative Z-Score of the “unit” portfolio’s price. A unit portfolio is one with shares determined by the Johansen
eigenvector. The share price of a unit portfolio is like the share price of a

mutual fund or ETF: it is the same as its market value. When a unit portfolio
has only a long and a short position in two instruments, it is usually called a
spread. (We express this in more mathematical form in Chapter 3.)
Note that by a “linear” strategy we mean only that the number of units
invested is proportional to the Z-Score, not that the market value of our
investment is proportional.
This linear mean-reverting strategy is obviously not a practical strategy, at
least in its simplest version, as we do not know the maximum capital required

Example 2.8: Backtesting a Linear Mean-Reverting
Strategy on a Portfolio

%

Apply a simple linear mean reversion strategy to EWA-EWC% IGE

lookback=round(halflife); % setting lookback to the halflife
% found above
numUnits =-(yport-movingAvg(yport, lookback))...
./movingStd(yport, lookback); % multiples of unit
% portfolio . movingAvg and movingStd are functions from
% epchan.com/book2
positions=repmat(numUnits, [1 size(y3, 2)]).*repmat(results. ...
evec(:, 1)’, [size(y3, 1) 1]).*y3;
% results.evec(:, 1)’ is the shares allocation, while
% positions is the capital (dollar)
% allocation in each ETF.
pnl=sum(lag(positions, 1).*(y3-lag(y3, 1))./lag(y3, 1), 2);
% daily P&L of the strategy
ret=pnl./sum(abs(lag(positions, 1)), 2); % return is P&L
% divided by gross market value of portfolio

Figure 2.7 displays the cumulative returns curve of this linear meanreverting strategy for a stationary portfolio of EWA, EWC, and IGE.
(Continued )

59
THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION

The yport is a Tx1 array representing the net market value of the
“unit” portfolio calculated in the preceding code fragment. numUnits
is a Tx1 array representing the multiples of this unit portfolio we
wish to purchase. (The multiple is a negative number if we wish
to short the unit portfolio.) All other variables are as previously
calculated. The positions is a Tx3 array representing the position
(market value) of each ETF in the portfolio we have invested in.
(This code fragment is part of cointegrationTests.m.)

Example 2.8 (Continued)

FIGURE 2.7 Cumulative Returns of a Linear Trading

Strategy on EWA-EWC-IGE Stationary Portfolio

We find that APR = 12.6 percent with a Sharpe ratio of 1.4 for the
strategy.
ALGORITHMIC TRADING

60
at the outset and we cannot really enter and exit an infinitesimal number of
shares whenever the price moves by an infinitesimal amount. Despite such
impracticalities, the importance of backtesting a mean-reverting price series
with this simple linear strategy is that it shows we can extract profits without any data-snooping bias, as the strategy has no parameters to optimize.
(Remember that even the look-back is set equal to the half-life, a quantity that
depends on the properties of the price series itself, not our specific trading
strategy.) Also, as the strategy continuously enters and exits positions, it is
likely to have more statistical significance than any other trading strategies that
have more complicated and selective entry and exit rules.
■ Pros and Cons of Mean-Reverting Strategies
It is often fairly easy to construct mean-reverting strategies because we are
not limited to trading instruments that are intrinsically stationary. We can
pick and choose from a great variety of cointegrating stocks and ETFs to
create our own stationary, mean-reverting portofolio. The fact that every

61
THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION

year there are new ETFs created that may be just marginally different from
existing ones certainly helps our cause, too.
Besides the plethora of choices, there is often a good fundamental story
behind a mean-reverting pair.Why does EWA cointegrate with EWC? That’s
because both the Canadian and the Australian economies are dominated by
commodities. Why does GDX cointegrate with GLD? That’s because the
value of gold-mining companies is very much based on the value of gold.
Even when a cointegrating pair falls apart (stops cointegrating), we can often still understand the reason. For example, as we explain in Chapter 4,
the reason GDX and GLD fell apart around the early part of 2008 was high
energy prices, which caused mining gold to be abnormally expensive. We
hope that with understanding comes remedy. This availability of fundamental reasoning is in contrast to many momentum strategies whose only justification is that there are investors who are slower than we are in reacting to
the news. More bluntly, we must believe there are greater fools out there.
But those fools do eventually catch up to us, and the momentum strategy in
question may just stop working without explanation one day.
Another advantage of mean-reverting strategies is that they span a great
variety of time scales. At one extreme, market-making strategies rely on
prices that mean-revert in a matter of seconds. At the other extreme, fundamental investors invest in undervalued stocks for years and patiently wait
for their prices to revert to their “fair” value. The short end of the time scale
is particularly beneficial to traders like ourselves, since a short time scale
means a higher number of trades per year, which in turn translates to higher
statistical confidence and higher Sharpe ratio for our backtest and live trading, and ultimately higher compounded return of our strategy.
Unfortunately, it is because of the seemingly high consistency of meanreverting strategy that may lead to its eventual downfall. As Michael
Dever pointed out, this high consistency often lulls traders into overconfidence and overleverage as a result (Dever, 2011). (Think Long Term
Capital Management.) When a mean-reverting strategy suddenly breaks
down, perhaps because of a fundamental reason that is discernible only
in hindsight, it often occurs when we are trading it at maximum leverage
after an unbroken string of successes. So the rare loss is often very painful
and sometimes catastrophic. Hence, risk management for mean reverting
is particularly important, and particularly difficult since the usual stop
losses cannot be logically deployed. In Chapter 8, I discuss why this is the
case, as well as techniques for risk management that are suitable for meanreverting strategies.

KEY POINTS
• Mean reversion means that the change in price is proportional to the
difference between the mean price and the current price.
• Stationarity means that prices diffuse slower than a geometric random walk.
• The ADF test is designed to test for mean reversion.
• The Hurst exponent and Variance Ratio tests are designed to test for
stationarity.
• Half-life of mean reversion measures how quickly a price series reverts to its
mean, and is a good predictor of the profitability or Sharpe ratio of a meanreverting trading strategy when applied to this price series.
• A linear trading strategy here means the number of units or shares of a unit
portfolio we own is proportional to the negative Z-Score of the price series
of that portfolio.
• If we can combine two or more nonstationary price series to form a
stationary portfolio, these price series are called cointegrating.
• Cointegration can be measured by either CADF test or Johansen test.
• The eigenvectors generated from the Johansen test can be used as hedge
ratios to form a stationary portfolio out of the input price series, and the one
with the largest eigenvalue is the one with the shortest half-life.
ALGORITHMIC TRADING

62

CHAPTER 3

Implementing
Mean Reversion
Strategies
I

n the previous chapter, we described the statistical tests for determining
whether a price series is stationary and therefore suitable for mean reversion trading. This price series may be the market value of a single asset,
though it is rare that such stationary assets exist, or it may be the market
value of a portfolio of cointegrating assets, such as the familiar long-short
stock pair.
In practice, though, we should remember that we don’t necessarily
need true stationarity or cointegration in order to implement a successful mean reversion strategy: If we are clever, we can capture short-term
or seasonal mean reversion, and liquidate our positions before the prices go to their next equilibrium level. (Seasonal mean reversion means
that a price series will mean-revert only during specific periods of the
day or under specific conditions.) Conversely, not all stationary series
will lead to great profits—not if their half-life for mean reversion is
10 years long.
We also described a simple linear mean reversion strategy that simply “scales” into an asset in proportion to its price’s deviation from the
mean. It is not a very practical strategy due to the constant infinitesimal
rebalancing and the demand of unlimited buying power. In this chapter,
we discuss a more practical, but still simple, mean reversion strategy—

63

the Bollinger bands. We describe variations of this technique, including
the pros and cons of using multiple entry and exit levels (“scaling-in”),
and the use of the Kalman filter to estimate the hedge ratio and mean
price. Finally, we highlight the danger data errors pose to mean-reverting
strategies.
In presenting the backtests of any strategy in this book, we do not include transaction costs. We sometimes even commit a more egregious error of introducing look-ahead bias by using the same data for parameter
optimization (such as finding the best hedge ratio) and for backtest. These
are all pitfalls that we warned about in Chapter 1. The only excuse for
doing this is that it makes the presentation and source codes simpler to
understand. I urge readers to undertake the arduous task of cleaning up
such pitfalls when implementing their own backtests of these prototype
strategies.
■ Trading Pairs Using Price Spreads, Log Price

Spreads, or Ratios

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

64

In constructing a portfolio for mean reversion trading in Chapter 2, we
simply used the market value of the “unit” portfolio as the trading signal.
This market value or price is just the weighted sums of the constituent price
series, where the weights are the hedge ratios we found from linear regression or from the eigenvectors of the Johansen test:
y = h1y1 + h2 y2 + … + hn yn

(3.1)

y is, by construction, a stationary time series, and the hi’s tell us the number
of shares of each constituent stock (assuming we are trading a stock portfolio). In the case of just two stocks, this reduces to a spread familiar to many
pair traders:
y = y1 − h y2 .

(3.2)

(We inserted a minus sign in Equation 3.2 to anticipate the fact that we will
usually be long one stock and short another, so that h as defined this way will
be positive.) Suppose instead of price series, we find that the log of prices
are cointegrating, such that
log(q) = h1log( y1) + h2log( y2) + … + hnlog( yn)

(3.3)

is stationary for some set of h’s derived from either a regression fit or Johansen’s eigenvectors. How do we interpret this equation, since q (for “query”)
is just a name given to a stationary time series that may or may not be the
market value of a portfolio? To find out its properties, let’s take its first difference in time:
Δlog(q) = h1Δlog( y1) + h2Δlog( y2) + … + hnΔlog ( yn).

(3.4)

65
IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES

Remembering that Δ log (x) ≡ log (x(t)) − log (x (t − 1)) = log (x(t)/x(t − 1))
≈ Δ x/x for small changes in x, the right hand side of Equation 3.4 becomes h1Δ y1/y1 + h2 Δ y2/y2 + … + hn Δ yn/yn, which is none other than
the returns of a portfolio consisting of the n assets with weights h’s. But
unlike the hedge ratio h’s in Equation 3.1 where they referred to the
number of shares of each asset, here we can set the market value of each
asset to h. So we can interpret q as the market value of a portfolio of assets
with prices y1, y2, …, yn and with constant capital weights h1, h2, …, hn,
together with a cash component implicitly included, and this market value will form a stationary time series. Note that a cash component must
be implicitly included in the portfolio q because if the capital weights
h’s are kept constant, there is no other way that the market value of the
portfolio can vary with time. This cash does not show up in Equation 3.4
because its market value, of course, doesn’t change from t − 1 to t as a
result of market movement, but its value will change at t when the trader
rebalances the portfolio to maintain the constancy of the capital weights,
realizing some of the gains or losses, and adding to or subtracting from
the cash balance. So to keep the market value of this portfolio stationary
(but not constant!) requires a lot of work for the traders, as they need
to constantly rebalance the portfolio, which is necessitated by using the
log of prices.
The upshot of all these is that mean reversion trading using price
spreads is simpler than using log price spreads, but both can be theoretically justified if both price and log price series are cointegrating. But
what about the ratio of prices y1/y2 that many traders favor as the signal
for a pair? If we look at Equation 3.1 in the case of just two price series, we notice that if h1 = −h2, then indeed log( y1/y2) or y1/y2 is stationary. But this is a special case: We normally don’t expect the hedge
ratios to be equal in magnitude, or equal to −1 if we normalize them.
So the ratio y1/y2 does not necessarily form a stationary series. But as
one reader mentioned, using ratios may have an advantage when the
