
Flow

75

Figure 3.3 CitiFX Flows: example 2a

Figure 3.4 CitiFX Flows: example 2b

price action. From this, the CitiFX Flows team put out a recommendation to sell the dollar–
yen exchange rate. Figure 3.4 shows the more medium- to long-term ﬂow picture in the
yen. Through mid-1998, the exposure indicator showed an increasing underweight position
in the yen. From then on, the underweight was continually reduced until mid-1999 when it
ﬂipped to an overweight position. Medium-term exposure indicators are useful in that they
imply a reversion to mean, and in this case that would mean the ﬂow moving back to a
more neutral reading, which would require signiﬁcant selling of yen. Thus, combining the

@Team-FLY

76

Currency Strategy

two, we get a picture of short-term ﬂows favouring a lower dollar–yen exchange rate, but
the medium-term ﬂow picture favouring a potentially signiﬁcant rebound in favour of the
dollar.

Short-Term Emerging Market Flow Models
The academic community and ﬁnancial market participants have ﬁnally come around to the
idea that tracking capital or order ﬂow in the developed world currencies was an important thing
to do. Given the depth and liquidity of developed world markets, this fact may be surprising
to some. However, as we have attempted to show above, this is nevertheless the case.
Where it is true in the developed world markets that watching ﬂow is an important pursuit
in determining the exchange rate path, this is even more the case in the so-called emerging
markets. Here, the relationship between individual capital ﬂows and overall market liquidity
is much more in favour of individual ﬂows. Liquidity in emerging markets is by deﬁnition
substantially less than in the developed world. Thus, individual ﬂows can cause substantial
price disruption in emerging markets, whereas they might be more easily absorbed in the
developed markets. For this very reason, it is important for currency market participants who
are involved in or exposed to emerging market currencies to have a reasonably accurate idea
of the prevailing type of ﬂows going through the market. One such is the EMFX Flow model
(Robert Lustberg and Callum Henderson, 2001) created to track client ﬂows going through
the global dealing rooms of Citigroup in emerging market currencies. The type of information
that one can glean from this is the following:

r Total ﬂow — The total ﬂow indicator looks at cumulative transactions in the currency concerned against all the major base currencies (such as the Euro, dollar, yen, sterling and Swiss
franc) combined. This gives an accurate indication of the client’s base total exposure to that
currency.
r Short- and medium-term ﬂow indicators — The short-term ﬂow indicator examines ﬂow
going through a speciﬁc exchange rate over the period of one month, while the mediumterm ﬂow indicator does this over six months.
r Client-type ﬂow — It is also useful to look at what types of clients are doing what. For
instance, one can see whether or not corporate hedgers are being particularly active in a
currency or not, or whether or not there is substantial speculative ﬂow.
The use of such a ﬂow model is to realize ﬂow trends, in some cases conﬁrming through the
model what one knows anecdotally, and then make formal trading recommendations on the
back of that. Some of the major ﬁnds in 2001 from this work were the following:

r Brazilian real — Corporate hedging was the main ﬂow dynamic of the dollar–real exchange
rate for much of 2001. Examining the model’s ﬁndings we saw that the consistency of
hedging activity, which entailed buying of dollars, and the quality of the types of corporations
hedging, strongly suggested the dollar–real exchange rate would continue to appreciate.
Equally, during November–December, when these corporations were no longer rolling their
hedges it was no coincidence that the dollar–real exchange rate stabilized and retraced lower
in favour of the real.
r Mexican peso — Through the ﬁrst eight months of 2001, client ﬂows going through the
dollar–peso exchange rate were largely in favour of the peso, conﬁrming the anecdotal view

Flow

77

that foreign direct investment remained a major supportive factor for the peso, more than
offsetting the current account deﬁcit. From October on, however, local corporations as a
group turned net buyers. This did not cause an immediate appreciation in the dollar–peso
exchange rate, but did put a ﬂoor under it and caused it to appreciate over time.
r South African rand — There has been over the past few years much controversy regarding
the ﬂows going through the rand. Local market participants in South Africa have largely
blamed the offshore market for rand weakness, while the economic community has been at
a loss to explain rand weakness given the country’s “strong economic fundamentals”. From
the EMFX Flow model, we discovered that the client ﬂow of the bank had an asymmetric
relationship with the price action of the dollar–rand exchange rate. That is to say, when clients
were net sellers of dollar–rand — which was most of the time — the exchange rate remained
largely range bound. On the other hand, during rare periods when clients became net buyers
of dollars against rand, the exchange rate exploded higher. From this we can deduce a
simple explanation for the rand’s weakness according to ﬂow — locals are responsible for
rand weakness.
Such ﬁndings can help greatly, not just in terms of providing trading recommendations for the
speculative community, but in helping investors or corporations to plan their hedging strategies. Proprietary FX ﬂow models focus generally on the short-term ﬂow picture. However,
there are ﬂow reports that focus on the medium-term structural ﬂows that go through asset markets. These also reﬂect useful information. As examples of such medium-term ﬂow
analysis, we now focus on the US Treasury’s “TIC” report and the Euro-zone capital ﬂows
report.
3.1.2 Medium-Term Flow Models
The US Treasury TIC (Treasury International Centre) Report
The second way we can approach this general issue of ﬂow analysis is to look at the speciﬁc
capital ﬂows going into equity and ﬁxed income markets. Here the availability and quality
of the data vary widely. For instance, there are data reports focusing on what amounts of
money are going into mutual funds. From this, we can of course break those mutual funds
down into investment types — equity or ﬁxed income, the destination of the investment and so
forth.
Why these ﬂows move over shorter periods of time depends as much on market psychology
as economic fundamentals — but how does market psychology work? Moreover, why does a
market that is impacted by some political and economic factors at one time then completely
ignore them at another? To a large extent, the answer must lie in the very structure of the
global currency market. While many people focus — rightly or wrongly — on hedge funds as
being dominant currency market players, on any given day the vast majority of transactions
are between banks, or “interbank” in market jargon. Hence, bank spot and forward dealers are
by a long way the largest single player in the currency market. No one model has been able to
forecast exchange rates accurately, because no one model has been able to predict accurately
the sum of their intentions, behaviour or feelings towards the market. Yet, while that is the case
there are some generalizations we can make about market behaviour given its participants.
Firstly, traders have to trade in order to make a living. Hence, even in the absence of marketmoving news or economic data, these traders still have to trade. This is of course linked in
with the increasing use of technical analysis. As more people use this and more people watch

78

Currency Strategy

certain levels, so those levels become more important. Needless to say, a break of those levels,
one way or the other, thus leads to herding activity.
There is another aspect to market psychology and it is that markets, just as economies, also
trade in cycles. This is not necessarily to say that the two cycles occur over the same time period.
Obviously, this is a subject that will be covered more fully in this chapter, but to summarize
brieﬂy the longer a cycle continues, the more self-fulﬁlling it becomes. Speculative elements
are increasingly attracted by what appears to be a one-way bet. Of necessity, the type of activity
that this reﬂects is trend-following. The rule of trends is that they have not ended until they have
ended. In other words, until there is clear evidence that the trend is over, the market continues
to buy into that trend. However, such ﬁnancial market trends have impact in the real economy.
If the trend represents capital inﬂows, then it causes the current account balance to become an
increasingly large deﬁcit. Increasing fundamental deterioration is initially ignored, but after
an extended period of time two things start to happen — the size of the current account deﬁcit
becomes alarming and investors start to get nervous as a result. Real money investors start
to pare back their positions, but speculators continue to pile in. Towards the end of a trend,
volatility starts to pick up markedly, until such time as an unforeseen catalyst causes the trend
to end abruptly and violently. Indeed, the longer the trend has gone on, the more people are
in the trend, and thus the more violent the trend reversal. Yet, just as trends are self-fulﬁlling,
so are trend reversals, which in turn become new — if opposite trends; so works the market
cycle, according to technical rather than economic factors.
Cross-border ﬂows are also driven by fundamental considerations such as:

r Portfolio diversiﬁcation
r Maximizing total returns
r Speciﬁc investor risk tolerance levels
When it comes to investment, these are important incentives and guidelines. Our purpose here
is to track not incentives but actions. Thus in our ﬁrst example we look at the US Treasury’s
“TIC” report, which examines portfolio ﬂows by non-residents of the US going into the US
equity and ﬁxed income markets. As we have seen, as barriers to capital have fallen across
the world, so capital ﬂows have become increasingly important in determining exchange rates.
The usefulness of this report is in explaining and conﬁrming medium-term ﬂow trends either
in favour or against the US dollar in this case. Thus, as an example, Table 3.2 shows the TIC
report from August 2001.4
From this we can tell a lot of useful information. For instance, we can note that total foreign
investor inﬂows to the US asset markets rebounded in August to USD37.6 billion, after falling
sharply in July to USD26.8 billion from USD39.5 billion in June. There are both negatives
and positives from this. On the negative side, this USD37.6 billion was a rebound from a
14-month low in July and also well below the USD48 billion monthly average for the ﬁrst half
of the year. On the positive side, this month-on-month increase happened at a time of USD
weakness. A major positive swing in favour of US Treasuries was largely behind it, from a
total of –USD11.5 billion in July to +USD4.4 billion in August. Agencies, corporates and US
stocks all saw modest declines in net inﬂows from non-US accounts.
Looking at the regional breakdown, the largest swing in favour of Treasuries was by European
accounts, though the largest absolute buying was by Latin American/Caribbean accounts, which
are usually dominated by offshore hedge funds. For the US dollar to trend lower requires that
4

US Department of Treasury TIC Report, August 2001.

Flow

79

Table 3.2 US Treasury “TIC” (Treasury International Capital) Movement Data as of August 2001
Net foreign inﬂows into long-term US assets (USD billions)
Monthly net ﬂows

Quarterly average net ﬂows

Asset class

August

July

June

Q2-01

Q1-01

Q4-00

Treasuries
Agencies
Corporates
Total ﬁxed income
Stocks
Total US assets

4.40
11.91
12.71
29.02
8.59
37.61

−11.49
12.48
14.37
15.35
11.48
26.82

−3.45
16.91
15.56
29.02
10.44
39.46

−4.69
13.11
23.97
32.39
11.46
43.85

0.97
14.09
23.28
38.35
13.89
52.24

−8.96
15.49
17.15
23.68
12.17
35.85

Europe

Asia

Latin America/Caribbean

Asset class

August

July

August

July

August

July

Treasuries
Agencies
Corporates
Total ﬁxed income
Stocks
Total US assets

0.31
1.92
7.64
9.86
9.06
18.92

−8.22
4.60
7.31
3.68
6.70
10.39

0.58
4.83
2.72
8.12
1.44
9.57

−3.94
6.80
1.67
4.53
3.73
8.26

3.72
5.55
3.40
12.67
−3.06
9.61

1.89
1.02
5.21
8.12
0.07
8.18

inﬂows to US assets also trend lower, and as of this report those conditions had not been met.
Thus, comparing the spot price action in dollar exchange rates to the table, we see a ﬂow
conﬁrmation of what many in the market called the “surprising” resilience of the US dollar.
Subsequent TIC reports from the US Treasury conﬁrmed the US dollar strength through early
December, despite the accelerated deterioration in US economic fundamentals. The ﬂow picture
thus explained the strength of the US dollar where just using the fundamental picture did not.
The Euro-Zone Portfolio Flow Report
The Euro-zone capital ﬂows report for September 20015 shows that the Euro-zone, which
had been recording monthly capital outﬂows (combined direct and portfolio investment) from
1999 through the ﬁrst half of 2001 started to record capital inﬂows in the second half of 2001
and in September of that year saw the second highest monthly inﬂow since the establishment
of the Euro in January 1999. This was also the fourth consecutive net inﬂow. Comparing the
ﬁrst nine months of 2001 to 2000, the total net outﬂow fell to EUR51.3 billion from EUR87.5
billion, an important reason for the Euro’s more stable performance. See Figure 3.5.
Within this overall ﬂow picture, as we see in Figure 3.6, net ﬁxed income inﬂows rose
substantially to EUR16.6 billion in September, a ﬁve-fold increase from the previous month’s
small inﬂow. Indeed, for the ﬁrst time since the inception of the Euro in January 1999, the
assets side of total portfolio investment (Euro-zone-based investors) switched to net inﬂows in
September 2001.
Finally, equity ﬂows recorded a net inﬂow for the ﬁfth straight month in September rising
to more than double August’s level at EUR28.3 billion. All of this helps to support a picture
5

Euro-zone Capital Flows Report and European Central Bank, September 2001.

80

Currency Strategy

Figure 3.5 Euro-zone capital in ﬂows

of an improving ﬂow story for the Euro in the second half of 2001. This does not deﬁnitively
suggest on its own that the Euro should appreciate against its major currency counterparts. It
does appear to suggest however that the Euro should at the least be more stable — and this is
more or less what happened, excluding the speciﬁc volatility caused by the tragic events of
September 11.
The IMF Quarterly Report on Emerging Market Financing
Within the emerging markets, the International Monetary Fund produces a quarterly report
on asset market-related ﬂows, which is available on the IMF website. As an example of this,
we can take a look at the Q3, 2001 report,6 which appeared to conﬁrm that the events of
September 11 signiﬁcantly increased investor uncertainty and reduced risk tolerance at a time
when market concerns were already high about global slowing, emerging market fundamentals
and the potential for credit events in particular emerging markets. There was an across-theboard sell off of emerging market assets and at least initially an ensuing drought in new bond
issuance.
In terms of the ﬂow trends at work, the major symptoms were a broad-based sell off in
emerging market assets, thus increasing the correlation between individual market returns and a
general “ﬂight to quality” among investors within the credit spectrum. Treasuries outperformed
credit product for this reason. Some credit or spread products outperformed others, suggesting
6

IMF quarterly report on Emerging Market Financing, Q3, 2001.

@Team-FLY

Flow
20

EMU Fixed Income Inflow (Bonds & Notes) Surges

81
7

10

EUR (billions)

0

6
−10

−20

−30

55

J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O
00
01
99
EMU Portfolio investment, debt instruments, bonds & notes

Figure 3.6 Euro-zone ﬁxed income inﬂows

that the sell off was not entirely panic-driven and that some degree of differentiation was
made. Not surprisingly, ﬁnancing by the emerging markets on international capital markets
fell sharply in Q3 to issuance levels not seen since the Russian crisis in the autumn of 1998.
More speciﬁcally, bond issuance more than halved from levels seen in Q2.
The Emerging Market Financing report examined in depth two issues:

r The report examined in detail the investor selection and discrimination process within emerging ﬁxed income markets. The sharp fall in investor risk tolerance was found to be a crucial
determining factor in the parallel decline in bond issuance.
r The report suggested that, based on trends through the end of Q3, net capital ﬂows to the
emerging markets were set to turn negative for 2001 as a whole for the ﬁrst time in more
than 10 years, and then goes on to look at whether the rise in private sector capital inﬂows to
the emerging markets in the 1990s was a cyclical phenomenon or due to temporary factors,
the end of which may or may not have been signalled by the fact of negative inﬂows in
2001.
These are the kinds of issues that the IMF’s quarterly review of Emerging Market Financing
deals with. It is an excellent and exhaustive report, which shows the medium-term trends in
equity, ﬁxed income and lending ﬂows for the emerging markets. It is useful not so much for
short-term traders, but rather for corporations or institutional investors who require a detailed
medium-term ﬂow picture before making their investment decision, or alternatively require
information that will help in deciding whether or not to hedge or reduce currency exposure.

82

Currency Strategy

Table 3.3 25 delta risk reversals
EUR– USD– GBP– EUR– EUR– USD– AUD– USD– EUR– EUR– GBP– USD–
USD JPY USD JPY
GBP CHF USD CAD SEK CHF JPY PLN
1M

3M

6M

1Y

0.15
EUR
call
0.25
EUR
call
0.25
EUR
call
0.25
EUR
call

0.7
JPY
put
0.5
JPY
put
0.4
JPY
put
0.35
JPY
put

0.4
GBP
put
0.2
GBP
put
0.35
GBP
put
0.35
GBP
put

0.2
EUR
call
0.2
EUR
call
0.2
EUR
call
0.2
EUR
call

0.2
around
0.25
EUR
put
0.15
EUR
put
0.25
EUR
put

0.15
CHF
call
0.25
CHF
call
0.3
CHF
call
0.2
CHF
call

0.5
AUD
put

0.5
USD
call

0.3
EUR
call

0.7
EUR
put

0.35
GBP
put

1.8
USD
call

3.1.3 Option Flow/Sentiment Models
Risk Reversals
In addition to ﬂow indicators, there are also sentiment indicators. These do not reﬂect ﬂows
directly going through the currency market, but more indirectly by representing the market’s
bias towards exchange rates. A very useful indicator of market sentiment or “skew” is the
option risk reversal. This is the premium or discount of the implied volatility of a same delta
currency call over the put. For instance, a dollar–Polish zloty three-month risk reversal may
be 3 vols, which means that the implied volatility on the 25 delta three-month US dollar call
costs 3 vols more than the 25 delta dollar put against the Polish zloty.
Table 3.3 looks at the risk reversals for the major exchange rates and the US dollar–zloty
exchange rate. Given that it provides risk reversals across tenors, this produces in effect a risk
reversal “curve”. How do we interpret this information? Clearly, the best way of doing so is
by comparing current to historic levels. In this case, one should compare the current levels of
option risk reversals as expressed by the table results to a historic measure of risk reversals for
those same currency pairs.
Options are priced off forwards and through this option risk reversals are priced off interest
rate differentials. How do we price interest rate differentials? A key determinant for both the
level and trend of interest rates is the current account. A current account surplus results in
greatly increased liquidity, which in turn pushes interest rates lower. Equally, a current account
deﬁcit is an important factor in pushing interest rates higher. From this, we can say that term
currencies with current account surpluses usually have the risk reversal in their favour. Thus,
the dollar–Swiss franc exchange rate risk reversal should usually be in favour of Swiss franc
calls. In other words, Swiss franc calls should be more expensive than Swiss franc puts. Equally,
the same should usually be the case for dollar–yen risk reversals. If at any one time they are
not, then this may represent a proﬁtable trading or hedging opportunity.
Looking at Table 3.3, we see that Euro–dollar risk reversals are bid for Euro calls, which
should be the case given relative interest rate differentials and current accounts. However,
comparing this situation with how Euro–dollar risk reversals traded in the prior weeks before
this report, a picture emerges of the options’ market gradually reducing its bias in favour of Euro

Flow

83

calls. The risk reversal was substantially more in favour of Euro calls and has been reduced.
Thus, it is important not just to look at current risk reversal levels, but also to compare them
with where they have been in the past. Historically, the one-month dollar–yen risk reversal has
usually been around 0.4 in favour of yen calls given the interest rate differential and Japan’s
structurally high current account surplus. In 2001, Japan saw its current account surplus decline
from USD12.6 billion to USD9 billion, or from 2.5% of GDP to 1.8%. As a result, “fair value”
for the dollar–yen one-month risk reversal probably fell to around 0.3 for yen calls. Note
however that in the table the entire risk reversal curve is bid for yen puts. Hence, the options
market seems temporarily out of line and may at some stage revert to mean — through yen
appreciation and the risk reversal swinging back in favour of the yen. This is the kind of
information that one can gain from the risk reversal table.

3.2 SPECULATIVE AND NON-SPECULATIVE FLOWS
While these ﬂow and sentiment models vary, both in terms of the time span they focus on and the
kind of information they look at, the basic premise behind them is the same — exchange rates
are determined by the supply and demand for currencies, in other words by “order ﬂow”. Over
time, economic fundamentals will dictate the order ﬂow and therefore the exchange rate itself.
However, currency market practitioners do not necessarily have that long to wait. Therefore,
it is necessary to study order ﬂow separately and independently from the fundamentals, and
moreover it is necessary to study the drivers of that order ﬂow. That is what we have attempted
here in this chapter.
The key distinction between a speculative and a non-speculative capital ﬂow, keeping to the
deﬁnition that we are using for speculation — which is that speculation involves the buying
and selling of currencies with no underlying attached asset — is the exchange rate itself. For
a speculator, the exchange rate is the primary incentive for investing, using this deﬁnition.
However, for an asset manager, the exchange rate is not the primary consideration, which is
the total return available in the local markets. As the barriers to capital have broken down
and as currencies have been de-pegged and allowed to ﬂoat freely, so both speculative and
non-speculative capital ﬂows have grown exponentially. There remains a dynamic tension
between the two, allowing one or other to be more important in terms of total ﬂows at any one
time.
Generalizing somewhat, one can say that speculative ﬂows dominate short-term exchange
rate moves, while non-speculative ﬂows that are attracted by long-term fundamental shifts in
the economy dominate long-term exchange rate moves. This is a nice, cosy deﬁnition of the
dynamics affecting exchange rates, however there is a problem. Financial bubbles are seen
as essentially speculative creations, yet they are generated not by short-term exchange rate or
asset market moves but by long-term and increasingly self-perpetuating shifts. The essential
lesson behind this is that it is in fact exceptionally difﬁcult to differentiate the speculative from
the non-speculative. It is easier to focus on the incentive rather than the result. The primary
incentive behind speculative ﬂow, using our deﬁnition of speculation, is that it is mainly driven
by the exchange rate not the interest rate. If it were the latter, neither the Japanese yen nor
the Swiss franc would ever have risen. Yet, since the 1971–1973 break-up of the Bretton
Woods exchange rate system, both have trended higher against the US dollar (and most other
currencies). Expectations about the exchange rate are the primary motive and incentive behind
speculative capital ﬂow. This is a lesson that many economists have yet to learn, largely because
many of their theoretical ideas of how exchange rates should behave do not work in practice.
