
r The reversal began as a reversal from an overshoot of a trend channel line from
the old trend.

r It is reversing at a significant swing high or low area (e.g., breaks above a strong
prior swing high and reverses down).

r The low 1 and low 2 pullbacks have strong bear reversal bars for signal bars.
r It has trending “anything”: closes, highs, lows, or bodies.
r The pullbacks are small and sideways.
r There were prior breaks of earlier bull trend lines (this isn’t the first sign of
bearish strength).

r The pullback to test the bull high lacks momentum, as evidenced by it having
many overlapping bars with many being bear trend bars.

r The pullback that tests the bull high fails at the moving average or the old bull
trend line.

r The breakout reverses many recent closes and lows. For example, when there
is a bull channel and a large bear bar forms, this breakout bar has a low and
close that are below the lows and closes of five or even 20 or more bars. A large
number of bars reversed by the close of the bear bar is a stronger sign than a
similar number of bars reversed by only its low.

BAR COUNTING BASICS: HIGH 1, HIGH 2,
LOW 1, LOW 2
A reliable sign that a pullback in a bull trend or in a trading range has ended is when
the current bar’s high extends at least one tick above the high of the prior bar. This
leads to a useful concept of counting the number of times that this occurs, which
is called bar counting. In a sideways or downward move in a bull trend or a trading
range, the first bar whose high is above the high of the prior bar is a high 1, and
this ends the first leg of the sideways or down move, although this leg may become

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

34

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

a small leg in a larger pullback. If the market does not turn into a bull swing and
instead continues sideways or down, label the next occurrence of a bar with a high
above the high of the prior bar as a high 2, ending the second leg.
A high 2 in a bull trend and a low 2 in a bear trend are often referred to as ABC
corrections where the first leg is the A, the change in direction that forms the high 1
or low 1 entry is the B, and the final leg of the pullback is the C. The breakout from
the C is a high 2 entry bar in a bull ABC correction and a low 2 entry bar in a bear
ABC correction.
If the bull pullback ends after a third leg, the buy setup is a high 3 and is usually
a type of wedge bull flag. When a bear rally ends in a third leg, it is a low 3 sell setup
and usually a wedge bear flag.
Some bull pullbacks can grow further and form a high 4. When a high 4 forms,
it sometimes begins with a high 2 and this high 2 fails to go very far. It is instead
followed by another two legs down and a second high 2, and the entire move is
simply a high 2 in a higher time frame. At other times, the high 4 is a small spike
and channel bear trend where the first or second push down is a bear spike and
the next pushes down are in a bear channel. If the high 4 fails to resume the trend
and the market falls below its low, it is likely that the market is no longer forming
a pullback in a bull trend and instead is in a bear swing. Wait for more price action
to unfold before placing a trade.
When a bear trend or a sideways market is correcting sideways or up, the first
bar with a low below the low of the prior bar is a low 1, ending the first leg of the
correction, which can be as brief as that single bar. Subsequent occurrences are
called the low 2, low 3, and low 4 entries. If the low 4 fails (a bar extends above
the high of the low 4 signal bar after the low 4 short is triggered), the price action
indicates that the bears have lost control and either the market will become twosided, with bulls and bears alternating control, or the bulls will gain control. In any
case, the bears can best demonstrate that they have regained control by breaking a
bull trend line with strong momentum.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

PART I

Price Action

he most useful definition of price action for a trader is also the simplest: it is
any change in price on any type of chart or time frame. The smallest unit of
change is the tick, which has a different value for each market. Incidentally,
a tick has two meanings. It is the smallest unit of change in price that a market can
make, which for most stocks is a penny. It is also every trade that takes place during
the day, so each entry on a time and sales table is a tick, even if it is at the same
price as the prior trade. Every time the price changes, that change is an example of
price action. There is no universally accepted definition of price action, and since
you always need to try to be aware of even the seemingly least significant piece of
information that the market is offering, you must have a very broad definition. You
cannot dismiss anything, because very often something that initially appears minor
leads to a great trade.
The definition alone does not tell you anything about placing a trade, because
every bar is a potential signal both for a short and for a long trade. There are traders
out there who will be looking to short the next tick because they believe that the
market won’t go one tick higher and others who will buy it believing that the market
will likely not go one tick lower. They might be looking at the same chart and one
trader sees a bullish pattern and the other thinks there is a bearish pattern that is
stronger. They might be relying on fundamental data or any of a thousand other
reasons for their opinions. One side will be right and the other will be wrong. If the
buyers are wrong and the market goes one tick lower and then another and then
another, they will begin to entertain the prospect that their belief is wrong. At some
point, they will have to sell their positions at a loss, making them new sellers and

T

35

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

36

PRICE ACTION

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

no longer buyers, and this will drive the market down further. Sellers will continue
to enter the market either as new shorts or as longs forced to liquidate until some
point when more buyers start coming in. These buyers will be a combination of new
buyers, profit-taking shorts, and new shorts who now have a loss and will have to
buy to cover their positions. The market will continue up until the process reverses
once again.
For traders, the fundamental issue that confronts them repeatedly throughout
the day is the decision about whether the market is trending or not trending. Even
if they are looking at a single bar, they are deciding if the market is trending or not
trending during that bar. Is that bar a trend bar, opening near one end and closing
near the other, or is it a trading range bar with a small body and one or two large
tails? If they are looking at a collection of bars, they are trying to decide if the
market is trending or it is in a trading range. For example, if it is trending up, they
will look to buy high or low, even on a breakout of the top of the move, whereas if it
is in a trading range, they are only looking to buy at the bottom of the range and they
want to sell instead of buy at the top of the range. If it is in any traditional pattern
like a triangle or a head and shoulders top or bottom, it is in a trading range. Calling
it one of those terms is not helpful because all that matters is whether the market is
trending, and not whether they can spot some common pattern and give it a label.
Their goal is to make money, and the single most important piece of information
that they can discern is whether the market is trending. If it is trending, they assume
that the trend will continue and they will look to enter in the direction of the trend
(with trend). If it is not trending, they will look to enter in the opposite direction
of the most recent move (fade or countertrend). A trend can be as short as a single
bar (on a smaller time frame, there can be a strong trend contained within that bar)
or, on a 5 minute chart, it can last a day or more. How do they make this decision?
They do so by reading the price action on the chart in front of them.
It is important to understand that most of the time there is a 50 percent chance
that the next tick will be up and a 50 percent chance that it will be down. In fact,
during most of the trading day, you can expect that the market has a 50–50 chance
of moving up X points before falling X points. The odds drift to maybe 60–40 at
times during the day, and these brief times offer good trading opportunities. However, the market then quickly gets back to uncertainty and a 50–50 market where
the bulls and bears are mostly in balance.
With so many traders trading and using countless approaches, the market is
very efficient. For example, if you bought at the market at any point during the day
without even looking at a chart, and placed a profit target 10 ticks higher and a
one cancels the other (OCO) protective stop 10 ticks lower, you have a 50 percent
chance of making a profit. If instead you sold originally and again used a 10-tick
stop and profit target, you would still have a 50–50 chance of making 10 ticks on
your short before losing 10 ticks on your protective stop. The odds are the same if

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

37

you picked 20 or 30 ticks or any value for X. There are obvious exceptions, like if
you pick a very large value for X, but if your value for X is reasonable based on the
recent price action, the rule is fairly accurate.
During the spike phase of a strong trend, the probability may be 70 percent
or more that the trend will continue over the next few bars, but this happens only
briefly and rarely more than once or twice a day. In general, as a strong breakout
trend move is forming, if you choose a value for X that is less than the height of the
current breakout, the probability is 60 percent or better that you will be able to exit
with X ticks’ profit before a protective stop X ticks away is hit. So if a bull breakout
has gone four points (16 ticks) so far and is very strong and you pick a value of
eight for X, then you probably have about a 60 percent chance of being able to exit
with eight ticks’ profit before an eight-tick protective stop is hit.
Because of the inherent high level of uncertainty, I often use words like usually,
likely, and probably to describe what I think will follow in at least 60 percent of
cases. This can be frustrating to readers, but if you are going to make a living as
a trader, this is as good as it gets. Nothing is ever close to certain, and you are
always operating in a gray fog. The best trades that you will ever see will always
be described by uncertain words like these because they are the most accurate
descriptions of the reality that traders face.
Everything is relative and everything can change to the exact opposite in an
instant, even without any movement in price. It might be that you suddenly see a
trend line seven ticks above the high of the current bar and instead of looking to
short, you now are looking to buy for a test of the trend line. Trading through the
rearview mirror is a sure way to lose money. You have to keep looking ahead, not
worrying about the mistakes you just made. They have absolutely no bearing on the
next tick, so you must ignore them and just keep reassessing the price action and
not your profit and loss (P&L) on the day.
Each tick changes the price action of every time frame chart, from a tick chart
or 1 minute chart through a monthly chart, and on all other types of charts, whether
the chart is based on time, volume, the number of ticks, point and figure, or anything else. Obviously, a single tick move is usually meaningless on a monthly chart
(unless, for example, it is a one-tick breakout of some chart point that immediately
reverses), but it becomes increasingly more useful on smaller time frame charts.
This is obviously true because if the average bar on a 1 minute Emini chart is three
ticks tall, then a one-tick move is 33 percent of the size of the average bar, and that
can represent a significant move.
The most useful aspect of price action is what happens after the market moves
beyond (breaks out beyond) prior bars or trend lines on the chart. For example, if
the market goes above a significant prior high and each subsequent bar forms a low
that is above the prior bar’s low and a high that is above the prior bar’s high, then
this price action indicates that the market will likely be higher on some subsequent

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

38

PRICE ACTION

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

bar, even if it pulls back for a few bars in the near term. However, if the market
breaks out to the upside and then the next bar is a small inside bar (its high is not
higher than that of the large breakout bar) and then the following bar has a low
that is below this small bar, the odds of a failed breakout and a reversal back down
increase considerably.
Small patterns evolve into larger patterns that can lead to trades in the same or
opposite direction. For example, it is common for the market to break out of a small
flag to reach a scalper’s profit and then pull back, and the pattern then evolves into
a larger flag. This larger flag might also break out in the same direction, but it might
instead break out in the opposite direction. Also, a pattern often can be seen to be
several different things at the same time. For example, a small lower high might
be the second lower high of a larger triangle, and a second right shoulder of an
even larger head and shoulders top. The name that you apply is irrelevant since the
direction of the subsequent move will be the same if you read the bars correctly. In
trading ranges, it is common to see opposite patterns setting up at the same time,
like a small bear flag and a larger bull flag. It does not matter which pattern you
trade or what name you use to describe it. All that matters is your read of the price
action, and if you read well, you will trade well. You will take the setup that makes
the most sense, and if you are not fairly certain, you will wait until you are.
Over time, fundamentals control the price of a stock, and that price is set by
institutional traders, who are by far the biggest volume players among the traders
who are trading for the long term; high-frequency trading (HFT) firms trade larger
volume but are intraday scalpers and probably do not significantly affect the direction on the daily charts. Price action is the movement that takes place along the
way as institutions probe for value. The high of every bar on every time frame is
at some resistance level; the low of every bar is at support; and the close is where
it is and not one tick higher or lower, because computers put it there for a reason. The support and resistance may not be obvious, but since computers control
everything and they use logic, everything has to make sense, even if it is often difficult to understand. Short-term computer algorithms and the news determine the
path and speed, but the fundamentals determine the destination, and an increasing
amount of the fundamental analysis is being done by computers as well. When the
institutions feel that the price is too high, they will exit or short, and when they
feel it is too low (a good value), they will buy. Although conspiracy theorists will
never believe it, institutions do not have secret meetings to vote on what the price
should be in an attempt to steal money from unsuspecting, well-intentioned individual traders. Their voting is essentially independent and secret and comes in the
form of their buying and selling, but the results are displayed on price charts. They
can never hide what they are doing. For example, if enough of them are buying,
you will see the market going up, and you should look for ways to get long. In the
short run, an institution can manipulate the price of a stock, especially if it is thinly

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

39

traded. However, institutions would make much less money doing that compared
to what they could make in other forms of trading, and they don’t want to waste
their time on small profits. This makes the concern of manipulation of negligible
importance, especially in stocks and markets where huge volume is traded, like the
Eminis, major stocks, debt instruments, and currencies.
Each institution is operating independently of the others, and none knows what
any other is doing. In fact, large institutions have many traders competing against
one another; often they are on different sides of a trade without realizing it, and they
don’t care. Each trader is following his own system and is not interested in what
some guy on the ninth floor is doing. Also, every move on the chart is a composite based on the total dollars traded; each trader is motivated by different factors,
and there are traders trading on every time frame. Many traders are not even using
charts and instead are trading off fundamentals. When I say that the market does
something for a reason, it never does something for only one reason. Whatever reason I am giving is just one of the countless reasons behind the move, and I point
to that one reason to give some insight into what some of the major traders are
doing. For example, if the market gaps up a little on the open, falls quickly to the
moving average, and then rallies for the rest of the day, I might say that the institutions wanted to buy lower and were on the sidelines until the market fell to an area
of support and then they believed it was likely not to go lower. At that point, they
bought heavily. In fact, that might be the logic used by some institutional traders,
but others will have countless other reasons for buying at that price level and many
of those reasons will have nothing to do with the chart in front of you.
When I look at a chart, I am constantly thinking about the bullish case and the
bearish case with every tick, every bar, and every swing. During most of the day,
the chance of making a certain number of ticks on a trade is just about the same as
the chance of losing the same number. This is because the market is always searching for value and balance and spends most of the day with both bulls and bears
feeling comfortable taking positions. Sometimes the odds might be 60–40 in favor of
one direction, and in very strong trends the odds can briefly be 80–20 or even higher,
but after most ticks during the day, the odds are about 50–50 and uncertainty, value,
and balance prevail. Alan Greenspan said that as Fed chairman he was right about
70 percent of the time. This is very revealing because he had so much influence
over whether he was right, yet he could only get his winning percentage up to 70.
If you make money on 70 percent of your trades where you can never trade large
enough volume to increase your chances of success, you are doing extremely well.
Whenever a pundit on television says with certainty that the market is going up
and then castigates another panelist with an ad hominem attack, you know that the
person is a fool. His arrogance indicates that he believes that his ability to predict
is at least 90 percent, but if that were true, he would be so rich that he would not
bother being on television. Because most scalps are only about 60 percent certain,

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

40

PRICE ACTION

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

that other 40 percent possibility warrants a lot of respect. You should always have
a plan in case the opposite happens, since it will happen often. Usually, it is better
to get out, but sometimes it is better to reverse. It is always most important to be
aware that the exact opposite of what you believe will happen in about 40 percent
of your trades. It is worth noting that some traders are so good at reading charts
and placing and managing trades that they can win as much as 90 percent of the
time, but those traders are rare.
Television analysts always have impressive titles, make very convincing arguments, look impressive, sound professorial, and appear to be dedicating their lives
to helping you. However, it is all a sham and you should never forget that it is just
television. The purpose of television is to make money for the corporations that
own the shows and the networks. The shareholders of those companies are not
concerned at all about whether you make money from trade recommendations on
the shows. The networks choose analysts based on ratings. They want people who
will attract viewers so that they can sell advertising. They invariably choose charismatic people who look so sincere and concerned about your financial well-being
that you feel compelled to watch and trust them. And they might be sincere, but
that does not mean that they can help you. In fact, they can only hurt you by misleading you into believing that they can solve your financial problems and alleviate
the stress that you are feeling as you try to care for your family. They are selling
false hope and it is for their benefit, not yours. Remember, no one ever got rich
from watching television.
Many television analysts make trade recommendations based on their fundamental analysis, and then describe the trade in technical terms. This is particularly
true of forex traders. They will isolate an event, like an upcoming central bank
meeting for some country, predict what the outcome will be, and recommend a
trade based on that expected outcome. When they describe their trade, they will
invariably make it clear that the trade is entirely technical and has nothing to do
with the fundamentals. For example, if the EUR/USD is in a bull trend, they will
invariably conclude that the meeting will make the Euro stronger against the dollar and recommend buying a pullback, placing a protective stop below the most
recent swing low, and going for a profit target that is about twice as large as the
stop. No one needs to know anything about that meeting to place that trade. They
are simply recommending buying a pullback in a bull trend, and the trade has nothing to do with their analysis or the upcoming meeting. The people who actually
influence the direction of the market because of their huge volume, like governments and banks, know far more about the upcoming meeting and the effect any
announcement might have, and that is already reflected in the price. Also, these
institutions are concerned about many variables that have nothing to do with the
meeting. These television pundits are simply trying to impress listeners with their
tremendous intellectual capacity to analyze the fundamentals. They want to see
