
Part VI: The Part of Tens ........................................... 335
Chapter 21: Ten (Or More) Huge Trading Mistakes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .337
Fishing for Bottoms ..................................................................................... 337
Timing the Top............................................................................................. 338
Trading Against the Dominant Trend ....................................................... 338
Winging It ...................................................................................................... 339
Taking Trading Personally ......................................................................... 339
Falling In Love .............................................................................................. 340

xv

xvi

Trading For Dummies, 2nd Edition
Using After-Hours Market Orders .............................................................. 340
Chasing a Runaway Trend .......................................................................... 340
Averaging Down ........................................................................................... 341
Ignoring Your Stops..................................................................................... 341
Diversifying Badly........................................................................................ 342
Enduring Large Losses ................................................................................ 342

Chapter 22: Top Ten Trading Survival Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .343
Build Your Trading Tool Chest .................................................................. 343
Use Both Technical and Fundamental Analyses ..................................... 344
Choose and Use Your Favorite Tools Wisely ........................................... 345
Count on the Averages to Make Your Moves........................................... 345
Develop and Manage Your Trading System ............................................. 346
Know Your Costs ......................................................................................... 346
Know When to Hold ’Em and When to Fold ’Em...................................... 347
Watch for Signals, Don’t Anticipate Them ............................................... 347
Buy on Strength, Sell on Weakness ........................................................... 348
Keep a Trading Journal and Review It Often ............................................ 348

Index ....................................................................... 349

Introduction

T

rading used to be the purview of institutional and corporate entities that
had direct access to closed securities trading systems. Recent technical
advances have leveled the playing field, making securities trading much
more accessible to individuals. After the stock market crash of 2000, when
many lost large sums of money because professional advisors or mutual fund
managers didn’t protect their portfolio principal, investors chose one of two
options — getting out of the market altogether and seeking safety or finding
out more about how to manage their own portfolios. Many who came back
into the market ran from it again in late 2008 when the market saw its worst
year since the Great Depression.
The concept of buying and holding forever died after that 2000 stock crash; it
saw some revival from 2004 to 2007, but then suffered another death in 2008.
People are now looking for new ways to invest and trade. While investors still
practice careful portfolio balancing using a buy and hold strategy, they look
much more critically at what they are holding and are more likely to change
their holdings now than they were before the crash. Others have gotten out
of the stock market completely.
Still others have moved on to the world of trading. Many kinds of traders ply
their skills in the markets. The ones who like to take on the most risk and
want to trade as a full-time business look to day trading. They never hold
a position in a security overnight. Swing traders hold their positions a bit
longer, sometimes for a few days or even a few weeks.
But we’re not focusing on the riskier types of trading in this book; instead,
we’re focusing on position trading, which involves executing trades in and
out of positions and holding positions for a few weeks or months and maybe
even a year or more, depending on trends that are evident in the economy,
the marketplace, and ultimately individual stocks.

About This Book
Many people have misconceptions about trading and its risks. Most people
think of the riskiest type of trading — day trading — whenever they hear
the word trader. We’re definitely not trying to show you how to day trade.
Instead, we want to introduce you to the world of position trading, which is
much safer, less risky, and yet a great way to build a significant portfolio.

2

Trading For Dummies, 2nd Edition
Don’t get the wrong idea; trading in securities always carries risks. You
should never trade with money that you can’t risk losing. That means trading
with your children’s education savings isn’t a good idea. If you want to trade,
set aside a portion of your savings that isn’t earmarked for any specific use
and that you believe you can put at risk without ruining your lifestyle.
Obviously, we plan to show you ways to minimize risk, but we can’t promise
that you won’t take a loss. Even the most experienced traders, the ones who
put together the best trading systems, don’t have a crystal ball and periodically
get hit by a market shock and accompanying loss. By using the basics of
fundamental and technical analyses, we show you how to minimize your risk,
how to recognize when the market is ripe for a trade, when specific sectors
in the market are the right places to be, how to figure out which phases
economic and market cycles are in, and how to make the best use of all that
knowledge.

Foolish Assumptions
We’ve made a number of assumptions about your basic knowledge and
stock-trading abilities. We assume that you’re not completely new to the
world of investing in stocks and that you’re familiar with the stock market
and its basic language. Although we review many key terms and phrases as
we explore the basics of trading, if everything you read sounds totally new
to you, you probably need to read a basic book on investing in stocks before
trying to move on to the more technical world of trading.
We also assume that you know how to operate a computer and use the
Internet. If you don’t have high-speed access to the Internet now, be sure you
do have it before trying to trade. Many of the resources we recommend in
this book are available online, but you’ll need high-speed access to be able to
work with many of these valuable tools.

How the Book Is Organized
We’ve broken this book down into six logical parts. Well, we tried anyway.
The first focuses on tools, and then we explore the basics of fundamental
analysis right before delving into technical analysis. After getting the basics
out of the way, we discuss how you can use your newly discovered tools to
develop and begin building your own strategies and trading system. Just in
case you want to move on to riskier types of trading, we include some basic
information about day trading, swing trading, and trading derivatives and
foreign currency. That said, we highly recommend that you seek additional
training before trying any of the riskier forms of trading.

Introduction

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader:
Gathering Your Tools
Trading is a business, and just like any other business, you need to put
together a good set of tools to be successful. In Part I, we talk about the
basics of trading, introduce the markets and the exchanges, discuss various
alternatives for finding a broker and setting up your brokerage account, and
describe the minimum computer hardware and software necessities you
need to succeed as a trader. We also discuss your Internet needs and point
you to some good basic resources on the Internet that can help get you
started.

Part II: Reading the Fundamentals:
Fundamental Analysis
Many traders don’t use fundamental analysis. They believe technical analysis
is the only thing you need to understand. We don’t agree. You can gather
plenty of valuable information about the economy, markets, sectors, and
individual stocks that can help you excel as a trader. We start you out with
the economy, the basics of the business cycle, sector rotation, and various
economic indicators, because they can help you make your calls. Next we
show you how to delve into financial statements to find the crucial information
you need to pick the companies whose stocks you want to trade. Finally, we
talk about analysts and what information you can get and use from them and
what you shouldn’t use. We also explain how you can listen in on analysts’
calls to get the most current information about a company and how executives
perceive their company numbers.

Part III: Reading the Charts:
Technical Analysis
You can’t even begin to think about trading if you don’t understand technical
analysis and how to build and read charts so you can pick entry and exit
points when buying and selling stocks. We take you step by step through
the process of building a chart, and we describe how to identify trends and
distinguish between transitions from one trend to another. In this part, you
find out how to recognize bull and bear patterns and how to differentiate
between a stock that is range bound and one that is trending. We also
introduce you to some of our favorite tools and give you several examples of
how to use them.

3

4

Trading For Dummies, 2nd Edition

Part IV: Developing Strategies for
When to Buy and Sell Stocks
After finding out how to use the tools of fundamental and technical analyses,
you’re ready to develop strategies for your own trading. First you need to
explore good money discipline to avoid taking major losses and be around
to trade for another day. You also need to determine when to stay in a
position and when to trade out of it. You certainly want to take your profits
at the right time, but you also want to avoid standing idly by as a profit turns
into a loss. Next we talk about how you can gather key information through
fundamental analysis and then add the results of your technical analysis to
build an optimum trading strategy. And we talk about the mechanics of
trading before finally exploring how you can build your own trading system.

Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
You may want to try the riskier forms of trading, such as swing trading, day
trading, or trading in derivatives and foreign currency. We definitely won’t
be sharing any strategies for actually participating in these types of trading,
but we will introduce you to the basics and warn you about what you need to
become familiar with before entering these wilder forms of trading. Be careful
out there and don’t get caught up in any of the many frauds and scams that
are common with these types of trading.

Part VI: The Part of Tens
The final part of the book is a hallmark of the For Dummies series — the Part
of Tens. In it, we highlight the top ten huge trading mistakes and ways you
can avoid them, and we review the top ten basics you’ll need to remember
for surviving in the world of trading.

Introduction

Icons Used in This Book
For Dummies books use little pictures, called icons, to flag certain chunks
of text. Here’s what they actually mean:
Watch for these little flags to get ideas on how to improve your trading skills
or where to find other useful resources.

If there is something that is particularly important for you to remember, we
mark it with this icon.
The trading world is wrought with many dangers and perils. A minor mistake
can cost you a bunch of money, so we use this icon to point out particularly
perilous areas.

When you see this icon, we’re discussing higher-end, more technical material
for the experienced trader.

Where to Go from Here
You’re ready to enter the exciting world of trading. You can start anywhere
in the book. Each of the chapters is self-contained. But, if you’re totally new
to trading, starting with Chapter 1 is the best way to understand the basics.
If you already know the basics, understand everything about the various
markets and exchanges that you care to know, have a broker picked out, and
have all the tools you’ll need, you may want to start with fundamental analysis in Part II. Remember, though, to have fun and enjoy your trip through the
exciting world of trading.

5

6

Trading For Dummies, 2nd Edition

Part I

So You Want to Be a
Trader: Gathering
Your Tools

W

In this part . . .

ant to discover how you can be a successful trader
and why you should want to get involved in trading?
That’s what you get in Part I. You’ll explore the nuances of
the various markets and trading exchanges on which you
place your trades and find out about the brokers and the
types of brokerage houses frequently used by traders. In
addition, we describe what computer hardware and
software and Internet access you’ll need and provide you
with several useful Internet resources to get you started.

Chapter 1

The Ups and Downs
of Trading Stocks
In This Chapter
▶ Making sense of trading
▶ Exploring trading types
▶ Gathering your trading tools
▶ Discovering keys to success

M

aking lots of money is the obvious goal of most people who decide to
enter the world of trading. How successful you become as a trader
depends on how well you use the tools, gather the needed information, and
interpret what you’ve got. You need to develop the discipline to apply all that
you know about trading toward developing a winning trading strategy.
Discovering how to avoid getting caught up in the emotional aspects of
trading — the highs of a win and the lows of a loss — is key to developing a
profitable trading style. Trading is a business and needs to be approached
with the same logic you’d apply in your approach to any other business
decision. Setting goals, researching your options, planning and implementing
your strategies, and assessing your success are just as important for trading
as they are for any other business venture.
In this book, we help you traverse these hurdles, and at the same time, we
introduce you to the world of trading. In this chapter, we give you an overview
of trading and an introduction to the tools you need, the research skills you
must use, and the basics of developing all this information into a successful
trading strategy.

10

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools

Trading versus Investing
First, we need to discuss how trading differs from investing. Investors buy
stocks and hold them for a long time — many times too long, riding a stock
all the way down and possibly even buying more along the way. Traders, on
the other hand, hold stocks for as little as a few minutes or as long as several
months, and sometimes possibly even a year or more. The specific amount of
time depends on the type of trader you want to become.
Investors want to carefully balance an investment portfolio between growth
stocks, value stocks, domestic stocks, and foreign stocks, along with long-,
short-, and intermediate-term bonds. A well-balanced portfolio generally
offers the investor a steady return of between 5 percent and 12 percent,
depending on the type of investments and amount of risk he or she is willing
to take.
For investors, an aggressive portfolio with a mix of 80 percent invested in
stocks and 20 percent in bonds, if well balanced, can average as high as a
12 percent annual return during a 20-year period; however, in some years,
the portfolio will be down, and in others, it will go through periods of high
growth. The opposite, a conservative portfolio with 20 percent invested in
stocks and 80 percent in bonds, is likely to provide a yield on the lower end
of the spectrum, closer to 5 percent. The volatility and risk associated with
the latter portfolio, however, would be considerably less. Investors who have
10 or more years before they need to use their investment money tend to
put together more aggressive portfolios, but those who need to live off the
money tend to put together less aggressive portfolios that give them regular
cash flows, which is what you get from a portfolio invested mostly in bonds.
As a trader, you look for the best position for your money and then set a
goal of exceeding what an investor can otherwise expect from an aggressive
portfolio. During certain times within the market cycle, your best option may
be to sit on the sidelines and not even be active in the market. In this book, we
show you how to read the signals to decide when you need to be in the
market, and how to find the best sectors in which to play the market and the
best stocks within those sectors.

Why Trade?
Improving your potential profit from stock transactions is obviously the key
reason most people decide to trade. People who want to grow their portfolios
rather than merely maintain them hope that the way they invest in them

Chapter 1: The Ups and Downs of Trading Stocks
does better than the market averages. Regardless of whether traders invest
through mutual funds or stocks, they hope the portfolio of securities they
select gives them superior returns — and they’re willing to work at it.
People who decide to trade make a conscious decision to take a more active
role in increasing their profit potential. Rather than just riding the market up
and down, they search for opportunities to find the best times and places to
be in the market based on economic conditions and market cycles.
Traders who successfully watched the technical signals before the stock
crash of 2000 either shorted stocks or moved into cash positions before
stocks tumbled and then carefully jumped back in as they saw opportunities
for profits. Some position traders simply stayed on the sidelines, waiting for
the right time to jump back in. Even though they were waiting, they also
carefully researched their opportunities, selected stocks for their watch lists,
and then let technical signals from the charts they kept tell them when to get
in or out of a position.

Successful Trading Characteristics
To succeed at trading, you have to be hard on yourself and, more than likely,
work against your natural tendencies, fighting the urge to prove yourself
right and accepting the fact that you’re going to make mistakes. As a trader,
you must develop separate strategies for when you want to make a trade
to enter a position and for when you want to make a trade and exit that
position, all the while not allowing emotional considerations to affect the
decisions you make on the basis of the successful trading strategy you’ve
designed.
You want to manage your money, but in doing so, you don’t have to prove
whether your particular buying or selling decision was right or wrong. Setting
up stop-loss points for every position you establish and adhering to them is
the right course of action, even though you may later have to admit that you
were wrong. Your portfolio will survive, and you can always reenter a position
whenever trends indicate the time is right again.
You need to make stock trends your master, ignoring any emotional ties that
you have to any stocks. Although you may, indeed, miss the lowest entry
price or the highest exit price, you nevertheless will be able to sleep at night,
knowing that your money is safe and your trading business is alive and well.
Traders find out how to ride a trend and when to get off the train before it
jumps the tracks and heads toward monetary disaster. Enjoy the ride, but
know which stop you’re getting off at so you don’t turn profits into losses.

11

12

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools

Tools of the Trade
The first step you need to take in becoming a trader is gathering all the
right tools so you can open and operate your business successfully. Your
computer needs to meet the hardware requirements and other computer
specifics we describe in Chapter 4, including processor speed, memory
storage, and screen size. You may even want more than one screen,
depending on your trading style. High-speed Internet access is a must;
otherwise, you may as well never open up shop.
We also introduce you to the various types of software in Chapter 4, showing
you what can help your trading business ride the wave to success. Traders’
charting favorites such as Metastock and Trade Station are evaluated along
with Internet-based charting and data-feed services. We also talk about the
various trading platforms that are available and how to work with brokers.
After you have all the hardware and software in place, you need to hone your
analytical skills. Many traders advocate using only technical analysis, but we
show you how using both technical and fundamental analyses can help you
excel as a trader.

Taking Time to Trade More
than Just Stocks
The ways traders trade are varied. Some are day traders, while others are
swing traders and position traders. Although many of the tools they use are
the same or similar, each variety of trader works within differing time frames
to reach goals that are specific to the type of trades they’re making.

Position trading
Position traders use technical analysis to find the most promising stock trends
and enter and exit positions in the market based on those trends. They can
hold positions for just a few days, a few months, or possibly as long as a year
or more. Position trading is the type of trading that we discuss the most in
this book. After introducing you to the stock markets, the types of brokers
and market-makers with whom you’ll be dealing, and the tools you need, we
discuss the basics of fundamental analysis and technical analysis to help you
become a better position trader.

Chapter 1: The Ups and Downs of Trading Stocks

Weathering a bear market
Housing stocks crumbled in the housing crunch.
Financials were crushed in the credit crisis.
We can’t claim any special foresight or knowledge to know when a stock is about to take a
big plunge or a company is going to be taken
over by the Feds. We don’t have a crystal ball.
But we are able to keep most of our money safe
from the ravages of a down market. By using
strategies that we discuss throughout this book,
we can exit positions before giving back most of
our accumulated profits — while many others
unfortunately do just that.
An impending pullback is not illuminated with
flashing beacons. There is no instant indicator
telling us that it is time to sell everything.
Instead, we close individual positions as each
stock’s technical conditions deteriorate. The
tools we describe in this book enable us to
