whether the emphasis is on adding alpha or relative return. Either the portfolio manager or a
professional currency overlay manager will “trade” the currency around a selected currency
hedging benchmark for the explicit purpose of adding alpha. In most cases, this alpha is measured against a 100% unhedged position, although it could theoretically be measured against
the return of the currency hedging benchmark. With active currency management, the emphasis
should be on ﬂexibility, both in terms of the availability of ﬁnancial instruments one can use
to add alpha and also in terms of the currency hedging benchmark itself. On the ﬁrst of these,
an active currency manager should have access to a broad spectrum of currency instruments in
order to boost their chance of adding value. Similarly, their ability to add value is signiﬁcantly
increased by the adoption of a 50% or symmetrical currency hedging benchmark rather than
by a 100% hedged or 100% unhedged benchmark.
10.10.4 Tracking Error
Just as corporations have to deal with “forecasting error” in terms of the deviation of forecast
exchange rates relative to the actual future rate, so investors have to deal with tracking error
within their portfolios, which is the return of the portfolio relative to the investment benchmark
index being used. A portfolio manager can signiﬁcantly affect the tracking error of their
portfolio by the selection of the currency hedging benchmark. Empirically, it has been found
that a 50% or symmetrical currency hedging benchmark generates around 70% of the tracking
error of that generated by using a polar of 100% currency hedging benchmark. Put another
way, the tracking error of a polar currency hedging benchmark is around 1.41 times that of a
50% hedged benchmark. The advantage of a symmetrical or 50% currency hedged benchmark
for a portfolio manager is that it reduces tracking error and it also enables them to participate
in both bull and bear currency markets.
Two popular types of active currency management strategy are the differential forward strategy
and the trend-following strategy. Both of these strategies have consistently added alpha to a
portfolio if followed rigorously and interestingly have also proven to be risk reducing compared
to unhedged benchmarks. Thus, they also help to boost signiﬁcantly the portfolio’s Sharpe ratio.
10.10.5 Differential Forward Strategy
Forward exchange rates are very poor predictors of future spot exchange rates, in contrast to
the theories of covered interest rate parity and unbiased forward parity. As a result, one can
take advantage of these apparent market “inefﬁciencies” by hedging the currency 100% when
the forward rate pays you to do it and hedging 0% when the forward rate is against you. The
differential forward strategy has generated consistently good results over a long time and over
a broad set of currency pairs.
10.10.6 Trend-Following Strategy
The idea behind this strategy is to go long the currency pair when the price is above a moving
average of a given length and to go short the currency pair when it is below. Currency managers
can choose different moving averages depending on their trading approach to the benchmark.
Lequeux and Acar (1998) showed that to be representative of the various durations followed
by investors, an equally weighted portfolio based on three moving averages of length 32, 61
and 117 days may be appropriate. If the spot exchange rate is above all three moving averages,

202

Currency Strategy

hedge the foreign currency exposure 100%. If above two out of the three, hedge one-third of
the position. In all other cases, leaves the position unhedged. Trend-following strategies have
shown consistent excess returns over sustained periods of time.

10.10.7 Optimization of the Carry Trade
As with corporations, institutional investors can use optimization techniques. With corporations, the aim is to achieve the cheapest hedge for the most risk hedged. In the case of the
investor, the aim here is to add alpha by improving on the simple carry trade. The idea behind
the carry trade itself is that, using a risk appetite indicator, the currency manager goes long a
basket of high carry currencies, when risk appetite readings are either strong or neutral, and
conversely goes short that basket of currencies when risk appetite readings go into negative
territory.
It is possible to ﬁne tune or optimize this strategy to take account of the volatility and
correlation of currencies in addition to their yield differentials. This should produce better
returns than the simple carry trade strategy. The optimized carry trade hedges the currency
pairs according to the weights provided by the mean–variance optimization rather than simply
hedging the currency pairs exhibiting an attractive carry. The returns generated by the optimized
carry trade strategy are actually better than those generated by the differential forward strategy
on a risk-adjusted basis.

10.11 MANAGING CURRENCY RISK III — THE SPECULATOR
If the idea of currency hedging is controversial to some, then that of currency speculation is even
more so. Currency speculation — that is the trading of currencies with no underlying, attached
asset — makes up the vast majority of currency market ﬂow. Given that the currency market
provides the liquidity for global trade and investment, it is therefore currency speculation
that is providing this liquidity. When looking at the issue of currency speculation, one should
immediately dispense with such descriptions of it being a “good” or a “bad” inﬂuence and
instead focus on what it provides. It is neither a benign nor a malign force. Rather, its sole
purpose is to make money. Furthermore, it does not act in a vacuum, but instead represents
the market’s response to perceived fundamental changes. Thus, it is a symptom rather than the
disease itself, which is usually bad economic policy.
Currency speculators are usually made up of one of three groups — interbank dealers, proprietary dealers, or hedge or total return funds. However, at times, currency overlay managers
or corporate Treasurers can also be termed currency speculators if they take positions in the
currency markets which have no underlying attached asset.

10.12 CURRENCY STRATEGY FOR CURRENCY MARKET
PRACTITIONERS
Having gone through the main points that we have covered in this book so that they are clear, it
is now time to put them into practice. Currency market practitioners can use currency strategy
techniques for basically two activities:

r Currency trading
r Currency hedging

Applying the Framework

203

10.12.1 Currency Trading
This section includes currency speculators and active currency managers. Some corporate
Treasuries are run as a proﬁt centre and thus this part will also be of interest to them. For the
purpose of dividing currency activity into trading and hedging, we assume the generalization
that corporate Treasury for the most part uses the currency market for hedging purposes. The
aim here is to show how a currency market practitioner can combine the strategy techniques
described in this book for the practical use of trading or investing in currencies. Given that I
focus primarily on the emerging market currencies, we will keep the focus to that sector of the
currency market, though clearly these strategy techniques can and should be used for currency
exposure generally. The example we use here is that of a recommendation I put out on January
10, 2002. The key point here is not just that the recommendation made or lost money, but also
how the strategy was arrived at. The aim is not to copy this speciﬁc recommendation, but to
be able to repeat the strategy method. Note that these types of currency strategies should be
attempted solely by professional and qualiﬁed institutional investors or corporations.
Example
On January 10, 2002, I released a strategy note, recommending clients to sell the US dollar
against the Turkish lira, via a one-month forward outright contract. For the past couple of
months, we had been taking a more positive and constructive view on the Turkish lira, in line
with the price action and more positive fundamental and technical developments. Thus, we
came to the conclusion that while the Turkish lira remained a volatile currency, it was trending
positively and was likely to continue to do so near term. Hence, we recommended clients to:

r Sell USD–TRL one-month forward outright at 1.460 million
r Spot reference: 1.395 million
r Target: 1.350 million
r Targeted return excluding carry: +3.2%
r Stop: 1.460 million
From a fundamental perspective, we at the time took a constructive view on Turkey’s 2002 economic outlook. While recognizing persistent risks to that outlook, the prospects for a virtuous
circle of investor conﬁdence appeared to have improved signiﬁcantly. To recap, the Turkish lira
had devalued and de-pegged in February of 2001 and since then had fallen substantially from
around 600,000 to the US dollar before the peg broke to a low of 1.65 million. That decline
in the lira’s value had severe consequences for the economy, triggering a dramatic spike in
inﬂation. Indeed, in the third quarter of 2001, currency weakness and rising inﬂation appeared
to have created a vicious circle, whereby each fed off the other.
The CEMC model tells us however that the low in a currency’s value after de-pegging and the
high in inﬂation are highly related, and that Phase II of the model is related to a liquidity-driven
rally in the value of the currency after inﬂation has peaked. By the end of 2001, inﬂation had
clearly peaked on a month-on-month basis and was close to peaking on a year-on-year basis
at just over 70%. Thus, from the perspective of the CEMC model, the signs were positive as
regards prospects for a continuation of the rally in the Turkish lira, which had begun somewhat
tentatively in November 2001. A further positive sign, also in line with Phase II of the CEMC
model, was a massive and positive swing in the current account balance, from a deﬁcit of around
6% of GDP in 2000 to a surplus of around 1% in 2001. This was largely due to the collapse of
import demand in the wake of the pegged exchange rate’s collapse, just as the CEMC model

204

Currency Strategy

suggests. In January 2002, what we were witnessing was a classic liquidity-driven rally in
a currency which had hit its low after breaking its peg the previous year. This phenomenon
was far from unique to the Turkish lira. Exactly the same phenomenon was seen in the Asian
currencies after their crisis in 1997–1998, and to some extent also in the Russian rouble and
Brazilian real.
In addition to such economic considerations, favourable political considerations were also
an important factor, keeping Turkey ﬁnancially well supported, particularly in the wake of the
successful passage of such important legislation as the tobacco and public procurement laws.
Strong ofﬁcial support for Turkey at the end of 2001 appeared to make 2002 ﬁnancing and
rollovers look manageable. Finally, “dollarization” levels — that is the degree to which Turkish
deposit holders were changing out of lira and into US dollars — appeared to have peaked in
November 2001, after soaring initially in the wake of the lira’s devaluation in February 2001.
In our view, if the 1994 devaluation was any guide, this process of de-dollarization may
have been only in its early stages. Granted, any positive view on the Turkish lira still had
to be tempered with some degree of caution about the underlying risks. Any proliferation
of the anti-terrorism campaign to Iraq and/or renewed domestic political squabbling would
clearly have the potential to upset markets, as would any hint of delay in global recovery
prospects.
There was also the “technical” angle to consider. Despite the fact that the Turkish lira had
been a ﬂoating currency for only a relatively small period of time, the dollar–Turkish lira
exchange rate appeared to trade increasingly technically, in line with such technical indicators
as moving averages through September and October of 2001. Indeed, in November of 2001,
dollar–Turkish lira broke down through the 55-day moving average at 1.479 million for the
ﬁrst time since the lira’s devaluation, and then formed a perfect head and shoulders pattern (see
Figure 10.1). The neckline of that head and shoulders pattern came in around 1.350 million,
which was why we put out target there. Such technical indicators as RSI and slow stochastics
were also pointing lower for dollar–Turkish lira.
In sum, both fundamentals, technicals and the CEMC model all seemed aligned at the
time for further Turkish lira outperformance. Looking at the dollar–Turkish lira exchange
rate through the signal grid, we would have come up with the results in Table 10.1. While
recommendations can be made on the basis of only one out of the four signals, they are clearly
more powerful — and more likely to be right — if all four signals are in line.
So what happened to our recommendation? To repeat, the aim here is not to focus overly
on the results of this speciﬁc recommendation, but rather on how a currency strategist puts a
recommendation together, using the currency strategy techniques we have discussed throughout
this book. This example is used only for the general purpose of showing how a recommendation
might be put together. As for this speciﬁc recommendation, the dollar–Turkish lira exchange
rate hit our initial target of 1.35 million spot, but we decided to keep it on. Subsequently, it
traded as low as 1.296 million, before trading back above 1.3 million. With a week left to go
Table 10.1 USD–TRL signal grid

Buy/sell

Currency
economics

Flow
analysis

Technical
analysis

Long-term
valuation

Combined
signal

Sell

Sell

Sell

Sell

Sell

@Team-FLY

Jul

Sep

Nov

Jan99

Mar

May

Jul

Sep

Nov

Figure 10.1 Dollar–Turkish lira: head and shoulders pattern
Source: Reuters.

May 98

TRL= , Close(Bid), Line
10Jan02 1385000
TRL= , Close(Bid), MA 55
10Jan02 1478764
TRL= , Close(Bid), MA 200
10Jan02 1368928

Jan00

Mar

May

Jul

TRL=, Close(Bid) [Line][MA 55][MA 200] Daily

Sep

Nov

Jan01

Mar

May

Jul

Sep

Nov

Jan02

04Apr98 - 06Feb02

0.25M

0.3M

0.35M

0.4M

0.45M

0.5M

0.55M

0.6M

0.65M

0.7M

0.75M

0.8M

0.85M

0.9M

0.95M

1M

1.05M

1.1M

1.15M

1.2M

1.25M

1.3M

1.35M

1.4M

1.45M

1.5M

1.55M

1.6M

Pr
1.65M

Applying the Framework
205

206

Currency Strategy

before the forward contract matured, we decided to take proﬁt on the recommendation for a
return, including carry, of +8.4%.
What is important to remember from this example is not that the recommendation made such
a return — I freely admit that I have put out recommendations that have lost money. Rather, the
important thing to remember is the discipline that was involved in putting the recommendation
together.
10.12.2 Currency Hedging
For its part, this section should be the focus of passive currency managers and corporations. Here
too, the discipline of how one puts together a currency strategy is the same, though the purpose
is different. The currency market practitioner has to form a currency view. That view can
come from the bank counterparties that the corporation or asset manager uses, but the currency
market practitioner should also have a currency view themselves, with which to compare
against such external views. The view itself is created from the signal grid, incorporating
currency economics, technicals, ﬂow analysis and long-term valuation. The currency market
practitioner should be aware of all these aspects of the currency to which they are exposed.
Not being aware is the equivalent of not knowing the business you are in. In the example I
have chosen, we keep the focus on emerging market currencies, this time looking at the risk
posed by exposure to currency risk in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe.
Example
The Euro has ﬂattered to deceive on many occasions. Countless times, currency strategists in
the US, the UK and Europe have forecast a major and sustained Euro rally, and for the most
part they have been wrong. This is not to say the Euro has not staged brief recoveries, notably
from its October 26, 2000 record low of 0.8228 against the US dollar, reaching at one point as
high as 0.9595. However, such recoveries have ultimately proved unsustainable, not least with
respect to both hopes and expectations.
This has been extremely important for UK, US and European corporations with factories
or operations in Central and Eastern Europe. The reasons for this are simple — just as the
Euro has been weak against the US dollar over the past two to three years, so it has also been
simultaneously weak against the currencies of Central and Eastern Europe. Indeed, there is a
close correlation between the two, not least because the Euro area receives around 70% of total
CEE exports. Equally, the Euro area is by some way the largest direct investor in CEE countries,
ahead of EU accession and ultimately adopting the Euro. The pull for convergence has been
irresistible. Substantial portfolio and direct investment inﬂows to CEE countries, combined
with broad Euro weakness, has meant that the Euro has weakened substantially against the
likes of the Czech koruna, Polish zloty, Slovak koruna and also the Hungarian forint, after
Hungary’s de-pegging in May 2001, in the period 2000–2002.
For corporations that invested in the CEE region, this has been excellent news. As the Euro
has weakened against CEE currencies, so the value of their investment has appreciated when
translated back into Euros. More speciﬁcally, consolidation of subsidiary balance sheets within
the group balance sheet has been favourable as the value of the Euro has declined.
This raises an obvious question — what happens if it goes up? As we saw when looking at
translation risk in Chapter 7, corporations face translation risk on the group balance sheet on
the net assets (gross assets − liabilities) of their foreign subsidiary. Usually, corporations do

Applying the Framework

207

not hedge translation risk given the cost, the potential for “regret” and the view that balance
sheet hedging to a certain extent negates the purpose of the original investment. However, as I
have tried to show, sustained exchange rate moves can have a signiﬁcant impact on the balance
sheet if not hedged. Equally, the initial investment does not negate the need to manage the
balance sheet dynamically.
The threat in question is that of the Euro strengthening against CEE currencies. Readers
should note that once more that is a theoretical example and I do not mean to suggest that this
is in fact a threat. Rather, readers should be considering what they might have to do were it a
real threat. Consider then the possibility that the Euro might appreciate, perhaps signiﬁcantly
against CEE currencies. For a corporation, this represents a balance sheet risk when translating
the value of foreign subsidiaries’ net assets back onto the group balance sheet. It might also
represent transaction and economic risk as well, in terms of the threat to dividend streams and
to the present value of future operating cash ﬂows.
Thus, supposing there were a real threat of signiﬁcant Euro appreciation against CEE currencies, that threat would according to our signal grid have to be quantiﬁed in terms of currency
economics, ﬂows, technical analysis and long-term valuation. When — and only when — all
four are aligned in the form of a BUY signal should the corporation consider strategic hedging,
that is hedging more than just immediate receivables. For the purpose of this exercise, assume
that all four are indeed aligned. Our corporation therefore has to think seriously about hedging
the various types of currency risk associated with their investments in the CEE region.
How to go about hedging? Having ﬁrst decided to carry out a hedge, using the combined
signal from a currency strategy signal grid, there are two further steps in this process. The ﬁrst is
to quantify the speciﬁc type and amount of risk involved. For a corporation, this means whether
we are talking about transaction, translation or economic currency risk. The type of currency
risk may have a signiﬁcant bearing on what type of currency hedging instruments will be used.
The second step in this process is to focus on the speciﬁc types of instruments involved. For
this purpose, I have provided a shortened version of the menu of possible structures available
in Chapter 7 (see Tables 10.2 and 10.3). The corporate Treasury should get its counterparty
bank to price up a menu of possible hedging strategies, which are in line with their currency
view, in order to be able to compare the costs and beneﬁts of each strategy and arrive at the
cheapest hedging strategy for the most risk hedged.
The investor or asset manager will look at currency risk in a slightly different way, but for
that should still adopt the same degree of rigour in seeking to manage it. Passive currency
managers will presumably buy the same tenor of forward or option and continue to roll that

Table 10.2 Traditional hedging structures
Type

Advantages

Disadvantages

Unhedged

Maintains possible yield on
underlying investment
Covered against FX risk

Speculative, reﬂecting a view that
there is no or little FX risk
No ﬂexibility, high cost if interest
rate differentials are large,
vulnerable to unfavourable FX
moves
Premium cost

Vanilla EUR forward

Vanilla EUR call option

Covered against FX risk, ﬂexibility
(does not have to be exercised)

208

Currency Strategy

Table 10.3 Enhanced (option) hedging structures
Type

Advantages

Disadvantages

Seagull

Partly covered against FX risk, can be
structured as zero cost
Directional and vol play

Not covered against a major FX move

Risk reversal
Convertible forward

Enhanced forward

Converts to a forward at an agreed
rate during the tenor of the contract,
customer can take advantage of a
contrarian move in spot up to but
not including the KI
If the currency stays within an agreed
range, the rate is signiﬁcantly
improved relative to the vanilla
forward

Cost of the RR given interest rate
differentials, though could be
structured to be zero cost
The strike is more expensive than the
forward and this has to be paid if
the structure is knocked-in
If spot goes outside of the range, the
forward rate to be paid becomes
more expensive
