
201

Understanding Price Adion
small w should show itself more elongated also.
A subtle example of a premature break can be spotted at point T.
Casually regarded, this breakout appeared acceptable since it took off
from a bullish signal bar with its close right up against the box barrier;
but on close inspection we can see that at that point there was only one
black bar present in the squeeze, indicating that the alternating motion
of bullish and bearish bars had not fully completed W-characteristics;
or to put it more simply, the small w was underdeveloped when mea­
sured against its bigger W neighbor.
Please understand that assessing buildup is never a matter of count­
ing bars per se, nor about striving for technical perfection. While we
may entertain some preference for one situation more than another (for
example to see at least four bars in a squeeze) , we better not limit our­
selves with strict rules on these matters.
If the break at T was premature, then how about the break above bar
10? With now two bars added (T - 1 0) , the small w had definitely fattened
up. Furthermore, before turning bullishly around, bar 1 0 had briefly
broken below bar T, which had left a false low on the chart (showing
bullish persistence) . And it was a higher low within the Ww-box. Con­
sidering also the ideal magnet of the 50-level above, just begging to be
targeted, it really would have been a waste not to take our chances on
the break of bar 10.
Granted, it is not always easy to tell a valid break from a tease break
trap. At times the line between them can be very thin indeed. Nonethe­
less, I am absolutely positive that you can train your eye to at least
recognize the breakouts of poor quality; from that pleasant base, your
feel for harmony and proportion can only progress over time.
Not long after reaching the 50-level magnet, the Asian market slid
into a slow but steady decline. The bottom barrier here may initially
have been drawn to connect the lows of 5 and 7 with the lows of 2 and
3, but after the 1 3- 1 5 element showed up, it makes sense to have plot­
ted the line as depicted.
Just like the Ww-box had set up the bull break earlier on, so did
progression 1 3- 1 5 attempt to build up to a bear break. However, there
are some major differences in both the setup and the conditions. For

202

Chapter 7

Skipping Trades and Trading Breaks for Failure

example, the lows of the Ww-box were technically and very favorably
supported by the 2-3 cluster on the left. This formed higher lows along
the way and ultimately provided a base for higher prices away from sup­
port. The pre-breakout tension of 1 3- 1 5, on the other hand, showed up
unfavorably in the lows of a range. As we know, when buildup is absent
or lacking in substance, this seldom sets up favorably for continuation.
There may have been some stalling on the pattern line from 1 3 to 1 5 ,
but in terms o f buildup it all looked a bit feeble; and the 25ema wasn't
exactly helping out either (no squeeze whatsoever) . In other words, the
bear break in bar 1 5 enjoyed little technical backup, yet it had to over­
come strong support of multiple lows on the left (2 , 3, 5 and 7, take your
pick). Not surprisingly, few parties were prepared to commit themselves
on the sell side here; and it didn't take long for contrarian bulls to pick
up 6n this reluctance.
A failed breakout on one side of buildup often sets the stage for a
counterbreak at the other end; and not seldom this one comes with
better credentials attached. In fact, with combi 16 added, the 1 2 - 13- 1 415-16 progression now bore all the features of a W-pattern ready to be
completed.
Considering the bullish implications, we cannot blame a bear for
bailing out on his short on the break of combi 1 6 (reversal exit) . An even
stronger warning was sent out when bar 1 7 was broken on top, for this
was now a three-bar combi breakout, and it coincided with a pattern
line perforation to boot.
So why not trade long on the break of bar 1 7? Technically regarded,
this was not an offer of the most unsavory kind; but we cannot say the
conditions were of such favorable nature to look upon this wager as a
high-odds proposition. Here's another way to look at it: earlier on, we
saw little problem in declining the break in bar T, although the environ­
ment already spoke in favor of the bull side; why then risk capital on a
trade with arguably less buildup beneath it and facing more overhead
resistance as well (the 1 1 - 1 2 cluster) .

203

Understanding Price Action
www. ProRealTime. com

eur/usd 5-minute

I Fig 7.81 1 .335

1 .33

(f)ProReaITimc.com
reoo

""'00

10:00

1 1 : 00

12:00

13:00

14:00

Figure 7.8 If totally new to price action trading, the reader may have
gotten the impression that it takes a very detailed weighing of the pros
and cons to determine whether or not action is warranted. Quite the
opposite is true, really, and most certainly so on the skipping part.
Why evaluate the market's every little move under a microscope when
a quick glance would already suffice to determine that there are no
trades anywhere near. Remember, if we have to look hard for a trade, it
is probably not there. And even when the action builds up to a point of
interest, nine times out of ten we should be able to assess the situation
in the blink of an eye still.
Let's put this to the test. If we imagine to have switched on our trad­
ing platform at, say, 1 0:00, what could we have derived, in just a few
seconds of evaluation, from the hints and clues presented? 1 : A decent
bear swing from 08:00 to 09:00 had put the market in bearish mode.
2: From 09:00 to 1 0:00, bulls had found footing in the round number
level, which had stalled the bearish momentum in a sideways pattern
that now came to attack the trending 25ema. 3 : It will have taken us no
more than a few seconds also to wrap a box around this action and to
recognize the setup as a bull break trap.
It is safe to suggest that these observations could have been made
with minimal effort in the opening seconds of the bar that followed the
combi at 4, so even before the bull break had fully materialized. And it
will have taken no longer than the forming of bar 5 itself to have under ­

stood the bearish implications should this bar be broken at the bottom.
In fact, bar 5 was a textbook trade-for-failure setup (enter short below it).

204

Chapter 7

Skipping Trades and Trading Breaks for Failure

Notice that in the evaluation of the box progression there was no
need to discuss the false low at 1 , the higher low at 3 and the fact that
the first bull attack on the 25ema had failed at 2 with a false high to
show for it. These were elements that all bore technical meaning, but
since they represented the smaller parts of a bigger total (box) , a quick
assessment of their sum more than sufficed.
Very helpful also in the analysis process is to simply tap into your
mental database of price technical patterns and see if you can match
the current action with a variant of a pattern that you have seen fail or
succeed many times before. For example, compare the bull trap above
combi 4 with the one discussed in Figure 7.6 (above 3), or with the one
in the next chart, Figure 7.9 (above 3). Indeed, these poisonous break­
outs are far from unique and they show us most evidently that lessons
can be learned from the past. To see a bullish version, check Figure 7. 1
again and the way we handled the bear break below the first dotted line
(longing it for failure above bar 5).
Soon after the bull break had fallen through, the bearish pressure
picked up its earlier pace. An interesting feature here is to see the 5-6
swing mimic the bear move that had preceded the box progression; a
fine example of the pole-flag-swing principle.
Bulls had tried to hammer in a double bottom even before the
50-level was reached (6-8) ; but this was not the time or place for bullish
bravery to pay off. However, pullbacks 6-7 and 8-9 did not set up well
for bearish purposes, either. The former was too shallow to short, the
latter lacked a proper signal bar; and there was powerbar 8 to consider
as well, which had created the double-bottom element with the low of
bar 6.
It usually doesn't take much technical savvy to question the pros­
pects of a break against a newly established trend. But how exactly do
we rate the failure potential when the trend is already well on its way?
Surely, at some point, the market will attempt to turn with better odds
attached, and maybe this could set up a reversal trade worthy of ac­
ceptance.
Here's a little rule of thumb that may prove a very handy filter in
the vast majority of trending sessions: for as long as the 25ema is still

205

Understanding Price Action
trending, even when slowly flattening out, all wagers against its slope
are essentially off. If we translate this to the buildup situation between
1 2 :00 and 1 3:40, there should have been no discomfort in declining the
bull-side breaks offered, simply because the 25ema was still sloping
down. (Note: In a breakout situation that stems from a lengthy pull­
back, like an angular flag progression, it is not unthinkable to take
position against the current slope of the 25ema, because the extent of
the correction may have tilted the average the other way; but this is
quite different from trading breaks against a trending average.)
With bulls and bears keeping each other in check throughout the
lunch-hour doldrums ( 1 2 :00- 14: 00), the activity within the second box
slowly took on the shape of a W-pattern middle-part. The top barrier is
drawn across the highs of the lowest block, but it could also have been
plotted a few pip higher up, across the series of highs at the level of 10.
This was another good reason to be cautious regarding the buy side,
for a debatable pattern barrier is likely to keep consensus on its break
divided, and that never sits too well with follow-through.
Although rather compressed vertically, the price action within the
second box did show signs of bullish determination; in it there were
false lows, higher lows and even a three-bar combi right underneath the
top barrier ( 1 1- 1 2) . Nonetheless, both the box break entry above combi
1 2 and the pattern break pullback offer above bar 14 were easy skips,
if only for the 25ema "rule". A point of concern also was the 7-9 double
top not far to the left (potential obstruction).
When it comes to trading for failure, it is crucial to realize that a poor
break against dominance does not automatically set up a high-odds
break in the dominant direction. For example, the break below bar 13,
the first bearish bar to challenge the box breakout, failed to meet the re­
quirements of a valid short. Not only was the bull break not yet proven
false (prices still resided above the box barrier), bar 1 3 set up too tiny
to be considered a reliable signal bar for shorting purposes within the
circumstances present.
But how about bar 15? Apart from displaying persistence on the part
of the bears, this bar definitely showed more substance as a signal bar;
and a break below it would now technically confirm the failure of the

206

Chapter 7

Skipping Trades and Trading Breaks for Failure

box breakout. Should we not accept?
If we compare the break below bar 1 5 with the break below bar 5,
similarities cannot be denied; in both cases a bull break from a reversal
progression was proven false in the 25ema region. And on both breaks
an angular pullback line was taken out in the process. But there are dif­
ferences also. Personally, I am not a big fan of trading for failure when it
doesn't regard a first contrarian break against a trending 2 5ema. From
this perspective, the break below bar 5 met all the requirements of a
valid play. Subsequent wagers of this kind are not necessarily unsa­
vory, but they seldom match the quality of the preferable situation. In
the end, though, it is always a personal call, and one very much depen­
dent on the situation at hand. Hence the break below bar 15 annotated
as optional.
Wft'W.ProRealTlmB.com

eur/usd 5-minute

I Fig 7 91 .315

1 .31

. 305

' 5 00

16'00

17:00

18:00

'''00

2Q00

21:00

Figure 7.9 Contrary to popular notion, catching a ride on the high-and­

mighty supertrend can be far more challenging than, say, trading a
breakout from a well-defined range. So prominently displayed is the
dominance in the chart that it stands to attract a wide array of strate­
gies that all aim to trade the same thing (a pullback reversal), but with
highly divided consensus on the actual levels of entry. This could pro­
duce a tricky environment with traders entering all over the place and
getting trapped while at it.
A situation that certainly doesn't help to promote unanimity among
the majority is when a rally shows no hiccups on its march that could
serve as focus points for a later correction to gun for and possibly re-

207

Understanding Price Action
verse in; this may leave a pullback no choice but to roll over in "midair".
And as we can see also from the picture above, when the market is in
supertrend mode, the 25ema may have a hard time keeping up. As a
consequence of these exceptional conditions, plenty of strategies de­
signed for the "ordinary" and generally slower market may now fail to
produce dependable entry signals, leaving countless traders to ponder
on when and where to catch their ride on the bandwagon.
These worries are essentially irrelevant to a conservative break­
out trader, because he has no need for a trade . He doesn't care either
whether the market is trending or ranging, or lying dead in the water;
his sole aim is to participate in breakouts of the high-odds category and
he will lay low on all offers of the weaker kind.
Such a relaxed disposition is not exactly commonplace among as­
piring traders, particularly when confronted with a very lively market.
And even among the more experienced there are many that become so
blinded by the might of the trend that all they want for themselves is a
piece of the pie. But how should they go about it? Should they aim for
continuation in a round number level; should they pick the first turn­
around bar to come along; should they wait for a miniature hiccup in
the trend to be tested; should they trade the break of a pullback bound­
ary line?
Depending on the situation, any of these techniques could get a trad­
er in position; but since consensus on the "most sensible" course of
action is likely to be divided, trend traders and contrarians may have to
battle it out somewhat further still, and this can make for pretty bumpy
rides.
In other words, as much as we can almost be certain that a super­
trend will find some form of continuation, it remains to be seen how
well a 1 0 pip stop-or any tight stop, for that matter-would hold up if
the chosen entry is only a wee bit premature. It is up to the individual,
of course, whether he is comfortable trading this sort of environment.
Plenty of traders do love it, particularly those with a soft target in mind.
If not shaken out in the early stages of the trade, these players may be
so fortunate as to see their winners run for many, many pip on end.
Even when aiming for "just" 20 pip, entry may have been accepted

208

Chapter 7

Skipping Trades and Trading Breaks for Failure

on the pattern break pullback offer below bar 1 , or perhaps on the sec­
ond break offer below bar 2, which now confirmed the bearish pressure
and set up from a better signal bar as well. However, the trouble with
both entries was the "poor" technical base from which they had to be
deployed and the fact that there were strong adverse magnets running
above (DO-level and 25ema).
Regardless of personal style and trading technique, there is no es­
caping the fact that any wager in the market-be it a bounce, break,
scalp, swing, range or trend trade-is always a function of weighing
the pros against the cons; in essence, of whether the prospect for profit
makes up for the danger of an unpleasant shake. That is trading in a
nutshell.
But no matter how savvy one's view on the market, and how care­
fully chosen one's trading ventures in it, shakeouts do come with the
territory, for the losses in the field are an inevitable byproduct of profit­
able trading.
That being said, there is never any need to get caught in a very con­
spicuous trap. When it comes to the occasional supertrend, hopefully it
needs little explaining that at all times a trader should not be so foolish
as to go out and defy it on account of a perception that its decline or rise
is way overextended. That can be a very dangerous practice.
In the session above, some unfortunate bulls had to learn this lesson
the hard way when they bought themselves in on the box break above
bar 3 . Beyond doubt, this was a breakout of the poisonous variety. Yet
what is poisonous to one, can taste very sweet to another (short for fail­
ure below bar 4).

209

Chapter 8

Recap Part 1

Before we go on to evaluate our studying efforts on six consecutive
months of intraday price action in Part 2 , it might be a good idea to
recap all that we have taken up so far, so as to have everything fresh
on the mind.
For this purpose, a new series of charts will be introduced, but they
will not be taken apart as extensively as before. Not unlike gauging the
current environment in an actual session, we will approach these charts
with an overview perspective first, and then dig in a little deeper on the
points of interest offered. To ease this process further, it is chosen to
use a two-page layout for each example, starting at the left page, which
will keep the charts in view at all times when reading through the text.
Upon reviewing this recap series, try not to focus too much on the
setups alone; instead, really work on reading the full picture. For each
wager is always a consequence of pressure, conditions and setup. Do
take into account as well that the suggested entry and exit techniques
are meant to reflect the conservative mode of operation as discussed
in the foregoing chapters; in any given session, there are always more
ways to take advantage of double pressure, for instance by incorporat­
ing contrarian tactics and quick in-and-out scalps.
Note: As one's understanding of price action is likely to grow over

time, so may the urge to expand the range of conservative routines with
all sorts of outings of the more aggressive variety. This is a very natural
process and can only be encouraged. However, it is strongly recom-

211

Understanding Price Action
mended not to implement any of these additional tactics into the plan of
attack until fully comfortable, and consistently profitable, trading con­

servatively and metlwdically first.
As in all foregoing examples, the trade suggestions can be evalu­
ated by imagining the application of a rigid 20 j 1 0 bracket, but please
recall that these settings do not claim to represent the ideal target and
stop on the 5-minute eurjusd chart. In a "normally" active environ­
ment, however, this bracket will prove very effective, on both sides of
the fence, but more important than the exact type of management is to
understand why position is suggested in the first place. In this recap
series, too, all entry techniques are based on the five trade setups as
discussed in Chapter 5 and 7: the pattern break, the pattern break
pullback, the pattern break combi, the pullback reversal and the trade­
for-failure setup.
Of course, the bracket can be overruled at any time as one sees fit,
and additional wagers and alternative techniques can always be con­
sidered-but try not to let this be a function of hindsight reflection.
Studying price action-or trading itself, for that matter-is never about
how to have reaped the maximum amount of profit from a certain situ­
ation; that is a pointless goal and quite undoable in practice. The only
task of relevance, for any student trader, is to first develop an edge in
the plan of attack, so as to come out ahead in the game; once this is
accomplished, the sharpening of tactics and the honing of skills are
just a matter of experience, as is the case with any other endeavor and
profession in life.
As taken up in Chapter 6 on Manual Exits, valid bailout options are
the news report exit, the exit in resistance and the exit on a reversal
development, like the break of an M or W-pattern middle-part. The first
two should already be on the radar prior to taking position; the latter is
always a function of a price technical development adverse to the open
position (reversal exit) .
Before we dig in, allow me to again call up the list of common trading
mistakes that we came to address at an earlier stage. With now more
practice behind us, some of these errors may hardly need mentioning,
but it's good to realize that no folly is ever the sole prerogative of the

212

Chapter 8

Recap Part I

less savvy in the field. When capital and ego are at stake, even the most
experienced and stoic of traders are never fully safe from the powers of
delusion. We would do well not to think ourselves above these players.
So once again, classic trading errors are:
1 : Trading against a strong trend or an otherwise dominant pres­
sure.
2: Trading with the pressure but into resistance overhead or under­
foot.
3: Perceiving a trend to be in place when the market is actually
rangmg.
4: Choosing entries too far removed from the 2Sema, or with little
regard for the adverse round number magnet.
S: Picking entries in a frantic environment in which the majority of
bars exceed their average span.
6: Aiming to trade a reversal of a pullback that shows aggressive
powerbars or clusters within.
7: Front-running a break or turn of the market with too little buildup
to warrant such action.
And lastly, let us one more time summarize the seven most essential
price action principles in any chart. They concern:
Double pressure.
Support and resistance.
False breaks, tease breaks and proper breaks.
False highs and lows.
Pullback reversals.
Ceiling test.
Round number effect.

213

Understanding Price Action
lFig 8.1!

IIIW.ProRealTime.com

eUf/usd 5·minute

09;00

10:00

12:00

13000

14:00

Figure 8.1 Session overview: Before trending up, prices were caught

in a choppy round number range all throughout the UK morning ses­
sion. Bears had been successful in keeping the bullish charges in check
above 1 .40, but they had shown little power below it. From the footing
of the smaller box, bulls had managed to slowly reclaim the initiative
and this had set them on their way to the next round number in line
(50-level) .
Points of interest: The break above combi 4 failed to qualify as a

pullback reversal offer of the conservative kind; prices had corrected
rather aggressively within the 3-4 retracement and there was a danger
of the adverse round number magnet kicking in ( 1 .40). If position was
accepted, a reversal exit below bar 7 will have kept the damage to a
mmnnum.
While a bull may have justifiably exited below bar 7, a bear would
have done well to lay low on the offer. This is not to say that the bearish
pressure was weak, but the conditions did not allow for a substantial
break on the sell side yet; the chart still showed higher lows on the
whole and there was the potential obstruction of the big round number
to consider as welL
Prices did sink through the number a bit, and they even fell below
the low of the nearest turnaround (combi at 4); but the more prominent
low of the morning-star on the left held up well ( 1 -2), which will surely
have helped to keep the prospects of re-conquering the round number
alive for the bulls.
In bar 8, prices broke out of what can be regarded as a W-pattern
