
I became a computer
applicant of Dick’s
[Donchian] ideas. He was
one of the only people at
the time who was doing
simulation of any kind.
He was generous with his
ideas, making a point to
share what he knew; it
delighted him to get
others to try systems. He
inspired a great many
people and spawned a
whole generation of
traders, providing
courage and a road map.
Ed Seykota97

We started our database
using punch cards in
1968, and we collected
commodity price data
back to July 1959. We
back-tested the 5 and 20
and the weekly rules for
Dick. I think the weekly
method was the best
thing that anyone had
ever done. Of all Dick’s
contributions, the weekly
rules helped identify the
trend and helped you act
on it. Dick is one of those
people who today likes to
beat the computer—only
he did it by hand. He
enjoyed the academics of
the process, the
excitement of exploring
new ideas and running
the numbers.
Dennis D. Dunn, Dunn & Hargitt99

86

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

technical records on futures prices, recording daily price data in a
ledger book. Barbara Dixon, one of his students, observed how he
computed his moving averages, posted his own charts by hand, and
developed his market signals—without the benefit of an accurate
database, software, or any computing capability. His jacket pockets
were always loaded down with pencils and a pencil sharpener.100
Much of Donchian’s work went unnoticed by the numerous
stars of finance that followed him. Dixon makes it clear that her
mentor’s work preceded and prefigured that of the academic
theorists who developed the foundations of the modern theory of
finance. Long before Harvard’s John Litner published his
quantitative analysis of the benefits of including managed futures in
a portfolio with stocks and bonds, Donchian used concepts like
diversification and risk control, key elements of modern portfolio
theory that won William Sharpe and Harry Markowitz Nobel prizes
in economics in 1990.101
I remember in 1979 or
1980, at one of the early
MAR conferences, being
impressed by the fact that
I counted 19 CTAs who
were managing public
funds, and I could
directly identify 16 of the
19 with Dick Donchian.
They had either worked
for him or had had
monies invested with
him. To me, that’s the best
evidence of his impact in
the early days. Dick has
always been very proud
of the fact that his people
have prospered. He also
was proud that after too
many years in which his
was the lone voice in the
wilderness, his thinking
eventually came to be the
dominant thinking of the
industry.
Brett Elam,
Elam Management Corp.103

Donchian: The Personification of Persistence
Was Donchian an overnight sensation? After 42 years,
Donchian was still managing only $200,000, despite his detailed
graphs of price charts for stocks and commodities. Then, in his mid60s, everything came together, and a decade later, he was managing
$27 million at Shearson American Express making $1 million a year
in fees and commissions and another million in trading profits on
his own money.102
Mid-60s? What patience and persistence! Like all of the other
great trend followers, the importance of price was critical for
Donchian:
“He didn’t predict price movements, he just followed them.
His explanation for his success was simple and as old as the
‘Dow Theory’ itself: ‘Trends persist.’ ‘A lot of people say
things like: Gold has got to come down. It went up too fast.
That’s why 85 percent of commodities investors lose
money,’ he says. He was never distracted from his system.
‘The fundamentals are supposed to be bullish in copper,’ he
says. ‘But I’m on the short side now because the trend is
down.’”104

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

What were his rules? The following Donchian trading guidelines
were first published in 1934:
General Guides
1. Beware of acting immediately on a widespread public opinion.

Even if correct, it will usually delay the move.
2. From a period of dullness and inactivity, watch for and prepare

to follow a move in the direction in which volume increases.
3. Limit losses and ride profits, irrespective of all other rules.
4. Light commitments are advisable when market position is not

certain. Clearly defined moves are signaled frequently enough
to make life interesting and concentration on these moves will
prevent unprofitable whip-sawing.
5. Seldom take a position in the direction of an immediately

preceding three-day move. Wait for a one-day reversal.
6. Judicious use of stop orders is a valuable aid to profitable

trading. Stops may be used to protect profits, to limit losses,
and from certain formations such as triangular foci to take
positions. Stop orders are apt to be more valuable and less
treacherous if used in proper relation to the chart formation.
7. In a market in which upswings are likely to equal or exceed

downswings, heavier position should be taken for the upswings
for percentage reasons— a decline from 50 to 25 will net only
50 percent profit, whereas an advance from 25 to 50 will net
100 percent profit.
8. In taking a position, price orders are allowable. In closing a

position, use market orders.
9. Buy strong-acting, strong-background commodities and sell

weak ones, subject to all other rules.
10. Moves in which rails lead or participate strongly are usually

more worth following than moves in which rails lag.
11. A study of the capitalization of a company, the degree of

activity of an issue, and whether an issue is a lethargic truck
horse or a spirited race horse is fully as important as a study of
statistical reports.

87

88

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Donchian Technical Guidelines
1. A move followed by a sideways range often precedes another

move of almost equal extent in the same direction as the
original move. Generally, when the second move from the
sideways range has run its course, a counter move approaching
the sideways range may be expected.
2. Reversal or resistance to a move is likely to be encountered:
a. On reaching levels at which in the past, the commodity has

fluctuated for a considerable length of time within a narrow
range
b. On approaching highs or lows
3. Watch for good buying or selling opportunities when trend lines

are approached, especially on medium or dull volume. Be sure
such a line has not been hugged or hit too frequently.
4. Watch for “crawling along” or repeated bumping of minor or

major trend lines and prepare to see such trend lines broken.
5. Breaking of minor trend lines counter to the major trend gives

most other important position taking signals. Positions can be
taken or reversed on stop at such places.
6. Triangles of ether slope may mean either accumulation or dis-

tribution depending on other considerations, although triangles
are usually broken on the flat side.
7. Watch for volume climax, especially after a long move.
8. Don’t count on gaps being closed unless you can distinguish

between breakaway gaps, normal gaps, and exhaustion gaps.
9. During a move, take or increase positions in the direction of the

move at the market the morning following any one-day
reversal, however slight the reversal may be, especially if
volume declines on the reversal.

Donchian’s Student
Barbara Dixon was one of the more successful female trend
traders in the business. She graduated from Vassar College in 1969,
but because she was a woman and a history major, no one would
hire her as a stockbroker. Undaunted, she finally took a job at

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

Shearson as a secretary for Donchian. Dixon received three years of
invaluable tutelage in trend following under Donchian. When
Donchian moved to Connecticut, she stayed behind to strike out on
her own in 1973. Before long, she had some 40 accounts, ranging
from $20,000 to well over $1 million.
Dixon saw an uncomplicated genius in Donchian’s trading:
“I’m not a mathematician. I believe that the simple solution
is the most elegant and the best. Nobody has ever been able
to demonstrate to me that a complex mathematical
equation can answer the question, ‘Is the market moving in
an uptrend, downtrend, or sideways.’ Any better than
looking at a price chart and having simple rules to define
those three sets of circumstances. These are the same rules
I used back in the late 70s.”105
Donchian was, once again, ahead of his time when he taught the
critical importance of fast and simple decision making, a subject
covered in Chapter 7, “Decision Making.”
Dixon was fond of pointing out that a good system is one that
keeps you alive and keeps your equity intact when there are no
trends. She explained that the reason for any system is to get you
into the market when a trend establishes itself. Her message is
clear: “[D]on’t give up the system, even after a string of losses…that
is important because that’s just when the profits are due.”106
Dixon doesn’t attempt to predict price moves, nor expect to be
right every time. She knows she can’t forecast the top or bottom of
a price move. The hope is that it continues indefinitely because you
expect to make money over the long run, but on individual trades,
you admit when you’re wrong and move on.107
Today, most people fixate on the new and fresh fast money idea
of the day, yet I still find almost every word Donchian (or Dixon)
wrote newer, fresher, and more honest than anything currently
broadcast on CNBC. My favorite Donchian wisdom tackles an issue
that people are still struggling with in 2009:
“It doesn’t matter if you’re trading stocks or soybeans.
Trading is trading, and the name of the game is increasing
your wealth. A trader’s job description is stunningly simple:
Don’t lose money. This is of utmost importance to new
traders, who are often told do your research. This is good

89

Losing an illusion
makes you wiser than
finding a truth.
Ludwig Borne

90

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

advice, but should be considered carefully. Research alone
won’t ensure a profit, and at the end of the day, your main
goal should be to make money, not to get an A in How to
Read a Balance Sheet.”
Donchian’s blunt talk may explain why Harvard’s finance
curriculum does not include mention of Dunn, Henry, Seykota,
Campbell, Parker, Abraham, or Donchian himself.

Key Points
Can one know absolutely
when price will trend?
No. Does one have to
know absolutely in order
to have a profitable
business? No. In fact, a
great number of
businesses are based on
the probability that a
time-based series will
trend. In fact, if you look
at insurance, gambling,
and other related
businesses, you will come
to the conclusion that
even a small positive
edge can mean great
profits.
Chat Forum Post

• Donchian’s account dropped below zero following the 1929
stock market crash.
• He was one of the Pentagon whiz kids in World War II. He
served as a cryptanalyst and worked closely with Robert
McNamara during his Air Force tenure.
• Donchian did not start his trend following fund until age 65. He
traded into his 90s. He personally trained legions in the art of
trend following. He trained women at a time when women had
little respect on Wall Street.
• Donchian: “Nobody has ever been able to demonstrate to me
that a complex mathematical equation can answer the
question, ‘Is the market moving in an up trend, downtrend, or
sideways.’”

Jesse Livermore and Dickson Watts
Ed Seykota found wisdom and inspiration through the work of
Richard Donchian. But who else influenced trend followers? How
long ago did this style of trading start? Trend followers would point
to Jesse Livermore, an early twentieth-century stock and
commodity trader, who traded as a trend follower long before the
term existed.
Livermore was born in South Acton, Massachusetts in 1877. At
the age of 15, he went to Boston and began working in Paine
Webber’s Boston brokerage office. He studied price movements and
began to trade their price fluctuations. When Livermore was in his
20s, he moved to New York City to speculate in the stock and

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

91

commodities markets. After 40 years of trading, he developed a
knack for speculating on price movements. One of his foremost
rules was, “Never act on tips.”
The unofficial biography of Livermore was Reminiscences of a
Stock Operator first published in 1923 and written by journalist
Edwin Lefevre. Readers likely guessed Lefevre as a pseudonym for
Livermore himself. Reminiscences of a Stock Operator went on to
become a Wall Street classic. Numerous quotations and
euphemisms from the book are so embedded in trading lore that
traders today don’t have the slightest idea of their origination. I’ve
selected a few of his best:108
1. “It takes a man a long time to learn all the lessons of his

mistakes. They say there are two sides to everything. But there
is only one side to the stock market; and it is not the bull side
or the bear side, but the right side.”
2. “I think it was a long step forward in my trading education

when I realized at last that when old Mr. Partridge kept on
telling the other customers, ‘Well, you know this is a bull
market!’ he really meant to tell them that the big money was
not in the individual fluctuations but in the main movements—
that is, not in reading the tape, but in sizing up the entire
market and its trend.”
3. “The reason is that a man may see straight and clearly and yet

become impatient or doubtful when the market takes its time
about doing as he figured it must do. That is why so many men
in Wall Street, who are not at all in the sucker class, not even
in the third grade, nevertheless lose money. The market does
not beat them. They beat themselves, because though they
have brains they cannot sit tight. Old Turkey was dead right in
doing and saying what he did. He had not only the courage of
his convictions but the intelligent patience to sit tight.”
4. “ …The average man doesn’t wish to be told that it is a bull or

bear market. What he desires is to be told specifically which
particular stock to buy or sell. He wants to get something for
nothing. He does not wish to work. He doesn’t even wish to
have to think. It is too much bother to have to count the money
that he picks up from the ground.”

We love volatility and
days like the one in
which the stock market
took a big plunge, for
being on the right side of
moving markets is what
makes us money. A
stagnant market in any
commodity, such as grain
has experienced recently,
means there’s no
opportunity for us to
make money.
Dinesh Desai109

92

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

5. “A man will risk half his fortune in the stock market with less

reflection than he devotes to the selection of a medium-priced
automobile.”
Think about the wild speculation that took place during the dotcom bubble of the late 1990s, the wild speculation that ended with
the October 2008 market crash, and then remember Livermore was
referring to the market environment of 75 years ago, not today.
Livermore did write one book: How to Trade in Stocks: The
Livermore Formula for Combining Time, Element, and Price. It
was published in 1940. The book is rare and difficult to find, but a
little persistence paid off for me. Livermore was by no means a
perfect trader (and he says so). He was no role model. His trading
style was bold and extremely volatile. He went broke several times
making and losing millions. That said, his personal trading
performance does not detract from the wisdom of his words.
Was Livermore the first trend follower? I doubt it. One trader
who had an influence on Livermore was Dickson Watts. Watts was
president of the New York Cotton Exchange between 1878 and
1880, yet his words are as relevant as ever:
“What is speculation? All business is more or less
speculation. The term speculation, however, is commonly
restricted to business of exceptional uncertainty. The
uninitiated believe that chance is so large a part of
speculation that it is subject to no rules, is governed by no
laws. This is a serious error. Let us first consider the
qualities essential to the equipment of a speculator:
1. Self-reliance: A man must think for himself, must

follow his own convictions. Self-trust is the
foundation of successful effort.
2. Judgment: That equipoise, that nice adjustment of

the facilities one to the other, which is called good
judgment, is an essential to the speculator.
3. Courage: That is, confidence to act on the decisions

of the mind. In speculation, there is value in
Mirabeau’s dictum: Be bold, still be bold; always be
bold.

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

4. Prudence: The power of measuring the danger,

together with a certain alertness and watchfulness,
is important. There should be a balance of these
two, prudence and courage; prudence in
contemplation, courage in execution. Connected
with these qualities, properly an outgrowth of them,
is a third, viz: promptness. The mind convinced, the
act should follow. Think, act, promptly.
5. Pliability: The ability to change an opinion, the

power of revision. ‘He who observes,’ says Emerson,
‘and observes again, is always formidable.’
“The qualifications named are necessary to the makeup of
a speculator, but they must be in well-balanced
combination. A deficiency or an over plus of one quality
will destroy the effectiveness of all. The possession of such
faculties, in a proper adjustment is, of course, uncommon.
In speculation, as in life, few succeed, many fail.”110
Ultimately, people want to know why trend following keeps
working. Livermore’s words from another time answer that question
for our time:
“Wall Street never changes, the pockets change, the
suckers change, the stocks change, but Wall Street never
changes, because human nature never changes.”

Key Points
• Trend followers are not lucky. They are prepared for the
unexpected.
• Trend followers take what the market offers in the moment.
They don’t predict the future.
• Making money requires that you be able to live with and accept
volatility.

93

This page intentionally left blank

Part II

95

This page intentionally left blank

Performance
Data

3

“The criterion of truth is that it works even if
nobody is prepared to acknowledge it.”
—Ludwig von Mises
“What we’ve got here is failure to communicate. Some men you just
can’t reach, so you get what we had here last week, which is the way he
wants it. Well, he gets it. And I don’t like it any more than you men.”
—Cool Hand Luke

Any person can tell you that he has a successful trading method
or system, but ultimately the only objective measurement that
matters at the end of the day is raw performance. Consider the
presented data in this text to be scientific proof of trend following.
If a claim is to be made, it must be supported. The numbers in this
chapter and Appendix B, “Performance Guide,” don’t lie.
In reviewing the performance histories from the trend followers
profiled in Chapter 2, “Great Trend Followers,” I zeroed in on five
key concepts to help explain the data:
1. Absolute returns

4. Correlation

2. Volatility

5. Zero sum

3. Drawdown
97

It is a capital mistake to
theorize before one has
data.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle1

98

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Absolute Returns
An absolute return trading strategy simply means that you are
trying to make the most money possible without being limited to a
linkage to an index such as the S&P. Author Alexander Ineichen
explains:
“An absolute return manager is essentially an asset
manager without a benchmark—Bench marking can be
viewed as a method of restricting investment managers so
as to limit the potential for surprises, either positive or
negative.”2
Trend followers don’t track or attempt to mimic any particular
index in their trading—ever. If trend followers had a coat of arms,
“Absolute Returns” would be emblazoned upon it. They thrive and
profit from the “surprises” that benchmarking by its nature
artificially stops.
This ain’t clipping
coupons. No risk,
no return.
Anonymous

Are all trend followers shooting for absolute returns and the
most amount of money possible? No, not all play the game full tilt.
Jerry Parker, a good trend follower, purposefully aims for lower
returns to cater to a different client base (those who want less risk
and hence less return).
Trend trader John W. Henry has long made the case for his
absolute return strategy:
“JWH’s overall objective is to provide absolute returns. JWH
is an absolute return manager, insofar as it does not manage
against a natural benchmark. Relative return managers,
such as most traditional equity or fixed income managers,
are measured on how they perform relative to some predetermined benchmark. JWH has no such investment
benchmark, so its aim is to achieve returns in all market
conditions, and is thus considered an absolute return
manager.”3
Shoot for a benchmark in return, and you run with the crowd.
Benchmarks such as the S&P might make people feel safe, even
when that feeling is clearly artificial. Trend followers, on the other
hand, understand that trading for absolute returns and not from

Chapter 3 • Performance Data

99

blind adherence to benchmarks is the best way to handle
uncertainty.
The concept of indexing and benchmarking is very useful in the
world of traditional, long-only investing, but it has limited
usefulness for absolute return investing. Again, it gets back to the
notion of what it takes to achieve an absolute return—portfolio
managers need to have an enormous amount of latitude and
freedom in the execution of their trading strategy to ensure capital
preservation and achieve a positive return. At its core, the concept
of absolute return investing is almost antithetical to benchmarking,
which encourages traditional managers to have similarly structured
portfolios and look at their performance on a relative basis.4
If you base your trading strategy on benchmark comparisons, it
doesn’t matter whether you are a talented trader or not because all
decisions are made only with respect for what the averages are
doing. Why is any trading skill relevant? It’s not. That’s why 80
percent of mutual funds don’t beat the averages.

Fear of Volatility and Confusion with Risk
There are organizations that rank and track monthly
performance numbers. One organization gives a “star ranking” (like
Morningstar):
“The quantitative rating system employed ranks and rates
the performance of all commodity trading advisors
(CTA)…Ratings are given in four categories: a) equity, b)
performance, c) risk exposure, and d) risk-adjusted returns.
In each category, the highest possible rating is five stars and
the lowest possible rating is one star. The actual statistics
on which the percentiles are based as follows:
1. Performance: Rate of Return
