
Technical Analysis of Stock Trends Explained: An Easy-to-Understand System for Successful Trading 

 Segment 3. Sources of confirmation The process of confirmation includes many possible variations and signals. All evidence gathered is legitimate, although some signals are invariably stronger than others. Chartists are left with the task of determining the strength or weakness of particular signals. This judgment is gained with experience. However, it can also be acquired through observation, seeing the cause and effect of specific changes in price based on combinations of initial signals and confirmation; the momentum of change; and proximity of signals to resistance and support. Candlestick and candlestick confirmation One of the strongest combinations of signal and confirmation occurs when two candlestick signals appear in close proximity to each other. When both foreshadow the same event (reversal, for example), the likelihood of reversal is strengthened considerably. Television Broadcasts exhibited an exceptionally strong double signal at the top of an uptrend, consisting of two bearish piercing lines. The trend halted there and immediately reversed top the downside.   The type of candlestick signal defines the strength or weakness of the signals. Certain types of signals (such as engulfing patterns, three white soldiers or three black crows, and long candlesticks) are normally very strong. Other signals (notably singular dragonfly, gravestone and long-legged doji days) are relatively weak. Weaker candlesticks may be excellent forms of confirmation if they appear in the right placement, such as at the top of an uptrend or the bottom of a downtrend – and when additional candlestick reversal signals are found at the same time. For example, G S Global Corp. showed two bear harami signals in close proximity. The first was quite weal as it did not appear after an uptrend. The second one, however, was at the top of a brief uptrend, and it led right away to a reversal.   Candlestick and Western confirmation A frequent event is the coexistence of candlestick reversals with traditional Western signals. Among these, double tops or bottoms occurring at the same time as candlestick reversals are likely to lead to reversal a majority of the time – especially if they are found at resistance or support. The chart of Qualcomm provided an example of this. The bearish doji star is a three-session signal and a strong one as well. At the same time, the price dipped below support and formed a double bottom. As expected, price turned immediately into a sharp uptrend lasting a full month. This often occurs when support is violated with a confirmed reversal signal.   Another example of the combined candlestick and Western reversal/confirmation involving gapping price movement was found in the chart of Johnson Electric Holdings. Very fast rising prices were characterized by repetitive gaps, always a signal that the trend may reverse. This also moved above resistance at the same time and culminated with a bearish doji star. As the price trend reversed, a similar gapping pattern was seen on the way down, confirming that the move above resistance could not hold.   Candlestick and oscillators confirmation Oscillators by themselves are not reliable at all times; but when they are found along with candlestick signals, they are strong forms of confirmation. Oscillators may be the deciding factor in the timing of entry or exit due to this confirmation attribute. For example, Seoul Broadcasting System formed a bullish meeting lines signal, but placement was not strong enough, as the preceding downtrend was brief and did not cover many points. The MACD line confirmed the reversal, however, by moving into bullish territory. Even so, prices continued moving sideways for another month before the uptrend began as a delayed reaction. This uncertainty was also found in MACD, which hovered at the signal line for the same length of time.   Even so, oscillators should be used only in combination with very strong reversal candlesticks and preferably at the end of an especially strong trend. Otherwise, false signals are likely. Showing up after a relatively weak trend, an oscillator may not be a reliable confirming signal. For example, Comcast Corporation displayed a bearish side-by-side black lines indicator, a continuation pattern. As MACD also moved down into bearish territory, the signs pointed to continued downward movement. However, these signals both proved false. After two weeks of sideways movement, the price moved into a new uptrend, reversing the pattern in spite of the continuation signals and confirmation.   Western and Western confirmation Chartists relying on Western indicators are likely to find many examples of signal and confirmation in these signals alone. Typically, wedges approaching resistance (rising) or support (falling) or double tops and bottoms, accompanied by gapping price movement, provide strong signals and confirmation. The chart of Apple gave a good example of this. The falling wedge is a bearish pattern and this developed to end with a downward move and a triple bottom. This was a very strong bullish sign and the next step was a strong uptrend.   Another example was found in the case of FedEx. Note the clear lines of resistance and support. The first move was a price decline below support, which quickly returned to the narrow breadth of trading range. Next, prices trended above resistance and formed a double top. This lacked momentum, however, as prices gapped lower and back into the previous trading range, where they remained for the rest of the period charted.   Western and oscillator confirmation Western signals may be confirmed as well by tracking momentum oscillators. As the oscillator moves into an overbought or oversold condition, it may further support a strong reversal signal, especially at or near resistance or support. Oscillators are especially strong when price breaks through resistance or support. If that occurs with gapping price action, an oscillator signal is compelling for immediately reversal. Southwest Airlines experienced price breakouts first above resistance and then in reaction, below support. By the end of the charted period, prices had returned to the established trading range. Notice the reversal signals in both breakouts: first a double top and then a double bottom. The double bottom was confirmed by a brief dip into bearish territory but an immediate return into the bullish region. Oscillator and oscillator confirmation Less common in chart analysis is an oscillator confirmed by another oscillator. Most chartists will tend to prefer one or two oscillators as confirmation of either candlestick or Western signals. However, one situation may depend on whether two oscillators agree or contradict one another. The chart for Intel Corp. includes an uptrend in between two downtrends. The second downtrend may have led to uncertainty due to the short-term duration of the previous price moves. However, both MACD and Stochastic oscillators confirmed the price direction.   Just as significant is the case in which the initial signal is uncertain and twp oscillators do not agree. This lack of confirmation requires more information before entry or exit decisions are made. For example, the chart of Founder Holdings was highly volatile, so checking two oscillators made sense. If they agreed, then a direction could be expected to hold. However, MACD appeared positive while Stochastic was negative. This contradiction provided no useful indication of where the price might move next. The price is too volatile and the lack of confirming signals is troubling. Because the oscillators contradicted each other, the prudent decision here would be to take no action.   Semi-signals: Trend or channel lines and moving averages Two particular Western tools used in technical analysis are not indicators but pattern signals. Both are key for use in confirmation, however. These are trend or channel lines, and moving averages. Trend lines are very straightforward summaries of the shape and angle of trends. Their value is in how they identify the reversal in price. The chart of Edison International summarized price movement very neatly by identifying the three trends in the charted period. The first and third were uptrends and the second was a downtrend. In each case, the end of the trend is easily located because price reverses and the trend line is stopped by the opposite movement in the candlestick.   Channel lines provide the same type of information, but with an additional twist. By identifying the consistency in breadth of trading during a dynamic and moving trading range, channel lines are likely to mark a trend’s conclusion by way of changes in breadth of trading. For example, AT&T prices moved sideways in a channel of more than one month’s duration, and ended with a clearly identified bullish harami. This also marked the conclusion of the channel and the start of a new uptrend.   Moving averages often consist of the use of two MAs at the same time but with different duration. Chartists look for convergence and divergence (between MAs and in relation to price) to provide initial clues of coming reversals. A single MA also provides valuable information simply by changing its proximity with the current price. Trinity Ltd. was quite volatile over a three-month period, making it difficult to spot reversal indicators. However, the MA line showed how crossover helps in this analysis. At the beginning of the period. MA was above price as the downtrend continued. This weakened in the middle as MA merged into the middle of price levels. The MA move below price was brief but it drew attention to a change in the climate of the price itself. When MA again moved above price at the end of the period, it could have signaled a resumption of the downtrend or at least alerted chartists to proceed with caution.   Conclusion A wide range of indicators are employed in confirmation. These include any number of combined studies and analysis. Chartists depend on confirmation to reduce the chances of acting on false signals. Even with the best confirmation, false signals are going to occur. The purpose in confirmation is not to remove the uncertainty, but to improve the chances of well-timed trade decisions.

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends Explained: An Easy-to-Understand System for Successful Trading 

 Segment 4. Confirmation techniques used with trend changes Technicians employ numerous systems for responding to confirmation. While emphasis is on exit upon finding reversal signals, the opposite is just as important: deciding how to react to confirmation. If a trend is expected to continue, should you take some of your profits, hold your position or add to it? This section addresses these questions. Partial exit A conservative method upon building profits in an open position is to take some profits, while leaving the rest to continue growing. Technicians may set pre-established price goals for partial exit, so that even with continuation of a trend, a disciplined approach would be to take some profits. This is a dollar-based system. For example, a trader may decide that if a position’s value increases by $1,000, the overall position will be reduced by $500 (or closed). Equally important is to set bail-out points based on dollar values, in order to reduce maximum losses. For example, a trader may also decide that if a position loses $500, it will be closed. If the position will continue to lose value, cutting losses is prudent, and those same dollars may be put to use elsewhere. The difficulty with a fixed dollar-based Another method is the percentage system exit strategy is its inflexibility. Percentage systems address this problem. A trader may set two exit points for any position: One if the price grows and another if it declines. For example, if the value of a position grows by 5%, one-tenth of the position will be closed; and if the position declines by 10%, the entire position will be closed. This ensures a level of profits or a limited level of losses. For example, on the chart of the Tom Group, Ltd., sale points are identified at 10% intervals. This enables the trader to sell 10% at three different 5% increase price points, so some profits are taken as the uptrend continues.   Another example demonstrates how the bail-out rule works. In the case of Aluminum Corp. of China, the buy point was 3.20 and bail-out was set at a drop of 10%, or 2.88. This occurred toward the conclusion of the charted period.   Stop loss and trailing stop orders The use of specific types of orders, placed when positions are opened, helps to put exit systems in place. A stop loss is an order to sell an open long position once a price reaches a per-determined price. This creates a sale to minimize losses. For example, a stop loss order tells the broker to sell shares if the price declines by 10%. However, the stop loss does not ensure that the target bail-out price will be the sales price. The stop loss is activated once that price is reached. However, the price may continue to decline before the order is executed. So using a stop loss may generate a bail-out, but actual execution could occur at a lower price. The chart of Hewlett-Packard specified bail-out at a 10% drop, or 19.35 based on purchase price of 21.50. At that point, a new bail out, 10% of 19.35, was set at 17.41. In a case of a rapid price decline, the actual loss could be much lower, however. For example, Research in Motion’s price dropped with a large gap. The specified sales price had been set, but the sale price was lower. So although the stop-loss was set at 8.50, this was only the point where a sale order was placed. By the time it was executed, the price had declined to 7.50. Another type of order is the  trailing stop . If the stock’s price rises, the trailing stop is adjusted to a specified percentage or amount below. For example, the trailing stop is fixed at 10% below each day’s high. As long as the stock continues to rise, the trailing stop is adjusted. As soon as it declines to the 10% level, a sale is generated automatically. The advantage of the trailing stop over the stop loss is that it adjusts to protect profits. It provides for unlimited profits while fixing loss levels. For example, a buyer of shares in Akorn set a 10% decline as the point where 20% of the position was to be sold. This occurred only once in the charted period. The rest of the trend continued upward throughout the charted period. 
 Risk reduction – using options to hedge 
 Even with confirmation of a continuation or reversal signal, you cannot be certain about timing of entry or exit. An open position is at risk if reversal signals are ignored; and closing a position prematurely based on a false reversal is also damaging. Positions can be hedged with the use of options. These may be employed to manage positions rather than to speculate. Two ways this can be accomplished: 1.  Protecting unrealized profits in open positions. In this situation, a trader may have an open long position. A reversal signal appears, but it is inconclusive. In this case, rather than selling shares, the trader purchases one long put for every 100 shares owned. This creates an “insurance put.” If the stock value falls, the put will gain one point in value for each point lost in the stock. It costs money to buy the put, but it is a relatively small premium for the protection it provides. If the price does decline, the put can be sold at a profit to offset losses in the stock. Or the put can be exercised and shares will be sold at the fixed strike of the put. For example, Boeing was quite volatile from June through September, 2012. Once at upside gap appeared, a trader might be concerned about possible price retreat. At that point the trader may buy a put. The example is based on a 75 put, which is at the money, so its value will grow one point for each point lost in the stock. Once the price fell to 71, the trader sold the put and took a four-point profit, but did not sell any stock. Another price rally occurred and once again, went above 75 per share. The trader bought another put at this high price and held it until the price fell to 70. Selling the put generated another five points of profit, all without needing to sell shares of stock.   2.  Increasing potential in reaction to bullish continuation. An open long position is in the middle of a strong uptrend. A continuation signal has developed. However, in place of buying more shares and increasing the full market risk, a trader buys a call. The long call will increases one point for each point of growth in the price of the stock. If the stock price declines, both stock and call lose value. However, using the call as a continuation strategy is a relatively inexpensive method for increasing profit potential. If the stock rises, the call can be sold at a profit to take advantage of the higher price per share. Or the call can be exercised to buy additional shares at the fixed strike. The chart of Caterpillar went through a volatile period, trending downward before turning to the upside. A bullish continuation signal appeared in the form of a thrusting lines indicator. The this point, a trader bought an 85 call and held onto it until the price had risen to nearly 90. At this point, the call was sold and profits taken. This was an example of increasing the long position but without taking the risk of buying more stock.   Recognizing continuation signals With emphasis on likely reversal, traders may easily overlook the importance of continuation. A continuation signal may lead to taking of partial profits, cutting losses, or increasing a position. Continuation comes in many forms, and should always be confirmed. For example, the chart of Silver Base Group Holdings marked the start of a long downtrend with a large downward price gap. The meaning of this gap was not known right away. However, the bearish trend was confirmed when MACD lines crossed from bullish down into bearish territory. MACD remained bearish throughout the remainder of the period.   Mid-trend entry Some traders use continuation and confirmation to increase positions already held. This mid-trend entry strategy can be timed in several ways: a. Increase positions at recognized likely conclusion of retracement. The tendency is for retracements to be very short-term and of predictable degree. They may also take on specified shapes likes flags or pennants. For example, the chart of Norfolk Southern exhibited a strong uptrend throughout the period charted. However, increased position size was timed to coincide with the end of two retracements, as marked. The first retracement was clear because the uptrend resumed. The second example was less clear and it seems that buyer momentum was beginning to stall at this point.   b. Increase positions upon breakout with continuation signals. In this case, a price breaks out of the trading range. Rather than a reversal signal, however, the signs point to continuation. Upon seeing this, a position size is increased to take advantage of the change in the trading range. The chart of Southern Co. began trading under resistance, but then broke through strongly. Once it was established that a flip had occurred (prior resistance became new support), a new entry point was identified, and the long position size was increased.   c. Increase positions when price in an uptrend falls to the level of the moving average. When MA is below price, as price falls and touches the MA, if the uptrend is confirmed, this point may be used to increase the size of the open position. China Foods trended upward from February through to the end of April. The entire time, the moving average was below price. At four points, the price dipped and touched the MA line. These were identified as points to increase position size. However, once the MA line moved through price and then above, it signaled the possible end of the uptrend. At this point, the seller would be likely to sell the entire position, take profits, and wait for new signals.   The methods employed to increase a position contradict most technical assumptions of fixed position size. The fixed size assumption is useful to demonstrate how trends affect value; however, in practice, increasing the size when a positive trend is underway can increase profits. This applies in most situations to long positions during uptrends. However, it can also be applied to existing short positions during downtrends. A trader who has shorted stock may sell more stock with a downside continuation, or the holder of short calls may sell additional calls if a bearish continuation signal is confirmed. Techniques for increasing position size are called pyramid systems or pyramiding . While the appeal of exploiting trends is compelling, risk should be kept in mind as well. Increasing position size in reaction to continuation signals (or timed to enter after retracement of convergence with MA) is logical. However, when open positions are increased, a greater risk of loss also occurs. Dangers of greed and panic With all trades and strategies, there are two inhibiting emotions within the market: greed and panic. Greed causes traders to enter positions during strong uptrends, but without analysis of whether the timing is sound. As an uptrend begins to lose momentum, the tendency is for more long position traders to enter positions. This often leads to entry at exactly the wrong time. Panic causes traders to get out of positions at the wrong time as well. During a strong downtrend, for example, as the price approaches the bottom, a growing number of long position traders sell. The contrarian approach is a profitable one. The contrarian does not simply act opposite of the timing of the overall market. The contrarian acts for different reasons. Ignoring the tendency to act out of greed or panic, the contrarian uses logic and analysis to time entry and exit. Requiring signals and confirmation leads to a higher degree of well timed decisions. This often means the timing is made opposite of most traders, which is why the term “contrarian” applies. However, it is caused by the application of confirmation of discovered signals instead of emotional causes for timing of entry or exit. Understanding the technical ideal – key point to remember Technical analysis is a science, but it is not precise. The purpose of using these techniques is to improve the percentage of well-timed entry and exit decisions. Knowing that success can never be 100%, technicians employ specific strategies but also are aware of risks. And so a wise approach is to never risk more in a single trade than you can afford to lose. The technical skills to keep in mind and to practice include: 1.  Knowledge of the basics Learn the differences between fundamental and technical analysis and use both to improve your analytical skills. Technical indicators may include Western indicators based on price patterns and volume; or Eastern indicators (candlesticks) that include specific price patterns for both reversal and continuation. 2. Master the power of charting Charts develop patterns and display not only trends, but momentum as well. Chart patterns also help coordinate many different signals to recognize how trends evolve. Technical analysis is most often defined as the study of price. More accurately, though, it is the study of price patterns , and these are found on charts. As price evolves, recognizable patterns are used to signal momentum and directional change. 3. Rely on the strength of candlesticks. Candlestick charts are powerful technical tools. Candlestick formations include dozens of reversal and continuation signals that, when confirmed, vastly improve entry and exit timing. Dozens of candlestick signals, both reversal and continuation, are found in single-session, double-session, and multiple session types. Some are more reliable than others, and some others may act either as reversal or continuation. However, when confirmed, candlestick indicators are among the best technical tools for timing entry and exit. 4. Always follow the trend Trends follow predicable paths and are recognized through visual technical tools. Use these to better understand the direction, momentum, and change in the trend itself. The trend involves several attributes worthy of study at the same time: direction, momentum, and retracement are key among these. All trends will contain elements of these attributes, which provides strong clues about likely reversal. 5. Use moving averages to recognize coming price changes Short-term price movement is chaotic, but moving averages help smooth out the longer-term trend. Specific changes in MA also foreshadow coming price reversals. MA can be employed as an overlay to price. Crossover points between MA and price may accompany changes in direction and this tendency, when confirmed, aids in recognizing how trends develop patterns for continuation or reversal. 6. Track the interaction of price and volume. Crossover and divergence are significant because they predict reversal before price changes. Volume confirms price trends effectively. Volume indicators or single-session spikes are among the best signals about the nature (strength or weakness) of the trend. Volume signals also are valuable confirming signs that, when used with Western of Eastern indicators, strength what these reveal. 7.  Momentum is the key change in trends No trend continues forever. Eventually, the controlling side begin losing momentum, and this shows up in the momentum oscillator, which confirms other reversal signals. Momentum and other signals take on added significance when they occur at resistance or support. These borders of the trading range are most resistance to continuation of a trend, so weakening momentum is most likely to occur as price approaches these price points. 8. More than anything else, rely on confirmation for all signals No signal provides enough by itself to act upon with confidence. Always seek confirmation before you act. Confirmation comes in many forms, and combinations of indicators add effectively to timing of entry and exit. Confirmation may be of either reversal or continuation. Also seek contradiction as a means of challenging an initial signal. When this occurs, it may reveal that the initial signal is false. Conclusion All technical analysis is estimation. Technicians may use price to confirm what they have seen in fundamentals, or to time day or swing trades. Many experienced technicians track price movement by the minute or hour rather than by the day. Regardless of the duration of a session employed in the chart, patterns, momentum and volume all continue to provide reliable signals and confirmation for an evolving trend. Although short-term price movement is highly chaotic, charting and signals bring order to the process of timing trades. ###
