
Next, we'll look at the two-candle pattern called the bullish engulfing
pattern, illustrated in Exhibit 3.2. Like a piercing pattern, the bullish engulf-
ing pattern typically appears at the culmination of a decline or a downtrend
(see Exhibit 3.24). The market falls, and a black candle forms. Next, a candle
line develops with a real body that wraps around the prior session’s black
body. (The Japanese sometimes refer to this as a hugging line, for obvious
reasons.) As the white real body opens under the prior black real body's
close and closes above that session's open, it shows that buying pressure
has overpowered selling pressure (Le, the bulls have taken charge!) If the
market is solid, the lows of the bullish engulfing pattern should be support.
Thus, for those who are long based on this pattern, there should be a stop
under the lows of this pattern.

Bullish engulfing pattern Bearish engulfing pattern

; ‘tf

EXBIBIT 3.2 — Enguifing Patterns


The Power of Candle Patterns 67

HA] SIDE LIGHT

When you see a bullish or bearish engulfing pattern, you may think it resembles a
Westem key reversal, or outside day. You are right on the money! In classic Westem
technical analysis, a key reversal day or outside day takes place when a security
makes a new high in the context of an uptrend. It then falls to close below the prior
day's close, resulting in a bearish signal. The reverse is true for a downtrend, with the
key reversal day making a new low, then closing above the prior session's open.

The flip side of a bullish engulfing pattern is the bearish engulfing pat-
tern, which appears at the top of a market experiencing an uptrend. A white
real body 1s engulfed by a black real body, suggesting a top reversal. As you
ean see in Exhibit 3.2B, the black real body gaps open above the prior white
real body's clase. Then the market falls to close below the prior session's
open—a bearish signal. That movement indicates that supply has overpow-
ered demand. Obviously, the bears have wrested control from the bulls. If the
market is weak, the high of the bearish engulfing pattern should be a resis-
tance area.

The next patterns we'll study are counterattack lines. Counterattack lines
are formed when opposite-colored candles have the same close.

The bullish counterattack lane oceurs during a decline. As illustrated in
Exhibit 33, the initial candle in this pattern ts usually a black candle. The

Bullish counterattack pattern Bearish counterattack pattern
| | | Close
| Close |
A B

EXGIBIT 3.3) ~ Counterattack Patterns


62

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

| Ns KEY POINT

With the bullish and bearish engulfing pattems, only the prior real body needs to be
engulfed. Shadows need not be engulfed.

next candle opens lower, which delights the bears. Suddenly, the bulls stage
a counterattack by propelling prices to the prior candle's close. This causes
the downtrend to stall.

The bullish counterattack pattern 1s similar to the bullish piercing pattern.
The difference is that the bullish counterattack line does not move up into the
prior candle’s real body. Instead, it returns to the prior candle's clase. The in-
ability of the bullish counterattack formation to push into the former candle’s
real body tells you that it may not be quite as potent as the piercing pattern,
nonetheless, the counterattack line should be respected. It shows a changing
of the guard from bears to bulls, and that’s always a significant event.

Ina bearisk counterattack pattern (see Exhibit 3.3B), the first white can-
dle shows the bulls happily in control. The next candle gaps open higher, but
the bears rush in to force the closing price down to the prior session's close.
The surprised bulls have no doubt swallowed their recent optimism and now
find themselves on shaky ground.

As you've probably surmised, the bearish counterattack pattern is similar
to dark cloud cover, but again, the black counterattack candle does not pen-
etrate the prior session's real body. Instead, it closes at the prior session's
close. This suggests that dark cloud cover may display a slightly stronger sig-
nal, but again, whenever supply overwhelms demand, it significantly changes
the market’s texture.

Bearish counterattack lines send especially potent signals when the sec-
ond session gaps open much higher than the previous session. This tells you
that the market moved strongly in the direction of the prevailing trend, then
made a sharp U-turn to close at the prior day's closing price. In other words,
it shot up, only to end back down where it started.

You can imagine the same scenario, with directions reversed, for the bull-
ish counterattack pattern.

Now you can see why the two-candle bullish and bearish engulfing pat-
tern, bullish piercing pattern, dark cloud cover, and bullish and bearish coun-
terattack patterns are such powerful indicators. Strong opinion drives the
price in one direction, then suddenly that opinion reverts. Driven by a swift


The Power of Candle Patterns 69

change in supply and demand, the price turns around and shoots in the op-
posite direction.
In the next section, we'll talk about additional two-candle patterns that

presage trend change. For now, though, answer the questions that follow,
then check your answers to gain more insights on the patterns Just discussed.

CHECK VOUR UNDERSTAADING

Questions for Chapter Three, Section One: Close Cousins:
Piercing, Dark Cloud Covers, Enguifing, and Counterattacks

1. From the choices listed, select three conditions needed for a piercing
pattern.
a. Uptrend.
b. Downtrend.
¢. The first candle 1s black.
4d. The first candle 1s white.
e. The second candle ts black.
{. The second candle is white.

2. From the list in question 1, choose three conditions needed for dark
cloud cover.

3. As the second session of a piercing pattern pushes more and more deeply
into the first candle, it may become a
a. Morning star.
b. doji star.
¢. dark cloud cover.
4. bullish engulfing pattern.
4. The opposite pattern to the dark cloud cover is
a. the bearish engulfing pattern.
b. the bullish engulfing pattern.
¢. the piercing pattern.
d. the hammer.
5. A plercing pattern ts to a bullish engulfing pattern as a istoa
bearish engulfing pattern.


70

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

a. bearish counterattack
b. bullish counterattack
¢. bearish harami

a. dark cloud cover

. Fora bullish engulfing pattern, which ts true?

a. The second session's white real body has to wrap around the prior ses-
sion's shadows.

b. The second session's white real body has to wrap around the prior ses-
sion's black real body.

¢. The second session's black real body has to wrap around the prior ses-
sion’s black real body.

d. The second session's white real body has to wrap around the prior ses-
sion's white real body.

. From the following list, choose the two main uses for a bullish engulfing

pattern.

(1) As a bullish continuation signal
(2) As a bottom reversal signal

(3) As support

(4) As resistance

a. land2

b. 2and3

«. 3and4

d. land4

. The two candle lines that make up the bullish engulfing pattern have

a. the same color real bodies.

b. a black real body followed by a white real body, in a downtrend.
¢. a white real body followed by a black real body, in a downtrend.
dl. two white real bodies in a downtrend.

. Adark cloud cover ts to a piercing pattern as a is to a bullish en-

gulfing pattern.

a. bearish engulfing pattern
b. evening star

¢. bearish counterattack

4d. bullish counterattack


The Power of Candle Patterns 71

10.

12.

13.

The most significant difference between the bearish engulfing pattern
and a dark cloud cover is

a. the second session of the bearish engulfing pattern wraps around the
prior white real body, while the second session of dark cloud cover
closes partially into a prior white real body.

b. the bearish engulfing pattern wraps around a prior black real body,
while the dark cloud cover wraps around the prior black candle.

c. the dark cloud cover appears after an uptrend, while the bearish en-
guifing pattern comes after a downtrend.

a. the dark cloud cover develops after a downtrend, while a bearish en-
gulfing pattern appears after an uptrend.

From the following list, which are the requisite conditions for a bearish

engulfing pattern?

(1) The market is in a downtrend.

(2) On the second session of this pattern, the market should open above
the prior session's close.

(3) On the second session of this pattern, the market should close below
the prior session's open.

(4) On the second session of this pattern, the market must close above
the prior session's high.

a. land2
b. 3and 4
c. land3
a. 2and3

If an extremely large white candle completes a bullish engulfing pattern,
you should

a. buy immediately on the close of the white candle, since it is so strong.
b. sell on the close of the white candle, since the market 1s overbought.
c. it depends on the risk/reward profile.

d. None of the above.

The important considerations of a bullish counterattack pattern are

(1) the market is in a downtrend.

(2) on the second session of the pattern, the market must open under
the prior session's high.


72

14.

15.

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

(3) on the second session of the pattern, the market must open sharply
under the prior session's close, or low.

(4) on the last session of this pattern, the market must close above the
prior session's close.

a. Lland2

b. Land4

c«. land3

ad. 2and3

One aspect of the bearish counterattack is that today's isthe same

as yesterday’s__.

a. close, open

b. close, close

¢. Open, open

d. open, clase

List the order in which patterns form as a white candle real body moves

more deeply into a black candle.

(1) Bullish counterattack

(2) Bullish engulfing pattern

(3) Piercing pattern

(4) Dark cloud cover

ee |

b. 1,3, 2

c. 2,3,1

a4

16. List the order in which patterns form as the close of a black real body

moves more deeply into a white candle.
(1) Bearish counterattack.

(2) The patterns are all the same.

(3) Dark cloud cover.

(4) Bearish engulfing pattern.

a.1,3,4

b.4

2123

4. 4,3,2


The Power of Candle Patterns 7

17. Which of the patterns in Exhibit 3.4 are bearish engulfing patterns?

a. All

b. Land2
ec. 3and4
a. 1

el aL

EXGIBIT 3.4 Question 17

Refer to Exhibit 3.5 to answer questions 18 to 20.

i

(x) (y)

EXBIBIT 3.5 Questions 18-20

18.

19.

What candle signal is at x?
a. Hanging man

b. Shooting star

c. Bullish engulfing pattern
d. None of the above

Assume the dashed line ts our target on a bounce. Should you buy at the
close of candle line x?

a. Yes, since the candle signal at x 1s a potentially bullish turning signal.
b. No, because x has a small real body.

¢. No, because the risk/reward of the trade 1s not attractive.

d. Yes, because the risk/reward of the trade 1s attractive.


74

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

20. Assume the dashed line is our target on a bounce. Should you buy at the
close of candle line y?

a. Yes, since the lows of the hammer should be support.

b. No, because y 1s a black candle.

c. No, because the risk/reward of the trade 1s not attractive.
d. Yes, because the risk/reward of the trade ts attractive.

21. In Exhibit 3.6, after which bullish engulfing pattern 1s the market most
likely to bounce?
a.

- OO we

b.
«.
a

wet te LL 4

1 2 3 4
EXBIBIT 3.6 = Question 21

Use Exhibit 3.7 to answer questions 22 to 24.

/

EABIBIT 3.7 Questions 22-24

22. The pattern shown in Exhibit 3.7 has the same group of candle lines as
which pattern?

a. A bearish engulfing pattern c. Adark cloud cover
b. A plercing pattern d. A tweezers top


The Power of Candle Patterns 73

23.

24.

Why ts the pattern in Exhibit 3.7 not a classic example of this pattern?
a. The black candle did not open high enough.
b. The lower shadow of the black candle is not long enough.

¢. The close of the black real body did not intrude deeply enough into the
white real body.
4d. The white real body was not long enough.

Based on the pattern in Exhibit 3.7, what should you wait for to increase
the hkelihood of a top reversal?

a. Wait for doji.

b. Wait for the next session to close more into the white candle’s real
body.

¢. Wait for another tall white candle.

a. Wait for none of the above.

. In Exhibit 3.8, which is(are) piercing patterns?

al
b. 2and3
c4
a. Land3

1 2 3 4

EXBIBIT 3.8 Question 25

26. In Exhibit 3.9, which group(s) of candle signals hint(s) that the bulls are

losing momentum?
al

b. 2

c. 2and3

a.4


76

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

fi 7 | ut.

1 2 3 a
EXGIBIT 3.9 Question 26

27. Which of the bullish counterattack lines shown in Exhibit 3.10 is more
likely a reversal?
a. None of these
b. All of these
«2

AN fs
a "0

1 2 3 4
EXGEBIT 3.10 Question 27

Answers for Chapter Three, Section One: Close Cousins:
Piercing. Dark Cloud Cover, Engulfing. and Counterattacks

1. b. ¢, f. The piercing pattern 1s composed of two candlesticks in a falling
market. The first candlestick session in this pattern has a black real body;
the second has a long, white real body. The white session opens sharply
lower, under the low of the prior black session. Then prices push higher,
creating a relatively long, white real body that closes above the midpoint
of the prior day's black real body.


The Power of Candle Patterns i7

2.

10.

a, d, e. The dark cloud ts the opposite of the piereing pattern. The dark
cloud cover is a dual candle pattern that represents a top reversal after an
uptrend. The first session of this two-candle pattern is a strong, white
real body. The second session's price opens above the prior session's
high, meaning above the top of the upper shadow. By the end of the sec-
ond day’s session, however, the market closes deeply within the prior
session's white body.

d. If the white candle 1s large enough to close above the opening of the
prior black real body, it will become a bullish engulfing pattern.

c. The dark cloud cover takes place in an uptrend, forming a black real
body closing deeply into a prior white real body. The oppasite of that is
the piercing pattern. It is a bottom reversal signal that occurs during a
market decline, and has a white real body that pushes deeply into the
prior black real body.

d. This question compares how deeply a real body closes into a prior real
body in the two patterns. The piercing pattern has a white candle that
closes partially into the prior session's black real body. The bullish en-
gulfing pattern has a white real body that completely wraps around the
prior session's black real body. Since a bearish engulfing pattern encom-
passes all price action of the prior white candle, dark cloud cover, which
only partially moves Into the prior session's white real boxy, Is the cor-
rect answer.

b. A bullish engulfing pattern requires that a white real body wraps
around the prior black real body during a downtrend. It is not a requisite
for a bullish engulfing pattern that the white real body wrap around the
prior session's upper or lower shadows.

b. Besides acting as a potential bottom reversal signal, the lows of the
bullish engulfing pattern can be used as a support level.

c. A bullish engulfing pattern consists of a white real body that wraps
around a black real body in the context of a downtrend. They have to be
consecutive sessions.

a. In this analogy, the dark cloud cover is the opposite of the piercing
pattern. The opposite of a bullish engulfing pattern is a bearish engulfing
pattern.

a. The combination of candle lines for both the bearish engulfing pattern

and dark cloud cover are the same. Specifically, the market is moving
up, and the next session consists of a white candle immediately followed


72

12.

13.

14.

15.

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

by a candle with a black real body. The main difference between the
bearish engulfing pattern and dark cloud cover is that the bearish en-
gulfing pattern’s black real body must wrap around the prior session's
white real body. The dark cloud cover need only move into the middle of
the prior session's white real body.

d. Since the bearish engulfing pattern consists of a black real body that
wraps around a white real body in an uptrend, the open of the second
session (1e., the black real body) must open above the prior session's
close.

c. A bullish engulfing pattern doesn't equate with automatically buying,
whether one buys or not on this pattern (or any candle signal) is depen-
dent on the risk/reward profile of the potential trade.

¢. A bullish counterattack pattern occurs during a decline. The first ean-
diestick of this pattern is a long, black real body. The second session
opens dramatically lower. At this point, the bears feel confident. The
bulls then stage their counterattack by pushing the price back up to
the prior close, so the price 1s virtually unchanged. It's important that the
market initially opens deeply under the lows of the preceding session.
This gap down shows that the bears have a foothold, at least at the open-
ing bells. But by that session’s end, the bulls come back in what the
Japanese call a kamikaze battle, to return the market to the prior close.
b. A bearish counterattack pattern requires that (1) the market is in an
uptrend, (2) a white candle is immediately followed by a gap higher open-
ing, and (3) the session that gaps higher closes unchanged, at the same
price as the prior white candle session's close.

b. All these patterns are bottom reversal signals that have a black candle
directly followed by a white candle that opened weaker. The difference
in these patterns ts the extent to which the white candle intrudes into
the black candle. The bullish counterattack pattern has as its second can-
die a white candle that closes at the same price as the prior session's
close. A piercing pattern's second session (white) candle closes above
the prior session's close. (Ideally, it closes above the center of the prior
white candle.) The bullish engulfing pattern develops with a white candle
for the second session that cornmpletely wraps around the prior session's
black real body. The dark cloud cover has a black candle closing in a
prior white candle’s real body.

16. a. The bearish counterattack has as its second candle a black real body

that closes at the same price as the prior (white candle) session's close.


The Power of Candle Patterns 7m

17.

19.

21.

The dark cloud cover’s first session is a white candle. The second session
is a black candle that moves below the prior session's close. (Ideally, the
black candle closes at least halfway into the white candle.) The bearish
engulfing pattern has as its second session a black real body that com-
pletely wraps around the prior session's white real body.

c. Two criteria for a bearish engulfing pattern are a black real body en-
gulfing a preceding white real body, and the market must be in an up-
trend. Although in examples 1 and 2 we see black real bodies wrapping
around white real bodies, the trend preceding the pattern was incorrect.
Therefore, 3 and 4 meet the requirement for a bearish engulfing pattern.

4d. This is a hammer. The shape of the line 1s correct and the trend before
the line was the requisite downtrend (even though it was a short+erm
downtrend ).

c. If one buys on the hammer's close, the risk is to the bottom of the
lower shadow of the hammer (that should be a support area). Next we
have to determine the potential upside of the trade, which in this case is
the dashed resistance line. Consequently, we now have our stop-out level
(under the low of the hammer's lower shadow) and a price target (the
dashed line). Now we ask the pivotal question: Is this a good trade based
on the risk‘reward profile of this scenario? In this case, with the risk Just
about the same as the reward, this might be a trade to bypass. This brings
out a erttical aspect of the candle charts: Even a beautifully defined can-
dlestick line or pattern may not offer an attractive trade because of a
poor risk/reward.

. a. While the market is descending at y, we now have a better nsk/reward

than in the previous question. This is because the hammer ts still poten-
tial support and we still have the same price target shown by the dashed
line. Since at y we are now near the bottom end of the hammer's support
area (the bottom of the lower shadow), we have a tighter stop with more
upside potential in relation to this stop-out level. Of course, if the market
closed under the lows of y, one should consider vacating longs.

d. In this case, we see volume confirming the potential bullish implica-
tions of the bullish engulfing pattern. Specifically, there 1s light volume
on the black real body portion of the bullish engulfing pattern and vol-
ume Increase on the white turnaround candle. Although choice ¢ also has
higher volume on the white candle than the black, answer d has a much
higher-volume session on the white candle compared to the black candle
than does choice ec. This question displays a powerful aspect of the can-


22.

23.

24.

25.

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

die charts: All classic Western charting techniques, such as volume in this
example, can be easily merged with candle charting techniques.

¢. This ts the same combination of candle lines needed for a dark cloud
cover. Specifically, the market is In an ascending mode with a black real

body that opens above the prior session's high and then closes into the
prior session's white real body.

¢. A classic dark cloud cover should have a close higher than the middle
of the prior tall white candle, which shows that the bears have intruded
deeply into the bulls’ territory.

b. Bearish confirmation of a less-than-ideal dark cloud cover can be ob-
tained by waiting for the next session (after the second session of the
dark cloud cover) to see a close that goes more deeply into the white can-
die that started the dark cloud cover.

¢. A plercing pattern is a potential bottom reversal signal in which the
market opens under the prior day's close, or preferably under the prior
day's low, and then closes above the middle of the prior black real body.
In scenario 1, the close of a white real body did not get deeply enough
into the black real body. In scenario 2, the close of a white real body was
strong enough that it wrapped around the black real body and so became
a bullish engulfing pattern. Scenario 3 did have the same combination of
candle lines that is needed for a piercing pattern, but these lines came
after an uptrend instead of the necessary downtrend.
