
 Usually, after a week or two, Clark would decide there was something wrong with his new idea, and drop it. Moments after he’d exploded with his latest plan to create another multibillion-dollar industry, he would have forgotten about it. But every now and then the long, dark tunnel didn’t come to a dead end. Whatever radar Clark possessed told him that it was okay to sprint into the dark. That’s when he was most dangerous. It was also when he was at his best. 

 Anyway, it took some months before I realized that I was never going to hear about his past from him, at least not in the usual way that information changes hands. The few times I asked him directly how he had got from there to here—which, it was becoming clearer, was the same as asking how the modern world had got from there to here—he would offer some perfunctory reply and wave me away. “That’s boring,” he’d say. When I pressed he might say, “That’s the past. I really don’t give a shit about the past.” 

 Then one day I discovered the cardboard boxes. They were stacked up in a closet in the guest bedroom of his house. It was, like most guest rooms, one of those rooms that looked as if they had been cleaned a thousand times and never inhabited. Since he first started out in Silicon Valley back in 1979 Clark had the same secretary, a woman named D’Anne Schjerning. After Netscape went public, in August 1995, she made so much money from her stock in various Clark-inspired enterprises that she bought herself a long gold Cadillac and retired. Up until then, bless her heart, she squirreled away Clark’s notes and papers, and stuffed them into cardboard boxes. She kept the boxes at Netscape until the company outgrew its space, at which point she shipped them to Clark’s home. The boxes had never been opened. They looked as new as everything else in the room. Clark had no idea what was in them (“It must just be some boring old stuff,” he said), but he did not mind if I opened them. 

 At the top of the first box there was a yellowing clipping from the local newspaper in Plainview, Texas, where Clark grew up. The paper wanted to let the townspeople know that one of their own had gone to California and created a big company called Silicon Graphics. It played it as a straightforward local-boy-makes-good story, and made light of Clark’s boyhood failure. It mentioned that he’d been expelled from the local public high school in his junior year. He’d been an indifferent student and a cutup—one of those great bad examples to youth who prove that if you really want to be a success in American life you have to start by offending your elders. The offense that got Clark tossed out for good was telling an English teacher to “go to hell.” Before that he had exploded a small bomb on a school bus, smuggled a skunk, inside a horn case, into a school dance, and set off a string of firecrackers inside another student’s locker, among other tricks. Once he left school—or school left him—he fled town. 

 The next clue folded neatly inside the cardboard boxes was a photograph of Clark circa 1970, having just received his master’s degree in physics from the University of New Orleans, on his way to a Ph.D. program at the University of Utah. He wore thick dark-rimmed glasses, a crew cut, and an expression that approached, but did not quite achieve, innocence. In under eight years this person, considered unfit to graduate from public high school in Plainview, Texas, had earned himself a Ph.D. in Computer Science. 

 Actually, the story was more remarkable than that. His father abandoned the family when Clark was a small child. His mother should have taken welfare, but it never occurred to her. The home Clark went back to after a day of turning his school on its head was situated somewhere below the poverty line. When I asked him about the article in the Plainview paper, all he said was “I grew up in black and white. I thought the whole world was shit and I was sitting in the middle of it.” At the minimum age of seventeen and a half Clark asked his mother to sign the piece of paper that permitted him to join the Navy. In September 1961, when the rest of his high school class returned for its senior year, he left Plainview for basic training just outside of New Orleans. 

 His career in the Navy started as badly as his career in high school ended. When he arrived at training camp, he was given, along with every other new recruit, a multiple-choice aptitude test. He had never seen a multiple-choice test, and he didn’t know how to take one. To most of the questions several different answers struck him as at least partially correct. Instead of picking the one that seemed most correct, he just circled them all. The Navy assumed that he knew that circling more than one answer fooled the computer that graded the tests. They charged him with cheating, took him off the ordinary slow track for enlisted men, and put him on an even slower one for juvenile delinquents. Thus the first time Jim Clark ever heard of computers was when he was accused of trying to fool one into thinking he was smarter than he was. 

 The other recruits who took the multiple-choice test went into a classroom and obtained their high school equivalency diplomas. Clark alone found himself shipped out to sea. There he spent the next nine months, performing the most disgusting chores that need doing on a ship. Those nine months at sea have filled a lot of Clark’s memory. He recalls officers telling him that he was stupid, and bullies tossing plates full of food on the floor just so that he would have to clean them up. He returned to the Navy’s classroom convinced that Plainview, Texas, just might not be the world’s capital of shit. He took his first math test and scored the highest grade in the class. He was unaware that he had any particular aptitude for math and didn’t quite believe the result. Neither did anyone else. The Navy gave him another test. Same result. Six weeks later Clark was assigned to teach basic algebra to incoming recruits. A few after that, one of the instructors told him that it had been a long time since he’d seen someone so naturally gifted in mathematics. He suggested that Clark enroll in night classes at Tulane University with a view to getting a college degree after he’d finished his tour of duty. Within eight years Clark had his college degree, plus a master’s in physics, plus a Ph.D. in computer science. 

 In the Navy, Clark said, he learned that his desire for revenge could lead to success. He was propelled in the classroom by his anger about the humiliation he’d suffered at sea. Thus success, for him, became a form of revenge. 

 I returned to the cardboard boxes. They suggested a turbulent early career. There were hints that between 1970 and 1978 Clark had married at least twice, sired at least two children, moved back and forth across the country at least three times, and held at least four different jobs, mainly at universities. He did postgraduate work at the University of Utah with the forefather of computer graphics, Ivan Sutherland. In 1978 he was fired for insubordination from a post at the New York Institute of Technology, at which point a wife, not his first, left him. “I remember her saying that she couldn’t live the way I lived anymore,” he recalled when asked. “She just wanted a more settled life.” 

 When he said this, he was standing outside of his house, near his hill. Just a few years back, before the Internet boom, Clark’s house in Atherton had been surrounded by empty fields. Now he was surrounded by new houses, many of them bigger than his own. One morning he looked up from his kitchen table and saw the neighbors looking back. He requested, and was denied, a permit to build a fence tall enough to screen them from his view. The city of Atherton, California, had strict rules about fences, and the fence Clark wanted to build was declared too high. So Clark built a hill, and put the fence on top of the hill. It did not occur to him that there was anything unusual about this. 

 As he stood beneath his self-made hill, he tried to explain this extraordinary leap in his career from thirty-eight-year-old unsuccessful college professor with a warning label on his forehead to a founder of a multibillion-dollar corporation. “It was one of those times when the whole fucking world went berserk,” he said. “After my wife left I went into this spiral…six months of counseling. Then I said fuck counseling; it wasn’t helping anything. There was all of this self-actualization stuff around, est and that kind of thing. I thought I don’t need some guru to tell me how to find my way out.” 

 “So it was as simple as that?” 

 He laughed. “No. For a year and a half I was in this kind of down-beat funk. Dark, dark, dark.” 

 I said he still hadn’t answered the original question. 

 “It’s funny,” he said. “One day I was sitting at home and, I remember having the conscious thought ‘You can dig this hole as deep as you want to dig it.’ I remember thinking, ‘My God, I’m going to spend the rest of my life in this fucking hole.’ You reach these points in life when you say, ‘Fuck, I’ve reached some sort of dead end here. What was the point of getting here?’ And you descend into this chaos. All those years you thought you were achieving something. And you achieved nothing. I was thirty-eight years old. I’d just been fired. My second wife had just left me. I had somehow fucked up. I developed this maniacal passion for wanting to achieve something .” He paused. “I guess it was a little bit of self-imposed psychology.” In something like an instant the man had changed his life. He reinvented his relationship to the world around him in a way that is considered normal only in California. No one who had been in his life to that point would be in it ten years later. His wife, his friends, his colleagues, even his casual acquaintances—they’d all be new. 

 The result of his self-imposed psychology surprised even Clark. He insists that the transformation occurred overnight and that he cannot really explain it. But all of a sudden the best graduate students at Stanford wanted to work with him on his special project—a computer chip he’d been tinkering with for nearly three years. Computer science became a formal academic discipline only in the late 1960s when an obscure subdivision of the U.S. government called ARPA (for Advanced Research Projects Agency) funded four university departments—at the University of Utah, the Carnegie-Mellon Institute, the University of California at Berkeley, and Stanford University. The best computer science students at Stanford were some of the best computer science students anywhere. Under Clark they gathered together into a new, potent force. “The difference was phenomenal, for me. I don’t know how many people around me noticed. But my God I noticed. The first manifestation was when all of these people started coming up and wanting to be part of my project.” 

 That project turned out to be Clark’s first experience with the new new thing. It was 1979. Silicon Valley was chiefly a place where chips were made, though this new company called Apple Computer was having some success mass-marketing computers. Clark set to work turning his new interest in being alive into new technology. With his graduate students he created a chip that could do things no other computer chip could do. That much I knew from a fascinating new book, called Dealers in Lightning , about the role of Xerox’s Palo Alto Research Center (PARC) in the modern computer industry. That day I showed Clark a passage from a chapter called “The Silicon Revolution”: 

 Years later Lynn Conway [a PARC researcher] could still remember the moment she first laid eyes on the chip that would launch a new science. It was a week or two after Christmas 1979. She was seated before her second-floor window at PARC, which looked down on a lovely expanse of valley in its coat of lush winter green, sloping down toward Page Mill Road just out of the view to the south. But her eyes were fixed on a wafer of silicon that had just come back from a commercial fabrication shop. 

 There were dozens of chip designs on the wafer, mostly student efforts from a Stanford course being taught with PARC’s technical supervision. They all strived toward an intricate machined elegance, comprising as they did tens of thousands of microscopic transistors packed into rectangular spaces the size of a cuticle, all arranged on a wafer that could fit comfortably in the palm of one’s hand. A few years earlier the same computing power could not have fit on an acre of real estate. 

 One design stood out, and not only because it bore along its edge the assertive hand-etched legend: “Geometry Engine © 1979 James Clark.” Where the others looked to be simple arrays of devices that formed simple digital clocks and arithmetic search engines and the like, Clark’s was obviously something more—larger, deeper, more complex than the others, even when viewed with the naked eye. 

 …After the appearance of Clark’s chip, the art and science of computer graphics would never be the same. The computer-aided design of cars and aircraft, the “virtual reality” toys and games of the modern midway, the lumbering dinosaurs of the movie Jurassic Park —they all sprang from the tiny chip Lynn Conway held by its edges that winter day. 

 Once again Clark’s mind wandered out of the conversation. He had no interest in his Geometry Engine. He’d never heard of the book or its author, Michael A. Hiltzik, though he did, vaguely, recall Lynn Conway. “Kind of overblown title isn’t it. Dealers in Lightning, ” he snorted, and then moved back to finding something in his house that needed to be changed. His ego was far too big for garden-variety immodesty, taking pride in his past accomplishment. He was actually irritated that he was somehow obliged to exhibit pride in something he had done; and he reacted by looking for something he might do. He’d pulled out the previous owner’s idea of iron work and put up his own. He’d dug up his swimming pool and moved it across his yard. Twice. Now he cast around with the blank expression that always preceded a new plan. 

 I left him to it and returned once again to the room that had been cleaned one thousand times and cardboard boxes that had never been opened. They went silent. Right up until 1991 was a giant black hole. But after that the paper came fast and thick. First there was a big bill to Clark from a local hospital. “Motorcycle accident,” read a scrap of paper attached to it. A note described an “interior tibia detached completely from bone.” Beneath the hospital bill and the clinical description of Clark’s shattered leg was a rough draft of a paper written by Clark, and dated just after his motorcycle accident. His paper was called “The Telecomputer.”

The New New Thing 

 4 

 Disorganization Man 

 I n 1956 a Fortune magazine writer named William H. Whyte published his classic study of American corporate life, The Organization Man . The book found its way onto the shelf crammed with evocative 1950s titles such as The Lonely Crowd and The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit . All these texts tried in one way or another to explain the strange uniformity of the American businessman. He commuted to work in his immaculate gray suit from his neat suburban tract house. He kept his front lawn and his hair trimmed to lengths tacitly agreed upon by his peers. He avoided high culture, or anything else that smacked of elitism. He worked for some enormous gray corporation such as IBM or AT&T that was more of a home to him than his house in the suburbs. The enormous gray corporation maintained a constant lookout for anarchists trying to pass themselves off as conformists. They devised clever multiple-choice personality tests, which they gave to anyone who applied for a job: 

 Underline the word you think goes best with the word in capitals: 

 NIGHT: (dark, sleep, moon, morbid) 

 NAKED: (nude, body, art, evil) 

 That question came from a test Whyte dug out of the archives of one of the enormous gray corporations. An actual human being read these tests, presumably looking for the fellow stupid enough to circle “morbid” and “evil.” When the true Organization Man read NAKED, he underlined “nude,” even if he thought “evil.” 

 In any case, the Organization Man’s taste for conformity led Whyte to a simple theory: the Protestant Ethic, with its emphasis on rugged individualism, had been displaced in American life by something else. “The Social Ethic” is the fancy name Whyte gave that something else. The Organization Man believed in the essential rightness of large groups—and the essential wrongness of the individual. He felt very strongly that people had a moral obligation to fit in. To Whyte this represented an important and possibly permanent shift in American values—a kind of loss of innocence. Americans were not merely working differently than they had in the past. They were voting, praying, dressing, buying, and loving differently, too. And all of it flowed from changes in the corporate culture. When Americans changed the way they made money, they changed a lot of other things too. 

 The character at the center of Whyte’s wonderful psychodrama was “the well-rounded man.” The well-rounded man was the ideal 1950s type. Whyte wrote his book in part as an argument against the well-rounded man. He believed that when society exalted the well-rounded it punished the truly talented: the scientists, the artists, the musicians, the engineers, the people who came at life from surprising new directions. The pressure exerted on the oddballs to be “normal” caused extraordinary products of the human imagination to be discouraged and suppressed: 

 Searching for their own image, management men look for the “well-rounded” scientists. They don’t expect them to be quite as “well rounded” as junior-executive trainees; they generally note that scientists are “different.” They do it, however, in a patronizing way that implies that the difference is nothing that a good indoctrination program won’t fix up. Customarily, whenever the word brilliant is used, it either precedes the word but (cf. “We are all for brilliance, but…”) or is coupled with such words as erratic, eccentric, introvert, screwball , etc. 

 Somewhere along the line the Organization Man passed from the American scene. Whether he was murdered or died of natural causes is hard to say; obviously, he had a lot of bad luck between the late 1950s and the late 1990s. One piece of bad luck was rapid technical change, which was a weapon that oddball upstarts could use against the enormous gray corporations. Another was Jim Clark or, more generally, the engineer with a taste for anarchy, who lifted one big middle finger in the direction of the enormous gray corporation. Silicon Valley hatched a lot of certifiable weirdos interested in getting their hands on money and power. These people became some of the most admired businessmen on earth. And yet, by the standards of the Organization Man, they were barely socialized. 

 Clark’s quixotic bid for power and money began at Silicon Graphics. The company he founded with several of his Stanford graduate students was one of a handful that extended the reach of the computer and caused important people to rethink what the machine might be capable of. The chip Clark had designed, the Geometry Engine, was better able than any before it to process three-dimensional graphics in real time, and so create a simulation of reality on the computer screen. “Jim’s logic was that the world was three-dimensional, and so the computer world would have to be, too,” said Kurt Akeley, one of Clark’s students. “He thought the right way to interact with the machines is the way you interact with the world.” Clark had long been fascinated by virtual reality. The Geometry Engine made it possible to draw and redraw the real world inside a computer, which was the equivalent of bestowing upon the computer a sense of sight. When you turned on the computer in Clark’s Stanford lab, you now saw a realistic, three-dimensional picture. “Computer graphics is as fundamental to computers as vision is to humans,” Clark wrote back in his teaching days. That thought, strange at the time, soon became commonplace. 

 A lot of people who should have seen the importance of Clark’s Geometry Engine thought it was a useless toy. Half the venture capitalists on Sand Hill Road who made their money, in theory at least, financing the future had failed to see its potential. So had the enormous gray corporations of the late 1970s. Clark had offered to license his invention to IBM, Apollo, Hewlett-Packard, and DEC. All turned him down. Even people whose work would be transformed by his invention were slow to grasp its importance. For instance, an engineer from Lockheed visited Silicon Graphics (SGI) soon after the company was founded. The SGI engineers offered him a demonstration: an automobile depicted and manipulated in three-dimensional space on an SGI computer. “That might be good for designing cars,” said the man from Lockheed, “but I design airplanes.” He essentially did not believe what he had just seen; he assumed Clark and his engineers had made a one-off trick of putting a picture of an automobile inside the computer. He didn’t understand that Clark’s new company had made it possible to design everything inside a computer. And that every new Lockheed airplane from now until eternity would be created by Silicon Graphics’ technology. 

 The Hollywood people were shrewder about the possibilities, and it wasn’t long before Steven Spielberg and George Lucas were banging on Clark’s door and asking to be his first customers. The Silicon Graphics work station made possible a lot of new special effects. The spectacle that overran movies and television in the 1980s and 1990s, and kept viewers glued to bad stories, were all accomplished with SGI’s technology. When a moviegoer rubbed his eyes and said, “What’ll they think of next?” it was usually because SGI had upgraded its machines. Someone once said that the best technology is indistinguishable from magic. Clark now had the best magic act in Silicon Valley. 
