
therefore have been a conscious act of sedition. But by whom? All we
knew was that it had come from a member of the board. The board
included John Gutfreund, Tom Strauss, Bill Voute, Jim Massey, Dale
Horowitz, Miles Slater, John Meriwether, and about a dozen other,
lesser players. They were said to be searching frantically for Deep
Throat. At first I thought the obvious place to start was by asking who
among them had the most to lose from the cuts. Easy. Horowitz, the
head of the municipal bond department. He lost every* Most of the municipal bond staff was later gobbled up by Dean Witter,
which then fired its own people.
thing. After the cuts he became a minister without portfolio.
But then again, if the motive was to save the municipal bond department,
it clearly backfired. As Gutfreund said, it resulted in even more people
being cut than was planned. So perhaps the source was not engaged in a
last-minute rescue mission. What if one assumed that the source got
exactly what he wanted? Who gained from the leak? Unfortunately,
unless the motive was revenge on Horowitz, no one. And revenge was too
weak a motive to justify the risk of being caught leaking. Whoever
leaked put his job on the line. The entire board of directors would have
been petrified at the thought of being discovered and humiliated by
John Gutfreund. Fear is perhaps the key to the riddle: Who had the
least to fear from John Gutfreund? Elementary. John Gutfreund.
I know; it begins to sound crazy. And when a Salomon Brothers colleague
put the theory to me that Gutfreund had contrived the leak in order to
expedite the firings, I laughed. But I was unable to shake the notion, for
I saw how eagerly Gutfreund clung to the leak as an excuse for what he
had done. The leak became his life raft. Once we had read about them in
the newspaper, the cuts assumed an odd air of inevitability. "There, you
see," he could say, "it was in The New York Times and goddamn the
bastard who told them." Still, the hypothesis was weak. For surely
Gutfreund would have realized that such a leak discredited, ultimately,
himself.
Whoever the source, his anonymity had the effect of spreading the guilt
of one man (that is, if it was just one) across the entire board of
directors; they all were thought to be guilty by the rest of us. Salomon
Brothers had a Deep Throat. A few managing directors who were not on
the board refused to discuss anything requiring discretion in the

presence of board members. The divisiveness at the top of the firm was
more apparent to us peons than ever before. One crusading managing
director (with big brass balls) told each board member, "I'm sorry, but
until we find out who leaked, we feel we can't trust any of you." Such a
true tale of valor spread quickly across the trading floor. *
I felt a welling frustration. There was nothing I could do but watch. Did
corporate heads ever take responsibility for their actions or the actions
of their subordinates? Was there no honor left? A similar leak in
*Deep Throat was never found. I was told, as late as October 1988, that
the search for the man was still on.
f
the British government would precipitate a flurry of resignations. But
our chiefs never seemed to suffer for their mistakes. They applied a
kind of marginal analysis to each new screwup and said that what had
been done was behind us and that no good would come from further
shock to the firm (such as their resignations). My feeling was that our
woes were caused, at least in part, by the feeling among the men at the
top of the firm that they had no personal exposure if their empire
collapsed.*
What was perhaps most disturbing of all, however, was that the only
promise made to all new Salomon Brothers employees had been broken.
Most people had been assigned to municipal bonds and money markets
without having had much say in the matter. I'm glad I hadn't believed
Jim Massey when he told us, as he told every training class, to relax and
let the firm decide which department you joined. Performance will always
be rewarded, he had said. Many had trusted him. If the firm broke the
covenant when it fired Lewie Ranieri, it scattered the shards with this
decision.
At the end of the grisly day there were as many nervous people as there
had been at the beginning, especially in London. Deep Throat had told
The New York Times that Salomon planned to fire a thousand people.
Five hundred were gone. It clearly wasn't over yet. But who, pray tell,
was next?
Wednesday, October 14, 1987: Day Three • President Tom Strauss came
to tell us that we had been earmarked as the branch office most in need
of cuts. That diagnosis had been made a month ago, when a London
managing director had botched a presentation in our defense to a

business review committee in New York. Instead of justifying our levels
of staffing or mapping a plan, he had spent his time explaining why our
failure wasn't his fault. Gutfreund had been justifiably upset by his
posturing, of which we had now all learned. The review committee
members had assumed the worst about us. You couldn't fault them. We
weren't doing very well.
The waiting part was the worst. People on the London trading floor
seemed to have no clue whether they had been targeted by management
* It was certainly true. At the end of the year no senior manager
resigned. Tom Strauss was paid $2.24 million. Bill Voute was paid $2.16
million, and perhaps most amazingly Dale Horowitz, who was both head of
a department that had disappeared and largely responsible for our
involvement in Columbus Circle, was paid $1.6 million. Gutfreund, however,
did forgo his own bonus and allowed himself only a $300,000 thousand
salary and $800,000 more in deferred compensation. In lieu of his bonus,
he received three hundred thousand share options, which, at the time of
this writing are worth in excess of $3 million.
or not, but all knew that a lot of us, as many as a third of the bond
people, would be liquidated. Each person considered himself essential to
the future of Salomon Brothers. I, too, considered myself essential to
the future of Salomon Brothers, but that in itself was no assurance when
everyone else felt the same way. I began to wonder: What will I do if
they fire me? Then: What will I do if they don't fire me? All of a sudden
Salomon Brothers seemed more leavable than before. Each unit managera jungle guide-submitted a list of his employees in order of their
usefulness to him. The London managing directors convened beneath an
imitation Canaletto in one of the Gone with the Wind dining rooms and
chopped from the bottom of each list. I eyed my jungle guide with
suspicion.
Friday, October 16, 1987: Day Five • The first hurricane in a hundred
years hit London squarely early in the morning. Huge trees snapped,
power lines fell, and windows shattered from about 2:00 A.M. until dawn.
Commuting into work was positively eerie. The streets were empty, and
shops normally open were boarded shut. A crowd huddled beneath the
awning of Victoria Station, going nowhere The trains did not run. It
looked like an ABC miniseries on nuclear winter or perhaps a scene from
The Tempest. Caliban could not have chosen a better day to roar.

It was a bad day for 170 people in our office. People struggled over
fallen trees, treacherous roads, and water hazards to make their way
into work only to find, at the end of the steeplechase, no job. Others
suffered slow torture, waiting literally in the dark for hours before they
learned of their unemployment. The storm had knocked out the
electricity, and we had no lights on the trading floor. Most of us hovered
near our desks. Phone calls came from managing directors, inviting people
one by one to their doom. What was so awful was not the loss of income
but the embarrassment of having failed. We had taken for granted the
narrow sort of success we had achieved, thought it to be not just
important but essential, like legs. Anyone fired seemed defective, and we
all blushed at his deficiency. A few people took their first cold look at
the situation and telephoned head hunters from their desks while they
waited.
A few others were even craftier. Word spread that all the cuts were in
the bond departments. This was true. The head of equities, Stanley
Shopkorn, had taken a brave stand against Gutfreund; he said he'd
rather resign than fire a single person. Seeing that the equity
department was
not firing anyone, the crafty few began to interview for equity jobs. (At
last equities was enjoying its day in the sun! And, as we shall see, it was
to be exactly one day.) Theirs was a race against the clock. They needed
to be hired before they were fired. Once fired, they lost their right to
remain on the trading floor! A security guard would take away their
security passes as they emerged from the firing squad's chamber and
banish them from the building.
Management took the path of least resistance and fired the most recent
additions to the office, until the day came to resemble the massacre of
the innocents. This defeated the purpose of the cuts. Fire ten geeks and
you reduced costs by about as much as if you had fired one elderly (midthirties) managing director. But young people had the advantage of being
easy to sack because they had yet to build a web of connections within
the firm. They had no voice. I was safe partly because I was considered,
unbelievably, an old hand, partly because I had just enough friends in
high places, and partly because I was one of the two or three biggest
producers in the office.
A disproportionately large number of women in London were fired. They

later compared notes and learned they had been given, almost verbatim,
the same speech by the head of sales. To each he hemmed and hawed
and said, "You're a smart gal, and this is no reflection on your abilities."
Most of them didn't like being called "gal." Who are you calling "gal,"
peckerwood? A few told the security guard to fuck off when he asked
for their passes (and fuck off he did). As the firings progressed, the
victims began to return to the trading floor. There was a good deal of
weeping and hugging all around, which I wouldn't mention except it was
such an unusual sight. No one ever cried on the trading floor. No one ever
showed weakness or vulnerability or need for human kindness. Early on
Alexander taught me the importance of a strong exterior. "I learned
awhile ago that there was no point to showing weakness," he said. "When
you arrive at six-thirty A.M., having had no sleep the night before, and
having lost your best friend in a car accident, and some Big Swinging Dick
walks over to your desk, slaps you on the back, and says, 'How the hell
are you?' you don't say, T'm really tired and really upset.' You say, T'm
great, how the hell are you?' "
There was a single upbeat note struck this day. A friend of mine, one of
the few remaining older Europeans (long ago dozens had followed their
noses out of Salomon Brothers and into greener pastures),
stood at his desk from 8:00 A.M. until noon. He hopped about like a small
child on Christmas Eve. What he wanted from Santa was the sack. He
had already accepted a better job at another firm. He had intended to
quit Salomon at the beginning of the week, but seeing he might be fired
instead, he waited and held his tongue, hoping to receive a golden
handshake. The severance payments were indeed generous and based on
tenure. My friend had been with Salomon for seven years and, if fired,
stood to receive several hundred thousand dollars. I rooted for him. I
was sure he deserved the ax, but I was afraid that management might
feel reluctant to jilt an employee of such long standing. Thankfully it
swallowed its devotion, gathered its courage, and called him into the
dining room. When the call came through, there was a rush on the floor
to congratulate him and lots of smiles and laughter. He was going to a
better afterlife.
A trader posted a notice in the men's room near the end of the day. The
men's room doubled as a used-car auction room. Most days there was a
BMW or a Mercedes on offer. This trader, however, was selling a Volvo.

A bad omen.
Saturday, October 17,1987: Day Six • I flew to New York, for two
reasons. Months before I had agreed to speak to the training program on
salesmanship. My speech was scheduled for Tuesday, October 20. This
now appeared to be a grim assignment, for the 250 trainees (the largest
class ever) had little hope of keeping their jobs.
The other reason for my trip was to lobby with New York managing
directors for a big bonus. This oleaginous practice was standard in the
London office. During the last couple of months of each year most
London salesmen and traders visited New York to be seen and to argue,
very subtly, that they deserved a great sum of money at the end of the
year. The argument took the form of wishing bosses a happy holiday
season in a loud voice and looking poor when they asked how you were
doing. My jungle guide virtually insisted that I make the journey; that
was most kind of him. He was watching out for my interests. That made
two of us.
Monday, October 19, 1987: Day Seven • Because my speech wasn't until
Tuesday, I had the day free to roam the forty-first floor in New York.
Normally I hated doing this. On 41, even after I had established myself,
I always felt I was having an out-of-body experience. The place to me
always felt as dumb as a football huddle. But this time it was
different. The floor had been gelded. It was like a visit to a museum or
to a ghost town, rather than a barroom brawl. There was a vast, empty
space around John Gutfreund's desk, which was where the money market
people once sat. Where there once was noise and bustle there was now
only eerie silence, much like the streets of London last Friday. The
money market people had apparently left in a hurry. Inspirational signs
still hung over their empty desks. EAT STRESS FOR BREAKFAST, read
one. Pictures of boyfriends and private messages remained taped to the
trading positions. Scribbled over the empty seat of a redundant
saleswoman was her view that "Men who call women sweetheart, baby, or
honey should have their tiny little peckers cut off."
These were no ordinary victims, though victims they were. Here in New
York, as in London, a conspicuously large number of women were canned.
It's not as if the women had been less astute in choosing their jobs; they
just had less say in their destiny. For whatever reason, women coming out
of the training program were usually assigned to loss leaders. For several

years one of the sinkholes had been the money market department.
Perhaps 10 percent of the trading floor professionals were women. But
women were nearly half of money markets sales and, therefore, a large
number of the sackees.
My New York rabbi and his congregation were moving into the seats
vacated by the money market department. Whenever I returned to New
York, I sat beside my rabbi, normally with a sigh of relief. But this time I
shuddered at the thought. I wondered if the move wasn't a trifle
premature, like moving into a house while the previous owner is carried
out in a coffin. It made me uneasy knowing what happened to those who
once sat where I did. However, there was plenty to distract me. My rabbi
was moving up in the world. The seat beside him happened also to be
right next to John Gutfreund. So I plunked myself right beside our
chairman and rode shotgun on the deathmobile. The public announcement
of the sale of Salomon Brothers to Phillips Brothers in 1981 stood on his
desk, beside a fuming cigar. Symbol! Metaphor! Ashes to ashes, and so
on. From this lofty promontory, I watched the crash of 1987.
The stock market fell, of course. It fell as it had never fallen before in
history, paused, then fell some more. I rushed back and forth between
my seat on 41 and the equity department on 40. The stock market crash
had huge and arbitrary wealth redistributionary effects, and the two
floors had entirely different reactions to it. A lucky man in the equity
department had gone short S&P stock index futures (meaning he made a
large bet that the market would fall) on Friday, and by the time he had a
chance to close out his bet on Monday the futures were sixty-three
points lower, and he had cleared twenty-seven million dollars. His joy was
unique. The rest of the equity department was tossed between despair
and confusion. Early in the day there was trading. I heard the Brooklyn
screams of a dozen men at once. "Yo, Joey!" "Hey, Alfy!" "Whaddya doin',
Mel!" "George Balducci, youse can buy twenty-five thousand Phones
[AT&T shares] at a half." Later, however, trading dried up, a harbinger
of the coming torpor in the stock market. Investors froze like deer in
headlights. Time and time again someone stood up and shouted, for no
particular reason, "Jeeee-Sas Christ!" They were helpless as they
watched their beloved market die.
Of course, my customers in Europe were losing their shirts, but there,
was nothing I could do for them. I thanked Mammon for the umpteenth

time for making me a middleman. To a man my customers chose to hunker
down and wait out the storm. Meanwhile, the bond market was shooting
through the roof, and more than a few bond traders failed to conceal
their glee. Once the stock market had fallen a few hundred points,
investors began to consider the macroeconomic effects of an honest-toGod crash. The prevailing reasoning in the bond market went like this:
Stock prices were lower; therefore, people were less wealthy; therefore,
people would consume less; therefore, the economy would slow down;
therefore, inflation would fall (maybe there'd even be depression and
deflation); therefore, interest rates would fall; therefore, bond prices
should rise. So they did.
One bond trader who had bet against the bond market stood up and
screamed in the direction of the Statue of Liberty, "Fuck! Fuck! Fuck!
Fuck! I bad-mouth the U.S. government, I short their debt, and they
fuck me. That's what I do for a living. Why fucking bother?" But most
everyone else was long and getting longer. The bond traders were making
a fortune. This one day made up for much of the year. As the stock
market crashed, the forty-first floor of Salomon Brothers cheered.
And many of us asked our first questions about the wisdom of the firings
of the previous week. The world of money was in upheaval. Funds were
rushing out of the stock market and into safe havens. The conventional
safe haven for money is gold, but this was not a conventional moment.
The price of gold was falling fast. Two creative theories
made their happy way around the trading floor, both explaining the fall in
gold. The first was that investors were being forced to sell their gold to
meet margin calls in the stock market. The second was that in the
depression that followed the crash, investors would have no need to fear
inflation, and since for many gold was protection against inflation, it was
less in demand. Whatever the case, money was pouring not into gold but
into the money markets-i.e., short-term deposits. Had we had a money
market department, we could have made a killing presiding over this
movement, but we did not and could not. The decline in business after
the crash occurred mainly in the equity markets. And which was the one
and only department not to cut a single employee? Equities. So the area
most direly overstaffed was the one that had made no cuts.
Many of us also asked our first questions about the wisdom of entering
the junk bond market. With the stock market crash the market in junk

bonds, inextricably linked to the asset values of corporations,
temporarily ceased to function altogether. The fickle stock market was
saying that one day corporate America was worth $1.2 trillion, and the
next only $800 billion. Junk bond investors dumped their holdings when
they saw the wild behavior of their collateral. Our Southland junk bond
deal collapsed on October 19. When the stock market crashed, the value
of 7-Eleven stores and, therefore, junk bonds backed by 7-Eleven stores,
crashed, too. From my seat on the trading floor I called my customers in
Europe. When I reached my Frenchman, he thanked me for never having
sold him junk.*
Most of what happened to a big firm like ours during the crash was
largely invisible to the outside world. But one important event was not.
Along with other Wall Street firms, Salomon Brothers had agreed to
purchase from the British government, and distribute worldwide, 31.5
percent of the shares in British Petroleum. We owned a chunk of the
company at the time of the crash. We had lost more than a hundred
million dollars on our stake. Who'd have imagined that our largest single
equity underwriting would coincide with the largest drop in his* Ironically, Southland, I later learned, should have been a smashing
success and was eventually revived. But my skepticism of our skills in
junk bonds was not unjustified. In the middle of 1988 the first two
multibillion-dollar leveraged take-overs in America sponsored by Wall
Street went bankrupt. The drugstore chain Revco, which had been
purchased by its management with junk bond money, filed for Chapter 11,
as did TVX, a chain of television stations. Both deals were created by
Salomon Brothers. Since by default we were forced to assume a
management role in TVX, it marked Salomon's entry into the television
industry.
tory in the stock market? Then who'd have imagined that our first big
junk bond deal would coincide with the crash of the junk bond market? It
was striking how little control we had of events, particularly in view of
how assiduously we cultivated the appearance of being in charge by
smoking big cigars and saying fuck all the time.
Throughout the crash John Gutfreund seemed in his element. He was,
for the first time in ages, making trading decisions. It was a joy to see a
man rediscover his youth. He spent little time at his desk. He sprinted
back and forth across the floor and held brief strategy sessions with his

head traders. At one point his attention drifted to his net worth, and he
bought three hundred thousand shares in Salomon Brothers for his
personal account. When I overheard him do this, my first reaction was
that he was trading on inside information.
My second reaction was that as long as it was legal, I should do it too.
Pretty greedy, huh? But also pretty smart. Salomon's stock was crashing
faster than the market as a whole; all brokerage stocks were getting hit
because investors, who had no way to gauge the internal damage we had
suffered, assumed the worst. We were losing small fortunes on both
British Petroleum and Southland, our two visible risks. Gutfreund knew,
however, that our losses were not what they seemed. We had lucked into
twenty-seven million dollars in the equity department, and the bond
departments were rolling in dough. A quick calculation showed that
Salomon's share price implied a value for the company less than its
liquidation value. (If we had been a take-over play three weeks before at
thirty bucks a share, we were a bargain now at eighteen. A false rumor
spread that Lewie Ranieri had raised money and was returning to buy
Salomon Brothers).
After checking with our legal department to make sure I wasn't
following Boesky's footsteps, I followed Gutfreund's and bought a bunch
of Salomon shares with the bonus I was busy lobbying for. Many, many
others on our trading floor were doing the same. Gutfreund would later
say that it bespoke of a faith in the firm when employees bought
Salomon shares and that he personally found it encouraging. Perhaps. But
I for one wasn't making a statement of faith when I made my purchase.
My investment was raw self-interest, coupled with a certain abstract
pleasure in having found a smart bet. Within a few months Salomon
shares had bounced back, from a low of sixteen dollars to twenty-six
dollars.
Tuesday, October 20, 1987: Day Eight • The postmortem began. The
credit committees convened in an emergency session in New York. Its
stated purpose was to assess Salomon's credit exposure to institutions
that appeared bankrupted by the events of yesterday, such as E. F.
Hutton and the entire community (if you can call it that) of equity
arbitrageurs. Instead, for the first half hour the committee members
squabbled. All but one man on the committee were American. The
exception was a Brit, who flew in from London especially for the meeting.
