to close out some (or all) of their positions at the end of each trading session.
For all technical traders, technical strategy should be rule-based. Here, the
contrast with fundamental strategy is most stark. Fundamental analysis
admittedly has an abstract quality to it, which can be frustrating. For
example, “Given current interest rate levels, the AUD/USD seems
undervalued,” or, “In light of the EU fiscal crisis, the EUR/USD should
continue to decline.” Technical strategy, on the other hand, is concrete. For
example, “I will buy when the CHF/USD exceeds its 50-day moving
average,” or, “I will sell when both the fast and slow oscillators indicate
oversold conditions.” In this way, opening and closing positions takes place
in accordance with a clear plan. That’s not to say that this plan guarantees
success and profits. Instead, the idea is that a scientific approach to analysis
demands an equally scientific approach to trading.
In fact, many trading platforms now support the development of automated
strategies. You can select from a list of pre-defined strategies or manually
create your own strategies. For example, a so-called 5 x 5 system will
generate a buy signal when the close price is above a specified simple
moving average (SMA) and the Relative Strength Index (RSI) is above the
mid-line 50. A sell signal will be generated when the close price is below the
SMA and the RSI is below the mid-line 50. Through the same platform, you
can instantly backtest this strategy for specific time periods and currency

Forex for Beginners
pairs. (Backtesting will be covered in detail in Chapter 9.) With any
automated trading system, you must decide whether or not computergenerated trading signals will trigger automatic trade executions. In other
words, you can choose to receive signals automatically but to manually
execute trades, or, if you have confidence in your system, you can check the
box for automated execution.
There will always be technical traders that bristle at the lack of flexibility
inherent in mechanical trading systems. For these traders, technical
indicators are an important guide for making trades but are no substitute for
experience. These traders might try to adhere to a handful of technical
trading rules. At the same time, they abide by the adage that “rules were
made to be broken.” They may ignore the indicators and enter a trade
prematurely or not at all, wary that a potential breakout may turn into a fake
out. They may take profits early or ride out a trend even when their indicators
show that a pair has reached an overbought or oversold level. They may open
a chart, apply a few technical studies, and simply make an assessment about
what will happen next. Above all else, these technical traders trust their
intuition.
As with most other aspects of strategy, there is no right answer to which
approach is better. My advice is that, when you are just beginning to trade,
you should err on the side of trusting the rules that you have developed.
Without experience, you really don’t have much of an alternative. At this
point, you are more likely to confuse emotion with intuition, which could
lead to expensive mistakes early on. As you hone your strategy and begin to
achieve success, you might relax the reins slightly and allow yourself some
flexibility in the way that you execute your trading system.
But let’s not get ahead of ourselves. Before we can decide how much faith to
put in our trading system, we must first create such a system. There are a few
of ways to go about this. The first involves simply opening up a chart, using
your preferred time horizon as a basis for selecting the time scale—and try to
loosely identify the current pattern that applies to the pair. Is it trending
upward, downward, or sideways? From here, you can layer on your favorite
technical indicators and see if any signals pop out at you. The next step
would be to fine-tune your indicators—perhaps some of the parameters need
to be tweaked—and to analyze how this pair performed the last time that the
indicators flashed in such a way. Based on your level of confidence, you
should determine the position size and the amount of leverage. If you’re not
entirely sure, you might want to leave some of your equity capital on the side

171

172

Chapter 7 | Trading Strategy
so that you can scale in and/or minimize any potential losses. If you decide to
open a position, you will naturally need to have an exit plan—one that
probably incorporates the same indicators that guided your decision to enter.
By way of example, let’s say that you happen to be looking at the first frame
of the USD/CAD (five-hour interval) chart depicted in Figure 7-3. It looks
like the USD/CAD has been range bound over the last five weeks, with
especially tight consolidation over the last week. However, it just pierced the
upper limit of your chart’s Bollinger Bands (at the last candlestick on the
left-hand panel), which means that a breakout could be taking place!
Furthermore, the commodity channel index (CCI) just crossed above 0 and
has already spiked above 100. Unfortunately, the Moving Average
Convergence Divergence Indicator (MACD) isn’t giving you a very strong
signal. You replace it with another indicator that is just as ambiguous. What
do you do?
You could wait for further confirmation, but given that the pair has already
jumped 100 PIPs and volatility has been running low, it seems likely that any
upward momentum will soon be exhausted. Besides, the pair has bounced off
of resistance at 1.01 a handful of times over the last five weeks, and this time
probably won’t be any different. You buy in for $5,000 at 1.022 using 2:1
leverage, with the intention of holding the position for a week or so. Moving
to the right-hand panel, it looks like you guessed right. The USD/CAD is
now definitively trending upwards.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 7-3. Technical strategy based on improvised analysis

You unwind half of your position at 1.034 when the MACD and the CCI dip
below the zero line, just to be on the safe side. The USD/CAD rallies another
100 PIPs, and you feel smart for having held on to your position. Without
warning, however, the currency pair suddenly takes a nosedive below the
lower limit of the Bollinger Bands and the CCI is flashing “SELL, SELL,
SELL.” You oblige and close out the remainder of your position at 1.029.
You earned an average of 95 PIPs on your trade. Thanks to your 2:1
leverage, that’s an annualized return of 58%. Not bad for your first trade!
For those that don’t possess this kind of ability (or the stomach) to improvise
trades, you might want to develop a trading system first and then find
concrete situations to which to apply it. Consider that a technical trading
strategy must seek to profit from one of three basic phenomena: trend
continuation, trend reversal, or breakout (from range bound trading). You
could conceivably have separate systems for each. You might begin by
establishing your time horizon; are you looking to open a position for one
day, one week, or more?
Your technical trading rules can be as creative as you like. The only caveat is
that the more limiting they are, the harder it will be for you to find situations

173

174

Chapter 7 | Trading Strategy
to apply them. For instance, if your system is based on a moving average
crossover and the MACD, you will probably come across more potential
trades than you can handle. On the other hand, if you insist on building a
system that is based on no fewer than half a dozen indicators, you will spend
most of your time hunting and little time actually shooting.
Let’s take my first suggestion as an example. Based on my hypothetical
experience, let’s pretend that I have developed the following rule: “When the
5-day moving average crosses the 20-day average, it heralds a trend
reversal.” Let’s say that I also rely on the MACD: when the signal line
crosses the moving average line and when the histogram crosses the zeroline, it is further evidence of a trend reversal. Therefore, I will enter a
position upon the next trend reversal and close it out after the following trend
reversal. This is my hypothetical mechanical trading system.
After looking at a handful of charts, I settle on the EUR/USD (one-day
interval) chart (shown in the left-hand panel of Figure 7-4) because of the
way it seems to exemplify my pre-established rule. Currently, it appears that
the EUR/USD is in the midst of a strong upswing. I have resolved to sell as
soon as my trading system indicates that the uptrend has given way to a fresh
downtrend. A couple of weeks later, two consecutive very bearish
candlesticks appear suddenly, and the MACD signal is first to sound the sell
alarm. One day later, the 5-day MA crosses the 20-day MA, and I open a
short position around 1.38. After 2 months, my hypothetical position is still
open. While the MACD has let out a few burps from time to time, the
moving averages haven’t crossed over a second time, and I am already 1,000
PIPs richer for my efforts!

Forex for Beginners

Figure 7-4. Technical strategy based on mechanic trading system

In the world of forex, these kinds of examples abound, especially with the
benefit of hindsight. If I offered any more, though, I would be doing your
homework for you.

Technical & Fundamental
Trend Trading
Medium-term trend trading (also known as swing trading) is the approach to
the forex markets advocated in this book. That being the case, you might be
wondering why it’s buried in the middle of this chapter instead of at the
front. The answer is that trend trading first requires proficiency in both
fundamental and technical analysis, and in both short-term and long-term
trading.
The sweet spot for timing swing trades is somewhere between 3 to 12 weeks.
While this strategy can certainly be adapted to slightly shorter or longer
horizons, my experience suggests that this time frame is where swing trading
is most effective. In the long run, I think that fundamentals play a larger role

175

176

Chapter 7 | Trading Strategy
in dictating trends and, hence, that fundamental analysis is bound to be
effective. I wouldn’t discourage long-term fundamental traders from
incorporating technical analysis into their strategies, though I would certainly
question the relevance and effectiveness of doing so. When a pair is
following a long-term trend, long-term fundamental analysts usually treat
any deviations from that trend as random or inconsequential. Their goal is to
profit from the overall trend, not from the ebbs and flows along the way.
Short-term technical analysts, in contrast, probably won’t find much use for
fundamental analysis. An exchange rate might adjust over the course of 1–3
days following an important fundamental development, though this
phenomenon is as technical as it is fundamental. The gyrations that take
place around the mean (regardless of whether the pair is trading flat or
trending) are probably less due to constant adjustments in traders’ economic
models than they are to the short-term pull of speculative buyers and sellers
that are doing their best to time the market. Again, I wouldn’t discourage
technical traders from considering fundamental analysis, but I’m not sure
how effective it can be in short-term trading. (The exception is trading the
news, a distinct strategy that I will outline later in this chapter.)
To those of you who are still with me, the benefits of medium-term trend
trading should be easy enough to understand. Fundamental analysis is used to
predict trends, and technical analysis is used to confirm them. (Or, for those
who prefer to think of it the other way around, technical analysis is used to
spot trends, and fundamental analysis is used to understand them.)
Trend trading can take many forms. Those that lean toward fundamental
analysis can begin with the various tools outlined in Chapter 5. Only after
forming a prediction about the medium-term direction of the market will
technical analysis be brought in to help you time your entry and exit.
Technically inclined traders might use technical indicators as a basis for
predicting the beginning and end of medium-term trends before making sure
that their interpretation is consistent with the fundamentals.
I personally am a fundamental analyst at heart. I am a big-picture thinker,
and I thoroughly enjoy attempting to untangle the massive puzzle that is the
global forex market. When planning trades, fundamental analysis always
comes first for me, and technical analysis is more of an afterthought. In other
words, I will wait until I have a fairly good idea of the trade that I want to
make before I will layer technical indicators onto my price chart.

Forex for Beginners
Let’s look at a few examples. In the middle of 2010, I remember watching
the EUR/USD chart (depicted in Figure 7-5) and thinking that the euro had
become deeply undervalued. Meanwhile, economic data was improving
across the European Union, and the European Central Bank had begun to hint
that rate hikes would soon follow. To be sure, the euro had initially fallen
because of concerns over the Eurozone’s fiscal problems, but at that point the
true extent of the crisis had not yet been revealed. At the very least, the
euro’s purchasing power parity value was greater than its market value
against the dollar ($1.20–$1.25, depending on when you happened to be
looking at it). Finally, risk appetite was improving (signified by a rising S&P
500 Index), and the US dollar was still in vogue as a funding currency for
carry trades. In short, barring any sudden developments, I concluded that it
was only a matter of time before the euro rallied.
My theory was supported by basic technical analysis. After rallying in the
wake of the credit crisis, the EUR/USD had suddenly fallen 3,000 PIPs in
less than six months. The Commitments of Traders data (shown in the inset
of Figure 7-5) showed that short positions had reached an extreme level. This
development alone would be reason enough to buy the euro, since once an
uptrend started, it would cause a short squeeze, potentially catapulting the
euro upward by hundreds of PIPs in only a few days.

177

178

Chapter 7 | Trading Strategy

Figure 7-5. Example of trend trading (Source for inset chart: Countingpips.com)

Sure enough, the euro bottomed out in June 2010, and anyone who discerned
the change in trend—indicated by the moving average crossover—would
have cashed in. Over the next twelve months, the euro rallied 2,500 basis
points. From a technical standpoint, it trended very reliably—so much so that
I selected it in Chapter 6 to illustrate Elliott Wave Principle in action. Its rise
presented several solid points (circled in Figure 7-5) to take profits, and for
those that were firmly committed to this trade, it also provided several
additional points to re-enter. Just as bullish sentiment reached an extreme
level in April 2011, a wave of negative fundamentals came cascading down,
and the euro began the downward spiral that continues as I write this
sentence in April 2012.
By way of another example, consider the chart that is shown in Figure 7-6.
The left panel represents the present day. Based on visual analysis, it looks
like the USD/BRL encountered fairly strong resistance, first at 1.88 and then
at 1.885.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 7-6. Trend trading using a combination of fundamental and technical analysis

After dropping down just as precipitously as it rose, the USD/BRL is now
clearly riding another uptrend. You theorize that this uptrend will come to an
end when it hits the resistance that you previously identified. From a
fundamental standpoint, there isn’t much to justify your theory. Still, you
know that the current USD uptrend (against all currencies) is a product of
uncertainty and risk aversion rather than the result of any kind of substantive
factors that favor the USD at the expense of the BRL. On a long-term basis,
the real’s sudden decline makes it appear greatly undervalued. Besides,
Brazilian interest rates are higher than US rates, which gives you some
cushion on your bet. (This will be discussed later on in greater detail.)
To execute this strategy, you can rely on a handful of specialized order types
that will be detailed in Chapter 9. For example, you can place a sell limit
order at exactly 1.885, such that a short USD/BRL position will be opened
automatically if/when the pair reaches that critical level. In this way, you
won’t need to stay glued to your computer 24/7 and execute the order
manually. Your plan is to ride the wave downward as long as it lasts, though
you aren’t sure just how long this will be. Here, you can make use of a
trailing stop order, which will automatically close your position if the

179

180

Chapter 7 | Trading Strategy
USD/BRL retraces more than a given amount. If you were to set the number
of PIPs to 100 and the pair fell to 1.84, your position would be closed
automatically if the pair rose back to 1.85. If it continued falling to 1.80,
however, your stop would be automatically adjusted to 1.81, still 100 PIPs
above the lowest level. In this way, you can keep your position open as long
as possible (maximizing gains) while continuing to protect yourself from any
downside (minimizing losses).
But surely this is a best-case scenario, right? What if the USD/BRL crashes
straight through the 1.885 threshold and keeps rising, such that your recently
opened short position is now accumulating rapid losses? Here, too, you can
protect yourself with a buy stop order above 1.885. If you set the buy
threshold at 1.89, then your position will be closed at this level and your
losses will be limited to 50 PIPs—frustrating, but acceptable. Of course,
there is still the possibility that the USD/BRL will hit this level and then fall,
just as you predicted. Unfortunately, because of your buy stop order, you
have already locked in your losses and probably won’t find solace in
ultimately being right. By setting your stop-loss point slightly higher, you
can give yourself some margin for error. At the same time, you must be
prepared to take on more risk.

Currency Crosses
A currency cross is a pair that doesn’t involve the US dollar. In the early
days of the modern financial era, currency traders (especially those based in
the United States) who wanted to place trades that didn’t involve the dollar
had to perform some minor financial acrobatics. For example, if a trader
wanted to short the Japanese yen against the euro, he would have had to
make two simultaneous trades, shorting the yen against the dollar at the same
time that he bought the euro against the dollar, as follows:
EUR
________
USD

+

USD
________
JPY

=

EUR
________
JPY

Closing a position would have similarly involved two trades. Nowadays,
forex brokers offer a handful of the most liquid currency crosses, thus
relieving traders of this headache. Those that want to trade less popular
crosses, however, will have to resort to the method described above.

Forex for Beginners
Some traders gravitate to crosses because they are more suited to technical
analysis. For example, it would be very difficult to establish a model for the
Japanese yen against the British pound—even though both are major
currencies—because of the lack of a direct relationship between their
financial economies. Thus, movements in the JPY/GBP are more likely to be
technical than fundamental.
Of course, there are a handful of exceptions, most of which involve the euro.
For instance, the CHF/EUR is arguably as important as the CHF/USD for a
few reasons. First of all, the Swiss franc is easier to compare to the euro
because of regional proximity and economic interdependence. Second, the
Swiss National Bank has been more likely to measure the franc’s
performance against the euro—rather than the dollar—which means that
traders have no choice but to do the same. Recall that the infamous “line in
the sand” that would trigger intervention was €1.50 and not $1.50.

Carry Trade
The carry trade is a trading strategy that seeks to profit from interest rate
differentials. Such differentials are a factor in all overnight forex positions,
and interest is automatically credited or debited to one’s account in the form
of rollover. (This will be discussed more in Chapter 9.) Thus, all traders must
at least be aware of the interest rate differential that corresponds to the
particular currency pairs that they are trading.
Practitioners of the carry trade, however, seek out trades mainly on the basis
of these interest rate differentials. The primary goal is to capture the interest
rate spread rather than to profit from currency appreciation. For example, if
the benchmark interest rate is 1% in Japan and 10% in Brazil, the annual
expected interest earnings from a BRL/JPY position would be 9%. If this
interest rate differential changes—because Brazilian rates rise and/or
Japanese rates fall—interest earnings would change accordingly.
Since the carry trade is supposed to be a low-risk strategy, traders must also
control for risk. Taken at face value, a 9% annual return seems fairly solid.
However, if the standard deviation (also known as variability) of that return
is 20%, then the actual return could very well turn out to be negative. As a
result, currency pairs that are especially stable make the best candidates for
the carry trade. In fact, the carry trade tends to thrive when volatility is low
and to shrink during crises when uncertainty is high.

181

182

Chapter 7 | Trading Strategy
Figure 7-7 shows a breakdown of the returns earned from August 2007 to
January 2012 from a carry trade strategy against the US dollar. You can see
that in some cases (such as with the Brazilian real and the Australian dollar)
returns from interest were supplemented by currency appreciation. In other
cases (such as with the Mexican peso and the Turkish lira) high returns from
interest were partially or completely offset by currency depreciation. Most
currencies fell somewhere in the middle. Of course, the plot thickens when
you adjust for risk. While returns were high for the Brazilian real and the
Australian dollar, for example, so was volatility.

Figure 7-7. Returns and risk from USD carry trade, August 2007–January 20121

The carry trade also serves as a useful framework for understanding currency
fluctuations as part of a plain vanilla fundamental strategy. For example,
beginning in 2005, traders began to target the yen as a funding currency for
carry trades due to its low interest rates and similarly low volatility. The
massive capital outflows that followed caused the yen to decline more than
20% against the US dollar, bringing the price of the yen to a five-year low.
(See Figure 7-8.) At the peak of this practice, outstanding yen-short carry
trade positions were estimated at nearly $1 trillion!
