
Two days later, the call came that Kay had died. Warren had already told Lally that he wasn’t going to be
able to speak at Kay’s service. He would be an usher along with Bill Gates. Astrid took care of him at home,
and work consumed him at the office. When he wasn’t working, Sharon played bridge with him or he played
helicopter, anything to distract himself from the many shocks and horror of Kay’s death. So sudden, on such
a happy occasion; not being there when it happened; the ambulance, the helicopter, Susie Jr. calling about the
surgery; sitting in the condo waiting, the phone call in the middle of the night, flying to Boise not knowing;
going upstairs to see Kay lying so still and white, barely breathing; the normally controlled Don Graham so
distraught; the terrible trip home away from Kay, whom he would never see again; the phone call with the
news; no Big Susie to shepherd him through it all. No more Kay, no more Kay Parties, never again.
And yet, the day after Graham died, Buffett arrived, as scheduled, to speak to an audience of college
students at the Terry College of Business at the University of Georgia. He climbed onto the stage wearing his
stiff gray suit and looking only a little more awkward than usual, his breathy voice grating slightly. “Testing,
one million, two million, three million,” he said at the microphone. This line could always be counted on to
get a laugh, and it did. He then launched into a couple of Nebraska football jokes but, out of character,
rushed the punchline and got only chuckles from the audience.
Then he seemed to catch his rhythm. “People ask me where they should go to work, and I always tell them
to go to work for whom they admire the most,” he said. He urged them not to waste their time and their life.
“It’s crazy to take little in-between jobs just because they look good on your résumé. That’s like saving sex
for your old age. Do what you love and work for whom you admire the most, and you’ve given yourself the
best chance in life you can.”
They asked him what mistakes he had made. Number one was Berkshire Hathaway, he said—spending
twenty years trying to revive a failing textile mill. Second, US Air. Buffett spoke of his failure to call the
Air-aholic hotline beforehand. Third, he said, had been buying the Sinclair gas station as a young man. That
mistake, he reckoned, had cost him about $6 billion compared to what he could have earned on the money
invested.
But his mistakes of omission—things he could have done and didn’t do—had plagued him most, he said. He
mentioned only one—failing to buy FNMA stock, the Federal National Mortgage Association. That, he said,
had cost about $5 billion as of that date. There were others: passing on the television station that Tom
Murphy had tried to sell him; not investing in Wal-Mart. The reason that he had made mostly mistakes of
omission instead of commission, he explained, was his cautious approach to life.
Buffett had talked many times before about mistakes. But when he spoke, as he often did, of his mistakes of
omission, he never ventured beyond business mistakes. The errors of omission in his personal
life—inattention, neglect, missed chances—were always there, the side effects of intensity; but they were
shadow presences visible only to those who knew him well. He spoke of them only in private, if at all.
To the students, he explained his “Twenty Punches” approach to investing. “You’d get very rich,” he said,
“if you thought of yourself as having a card with only twenty punches in a lifetime, and every financial
decision used up one punch. You’d resist the temptation to dabble. You’d make more good decisions and
you’d make more big decisions.”
He ran his life on Twenty Punches, too, with as little flitting as he could arrange. Same house, same wife for
fifty years, same Astrid on Farnam Street; no desire to buy and sell real estate, art, cars, tokens of wealth; no
jumping from city to city or career to career. Some of that was easy for a man so certain of himself; some of
it came with being a creature of habit; some of it was a natural tendency to let things compound; and some of
it was the wisdom of inertia. When he gave somebody a punch on his card, they became a part of him and
that decision was permanent. Any crack in the facade of permanence was extraordinarily difficult for him to
face.
***

A few days later, police arrived early in the morning to close nearby streets for the crowd they expected at
the Washington National Cathedral, its gargoyle-bedecked flying buttresses silhouetted against a bright blue
sky.28 Television crews began to set up for an elaborately orchestrated event that had all the trappings of a
funeral for a head of state. By late morning, buses bearing Washington Post employees pulled up one by one.
A blue-and-white-striped bus carrying members of the Senate arrived, and people began streaming in from
cars and limousines. Gradually the front pews filled with dignitaries like Bill and Hillary Clinton and Lynne
and Dick Cheney. Around the Cathedral famous faces were everywhere: Supreme Court justices Ruth Bader
Ginsberg and Stephen Breyer; celebrity journalists Charlie Rose, Tom Brokaw, Mike Wallace, and Ted
Koppel; USA Today publisher Al Neuharth; Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan and his wife,
journalist Andrea Mitchell; editor Tina Brown; Senator Ted Kennedy; Congressional delegate Eleanor
Holmes Norton.29 Hundreds, then thousands, of people filed in through the enormous bronze doors to the
sound of the National Symphony Orchestra and the Kennedy Center Opera House Orchestra Brass
Ensemble, gradually assembling into what looked like the largest crowd the cathedral had ever held.30
From the nave, thousands of men in dark suits and white shirts formed a Mondrian backdrop for the women,
a pointillist grid of black and white. The women wore houndstooth check and crisp seersucker; black suits
with dainty white cotton blouses; sleeveless black sheaths with jackets and sleeveless black sheaths with bare
arms; white skirts with black sweaters; and black jackets over dotted Swiss and black-and-white polka-dotted
dresses. Their heads were topped with small black hats with discreet netting, black-and-white picture hats fit
for Ladies’ Day at Ascot, black straw bonnets with swooping veils. The cathedral was awash in a sea of
pearls, from pearls as small as peppercorns to pearls like huge champagne corks, black and white pearls on
hundreds of wrists, necks, and earlobes; women wearing strands of pearls the width of a lingerie strap, a
curtain tieback, a first-prize ribbon. Every detail paid tribute to the woman who had awed the world for years
in a summation and celebration of her life that had become the second, the grandest, the most stately, and the
final Black and White Ball.
As the service began, Buffett and Gates slipped into a pew next to Melinda. The music started. Historian
Arthur Schlesinger spoke; Henry Kissinger spoke; Ben Bradlee spoke; Graham’s children spoke. Near the
end, former Senator John Danforth gave the homily. Graham, he thought, never said much about religion, but
she lived the way a believer is supposed to live. “She dismissed out of hand the notion that she was the most
powerful woman in the world,” he said. “In Washington, especially, a lot of people strut, and Kay did not
strut…. We do not attain the victory of life by selfishness. Victory is for those who give themselves to causes
beyond themselves. It is very biblical and very true that everyone who exalts themselves will be humbled and
he who humbles himself will be exalted. That is a text for all of us. It was lived by Katharine Graham.”
Melinda Gates reached up and wiped away tears while Buffett sat next to her husband with a frostbitten,
grief-stricken face. The two cathedral choirs, dressed in black and white robes, sang Mozart. Carefully, the
pallbearers lifted the casket to their shoulders and bore it down the aisle while the congregation sang
“America the Beautiful.” The family followed the procession out of the cathedral to the Oak Hill Cemetery
across the street from Graham’s house, where she would be interred next to her late husband.
Early that afternoon, more than four hundred people swept up the circular driveway to Graham’s house and
walked around to the rear garden, where her children and grandchildren stood about, chatting with guests. At
a buffet inside the tent, people ate finger sandwiches and sliced ham and tenderloin. They wandered around
past the swimming pool, and found their way into the house to gather the collection of memories that it held.
They stood in the living room where President Reagan had gotten down on his hands and knees to pick up ice
cubes he’d spilled on the floor, and gazed for one last time at the books and knickknacks in the library where
Mrs. Graham had pondered whether to print the Pentagon Papers. They paused by Napoleon’s china on the
walls next to the round dining tables in the golden room where American Presidents from Kennedy to Clinton
had dined. From Jacqueline Onassis to Princess Diana, if Katharine Graham invited them, they all came.31
The house itself was a kind of history.
Warren walked through Kay’s house for one last time to remember, but he did not linger. He left early and
would never return.32

As the afternoon wore on, the rest of Katharine Graham’s friends and admirers told her good-bye. They
withdrew down the long hallway gallery past the rooms where she had entertained them so often and slipped
past the garden outside. Then slowly, sometimes reluctantly, they left the last Kay Party, and began their final
trip down the pebbled drive.

56
By the Rich, for the Rich
Omaha • July 2001–July 2002

Buffett flew back to Nebraska alone. He knotted every waking minute into a web of distractions. He read
the financial reports that came into his office. He read the Financial Times, the New York Times, the Wall
Street Journal. He watched CNBC. He talked to people on the phone. He played bridge in the evenings after
work. He surfed the Internet for news online. In between, he played helicopter on the computer.
A week later he was crying on the phone, great gulping sobs, choking, gasping cries that left him out of
breath. The convulsion broke through the dam that had kept his grief contained.
A moment later, after the torrent of grief had poured out of him, he was recovered enough to speak. He
regretted not being able to eulogize Kay at her funeral, he said. It shamed him. The man who had worked so
hard to become comfortable on a stage felt that he should have been able to do that for Kay. And there
would be more regrets, more second thoughts.
“If I’d been playing bridge with her that day she might not have fallen,” he reflected later, sadly. “I would
have taken her back in her golf cart myself. She might not have died.”
But Kay probably would have walked up the steps by herself anyway. And nobody knew whether she died
from the fall or whether she had fallen because she had a stroke.
Still, Warren was plagued by a sense of lost opportunities. He felt at times that, had he been with her, he
could somehow have kept Kay safe.
As weeks passed, if her death was mentioned, his eyes teared and the conversation would come to a stop
while he collected himself. Then, like a motor turning over and restarting, he would brighten and shift to
other subjects.
During August, other events helped to turn his mind away from the tragedy. He was planning the tenth and
final Omaha Classic charity golf tournament, which would take place in September. And he was already
looking forward to the Buffett Group meeting in Biarritz, France, in October. In the meantime, he flew to
Cody, Wyoming, with Big Susie for a long weekend at Herbert Allen’s J—9*33 ranch on the North Fork of
the Shoshone River.
Buffett would much rather watch a western movie than visit a dude ranch. But as with Sun Valley, he went
for the mix of elephant-bumping and people he considered friends. At Cody, he and Susie spent a leisurely,
relaxed time with media CEO Barry Diller and his wife, Diane von Furstenberg; Don and Mickie Keough;
film director Mike Nichols and his wife, newscaster Diane Sawyer; producer Sydney Pollack; actress Candice
Bergen; and Intel CEO Andy Grove and his wife, Eva, among others.
The Buffetts arrived late in the evening and spent the first night in one of the hand-hewn cedar-shake log
cabins that encircled the central lodge. They began the next morning greeting other early arrivals over

breakfast, which for Warren usually meant last night’s leftover dessert. The rest of the day, as guests trickled
in, he relaxed in the lodge or his cabin, reading books, playing bridge on the computer, and reading the
newspapers that Allen had printed off the Internet for him. The others began to entertain themselves with
trail rides up the canyon on some of Allen’s ranch geldings to see the elk and deer. Some people headed off
on mountain-bike expeditions or went fishing in the river that ran through the property. Buffett skipped all of
this. But at mealtime he appeared at the long rectangular table in the lodge, where the guests sat surrounded
by dark leather furniture and romantic rustic paintings by Thomas Hart Benton and Frederic Remington.
Buffett presided over a salon at the dinner table, talking politics, money, and world affairs. While the rest ate
fish, chicken, game, and salads, the cook at Cody challenged his appetite with huge slabs of meat.1
After dinner, Allen’s friend Al Oehrle took over at the piano. The guests sang from Candice Bergen’s
songbook, standards by Gershwin, Irving Berlin, and Cole Porter. Susie often sang solos. Buffett played his
ukulele, and, as he did every year, sang a duet of “The Hut-Sut Song”—an appalling number from the 1941
Hit Parade—with movie producer Sydney Pollack—a performance always dreaded by the audience, which
made him look forward to singing it all the more.
Hut-Sut Rawlson on the rillerah and a brawla, brawla sooit.
Hut-Sut Rawlson on the rillerah and a brawla sooit.2
The return from Cody effectively marked the end of Buffett’s summer vacation. His birthday would be
arriving in a few weeks, something to which he feigned indifference but actually dreaded. The one highlight
was hundreds of cards, gifts, and letters from friends—or, by now, mostly strangers—that poured into Kiewit
Plaza every year for weeks beforehand. Buffett was far from jaded, but it was hard to thrill a
multibillionaire—one who didn’t want to be a year older and cared nothing about possessions—with a
birthday gift. He appreciated the cards and letters, the sentimental, and was touched by anything unique that
reminded him of past episodes of his life. Otherwise, he had so much Coca-Cola memorabilia by now, so
many Nebraska football posters, so many flags, quilts, paintings, collages, and other tributes to him and
photographs of himself with other famous people that there was hardly any space left on an entire floor of
hallways. His actual birthday was a low-key event, usually just dinner at someplace like the Olive Garden
with family and perhaps a few friends.
This year he was turning seventy-one. He could not believe he was seventy-one. He could not believe it,
either, when he’d turned forty, and fifty, and sixty, and seventy. But this year, especially, he did not want to
think about his birthday, because he did not want any reminders of time passing so soon after Kay’s death.
Fortunately, the Omaha Classic golf tournament, an annual event that the Buffetts sponsored to benefit
various local institutions, followed his birthday like recess after study hall. Corporate CEOs and celebrities,
friends and relatives, people he knew and enjoyed, were coming to play golf and tennis at the Omaha
Country Club.3 The guests at this event were another collection, like his shareholders, like the people who
came to Omaha for his shareholder meeting, like the members of the Buffett Group. As the days counted
down, the staff juggled shifting guest lists, airport transportation, and food and entertainment for golfers at
the club. Buffett enjoyed knowing the details: who would come, how many times a guest had come before,
who was attending for the first time, and how much money the event would raise.
Most of the guests arrived Monday evening for a dinner at the Omaha Country Club with entertainment by
Academy Award–winning songwriter Marvin Hamlisch.4 Every year he sat at the piano and made up
personal songs on the spot for anyone who asked.
“He didn’t play golf. He came to the tournament some years ago, and he likes Little Sooz, and she likes him.
And he said, ‘Why don’t you let me do a little show the night before for the people who come in early?’ It
got to be the best part of the golf tournament. You say, ‘I wish I could get rid of that damn hook that I have
with my three wood,’ and it’s a song. People thought it was rigged. It wasn’t rigged. If you said, ‘I can’t
believe my mother-in-law steals the sugar packets from restaurants,’ thirty seconds later he’s banging out a
little tune and singing a song to that refrain.”

The next morning dawned under a flawless blue dome of sky. Around eight o’clock, Buffett’s phone rang. It
was Devon Spurgeon, a Wall Street Journal reporter who had been covering Berkshire Hathaway. “Oh, my
God, Warren, turn on the TV,” she said. He turned it on to a news channel. At opposite ends of the phone
line they watched what appeared to be a horrible aviation accident. The cameras were running footage that
panned across the North Tower of the World Trade Center, whose upper stories were slashed through by a
jagged, gaping wedge of flames. An airplane appeared, circled toward the building, and plunged into the side
of the South Tower, exploding in a corona of flames like a bomb going off. They watched in silence as the
news channel began repeating the footage: Plane turns, dives into building. Plane turns, dives into building.
“Devon,” said Buffett, “the world has changed.” He started asking her about her office, which was two
blocks from the Sears Tower in Chicago. Listen, he said, that’s not a safe place to be. The Wall Street
Journal headquarters in New York was across the street from the World Trade Center. They discussed the
fact that the Journal staff must be evacuating and reporting at the same time. Spurgeon could hear Buffett
switching, as they spoke, into his fastest-thinking, most rational, problem-solving mode.5
As he was hanging up the phone, the FAA halted all flight operations at U.S. airports, and minutes later
American Flight 77 crashed into the Pentagon. About fifteen minutes after that, while the White House was
evacuating, Buffett, his mind latticing bits of information into a plan, called General Re, where he was
supposed to be speaking the next day to a group of employees. He said that he was still planning to fly out to
Connecticut if the airports reopened and flights resumed.6 General Re and its neighbor in Connecticut, Ajit
Jain’s Berkshire Re, were both international gateways to insuring potential losses from terrorism. Meeting
with them now would enable him to talk with his managers about suddenly significant issues at a critical time.
While Buffett was working out logistics with General Re, the South Tower, burning from inside, collapsed, as
did a portion of the Pentagon. Within minutes, United Airlines Flight 93 crashed near Shanksville,
Pennsylvania. Over the next half hour, government buildings were evacuated, and the North Tower
collapsed. The New York Stock Exchange closed and civilians fled the clouds of smoke and debris in lower
Manhattan.
Almost everyone in Omaha at the golf tournament was affected in some way or another, however remotely.
Many had friends, relatives, neighbors, or business acquaintances who worked in the towers. The tournament
staff took care of their needs and helped them with logistics. One, Ann Tatlock, the CEO of Fiduciary Trust,
which was headquartered in the Trade Center, spent the rest of the day in her hotel room, making phone
calls.7 About a hundred Fiduciary Trust employees would prove to be missing. Berkshire, of course, had
employees in businesses scattered all across the country. In the end Buffett would find that Berkshire had lost
no employees—only money.
Some people decided to leave the golf tournament immediately, but with all airports closed this was not easy.
A few started making arrangements to rent cars and leave. Others stayed, some because they didn’t want to
insult Buffett, many because they had no choice.8 Radio commentator Rush Limbaugh, on the way to the
tournament, had turned his plane around in midair and headed back to New York.9
While these momentous events were occurring, Buffett proceeded with his schedule, compartmentalizing as
he did under stress even in extreme situations. He arranged to complete the acquisition of a small business
that was already in process. Then he went ahead with a meeting that had been scheduled with the head of
Home Depot, Bob Nardelli.10 Afterward he showed up at the Omaha Country Club, where about a hundred
guests were milling around or dining on hamburgers and ice cream. Buffett said that things would go on as
planned but people should do whatever they needed or wanted to do. Guests wandered in and out of the club
making calls and checking the news on television. Tony Pesavento and Gary Wiren, the local pros, followed
lunch with a golf lesson, and the tournament got rolling in a surreal atmosphere. Buffett rode a golf cart
through a planned circuit of stops at different tees so guests could have their picture taken with him.11 A
strange calm hung over the event, which was like a celebrity golf tournament the day Pearl Harbor was
attacked. And in fact, like Buffett, more than a few of the golfers could remember Pearl Harbor and its
aftermath. This was not an excitable crowd. Most of them were prominent businessmen accustomed to stress
and pressure, from a generation of men that considered poise and equanimity in the face of disaster as

essential as the suits and ties they wore every day to work.
Buffett had fallen automatically into statesman mode, moving through his routine with smooth composure.
Even so, his brain was busy turning over the threat of terrorism and its broader implications for weapons of
mass destruction, as well as the possible effect this would have on the economy.
He was more prepared for this than most because he had already been thinking about terrorism risk. In May,
he had told General Re and Berkshire Re to cut back on insuring buildings and clients that represented a
concentration of exposure to terrorism risk, his mind working as it always did to extrapolate toward potential
catastrophes. He had actually cited the World Trade Center as an example of a building complex where a
cluster of clients might create too much risk.12 While the rising threat of terrorism in the late 1990s and earlymillennium years was no secret, Buffett’s attempt to protect Berkshire against the danger had been unusually
prescient, and probably unique among insurers.13
All day long Buffett had been thinking about what to say that evening after dinner. He knew that the stock
market, which was closed, would plunge as soon as it reopened. He realized that the innocence of the United
States had now been shattered, and the government would be grappling with an unseen enemy. He saw his
role as to convey his thoughts on what all of this meant.
The guests who attended the dinner that night watched President Bush’s speech on a giant TV screen, then
heard Buffett speak about terrorism, contrasting it with conventional war. “Terrorists have a huge
advantage. They pick the time, the place, and the means. It’s very difficult to defend against fanatics….
This is just the start of things. We don’t know who our enemy is. Now, it’s us versus a shadow. There could
be many shadows.”14
The following morning and over the next few days, as airports gradually began to allow flights to resume on a
limited schedule, the Buffetts organized dinners, tennis, and golf for the remaining guests until everyone was
able to straggle home from Omaha.15 With the cleanup under way in lower Manhattan, and “Missing”
posters going up all over New York City, Buffett considered how he could use his nationally recognized
reputation to help the country. The stock market was about to reopen after its longest recess since the Great
Depression. He agreed to go on 60 Minutes with former Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin and Jack Welch,
the recently retired CEO of General Electric. Americans would recognize him as an expert on investing and
the stock market, more than anyone else. On the show that Sunday evening, Buffett said that he would not be
selling stocks—he might be a buyer if they declined enough—and explained that he had confidence in the
ability of the United States economy to surmount the ripples from the terrorist attack. By now Warren
Buffett’s reputation for honesty, built over decades, was known to anyone who cared about the stock market.
When he said something, people knew he meant it. At Sun Valley, of course, Buffett had said the value of the
market would need to fall by half before he would get really excited. So when he said he might be a buyer if
stocks declined enough, the savvy knew he meant it—but they also knew “enough” meant “a hell of a lot.”
The next day, the Dow fell 684 points, or seven percent, its largest point decline ever in a single day. The
Federal Reserve began to take action after the market plunged on its reopening, cutting interest rates fifty
basis points (half a percent). By the end of the week, the Dow had fallen more than fourteen percent, its
largest one-week drop in history. Yet the drop as a percent of investors’ wealth was less than half that of
1987, when the market plunged by one-third. From the time trading opened, sellers concentrated on sectors
like insurers and airlines, where the most serious financial consequences would be. People were less panicked
than they were groping in the dark to try to make intelligent guesses about the unknowable.
Within days, as barricades and new security gates were installed all over Manhattan amid bomb scares and
the Buffett Group trip to Biarritz was canceled, Buffett talked to Berkshire’s insurers and tried to assess the
damage to Berkshire Hathaway. The initial estimates, which would later be revised slightly upward, indicated
that Berkshire had lost $2.3 billion.16 This was many times its largest loss from any earthquake, hurricane,
tornado, or other natural disaster to date. Of the total, $1.7 billion came from General Re.
Buffett had had enough. He went to work writing a special letter that he posted on his Web site, excoriating
