cheap or expensive relative to that company’s competitors.
2. Analyze whether the relative cheapness or expensiveness is justified
by reviewing expected earnings growth rates.
I break down the nitty-gritty of these two essential steps in the next couple
sections.

Gauging shares’ relative cheapness
or expensiveness
Determining whether the shares of a company you’re looking to swing trade
are cheap or expensive relative to its competitors is essential. Realize that
this question is different than asking what the market capitalization of the
company is. Just because a company’s worth $10 billion doesn’t mean it’s
more expensive, on a relative basis, than a company worth $1 billion. The $10
billion company may be cheaper, for example, when earnings are compared
at market value.
So how do you go about figuring out this relative value? By using the most
accessible valuation metric — the price to earnings ratio (P/E) — in combination with other popular ratio metrics such as price to sales (P/S), price to cash
flow, and PEG (P/E divided by the expected earnings growth rate). Each ratio
has its pros and cons, which is why you need to use more than one when valuing a company.
Time to meet the ratio tools in your valuation toolbox:

197

198 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
 P/E: Calculate P/E by dividing a firm’s share price by the trailing 12
months of earnings per share. A forward P/E is a firm’s share price
divided by the expected earnings per share in the coming 12 months.
P/E is a popular metric because earnings drive market prices.
P/E can easily be distorted on the positive or negative side. For example,
a company may take a large one-time charge, which lowers its earnings
per share temporarily. If you don’t back that charge out, you may value
shares of the company incorrectly. That’s why you should always try
multiple valuation techniques.
 Price to cash flow: I consider this ratio the most important one after
P/E. Cash flow, like sales, is difficult to manipulate through accounting
shenanigans. This ratio divides the market capitalization of a company
by trailing 12 month cash flows (taken from the cash flow statement,
which I cover in Chapter 7).
 PEG: Also known as the price/earnings to growth ratio, this is the only
ratio that incorporates a firm’s growth rate into its calculation. I rank
PEG closely behind the price to cash flow measure. You can calculate it
by dividing a firm’s P/E by its annual EPS growth rate. A company trading at 20 times earnings but growing earnings at 30 percent per year
would sport a PEG of 0.67.
 P/S: The P/S helps you value a company that doesn’t have earnings.
This ratio is equal to a company’s market capitalization divided by total
sales. Like P/E, P/S is widely reported. Sales are more difficult to manipulate than earnings (U.S. accounting rules notwithstanding), but they
aren’t a helpful metric if a company’s unable to translate them into
earnings. For example, Vonage Holdings (look back at Figure 9-3) had a
superb P/S that kept on getting better because the company grew sales
while it bled losses.
Use P/S sparingly and always within a single industry.
For all four ratios, know that the lower the number, the cheaper the stock.

Figuring out whether the comparative
share-price difference is justified
After you know how cheap or expensive a company’s stock is based on the
four common valuation metrics (see the preceding section for details), you’re
ready to determine whether that relative cheapness or expensiveness is justified. Peter Lynch, the legendary fund manager, posits that a company should
trade for a similar rate as its P/E. A company growing earnings 15 percent, for
example, deserves to trade at 15 times earnings.

Chapter 9: Six Tried-and-True Steps for Analyzing a Company’s Stock
I agree with this postulation. You can determine a company’s growth rate by
examining expected earnings growth rates. Just consider the case of popular
search engine company Google (symbol: GOOG), which has been one of the
hardest companies to value. Every new high it made was followed by calls
from analysts saying that shares simply couldn’t go any higher. But guess
what? Shares of Google rose some more!
Could you have swing traded Google shares on the long side using a valuation technique that called for shares of Google to trade at roughly the same
level of its growth rate? At the end of 2007, Google’s shares traded for 50
times earnings. Meanwhile, the industry traded at 40 times earnings. With
such a premium, shares of Google must be overvalued, right?
Not necessarily. Figure 9-6 provides a snapshot of Google’s fundamentals at
the end of 2007 (all data used in this description has been circled). Although
Google’s P/E is 24.6 percent higher than the industry’s P/E, Google’s historical sales growth is 45.8 percent higher than the industry’s. Also, Google’s
historical EPS growth is 23 percent higher than its industry. By those measures, Google doesn’t look expensive relative to its industry. Analysts
estimate that Google’s earnings per share will grow 33 percent annually
throughout the next five years. If that’s true, Google’s shares should trade
at 33 times earnings, all else being equal.

Figure 9-6:
Snapshot
of Google’s
fundamentals at the
end of 2007.
Source: Reuters Finance

199

200 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
See, that’s not so hard! But you don’t have to go on earnings or sales
estimates alone to peg a company’s relative value. You should also look at
a company’s financial position, net profit margins, and return on equity
relative to its industry. If a company trades for the average P/E or price to
cash flow ratio of its industry but is achieving
 Higher profit margins or higher returns on equity, perhaps it should
trade at a premium to its industry.
 Lower profit margins or lower returns on equity than its peers, perhaps
it should trade at a discount to its industry.
Always keep relativity in mind when comparing the share prices of a company
you want to swing trade with the prices of its competitors. Be sure you’re on
the right side of the trade when you enter a long position. You want to buy
shares of a company that’s at a discount to its industry or not enough of
a premium given expected growth rates.

Handling hazy conditions
The best scenario for a swing trader is when a
company exhibits superior growth rates and
superior profit margins to its competitors but
trades at some discount. That’s a no-brainer.
But that doesn’t always happen. Sometimes, a
company’s shares exhibit higher margins but
lower growth rates than its peers. Or a company
may have higher growth rates but lower returns
on equity than its peers. What are you to do in
these circumstances?
Skip that company and move on to another if
major ambiguity is a factor. Or use the expected
earnings and sales growth rates as a guide for
what the “right” market multiple should be. If
you still need some guidance, rank the importance of the three measures mentioned here in
the following order:

1. Earnings growth rate
2. Return on equity
3. Profit margin
All else being equal, a company with a higher
earnings growth rate than its competitors
should trade at a premium to a competitor. If
both companies have the same expected earnings growth rate, then the company with the
higher return on equity ratio should trade at a
premium to its peer. If that’s also equal, then the
company with the higher profit margin should
trade at a premium to its peer.
These yardsticks can help you value
companies — relatively speaking, of course.
But relativity is all you need as a swing trader.

Part IV

Developing and
Implementing Your
Trading Plan

S

In this part . . .

urprisingly, your success as a swing trader isn’t
driven by your skill at reading price charts or financial statements. Your risk management system and
trading plan are far more important factors. Some of the
greatest swing traders have even gone so far as to say
that entering trades at random can be profitable if your
risk management system allows you to let profits run and
cut losses quickly. Kind of inspiring, huh?
Here, you find out how to build a first-rate risk management system. But just to make sure you’re feeling comfortable with your newfound skills, I walk you right through
the swing trading process (from finding trading candidates to entering orders to evaluating your performance)
so that you can develop a complete swing trading plan.
With that said, full speed ahead!

Chapter 10

Strengthening Your Defense:
Managing Risk
In This Chapter
 Getting the scoop on risk measurement and management
 Avoiding losses at the individual stock and portfolio levels
 Crafting your exit game plan

I

f you’ve ever seen the popular 1984 film The Karate Kid starring Ralph
Macchio and Pat Morita, you may already know why this chapter is the
most important in this book. In the film, karate master Mr. Miyagi teaches the
timid teenager Daniel Larusso martial arts. But instead of beginning Larusso’s
training with how to throw a right hook or how to do a round kick, Miyagi
stresses defensive techniques. “Wax on, wax off,” he tells his student. The
lesson is that you must block your opponents’ punches and kicks or you
won’t last very long in a fight.
Believe it or not, swing trading isn’t that different (fortunately, there’s no
need to train by waxing cars). I believe that the biggest determining factor
of whether you’ll be successful as a swing trader is how well you’re able to
implement your own risk management system. All too often, managing risk
gets relegated to one or two simple rules of thumb: diversify your holdings
and limit your investment in a single security, and all should be merry. Au
contraire — although diversification and position sizing are important parts
of risk management, they don’t encompass all features of it. Moreover, traders often fail to fully implement diversification and position sizing correctly.
Managing risk is threefold: limiting the risk from a single position, limiting
the risk on the portfolio level, and executing the orders your risk system
tells you to execute. The first two can be taught to a five-year-old, but the
practice of following your risk system is more difficult. As a swing trader, you
have no one behind you making sure you follow these rules, and that means
you’re literally your worst enemy. If you get sloppy and ignore a rule here or
there, you may get away with it a few times, but eventually the market will
punish you.

204 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
Two tales of foolish woe
Not convinced of the importance of risk management? Consider the following hotshots who
managed hundreds of millions of dollars and
posted amazing returns . . . only to lose it all
under difficult market environments when you
can differentiate the skilled from the amateurs.
Victor Niederhoffer: Dr. Victor Niederhoffer is a
well-known hedge fund manager and statistician with an impressive resume: Harvard undergrad with a PhD from the University of Chicago.
He taught finance at the University of California,
Berkeley, in the 1970s. You’d think that if anyone
knew about risk, it’d be Niederhoffer.
Niederhoffer launched his own hedge fund and
did quite well: He posted annual returns of 35
percent per year for several years. One popular
magazine even named his hedge fund the
number one fund in the world in 1996. But
remember that trading can be deceptive, and
the appearance of success can be illusory.
Niederhoffer’s party came to a crashing end in
1997. His wrong bet on Thai bank stocks coupled
with a major decline in the Dow Jones Industrial
Average caused Niederhoffer major losses and
forced him to shut down the fund. All those glorious gains in prior years were wiped out. Had
Niederhoffer better diversified, invested in more
liquid assets, and not used heavy leverage, he
may have walked away with a few bruises but
the ability to fight another day.
Despite his major setback, Niederhoffer
launched a new hedge fund in 2002 and, remarkably, was awarded a prize for the best performing fund in 2004 and 2005. But — and I kid you
not — his fund was closed in September 2007
after suffering a decline of more than 75 percent
following the sub-prime market collapse and
credit crunch. “He is his own worst enemy,”
Nassim Taleb, the author and derivatives trader,

says of Niederhoffer. “One of the most brilliant
men I have ever met, and he wastes his time
selling options — something nobody can have
any skill in — and it leaves him vulnerable to
blowing up.”
Long Term Capital Management: Long Term
Capital Management (LTCM) was a hedge fund
founded in 1994 with two — count ’em, two —
Nobel Prize winners in economics on its board
of directors. With people that smart steering the
ship, there was no way anything negative could
happen . . . or so it would seem. (As you may be
catching on, portfolio returns and intelligence
seem to be negatively correlated.)
In the early years, LTCM posted incredible
returns: 40 percent on average. But the firm
used extensive leverage (borrowing money to
amplify possible returns — for example, using
$1,000 to buy $2,000 worth of stocks). A crisis in
Russia sparked major losses in LTCM’s positions, and the firm went bust. LTCM failed
because it took on extraordinary leverage and
because its risk management system assumed
markets would become efficient, meaning security mispricings wouldn’t persist or widen.
Markets aren’t always rational, and during periods of panic, they become very irrational.
The point of these examples isn’t to convince
you that a Nobel Prize in economics or a degree
from Harvard won’t save you from the possibility
of blowing up. In fact, it’s nearly the opposite:
These things may be a greater hindrance than a
benefit! Why? Perhaps degrees from top
schools or Nobel Prizes make individuals arrogant of the risks that are present in the market.
After all, if I know everything and the market is
moving in a direction contrary to my thoughts,
then clearly the market is wrong. That kind of
thinking can kill your stock portfolios.

Chapter 10: Strengthening Your Defense: Managing Risk

Risk Measurement and Management
in a Nutshell
Trading in general can be very deceptive — things aren’t always as they
appear. A hotshot trader or portfolio manager may post tremendous returns
year-in and year-out, but if that trader or manager doesn’t manage risk well,
he or she may be one day away from blowing up and losing everything.
Risk management is the science (and sometimes the art) of limiting the losses
your portfolio may suffer. This chapter breaks down limiting risk into two
components: limiting the risk of an individual security and limiting risk at a
portfolio level.
Fortunately, you can limit the potential losses of your portfolios by following
several rules, which this chapter discusses in detail:
 Limit the amount of capital you invest in a position (position sizing)
 Invest in securities that trade frequently (liquidity)
 Spread out your capital over several positions (diversification)
 Spread out your capital over different sectors (diversification)
Risk management is how you put these various methods together into a
coherent strategy. Before you buy or sell a stock, you must have written
rules on how you’ll respond should that trade go sour. That’s your risk
strategy. But that doesn’t mean you won’t experience losses. All professional
(and great) traders lose money. What separates the successful ones from the
burnouts are those who manage their risk well.
You have to be humble when you invest in the financial markets; you can’t
ever think you’re smarter than the market. The minute you think that is the
same minute your proverbial head will be handed to you on a silver platter.

First Things First: Measuring the
Riskiness of Stocks before You Buy
Before you can manage the riskiness of your portfolio, you need to measure
the riskiness of the stocks you’re considering. So just how can you measure
the riskiness of an individual stock? There are a number of factors to consider, all of which can give you an idea how much a security’s share price
may move in the near term:

205

206 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
 The stock’s beta, which is the risk of a stock compared to a market:
Beta is often overlooked by individual traders and has more weight with
institutional traders. Although beta is backward-looking (that is, the
historical volatility doesn’t necessarily mean a stock or security will be
as volatile in the future), you should know a security’s beta in order to
get an idea of how it has historically traded relative to the market.
 The stock’s liquidity, or how frequently traders exchange the security’s shares: Liquidity refers to the ease of entering and exiting a security,
and you shouldn’t overlook it. Liquidity may not seem important when
you’re entering a security because you can be patient and enter over
time, but its importance becomes paramount when you need to exit and
can’t find a buyer (or seller, if you’re short).
 The size of the company: Institutional traders care more about size than
individual traders. Over the long term, small company stocks have outperformed large company stocks. But because small company stocks are
more volatile, traders must take extra precautions when investing in
“tiddlers.” (Seriously, that’s what they’re often called.) For example, you
may have a tighter stop loss on a small cap security than a large cap
security.
 The company’s share price: I usually don’t trade stocks below $10 per
share. Many major institutional buyers can’t even trade in stocks in the
single digits. Hence, these stocks are more susceptible to manipulation
(for example, via rumors in trading chat rooms).

Assessing the beta: One security
compared to the market
Beta is one way to measure how risky a position is. In plain English, beta tells
you how volatile a security is relative to the market. Unfortunately, beta isn’t
always right. Its calculation (which is beyond the scope of this book) is based
on historical data. There’s no guarantee that the beta of a stock may not
change — say from 2 today to 1 tomorrow. Therefore, you should know the
beta of a security to get a general idea of how volatile that security is, but
don’t bet your life on it.
Take a gander at some information on the shares of Microsoft Corporation as
an example:
Symbol: MSFT

Share Price: $30.26

Beta: 1.16

Volume: 56.29 million

Microsoft Corporation has a beta of 1.16, which means that, on average,
Microsoft shares tend to rise or fall 1.16 times the general market. If the S&P
500 Index rose 1 percent in a day, you may expect to see Microsoft shares
rise 1.16 percent.

Chapter 10: Strengthening Your Defense: Managing Risk
There’s no “right” beta for a security. A security that may move up a lot is
desirable, but not if it can also cause you losses significant enough to take you
out of trading. That doesn’t mean you have to pass up a security that has a
very high beta. But it does mean you may have to allocate less to that security
because of its inherent volatility.

Looking at liquidity: Trade frequency
To understand liquidity, it helps to understand how the market works. The
market is composed of millions of buyers and millions of sellers. The big
companies — like Dell Computer or Coca-Cola — almost always have thousands of traders wanting to buy or sell stocks. But what about other companies? Some securities may not have that many traders interested in buying or
selling stock on a particular day. The problem with that scenario is that the
fewer the shares that trade, the more expensive it is to get into and out of a
position.
In general, you should avoid at all costs companies with low liquidity.
Although there may be some excellent opportunities in stocks that trade 500
shares a day, there are also ample opportunities in stocks that trade 500,000
shares a day. Why expose yourself to the risk of being unable to find a buyer
for your shares if you need to exit in a hurry? You shouldn’t.
So how liquid should shares of a security be before you purchase stock in it?
That depends on your account size. If you’re investing $25,000, you probably
need to stick to stocks that trade at least 100,000 shares per day. If you’re
investing $1,000,000, you may be looking for stocks that trade at least 250,000
shares per day.
As a rule of thumb, your position size shouldn’t represent more than 5 percent
of the average daily volume of the shares.
Suppose you’re interested in buying shares of LowLiquid Corporation, which
trades (in this hypothetical world) on the New York Stock Exchange under
symbol LL. Table 10-1 shows the current orders outstanding for the purchase
and sale of shares in LowLiquid Corporation.

Table 10-1

Hypothetical Order Book

Buy 100 Shares

$25

Buy 100 Shares

$24

Buy 100 Shares

$23

Sell 100 Shares

$36

Sell 100 Shares

$26

207

208 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
An order book shows what the market maker sees: the current orders outstanding for a security. In this example, you see that buyers are interested
in purchasing shares of LowLiquid Corporation for $25, $24, and $23 per
share. However, the only sellers available at this time are selling shares for
$36 and $26.
If you want to buy shares of LowLiquid Corporation, it may be a difficult
proposition. Enter a market order for 200 shares, for example, and you’ll buy
100 shares at $26 and 100 shares at $36 — giving you an average cost basis
of $31. With the current bid at $25, you’re already down almost 20 percent!
The spread, or difference in share prices, may not be always so large, but this
example is intentionally exaggerated to illustrate the high cost that illiquidity
can have on your portfolio.

Sizing up the company:
The smaller, the riskier
Another factor to consider when determining how risky shares of a company
are is the size of that company. Large company stocks (often called large
capitalization stocks or large cap for short) are often less volatile — and
therefore less risky — than small company stocks. But what is “large” and
what is “small?” Ask Mr. Market Cap. Market cap tells you the value of a company — or more accurately, the value that Wall Street gives it today. The
calculation of market cap is simple, but you’re unlikely to need to calculate
the figure because most Web sites and research services provide it for
free. Yahoo! Finance (http://finance.yahoo.com) and Google Finance
(http://finance.google.com/finance) are two popular sources for
this information.
Market cap is defined as
Total shares outstanding × Price per share = Market capitalization
Generally, companies are classified into one of four market cap categories
based on market capitalization:
Market Cap Category
