
I am fairly good at discipline. I have no problems following n
sys tern.
Do you tend to get compulsive (i.e., get caught up in the
excitement of trading), have personal conflicts (i.e., have a
history of conflicts with yourfamily, at your job, or during
past trading experience),-or have any emotional issues that
constantly crop up, such as fear or anger?

CHAPTER 3 Setting Your Objectives

51

I certainly don’t think of myse(fas compulsive. 1 don’tfind trading
exciting at all. It’s just a business to me. I took at trading as an
interesting brain tease.
I don’t think I have any conflicts. Myfumily life is reasonably
stable. In addition, I rarely get angry orfrustrated.
I used to get tensefrom time to time. But I learned something in
one of your seminars about what happensfirst when lget tense. In
my case, myfingers got tensefirst. As soon as I became conscious
of it, I automatically went into a relaxation state as soon as I
noticed it. And now it’s so automaticfor me that 1 don’t even
notice it.
Based upon your personal inventory, what did you need to
learn, accomplish, or solve prior to beginning trading?
How did you do that?

I think my personal inventory wus and is quite strong. I’m able to
trade ruell.
I hope, for those of you who have a lot of things to overcome,
this inventory will be an eye-opener. You really need to think about
all these things before you start developing a trading system. Why?
Because the essence of a good trading system is to find one that best
fits you!
Part 11: Define Your Objectives
This section is probably the most important part of developing a
trading system. Until you know where you want to go, you can
never get there. As a result, a major portion of the time you spend
in developing a trading system should be in terms of developing
objectives.
Objectives probably should be treated differently for individual traders and investors versus those who are managing money.
Since Tom fills both roles, I asked him both sets of questions. First,
here are the questions for individual traders and investors.
A. Objectives for lndividual investors and ‘haders
What is your advantage or edge in trading? What is the
particular concept that you are trading that gives you an

PART

1

The Most Important Factor in Your Success: YOU!

advantage? If you don’t know, various concepts are

discussed in detail in Chapter 5.
Strategic thinking is our edge, because so many people don’t do
that. We also have an edge in terms ofpatience and detachment.
Most people are neither patient nor detached. Computer
programming is also an edge. Most people don’t take it to the level
that we do. Long-term automated trend following is the outflozu of
the edge.
How much money do you have personally? How much of
that money could you afford to lose? For example, most
funds stop trading at 50 percent. How about you? How
much risk can you afford to take on a given trade?

I have several million dollars and 1 could afford to lose 25 percent
of that comfortably. All of my money is in our trading program,
and we’re only risking between 0.8 to 1.0 percent per trade.
However, ifI mere trading on my own, I’d go to 1 percent to 1.5
percent. 1 think 2-3 percent risk would push the envelopefor me,
partially because I could be in up to 20 markets at a time.

APTER 3 Setting Your Objectives

I think I’m quite realistic about the returns and the risk. I also
know about 10 losses in a row. I’ve gone through that in the past,
so I know that it is to be expected.
Do you have the time to trade short term?

1 have about 6 hours each day to devote to trading. The rest of my
time is devoted to specrfic business or personal commitments. I
don’t plan to trade short term so that’s not n problem.
How much social contact do you need?

I don’t need much, but I do enjoy it.
Can you work by yourself day after day? Do you need one
or two other people around, or do you need a lot of other
people around? How much do those other people influence
you?

I have a full staff of people nt Trendstat, but I don’t need that. I can
easily work by myself Those people didn’t inf[uence me at all in
terms of the early development of our trading models.
In summary, what do you expect to make each year as a
percentage of your trading capital?

How much money do you need to make each year? Do you
need to live off that money? What if you don’t make
enough to live off? Can you make more than you need to
live off so that your trading capital can grow? Can you
stand regular withdrawals from your trading capital to pay
your monthly bills?

About 20 percent to 40 percent.

My income comesfrom my salary at Trendstat, so 1 don’t need
anythingfrom my trading income. Trading income is simply a
second income for me.

What is the largest peak-to-trough drawdown you are
willing to tolerate?

I know this doesn’t pertain to you, but I’ll ask it anyway
because it’s one of the standard questions under objectives.
Are you being realistic, or are you expecting to trade like
the best trader in the world? For example, suppose you
have a very good system that is right half the time and
gives you profits that are twice as large as your losses. In
that system, just by chance, you could still easily have 10
losses in a row. Your system is still working as expected,
but you could easily have 10 losses in a row. Could you
tolerate that?

53

What risk level are you willing to tolerate in order to
achieve that?

About halfthe potential gain, so the maximum loss would be 20
percent in a year.
About 25 percent.
How will you know your plan is working, and how will
you know’when it’s not working? What do you expect from
your system in various kinds of markets? Trending?
Consolidating? Highly volatile?

I plan everything. I set up worst-case scenarios, and we run
through them just as an exercise. I have specifications on the best
case and the worst casefor each scenario. Thus, when something
comes along, I have usually plannedfor it and have a range of
expectancy. If the results fall within that range, then I know
everything is as planned. If the resultsfull outside that range, then

CHAPTER 3 Setting Your Objectives

I know that something needs to befixed. We’ll then step in and
study what went wrong.
Generally, I expect Q 40 percent return at the best and a 10 percent
return at the zuorst, with average returns of 15 to 25 percent. We
also expect worst-case drawdowns of 25 percent.
1 remember one year 1 had a return greater than 40 percent. I’m
glad that happened because I was outside the extremes of our
parameters. What it told me is that our risk was too great and that
we could also be outside the range on the downside. As a result, we
went in and cut down our risk so that the worst case on the
downside couldn’t happen.
B. Objectives for Trading Advisors
Now let’s do the objectives for you as a trading manager.
What kind of clients do you want? Retail clients? A few

For that matter, how much gain can they tolerate before
they gei too excited?

Gains over 25 percent definitely get noticed. We don’t want to be
too high or clients tend to draw R straight line to the moon and
then expect that kind ofperformance
tocontinue.
What kind of fees do you charge? In other words, whai is
the total amount extracted from the client’s account each
quarter or month? What kinds of returns will you have to
make in order to be able to satisfy a client who is subject to
those fees?

We charge n mnnagement fee of 2 percent and an incentivefee qf 20
percent. Our clients are happy with thosefees as long as they can
make their 15-20 percent returns afterfees and they are not too
uncomfortable with the drawdowns.

good friends? Several pool operators placing money with
you? Very sophisticated investors?

What is your trading capacity? How do you expect to
achieve it? What do you expect to do when you achieve it?
How will that change your trading?

We want balanced clients that have reasonnble objectives. My
objective here is to remain one of the top lOOfirms by size, so we’ll
trike the kinds of clients who’ll get us there. We have both retail and
institutional clients. In some ways they are different and in other
ways they are the same, but both types arefine with us.

Our capacity is about $2 to $2 billion. We expect to achieve it by
our current policy of marketing to banks, large pool operators, and
high-net-worth individuals. When we reach it, we’ll simply turn
away new money. As we grow, our trading needs to be continually
consolidated at fewer trading desks.

What are your clients like? What are their goals? What
kind of service do you provide for them? For example, by
putting their money with you, are they attempting a special
type of diversification?

What’s the worst thing that can happen in terms of your
client relationship? How can you prepare for that so that it
will not occur?

Our clients are definitely lookingfor divers$ication. We provide
that withfour difirent programs that strivefor returns in the
10-20 percent range with lower drawdowns. We’re lookingfor
returns of 20 percent with 10 percent drawdowns. Our clients
know that, so that’s what they’re getting in terms of their goals.
Since you are trading clients’ money, how much risk can
they tolerate? When would they be likely to withdraw their
money?

They expect risk in the 5-10 percent range. Any drawdown that is
over 15 percent or fhat lasts~over a year is deadly-lots of clients
would fire us.

55

The worst thing that can happen to a client is a surprise. We make
sure that doesn’t happen by educating our clients. 1 even wrote a
book to prepare them, Panic Proof Investing.2
How will you handle a large infusion of new capital or a
large withdrawal?

A large infusion of new capital is planned in our programs. Large
withdrawals are easily handled by the software we’ve developed.
As you can tell, Tom Basso has carefully planned every little
detail of his trading program. That’s why an exercise like this one
is so important. It gets you thinking about issues you probably
,would not have thought about had you not done the exercise.

PART 1

56

The Most Important Factor in Your Success: YOU!

Part 111: Trading Ideas
The last section goes more specifically into how you want to trade.
It has to do with ideas about markets, entry, exit, and money management-the specifics of your trading plan.
Tom, what kind of markets do you want to trade? Is it
appropriate to specialize? Do you want to trade only liquid
markets, or are there some illiquid markets you’d like to
trade?
I’m a generalist, not a specialist. There are 20futures markets that

I trade, 15 cash currency markets, and 30 mutual funds. All of
them are very liquid, because I only concentrate on liquid markets.
If1 didn’t concentrate on these liquid markets, then we’d have a
very small capacity-not the several billion dollars we’re shooting
toward.

What beliefs do you have about entering the markets? How
important do you believe entry to be?
Entry is probably the least important component of my trading. I

want to enter the market when there is a change of trend. At tlu2t
instant-when the trend changes-the reward-to-risk ratio is
the best it will befor the rest of the trade.
Given yourgoals in terns of returns and drawdowns, what
kind of initial risk stop do you want? If it’s close, will you
be able to get right back into the market so that you will not
miss a move?
Stops, in my opinion, should be a violation ofthe reason why 1
wanted to get into the trade in thefirst place. And, yes, I always
have a way to get back into the trade.
My stop is afunction of the market and what it’s doing. [t’s only
indirectly related to risk-unless the risk is too bigfor me to even
take a position. I control risk as part of my money management,
which I suspect you’ll ask about later on in this interview.

CHAPTER 3

Setting Your Objectives

57

let my profits run. If1 everfind a trade that keeps going in my
direction so that I never have to get out, great!
I use trailing or technical stops. Once those are hit, I’m out of the
position.
What do you do in terms of money management (which I
call “position sizing” in this book)?
I set up a portfolio ofinstrumenls to be traded at set risk and

volatility limits as a percentage of equity. I monitor the amount of

initial risk and volatility and keep them at set limits. In addition, I
keep the ongoing risk and volatility atfixed percentages ofmy
equity. As a result, Inlways know how muchfluctuation can occur
in my portfolio overnight and it’s well within my sleeping limits.
Perhaps now you can understand why planning your objectives is so important to developing a trading system. If you do, then
I’ve done my job in this chapter. I cannot overemphasize the importance of establishing system and trading-related objectives. They
are the foundation upon which all successful trading (that I know
about) is built. They are also the most easily neglected area.

very

How do you plan to take profits? Reversal stops? Trailing
stops? Technical stops? Price objectives? Contrary to
popular opinion, much of your emphasis should be in the
area of stops and exits.
I don’t limit the amount I can make in a trade. My philosophy is to

SElTlNG

YOUR OWN OBJECTIVES

Now is the time for you to walk this same path to successful investing or trading. Reread the questions and Tom’s answers a number
of times. Take your time and enjoy the process. Write your answers
down on paper. Give them a lot of thought. What is critical is to
really take the time to think about the issues raised by these questions. That’s why this section should be 50 percent of the task of
preparing to trade. When you’ve finished, you will have developed
the foundation for a successful investing or trading business-a
foundation that very few people bother to build.
Don’t expect easy answers that just pop out at you. If you
don’t give this area some serious thought, then you have no business working on trading system development. Remember that
,&king about your objectives is about 50 percent of the task of
developing a trading system.
How will you know when you have psychological issues
related to trading system development for these questions? The

PART

questions will not tell you that directly. You’ll know that more by
your emotional response to the questions. The emotions you feel
when answering the questions will be a big clue for you.
If you don’t want to answer the questions and put off doing
so, then you have some psychological issues. If you get angry or
disturbed at some questions, then you probably have some psychological issues. However, keep working at these questions until
you are finished and have answers you can live with. Part of the
reason for doing the questions is to find out about the most important part of your trading-you.
You might also ask if the questions are telling you that you
should not trade. If you have not completed the questionnaire, or
have not completed it to your satisfaction, then you are not ready
to trade. I would not recommend that you do so until you thoroughly understand each question and your own response to it. Of
course, once you’ve done that, you must still develop a trading system that fits tfine criteria you’ve developed for yourself.
Lastly, you might ask how the questions will guide you in system development. What the questions do is allow you to establish
boundaries around which you must design your trading system.
I’d recommend that you answer the questions, read the book thoroughly, and then reanswer the questions. When you’ve done that,
then you will understand what you need to do in terms of developing a system that fits you.

NOTES
1. Since this interview was finished, Trendstat’s assets under
management have grown to over a half billion dollars.
2. Tom Basso, Pnzic ProofInvesting. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1994.

TWO

Conceptualization
of Your System

The purpose of Part II is to help you conceptualize your system and
then build the groundwork necessary to construct it. Part II consists
of three chapters. Chapter 4 presents the critical tasks that are necessary for developing a system that fits you. It represents years of
work studying the world’s best traders and investors to determine
exactly how they do their research.
Chapter 5 presents a synopsis of some of the various concepts
that you might use in your trading system. I’ve asked some
extremely knowledgeable people to contribute to this chapter, plus
I’ve added my own section. Read through the different concepts
and determine which concept appeals to you the most. You might
even adopt several of them.
Chapter 6 presents the concept of expectancy. Expectancy
refers to how much you will make with your trading system per
dollar risked. Few traders or investors really understand
expectancy, and yet it is one of the most important topics in this
satire book.

CHAPTER 4

Steps to Developing a System

There must be a map or model of the data which shows the zone to
be navigated and upon which is marked the best route.

Daoid Fosler, Ph.D.

It’s very useful to believe that if several people can do something
well, then the same skill can be copied, or modeled, and taught to
someone else. This is what NemoLinguistic Programming, or the
science of modeling, is all about. To develop a good model, you
need to find several people who can do the task well. You then need
to interview those people to find out what they do in common.
These are the key tasks involved in the model.’ It’s very important
to find out what they do in common. If you don’t, you’ll simply discover the idiosyncracies of the people involved, which usually are
not that important.
I’ve worked with hundreds of outstanding traders and
investors in a coaching role over the past 12 years. During that
time, I’ve had the opportunity to learn how to do trading research
,from these experts. The steps are quite clear and easy to do. This
chapter is a synopsis of the 12-step model I’ve developed through
~~thi.3 association.
:1.

TAKE AN INVENTORY

$he first key step is to take an inventory of yourself-your
3trengths and weaknesses. To have market success you must

l?ART 2 Conceptualization of Your System

62

develop a system that is right for you. In order to develop such a
system, you must take such a self-inventory-f your skills, your
temperament, your time, your resources, your strengths, and your
weaknesses. Without taking such an inventory, you cannot possibly develop a methodology that’s right for you.
Among the questions you need to consider:
Do you have strong computer skills? If not, then do you
have the resources to hire someone who does or who can
help you to become computer proficient?
. How much capital do you have? How much of that is risk
capital? You must have enough money to trade or invest
with the system you develop. Lack of sufficient funds is a
major problem for many traders and investors. If you don’t
have sufficient funds, then you cannot practice adequate
position sizing. This is one of the essential ingredients of a
successful system and yet it is one that most people ignore.
. How well can you tolerate losses?
How are your math skills?

l

l

There are many important issues that you should contemplate. For example, consider what time constraints you have. If you
have a full-time job, think about using a long-term system that only
requires you to spend about a half hour each night looking at endof-day data. Stop orders are then given to your broker for the next
day. Trading such a system doesn’t take much time, so it’s quite
appropriate to use if you don’t have much time. In fact, many professionals, who spend all day with the markets, still use long-term
systems that only use end-of-day data.
Let’s look at another issue you should consider. Are you going
to be in the market with your own money or someone else’s? When
you trade for other people, you have to deal with the impact of
their psychology on your trading, which could be quite substantial.
For example, in any kind of situation in which you are managing
other people’s money, the net results are a function of the psychology of the people who give you money plus your own psychology.
Say you are a money manager, and after two losing months,
your client withdraws her money. You then have three winning
months and the client decides to reinvht in your system, After you

CHAMER 4

Steps to Developing a System

63

have another two losing months, she again withdraws. She decides
to wait until you get really hot in the markets, and after five winning months, she puts her money back in. You have, again, two losing months. The result of all this is a client who is continually losing while you, as a money manager, made a lot of money. But the
wear and tear that she’d have experienced would affect both you
and your trading.
You should spend a lot of time thinking about the questions
asked in the self-inventory in Chapter 3 on managing client money.
And more importantly, think about your answers! Did you just
give a quick answer or did you give an accurate assessment of what
you believe and feel? In addition, did you just answer the questions
‘or did you put a lot of thought into each answer before you put it
down on paper ? Compare your answers with Tom Basso’s
answers, so you can compare yourself with a top professional
money manager.
2 . DEVELOP AN OPEN MIND AND GATHER
MARKET INFORMATION
At the International Institute of Trading Mastery, Inc., we conduct
an advanced 3-day seminar twice each year on the topic of
Developing a Winning System That Fits You. And we also have a
tape series from a prior seminar conducted in February 1996. Most
people learn a great deal from that seminar or set of tapes, but
sometimes people don’t learn enough until they’ve addressed
home of their psychological issues first. For example, some people
seem totally closed to what we are trying to teach. They have their
own ideas about what they want and are just not open to a general
model for improving their methodology-much less to specific
suggestions on how they should change. And the interesting thing
ti that the people who are closed to the ideas presented are usually
the people who need the material the most.
Thus, the first part of task 2 in system development modeling
& to develop a completely open mind. Here are some suggestions
“far doing that.
First, you need to understand that just about everything
You’ve ever been taught-including every sentence you’ve read so

CHAPTER 4 Steps to Developing a System

far in this book--consists of beliefs. “The world is flat” is a belief,
just as is the statement “The world is round.” You might say, “No,
the second statement is a fact.” Perhaps, but it is also a belief-with
a lot of important meaning in individual words. For example, what
does “round” mean? Or for that matter, what does “world” mean?
Anything that seems to be a fact is still relative and depends
upon the semantics of the situation. It depends upon some assumptions you are making and the perspective you are bringing to the
situation-all of which are also beliefs. You’ll become a lot less rigid
and much more flexible and open in your thing if you just consider “facts” to be “useful beliefs” that you’ye made up.
The reality that we know consists solely of our beliefs. As soon
as you change your beliefs, then your reality will change. Of
course, what I’ve just said is also a belief. However, when you
adopt this belief for yourself, you can begin to admit that you don’t
really know what is real. Instead, you just have a model of the
world by which you live your life. As a result, you can evaluate
each new belief in terms of its “utility.” When something conflicts
with what you know or believe, think to yourself, “Is there any
chance that this is a more useful belief?” You’d be surprised at how
open you’ll suddenly become to new ideas and new input. One of
my favorite quotes is the following from Einstein:
Keep in mind the following:
You don’t trade or invest in marketsyou trade or invest according to your
beliefs about the markets.
Thus, part of the necessity for having an open mind is the requirement to
determine your beliefs about the market. When you are not open,
they don’t seem like “beliefs’‘-they just seem like “what is.”
Trading an illusion, which everyone does, is particularly dangerous when you don’t know it. And you may be deluding yourself
extensively with your beliefs.
Charles LeBeau, a veteran trader of 30 years, says that when
he started to design trading systems for the computer, he had bundreds of beliefs about~ the market. Most of those beliefs did not
stand up to the rigors of computerized testing.
