
MONEY MANAGEMENT FORMULAS

231

In his ground-breaking book Portfolio Management Formulas, Ralph
Vince introduced the concept of the optimal f—the optimal fraction of
your account to risk in any given trade for maximum long-term gains.
His book is mathematically demanding, but it boils down to a few key
concepts: there is an optimal f for every trade; if you bet less, your risk
decreases arithmetically while profit decreases geometrically; if you
keep betting more than the optimal f, you are guaranteed to go broke.
The optimal f keeps shifting with every trade and is hard to calculate. It provides the highest returns in the long run, but it also leads to
vicious drawdowns that may exceed 90% of the account. Who has the
fortitude to continue trading a system that has brought his account
down from $100,000 to $9,000? The main value of the optimal f is simply to remind us that if we trade a size that’s too large, we’ll destroy
our account. The optimal f marks the zone beyond which you walk
into a minefield. Stay away from it, trade less than the optimal f.
Beginners who count profits put their cart before the horse. Reverse
that approach and begin by counting risks. Ask yourself what your
maximum permitted risk is if you follow the 2% and 6% Rules.
These are the steps of proper money management:
1. Measure your account value on the first of the month—the total
of cash, cash equivalents, and open positions.
2. Calculate 2% of your equity. This is the maximum you may risk
on any given trade.
3. Calculate 6% of your equity. This is the maximum you are permitted to lose in any given month, after which you must close out
all trades and stop trading for the rest of that month.
4. For every trade, decide on your entry point and a stop; express
your risk per share or per contract in dollars.
5. Divide 2% of your equity by your risk per share to find how
many shares or contracts you may trade. To get a round number,
round it down.
6. Calculate your risk on all open positions by multiplying the distance from the entry point to the current stop by the number of
shares or contracts. If the total risk is 4% of your account or less,
you may add another position, since you’ll be adding 2% with
your current trade, bringing the total to 6%. Remember, you do
not have to risk 2% per trade; you may risk less if you like.
7. Put on a trade only after meeting all of the above conditions.

232

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Establish the size of your trades on the basis of how much money you
can afford to risk, not how much you want to make. Follow the 2%
and the 6% Rules. If you are having a good month, with most trades
going your way, you will move your stops beyond breakeven and
will be allowed to put on more positions. You may even go on margin. The beauty of this money management system is that it clips your
losses when you are cold and lets you go forward at full throttle when
you’re hot.
On the first of the month, if you have no open positions, the 2% and
6% levels are easy to calculate. If you approach the first of the month
with some open positions, calculate your account equity—the value of
all open trades at the latest market price plus all cash or money market funds. Calculate the 2% and 6% levels on the basis of that number.
If you have moved stops beyond breakeven in open trades, you have
no capital at risk and may look for new trades. If your stops are not
yet at breakeven, find the percentage of your equity you have exposed
to risk and count it against the 6%. Once you deduct that number from
6%, the result will let you know whether you may put on new trades.
How should you apply the 2% and 6% Rules if you trade futures,
stocks, and options all at the same time? First of all, a beginner should
concentrate on a single market. Diversify only after you succeed. If you
are trading more than one market, open separate accounts and treat each
as a separate trading enterprise. For example, if you have $60,000 in
stocks and $40,000 in futures, calculate the 2% and 6% Rules for the
$60,000 and apply them to stocks, and then calculate the 2% and 6%
Rules for the $40,000 and apply them to futures. If you have more than
one account, allocate trading-related expenses in proportion to their sizes.
Remember, both your trading system and your money management
must be good in order to win in the markets.

P A R T
T H R E E

COME INTO
MY TRADING
ROOM
Traders go through several stages of development. Many beginners view
trading as a mechanical pursuit. They think that if only they could find
the right parameters for the Stochastic or the proper length for a moving average, success would be theirs. They become easy prey for gurus
selling mechanical systems.
Survivors realize that psychological factors, such as optimism or
doubt, greed or the fear of pulling the trigger are much more important than any technical indicator. They start developing a feel for the
importance of risk control. I keep running into folks at conferences
who have a good grip on technical analysis and some understanding
of psychology, but who know that something is missing because they
cannot win consistently and must keep their day jobs. What should
they do next?
Once you have a decent understanding of technical analysis, follow
money management rules, and know the value of trading psychology,
you need to develop new organizational skills. You already possess the
building blocks of success—now is the time to erect the structure of
successful trading.
There is no magic trick for converting a serious amateur into a professional trader. What I offer you here is a recipe for intense and
focused work which will enable you to move up to the ultimate stage
of professional trading.

C H A P T E R
E I G H T

THE ORGANIZED TRADER

W

hat is the single most important trait of a successful trader? High
intelligence? Not really, even though some basic level of performance is required. Good education? Not quite, since many of the
best traders haven’t gone past high school. The trait that all winners
have in common is a very high level of discipline. How can you measure your level and then increase it? You do it by maintaining and learning from several sets of trading records.
Keeping good records is the single most important contribution to
your success. If you maintain scrupulous records, review them, and
learn from them, your performance will improve. If your money management is in place to ensure survival during the learning process,
you’re sure to become a success.
These are strong words, but my experience confirms them. In the
years of teaching Traders’ Camps, whenever I saw a person with good
records, he was either a successful trader or soon became one. I have
found that women tend to keep better records than men, which is one
of the reasons the percentage of winners among them is higher.
Records are more important to your success than any indicator,
system, or technical tool. Even the best system is bound to have some
holes, but good records will allow you to find them and plug them up.
A person who keeps detailed records makes a huge leap in his development as a trader.
Show me a trader with good records, and I’ll show you a good
trader.
Bad traders keep bad records. People who do not learn from the
past are doomed to repeat it. “I’ve been hit, insulted, spat upon, and
abused—the only reason I stick around is to see what happens next.”
235

236

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

Good records let you learn from the past instead of struggling from day
to day. When the market hits you, good records show from where that
blow came. The next time, you’ll take a different path and avoid trouble. You may run into a different sort of trouble the next time around,
but keep at it long enough and you’ll run out of mistakes. Just be sure
your money management is in place, so that your money doesn’t run
out while you are learning. When you start making profits, your
records will show how they came about, helping you repeat that experience. Good records reduce guesswork and make trading a much
more professional exercise.
Remember the extensive notes you kept in college? Educators agree
that keeping notes is an essential part of the learning process. If you
are struggling, you must start keeping notes. Once you become a winner, you’ll continue to keep them, because they will have become a
key part of your trading process. Keeping records is time-consuming.
If you get tired or bored and give them up, take that as a sure sign that
you are gambling rather than trading. Your records are a litmus test of
your seriousness as a trader.
A trader needs four types of records. Three of them look back, and
one forward. The trader’s spreadsheet, his equity curve, and his trading diary help review past performance. The spreadsheet rates each
individual trade, the equity curve tracks your account as a whole, and
the diary reflects your decision-making process. The fourth record is a
trading plan for the day ahead. Maintaining these four records puts you
on the road toward responsible, professional, successful trading.

TRADER’S SPREADSHEET
The first step of proper record keeping is setting up a spreadsheet that
lists all your trades. Each horizontal line describes a new trade. Each
vertical column contains a certain detail of each trade or rates an aspect
of your performance. These columns belong in any workable trader’s
spreadsheet:
1. Trade number (list all trades in the order of entry)
2. Entry date
3. Long or short
4. Ticker (stock symbol)

THE ORGANIZED TRADER

237

5. Size (how many shares)
6. Entry price
7. Commission
8. Fee
9. Total (Entry price × size + commission + fee)
10. Channel (record the height of the channel on the daily chart or
whatever chart you use for your intermediate timeframe; you’ll
use it to rate your trade after exiting)
11 Exit date
12. Exit price
13. Commission
14. Fee
15. Total (Exit price × size − commission − fee)
16. P/L (profit or loss—column 15 minus column 9 for longs or the
opposite for shorts)
17. Entry grade (see below)
18. Exit grade (see below)
19. Trade grade (see below)
You may include several additional columns. For example, you may
want to record the name of the system that prompted that trade, the
initial stop, and slippage, if any. You can make your spreadsheet reflect
multiple exits as well as record the reasons for exits, such as hitting
price targets or stops, or impatience. You can make your spreadsheet
give you quick summaries of profit and loss or the number of winning
and losing trades per market and per system. You can make it show
the average, the smallest, and the greatest profit or loss per trade in
each market and each system.
The entry grade (17) rates the quality of your entry by expressing it
as a percentage of that day’s range. For example, if the high of the day
was 80, the low 76, and you bought at 77, then your entry grade is 25,
meaning you bought within the lower 25% of the day’s range. Had you
bought at 78, your grade would have been 50. The lower the percentage while buying, the better. Consistently buying at high numbers can
be ruinous. Try to keep your entry rating below 50. This may not seem
like much, but can be surprisingly difficult to accomplish.
The exit grade (18) rates the quality of your exit by expressing it as
a percentage of that day’s range. For example, if the high of the day

238

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

was 88, the low 84, and you sold at 87, your exit grade is 75. It means
you captured 75% of that day’s range. Had you sold at 86, your grade
would have been 50. The higher the percentage, the better for the
seller. Selling at high numbers is good, while selling at low numbers
amounts to charity. Work to get your exit rating above 50.
These ratings are important for position traders but even more so for
day-traders. Just keep in mind that when shorting, you open a trade by
selling and close it by buying. Similar ratings apply, as long as you
keep in mind that the sequence of buying and selling is reversed.
The trade grade (19) expresses your profit as a percentage of the
channel you’ve captured. It is the single most important rating of a
completed trade, much more important than the amount of profit.
Subtract column 6 (entry price) from column 12 (exit price) and divide
the result by column 10 (channel width), displaying the result in percentage format. Reverse the formula when you go short—column 6
minus column 12 divided by column 10.
Rating your profit as a percentage of the channel provides an objective yardstick of your performance. You can make a lot of money in a
big sloppy trade or just a little money in a finely executed trade in a
difficult market. Rating each trade on the basis of its channel reflects
your skill as a trader. If you can capture between 10% and 20% of the
channel, your grade is a C. If your profit exceeds 20% of the channel
width, you earn a B. And when you take 30% or more out of a channel, you make an A trade!
Add an extra column following each rating to calculate your average
grades for entries, exits, and completed trades. Graph those numbers
and keep doing everything you can to make them trend higher. A
scrupulously maintained trader’s spreadsheet is an active learning tool.
It puts you in touch with your successes and failures, creating an island
of stability and responsibility in the ocean of market chaos.

THE EQUITY CURVE
Are you disciplined enough to succeed in trading? Few people can definitely answer yes or no. Many traders are somewhere in the middle of
the scale. There is a gauge, a meter that shows whether you’re moving
up or down as a trader. That gauge is your account equity. Whenever
you act responsibly, it turns up, but ticks down with almost every lapse
of judgment.

THE ORGANIZED TRADER

239

Most traders look at charts, but very few look at themselves. That is
an oversight, since personality is a hugely important part of trading. An
equity curve holds up a mirror to your performance. Professionals keep
equity charts for themselves and their clients. When you start tracking
your equity curve, you make a big step toward joining the pros.
Use a spreadsheet to track your equity curve. Each horizontal line
reflects one unit of time, in this case a month. These columns belong
in the spreadsheet:
1. Date
2. Account equity
3. 2%
4. 6%
Find your account equity on the last day of each month and type in
that figure. Account equity equals all cash and cash equivalents in the
account, plus the value of all open positions. Mark your account to
market; your account equity is the liquidation value of your account.
Repeat this procedure every month. After accumulating this data for
several months, begin plotting your equity on a chart. The goal of every
professional trader is a smoothly rising equity curve, flowing from the
lower left to the upper right with only occasional shallow drawdowns.
Once you have accumulated a year’s worth of equity data, add a
moving average to your curve. A six-month simple MA will identify the
trend of your equity. It will also answer an important question—when
to add money to your account.
Most people add capital either after damaging losses or when they
feel very confident after a string of successes. Adding money after your
equity reaches a new high is emotionally understandable, but it happens to be a bad time to add money. We all go through cycles, and a
trader who has just reached a new equity high is due for a pause or a
pullback. If the moving average of your equity is rising, the best time
to add money is on a pullback to the rising MA. The uptrend of the
moving average of your equity confirms that you are a good trader, and
a pullback shows a return to value. You buy stocks and futures on pullbacks to their EMAs, so why not use the same tactic when you want
to give yourself more money to trade?
Program your spreadsheet to return two important numbers after
you type in that month’s equity—the 2% and 6% values. They set two
safety nets for your account for the month ahead. The 2% Rule limits

240

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

your risk on any single trade. Once you find a trade and decide where
to put a stop, the 2% Rule will give you the maximum number of
shares or contracts you may trade (try to risk less if you can). The 6%
Rule takes away your trading privileges for the balance of the month if
your account value drops to 94% of its previous month-end level.
You may enhance this spreadsheet, depending on what you want to
know and how good you are at programming. You can use it to calculate the monthly curve with and without interest. You can calculate
your curve both before and after trading expenses. You need to recalculate your curve whenever you add or subtract trading capital without mixing up past percentages. The key message—start plotting your
equity curve now!
Your equity curve is the yardstick of your performance. An orderly
uptrend is better than a steep uptrend with deep drawdowns. Your
equity curve should keep rising, and if it turns down, you have to
become much more defensive in your trading.

TRADING DIARY
A civilized person is in touch with his past. Understanding what has
gone before helps you deal with the present and face the future. A
trader who keeps a diary can learn from the past instead of mindlessly
repeating mistakes. A trading diary provides a private mirror, a valuable feedback loop. It is probably the single best learning tool available to traders.
A trading diary is both a visual and written record of your trades.
You can keep it on paper or in electronic form. I started keeping mine
such a long time ago that I still do it on paper, using scissors and
double-stick tape to paste up charts. You can follow these instructions
or adjust them and convert your diary into electronic format.
A trading diary is an album, 11 × 14 inches or bigger. Assign each twopage spread to a single trade. Whenever you enter a trade, print out the
charts that led to that trade, and paste them on the left page. Each chart
is about 3 × 5 inches, with the weekly on top, followed by one or two
dailies and sometimes an intraday chart. Write down the name of the
stock, the date, and the number of shares bought or shorted. Add a note
on the fundamentals if they had anything to do with that trade. Comment
on how you first became aware of that stock—a scan of the database, a

THE ORGANIZED TRADER

241

tip from a friend, or an article in a magazine or a newsletter. This allows
you to track the sources of your information. Use a pen to mark indicator signals and chart patterns that led you into that trade. Write a few
words about your feelings entering that trade (anxious, happy, confident, unsure) and note any unusual factors and circumstances.
I keep my diary at home, and if I trade at the office, I bring my
printouts with me and paste them up in the evening. It takes time to
clip the charts, tape them into my album, mark them up, and write the
commentary. This discipline reminds me that trading is what I do, and
trading takes priority over almost all other activities.
Repeat this process after exiting a trade—print out the charts and
paste them up on the right page of the album. There are usually fewer
charts on the right, as the weekly chart does not always figure in the
exit. Mark up trading signals and write down your comments on the circumstances of the exit, including your feelings about it.
As your diary grows thicker, this visual record of your trades becomes more and more valuable. Keep going back, leafing through your
diary. How do those signals look now? What are you happy with, what
would you have done differently, what lessons have you learned? Most
traders never ask themselves these questions. When they make money,
they swell with pride, and when they lose, they feel angry or ashamed.
Wallowing in feelings will not make you a better trader. Our losses can
teach us more than our gains. A trading diary helps you put aside selfkicking or self-congratulation and pay attention to the facts. It helps
you learn and succeed, helps you become free.
Nobody can give you a trading diary. You have to create it yourself,
and your ability to maintain it will provide a running check of your
discipline. Whenever you make some money, leaf through your diary
and ask whether you could have done any past trades differently in
light of what you have just learned. When you lose, do not kick yourself but write a good note on that trade, go back to review past trades,
and think how to avoid such losses in the future. Learn from your profits and losses.
To learn even more, go back to each completed trade approximately
three months after an exit and print out the current charts. Tape them
to a sheet of paper, mark them up, and attach that flyleaf to your exit
page. Now you can revisit your trades with the benefit of hindsight for
an extra dose of trading education.

242

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM

What if you are a very active trader or day-trader, making so many
trades that a diary entry for each is simply impractical? In that case,
have a diary entry for every fifth or every tenth trade listed in your
Trader’s Spreadsheet. You can add other trades to your diary if they are
especially important, but be sure to maintain the discipline of every
fifth or every tenth trade.
Keeping a diary and learning from your trades is as close as you can
come to a guarantee of trading success. Be sure to strictly observe
money management rules so that a string of freak losses doesn’t toss
you out of the game while you’re still learning. Follow the rules, keep
a spreadsheet, equity chart, and a trading diary, review them, learn from
them, and you’ll have everything it takes to become a successful trader.

ACTION PLAN
It is important to face each day knowing what and how you will trade.
This is especially true for position traders, as day-traders must instantly
react to quotes on their screens.
A pro does not squint at his charts. Good trades jump at you from
the chart and scream—here I am, take me. If you have to squint, there
is no trade and you should move on to the next stock. A good position trader, or any mature trader for that matter, looks not for the challenges but for the money.
The best time to search is in the evenings when markets are closed.
You can review your markets in peace, think, check out other stocks
and indicators, and then make your decision—to go long, short, or
stand aside. Write down your decision and review it in the morning
before the markets open.
Whenever you place an order, especially when you give it to the broker on the phone, it pays to read from a page instead of speaking from
memory. Why? Because almost every trader I know has had the embarrassing experience, usually more than once, of accidentally reversing an
order. You may want to sell short, but make a slip of the tongue, telling
your broker to buy, and seconds later find yourself an owner of a collapsing stock. Even worse, there is a temptation to change your order
at the last moment—buy more or less than you planned, or switch a
limit to a market order. Putting a sheet of paper between yourself and
your broker provides a useful layer of protection.
