
There is still one other argument investors sometimes use to sepa-
rate themselves from the profits they would otherwise make. This one is
the most ridiculous of all. It is that the stock they own has had a huge
advance. Therefore, just because it has gone up, it has probably used up
most of its potential. Consequently they should sell it and buy some-
thing that hasn’t gone up yet. Outstanding companies, the only type
which I believe the investor should buy, just don’t function this way.
How they do function might best be understood by considering the fol-
lowing somewhat fanciful analogy:

Suppose it is the day you were graduated from college. If you did not
go to college, consider it to be the day of your high school graduation;


112 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

from the standpoint of our example it will make no difference whatso-
ever. Now suppose that on this day each of your male classmates had an
urgent need of immediate cash. Each offered you the same deal. If you
would give them a sum of money equivalent to ten times whatever they
might earn during the first twelve months after they had gone to work,
that classmate would for the balance of his life turn over to you one
quarter of each year’s earnings! Finally let us suppose that, while you
thought this was an excellent proposition, you only had spare cash on
hand sufficient to make such a deal with three of your classmates.

At this point, your reasoning would closely resemble that of the
investor using sound investment principles in selecting common stocks.
You would immediately start analyzing your classmates, not from the
standpoint of how pleasant they might be or even how talented they
might be in other ways, but solely to determine how much money they
might make. If you were part of a large class, you would probably elim-
inate quite a number solely on the ground of not knowing them suffi-
ciently well to be able to pass worthwhile judgment on just how finan-
cially proficient they actually would get to be. Here again, the analogy
with intelligent common stock buying runs very close.

Eventually you would pick the three classmates you felt would have
the greatest future earning power. You would make your deal with
them. Ten years have passed. One of your three has done sensationally.
Going to work for a large corporation, he has won promotion after pro-
motion. Already insiders in the company are saying that the president
has his eye on him and that in another ten years he will probably take
the top job. He will be in line for the large compensation, stock options,
and pension benefits that go with that job.

Under these circumstances, what would even the writers of stock mar-
ket reports who urge taking profits on superb stocks that “have gotten ahead
of the market” think of your selling out your contract with this former class-
mate, just because someone has offered you 600 per cent on your original
investment? You would think that anyone would need to have his head
examined if he were to advise you to sell this contract and replace it with
one with another former classmate whose annual earnings still were about
the same as when he left school ten years before. The argument that your
successful classmate had had his advance while the advance of your (finan-
cially) unsuccessful classmate still lay ahead of him would probably sound
rather silly. If you know your common stocks equally well, many of the
arguments commonly heard for selling the good one sound equally silly.


When to Sell 113

You may be thinking all this sounds fine, but actually classmates are
not common stocks. To be sure, there is one major difference. That dif-
ference increases rather than decreases the reason for never selling the
outstanding common stock just because it has had a huge rise and may
be temporarily overpriced. This différence is that the classmate is finite,
may die soon and is sure to die eventually. There is no similar life span
for the common stock. The company behind the common stock can
have a practice of selecting management talent in depth and training
such talent in company policies, methods, and techniques in a way
which will retain and pass on the corporate vigor for generations. Look
at Du Pont in its second century of corporate existence. Look at Dow
years after the death of its brilliant founder. In this era of unlimited
human wants and incredible markets, there is no limitation to corporate
growth such as the life span places upon the individual.

Perhaps the thoughts behind this chapter might be put into a single
sentence: If the job has been correctly done when a common stock is
purchased, the time to sell it is—almost never.


7

The Hullabaloo about
Dividends

here is a considerable degree of twisted thinking and general
| eo of half truths about a number of aspects of common

stock investments. However, whenever the significance and impor-
tance of dividends are considered, the confusion of the typical investor
becomes little short of monumental.

This confusion and acceptance of half truths spreads over even to the
choice of words customarily used in describing various types of dividend
action. A corporation has been paying no dividend or a small one. Its
president requests the board of directors to start paying a substantial div-
idend. This is done. In speaking of this action he or the board will often
describe it by saying that the time had come to “do something” for
stockholders. The inference is that by not paying or raising the dividend
the company had been doing nothing for its stockholders. This could
possibly be true. However, it certainly was not true just because no div-
idend action had been taken. It is possible that by spending earnings not
as dividends but to build a new plant, to launch a new product line, or
to install some major cost-saving equipment in an old plant, the man-
agement might have been doing much more to benefit the stockholder
than it would have been doing just by passing these earnings out as div-
idends. No matter what might be done with any earnings not passed on
as dividends, increases in the dividend rate are invariably referred to as
“favorable” dividend action. Possibly with greater reason, reduction or
elimination of dividends is nearly always called “unfavorable.”

One of the main reasons for the confusion about dividends in the
public mind is the great variation between the amount of benefit, if any,


The Hullabaloo about Dividends 115

that accrues to the stockholder each time earnings are not passed on to
him but retained in the business. At times he is not benefited at all by
such retained earnings. At others he is benefited only in a negative
sense. If the earnings were not retained, his holdings would decrease in
value. However, the retained earnings in no sense increase the value of
his holdings, therefore, they seem of no benefit to him. Finally, in the
many cases where the stockholder benefits enormously from retained
earnings the benefits accrue in quite different proportions to different
types of stockholders within the same company, thereby confusing
investor thinking even more. In other words, each time earnings are not
passed out as dividends, such action must be examined on its own merit
to see exactly what is actually happening. It might pay to look a little
below the surface here and discuss some of these differences in detail.

When do stockholders get no benefit from retained earnings? One
way is when managements pile up cash and liquid assets far beyond any
present or prospective needs of the business. The management might
have no nefarious motive in doing this. Some executives get a sense of
confidence and security from steadily piling up unneeded liquid
reserves. They don’t seem to realize they are buttressing their own feel-
ings of security by not turning over to the stockholder wealth which he
should be entitled to use in his own way and as he sees fit. Today there
are tax laws which tend to curb this evil so that while it still occurs, it
is no longer the factor which it once was.

There is another and more serious way in which earnings are fre-
quently retained in the business without any significant benefit to stock-
holders. This occurs when substandard managements can get only a sub-
normal return on the capital already in the business, yet use the retained
earnings merely to enlarge the inefficient operation rather than to make
it better. What normally happens is that the management having in time
built up a larger inefficient domain over which to rule usually succeeds in
justifying bigger salaries for itself on the grounds that it is doing a bigger
Job. The stockholders end up with little or no profit.

Neither of these situations is likely to affect the investor who fol-
lows the concept discussed in this book. He is buying stocks because
they are outstanding and not just because they are cheap. Managements
with inefficient and substandard operations would fail to qualify under
our fifteen points. Meanwhile, managements of the type that do quali-
fy would almost certainly be finding uses for surplus cash and not just
piling it up!


116 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

How can it happen that earnings retained in the business can be
vitally needed yet have no possibility of increasing the value of the
stockholder shares? This can occur in one of two ways. One way is
when a change in custom or public demand forces each competitive
company to spend money on so-called assets which in no sense increase
the volume of business, but which would cause a loss of business if the
expenditure had not been made. A retail store installing an expensive air
conditioning system is a classic example of this sort of thing. After each
competitive store has installed such equipment, no net increase in busi-
ness will occur, yet any store which had not met the competitive move
might find very few customers on a hot summer day. Since for some
strange reason our accepted accounting system and the tax laws which
are based on it make no differentiation between “assets” of this type and
those which have actually increased the value of the business, the stock-
holder frequently thinks that he has been badly treated when earnings
have not been passed out to him and yet he can see no increase in value
coming to him from what was retained in the business.

The other and even more important way that retained earnings fail
to produce increased profits results from an even more serious failure of
our accepted accounting methods. In our world of rapid and major
changes in the purchasing value of our money units, standard account-
ing proceeds as though the dollar were a fixed unit of value. Accoun-
tants say this is all accounting is supposed to do. This may very well be
true; but if a balance sheet is supposed to have any relationship to the
real values of the assets described thereon, the confusion that results
seems about parallel to what would happen if engineers and scientists
made their calculations in our three dimensional world by using only
two dimensional plane geometry.

The depreciation allowance in theory should be enough to replace
an existing asset when that asset is no longer economically usable. If the
depreciation rate were properly calculated and the replacement cost of
the asset remained unchanged over its useful life, this would happen. But
with ever rising costs, the total accumulated depreciation is seldom
enough to replace the outmoded asset. Therefore, additional sums must
be retained from the earnings merely to make up the difference if the
corporation is to continue to have what it had before.

This type of thing, while affecting all investors, usually affects hold-
ers of growth companies less than any other class. This is because the
rate of acquiring new capital assets (as against merely replacing existing


The Hullabaloo about Dividends 117

and about-to-be-retired assets) is usually so fast that more of the depre-
ciation is on recently acquired assets installed at somewhere near today’s
values. A smaller percentage of it is for assets installed years ago at a
fraction of today’s costs.

It would be repetitious to go into detail concerning the cases where
retaining earnings for building new plants and launching new products
has proven of spectacular advantage to investors. However, consideration
of how much one type of investor benefits in relation to another is wor-
thy of careful consideration for two reasons. It is a matter about which
there is always misunderstanding throughout the financial community.
It is also a matter the proper understanding of which provides an easy
key to evaluating the real significance of dividends.

Let us examine these misconceptions about who benefits most from
dividends by taking a fictitious example. The well-managed XYZ
Corporation has had a steady growth in its earnings over the last sever-
al years. The dividend rate has remained the same. Consequently, where-
as four years ago it took 50 per cent of earnings to pay the dividend, so
much additional earning power has developed in these four years that
paying the same dividend now requires only 25 per cent of this year’s
earnings. Some directors want to raise the dividend. Others point out
that never before has the corporation had so many attractive places to
invest their retained earnings. They further point out that only by main-
taining rather than raising the rate will it be possible to exploit all the
attractive opportunities available. Only in this way can the maximum
growth be attained. At this point a lively discussion breaks out as to what
course to follow.

Someone on this fictitious board of directors is then sure to state
one of the financial community’s most common half-truths about div-
idends. This is that if the XYZ Corporation does not raise its dividend,
it will be favoring its large stockholders at the expense of its small ones.
The theory behind this is that the big stockholder is presumably in the
higher bracket. After paying taxes, the big stockholder can retain a much
smaller percentage of his dividends than the small stockholder. There-
fore he does not want the increased dividend, whereas the small stock-
holder does want it.

Actually, whether it is more to the interest of any individual XYZ,
Corporation stockholder to have the dividend raised or to have more
funds ploughed back into the growth depends upon something quite
different from the size of his income. It depends upon whether or not


118 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

each stockholder is at the point where he is putting any part of his
income aside for additional investment. Millions of stockholders in the
lower income brackets are handling their affairs so that each year they
put something, no matter how little, aside for additional investment. If
they are doing this and if, as is' likely to be the case, they are paying
income tax, it is a matter of elementary arithmetic that the board of
directors would be acting against their interests by raising the dividend
at a time when all these worthwhile opportunities are available for
using retained company earnings. In contrast, the raised dividend might
be to the interest of a big stockholder who had urgent need of addi-
tional funds, a contingency not entirely unknown to those in high tax
brackets.

Let us see just why all this is so. Almost anyone having enough sur-
plus funds to own common stocks will probably also have enough
income to be in at least the lowest tax bracket. Therefore, once he has
used up his individual dividend exemption of $50, even the smallest
stockholder will presumably have to pay as tax at least 20 per cent of any
additional income he receives as dividends. In addition, he must pay a
brokerage commission on any stock he buys. Because of odd lot
charges, minimum commissions, etc., these costs run to a much larger
percentage of the sums involved in small purchases than in large ones.
This will bring the actual capital available for reinvestment well below
80 per cent of the amount received. If the shareholder is in a higher tax
bracket, the percentage of a dividend increase which he can actually use
for reinvestment becomes proportionately less.

There are, of course, certain special types of stockholders such as uni-
versities and pension funds that pay no income tax. There are also some
individuals with dividend income less than the $50 individual exemp-
tion, although the total number of shares owned by this group appears to
be small. For these special groups the equation is somewhat different.
However, for the great majority of all stockholders, regardless of size,
there is no avoiding this one basic fact about dividends. If they are sav-
ing any part of their income rather than spending it and if they have their
funds invested in the right sort of common stocks, they are better off
when the managements of such companies reinvest increased earnings
than they would be if these increased earnings were passed on to them
as larger dividends which they would have to reinvest themselves.

Nor is this advantage—having 100 per cent of such funds put to
work for them in place of the smaller amount that would be available


The Hullabaloo about Dividends 119

after income taxes and brokerage charges—the only one the stockhold-
ers get. Selecting the right common stock is not an easy or simple mat-
ter. If the company considering the dividends is a good one, the investor
has already wisely done his task of selection. Therefore, he is usually run-
ning less risk in having this good management make the additional
investment of these retained extra earnings than he would be running if
he had to again risk serious error in finding some new and equally
attractive investment for himself. The more outstanding the company
considering whether to retain or pass on increased earnings, the more
important this factor can become.This is why even the stockholder who
does not pay income tax and who is not spending every bit of his
income finds it almost as much to his interest as to the interest of his
tax-paying counterpart to have such companies retain funds to take
advantage of worthwhile new opportunities.

Measured against this background dividends begin to fall into true
perspective. For those desiring the greatest benefit from the use of their
funds, dividends begin rapidly to lose the importance that many in the
financial community give them. This is as true for the conservative
investor going into the institutional type growth stock as for those willing
and able to take greater risks for greater gain. The opinion is sometimes
expressed that a high dividend return is a factor of safety. The theory
behind this is that since the high-yield stock is already offering an above-
average return, it cannot be overpriced and is not likely to go down very
much. Nothing could be farther from the truth. Every study I have seen
on this subject indicates that far more of those stocks giving a bad per-
formance price-wise have come from the high dividend-paying rather
than the low dividend-paying group. An otherwise good management
which increases dividends, and thereby sacrifices worthwhile opportuni-
ties for reinvesting increased earnings in the business, is like the manager
of a farm who rushes his magnificent livestock to market the minute he
can sell them rather than raising them to the point where he can get the
maximum price above his costs. He has produced a little more cash right
now but at a frightful cost.

I have commented about a corporation raising its dividend rather
than about it paying any dividend at all. I am aware that while the occa-
sional investor might not need any income, nearly all do. It is only in rare
cases even among outstanding corporations that the opportunity for
growth is so great that the management cannot afford to pay some part
of earnings and still—through retaining the rest and through senior


120 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

financing—obtain adequate cash to take advantage of worthwhile
growth opportunities. Each investor must decide in relation to his own
needs how much, if any, money to put into corporations with such
abnormal growth factors that no dividends whatsoever are justified.
What is most important, however, is that stocks are not bought in com-
panies where the dividend pay-out is so emphasized that it restricts real-
izable growth.

This brings us to what is probably the most important but least dis-
cussed aspect of dividends. This is regularity or dependability. The wise
investor will plan his affairs, He will look ahead to what he can or can-
not do with his income. He may not care about immediately increas-
ing income but he will want assurance against the decreased income
and unexpected disruption of his plans that this can cause. Further-
more, he will want to make his own decisions between companies
which should plough back a great part or all of their earnings and those
that may grow at a good but slower rate and need to plough back a
smaller proportion.

For these reasons, those who set wise policies on stockholder relations
and those who enjoy the high price-earnings ratios for their shares which
such policies help bring about usually avoid the muddled thinking that
typifies so many corporate treasurers and financial vice presidents. They
set a dividend policy and will not change it. They will let stockholders
know what this policy is. They may substantially change the dividend but
seldom the policy.

