REMINISCENCES
OF A
STOCK
OPERATOR

Edwin Lefèvre

Copyright © 2008
Published by John Wiley & Sons. Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
Originally published in 1923 by George H. Doran and Company.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of
the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of
the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to
the Copyright Clearance Center. Inc.. 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923,
(978) 750-8400. fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at http://www.copyright.com.
Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions
Department, John Wiley & Sons. Inc.. 111 River Street, Hoboken. NJ 07030, (201)
748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used
their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties
with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and
specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a
particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives
or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate.
Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other
commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential,
or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support,
please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800)
762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that
appears in print may not be available in electronic books. For more information
about Wiley products, visit our web site at http://www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lefèvre, Edwin, 1871-1943.
Reminiscences of a stock operator / Edwin Lefèvre.
p. cm.—(Wiley investment classics)
Originally published: New York : G.H. Doran, 1923.
Includes index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-471-77088-6 (pbk.)
ISBN-10: 0-471-77088-4 (pbk.)
1. New York Stock Exchange. 2. Speculation. I. Title. II. Series.
HG4572.L4 2006
332.64'273 —dc22
Printed in the United States of America.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

2005043672

to Jesse Lauriston Livermore.

Index
I..........................................................9
II......................................................23
III.....................................................39
IV.....................................................49
V.......................................................67
VI......................................................81
VII....................................................93
VIII.................................................101
IX....................................................115
X.....................................................133
XI....................................................147
XII...................................................161
XIII.................................................179
XIV.................................................193
XV...................................................211
XVI.................................................221
XVII...............................................239
XVIII..............................................255
XIX.................................................265
XX..................................................279
XXI................................................287
XXII...............................................305
XXIII..............................................327
XXIV..............................................339

7

I
I went to work when I was just out of grammar school. I
got a job as quotation-board boy in a stock-brokerage
office. I was quick at figures. At school I did three years of
arithmetic in one. I was particularly good at mental
arithmetic. As quotation-board boy I posted the numbers
on the big board in the customers' room. One of the
customers usually sat by the ticker and called out the
prices. They couldn't come too fast for me. I have always
remembered figures. No trouble at all.
There were plenty of other employees in that office. Of
course I made friends with the other fellows, but the work
I did, if the market was active, kept me too busy from ten
a.m. to three p.m. to let me do much talking. I don't care
for it, anyhow, during business hours.
But a busy market did not keep me from thinking about
the work. Those quotations did not represent prices of
stocks to me, so many dollars per share. They were
9

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

numbers. Of course, they meant something. They were
always changing. It was all I had to be interested in the
changes. Why did they change? I didn't know. I didn't
care. I didn't think about that. I simply saw that they
changed. That was all I had to think about five hours every
day and two on Saturdays: that they were always changing.
That is how I first came to be interested in the
behaviour of prices. I had a very good memory for figures.
I could remember in detail how the prices had acted on the
previous day, just before they went up or down. My
fondness for mental arithmetic came in very handy.
I noticed that in advances as well as declines, stock
prices were apt to show certain habits, so to speak. There
was no end of parallel cases and these made precedents to
guide me. I was only fourteen, but after I had taken
hundreds of observations in my mind I found myself
testing their accuracy, comparing the behaviour of stocks
to-day with other days. It was not long before I was
anticipating movements in prices. My only guide, as I say,
was their past performances. I carried the "dope sheets" in
my mind. I looked for stock prices to run on form. I had
"clocked" them. You know what I mean. You can spot, for
instance, where the buying is only a trifle better than the
selling. A battle goes on in the stock market and the tape is
your telescope. You can depend upon it seven out of ten
cases.
Another lesson I learned early is that there is nothing
new in Wall Street. There can't be because speculation is
as old as the hills. Whatever happens in the stock market
to-day has happened before and will happen again. I've
never forgotten that. I suppose I really manage to
remember when and how it happened. The fact that I
remember that way is my way of capitalizing experience.
I got so interested in my game and so anxious to
anticipate advances and declines in all the active stocks
that I got a little book. I put down my observations in it. It
was not a record of imaginary transactions such as so
10

I

many people keep merely to make or lose millions of
dollars without getting the swelled head or going to the
poorhouse. It was rather a sort of record of my hits and
misses, and next to the determination of probable
movements I was most interested in verifying whether I
had observed accurately; in other words, whether I was
right.
Say that after studying every fluctuation of the day in an
active stock I would conclude that it was behaving as it
always did before it broke eight or ten points. Well, I
would jot down the stock and the price on Monday, and
remembering past performances I would write down what
it ought to do on Tuesday and Wednesday. Later I would
check up with actual transcriptions from the tape.
That is how I first came to take an interest in the
message of the tape. The fluctuations were from the first
associated in my mind with upward or downward
movements. Of course there is always a reason for
fluctuations, but the tape does not concern itself with the
why and wherefore. It doesn't go into explanations. I
didn't ask the tape why when I was fourteen, and I don't
ask it to-day, at forty. The reason for what a certain stock
does to-day may not be known for two or three days, or
weeks, or months. But what the dickens does that matter?
Your business with the tape is now—not tomorrow. The
reason can wait. But you must act instantly or be left. Time
and again I see this happen. You'll remember that Hollow
Tube went down three points the other day while the rest
of the market rallied sharply. That was the fact. On the
following Monday you saw that the directors passed the
dividend. That was the reason. They knew what they were
going to do, and even if they didn't sell the stock
themselves they at least didn't buy it There was no inside
buying; no reason why it should not break.
Well, I kept up my little memorandum book perhaps six
months. Instead of leaving for home the moment I was
through with my work, I'd jot down the figures I wanted
11

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

and would study the changes, always looking for the
repetitions and parallelisms of behaviour learning to read
the tape, although I was not aware of it at the time.
One day, one of the office boys—he was older than I—
came to me where I was eating my lunch and asked me on
the quiet if I had any money.
"Why do you want to know?" I said.
"Well," he said, "I've got a dandy tip on Burlington. I'm
going to play it if I can get somebody to go in with me."
"How do you mean, play it?" I asked. To me the only
people who played or could play tips were the customers
old jiggers with oodles of dough. Why, it cost hundreds,
even thousands of dollars, to get into the game. It was like
owning your private carriage and having a coachman who
wore a silk hat.
"That's what I mean; play it!" he said.
"How much you got?"
"How much you need?"
"Well, I can trade in five shares by putting up $5."
"How are you going to play it?"
"I'm going to buy all the Burlington the bucket shop will
let me carry with the money I give him for margin," he
said. "It's going up sure. It's like picking up money. We'll
double ours in a jiffy."
"Hold on!" I said to him, and pulled out my little dope
book.
I wasn't interested in doubling my money, but in his
saying that Burlington was going up. If it was, my notebook ought to show it. I looked. Sure enough, Burlington,
according to my figuring, was acting as it usually did
before it went up. I had never bought or sold anything in
my life, and I never gambled with the other boys. But all I
could see was that this was a grand chance to test the
accuracy of my work, of my hobby. It struck me at once
that if my dope didn't work in practice there was nothing
in the theory of it to interest anybody. So I gave him all I
12

I

had, and with our pooled resources he went to one of the
nearby bucket shops and bought some Burlington. Two
days later we cashed in. I made a profit of $3.12.
After that first trade, I got to speculating on my own
hook in the bucket shops. I'd go during my lunch hour and
buy or sell—it never made any difference to me. I was
playing a system and not a favorite stock or backing
opinions. All I knew was the arithmetic of it. As a matter of
fact, mine was the ideal way to operate in a bucket shop,
where all that a trader does is to bet on fluctuations as they
are printed by the ticker on the tape.
It was not long before I was taking much more money
out of the bucket shops than I was pulling down from my
job in the brokerage office. So I gave up my position. My
folks objected, but they couldn't say much when they saw
what I was making. I was only a kid and office-boy wages
were not very high. I did mighty well on my own hook.
I was fifteen when I had my first thousand and laid the
cash in front of my mother—all made in the bucket shops
in a few months, besides what I had taken home. My
mother carried on something awful. She wanted me to put
it away in the savings bank out of reach of temptation. She
said it was more money than she ever heard any boy of
fifteen had made, starting with nothing. She didn't quite
believe it was real money. She used to worry and fret about
it. But I didn't think of anything except that I could keep
on proving my figuring was right. That's all the fun there is
being right by using your head. If I was right when I tested
my convictions with ten shares I would be ten times more
right if I traded in a hundred shares. That is all that having
more margin meant to me—I was right more emphatically.
More courage? No! No difference! If all I have is ten
dollars and I risk it, I am much braver than when I risk a
million, if I have another million salted away.
Anyhow, at fifteen I was making a good living out of the
stock market. I began in the smaller bucket shops, where
the man who traded in twenty shares at a clip was
13

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

suspected of being John W. Gates in disguise or J. P.
Morgan traveling incognito. Bucket shops in those days
seldom lay down on their customers. They didn't have to.
There were other ways of parting customers from their
money, even when they guessed right. The business was
tremendously profitable. When it was conducted
legitimately—I mean straight, as far as the bucket shop
went the fluctuations took care of the shoestrings. It
doesn't take much of a reaction to wipe out a margin of
only three quarters of a point. Also, no welsher could ever
get back in the game. Wouldn't have any trade.
I didn't have a following. I kept my business to myself.
It was a one-man business, anyhow. It was my head,
wasn't it? Prices either were going the way I doped them
out, without any help from friends or partners, or they
were going the other way, and nobody could stop them out
of kindness to me. I couldn't see where I needed to tell my
business to anybody else. I've got friends, of course, but
my business has always been the same—a one-man affair.
That is why I have always Played a lone hand.
As it was, it didn't take long for the bucket shops to get
sore on me for beating them. I'd walk in and plank down
my margin, but they'd look at it without making a move to
grab it. They'd tell me there was nothing doing. That was
the time they got to calling me the Boy Plunger. I had to be
changing brokers all the time, going from one bucket shop
to another. It got so that I had to give a fictitious name. I'd
begin light, only fifteen or twenty shares. At times, when
they got suspicious, I'd lose on purpose at first and then
sting them proper. Of course after a little while they'd find
me too expensive and they'd tell me to take myself and my
business elsewhere and not interfere with the owners'
dividends.
Once, when the big concern I'd been trading with for
months shut down on me I made up my mind to take a
little more of their money away from them. That bucket
shop had branches all over the city, in hotel lobbies, and in
14

I

near-by towns. I went to one of the hotel branches and
asked the manager a few questions and finally got to
trading. But as soon as I played an active stock my especial
way he began to get messages from the head office asking
who it was that was operating. The manager told me what
they asked him and I told him my name was Edward
Robinson, of Cambridge. He telephoned the glad news to
the big chief. But the other end wanted to know what I
looked like. When the manager told me that I said to him,
"Tell him I am a short fat man with dark hair and a bushy
beard!" But he described me instead, and then he listened
and his face got red and he hung up and told me to beat it.
"What did they say to you?" I asked him politely.
They said, "You blankety-blank fool, didn't we tell you
to take no business from Larry Livingston? And you
deliberately let him trim us out of $700!'' He didn't say
what else they told him.
I tried the other branches one after another, but they all
got to know me, and my money wasn't any good in any of
their offices. I couldn't even go in to look at the quotations
without some of the clerks making cracks at me. I tried to
get them to let me trade at long intervals by dividing my
visits among them all. But that didn't work.
Finally there was only one left to me and that was the
biggest and richest of all the Cosmopolitan Stock
Brokerage Company.
The Cosmopolitan was rated as A-1 and did an
enormous business. It had branches in every
manufacturing town in New England. They took my
trading all right, and I bought and sold stocks and made
and lost money for months, but in the end it happened
with them as usual. They didn't refuse my business pointblank, as the small concerns had. Oh, not because it wasn't
sportsmanship, but because they knew it would give them
a black eye to publish the news that they wouldn't take a
fellow's business just because that fellow happened to
make a little money. But they did the next worse thing—
15

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

that is, they made me put up a three point margin and
compelled me to pay a premium at first of a half point,
then a point, and finally, a point and a half. Some
handicap, that! How? Easy! Suppose Steel was selling at
$90 and you bought it. Your ticket read, normally: "Bot
Steel at 90-⅛." If you put up a point margin it meant that
if it broke 89-¼ you were wiped out automatically. In a
bucket shop the customer is not importuned for more
margin or put to the painful necessity of telling his broker
to sell for anything he can get.
But when the Cosmopolitan tacked on that premium
they were hitting below the belt. It meant that if the price
was $90 when I bought, instead of making my ticket: "Bot
Steel at 90-⅛," it read: "Bot Steel at 91-⅛." Why, that
stock could advance a point and a quarter after I bought it
and I'd still be losing money if I closed the trade. And by
also insisting that I put up a three-point margin at the very
start they reduced my trading capacity by two thirds. Still,
that was the only bucket shop that would take my business
at all, and I had to accept their terms or quit trading.
Of course I had my ups and downs, but was a winner on
balance. However, the Cosmopolitan people were not
satisfied with the awful handicap they had tacked on me,
which should have been enough to beat anybody. They
tried to double-cross me. They didn't get me. I escaped
because of one of my hunches.
The Cosmopolitan, as I said, was my last resort. It was
the richest bucket shop in New England, and as a rule they
put no limit on a trade. I think I was the heaviest
individual trader they had—that is, of the steady, everyday customers. They had a fine office and the largest and
completest quotation board I have ever seen anywhere. It
ran along the whole length of the big room and every
imaginable thing was quoted. I mean stocks dealt in on the
New York and Boston Stock Exchanges, cotton, wheat,
provisions, metals—everything that was bought and sold in
New York, Chicago, Boston and Liverpool.
16

I

You know how they traded in bucket shops. You gave
your money to a clerk and told him what you wished to
buy or sell. He looked at the tape or the quotation board
and took the price from there—the last one, of course. He
also put down the time on the ticket so that it almost read
like a regular broker's report—that is, that they had bought
or sold for you so many shares of such a stock at such a
price at such a time on such a day and how much money
they received from you. When you wished to close your
trade you went to the clerk—the same or another, it
depended on the shop and you told him. He took the last
price or if the stock had not been active he waited for the
next quotation that came out on the tape. He wrote that
price and the time on your ticket, O.K.'d it and gave it back
to you, and then you went to the cashier and got whatever
cash it called for. Of course, when the market went against
you and the price went beyond the limit set by your
margin, your trade automatically closed itself and your
ticket became one more scrap of paper.
In the humbler bucket shops, where people were
allowed to trade in as little as five shares, the tickets were
little slips different colors for buying and selling and at
times, as for instance in boiling bull markets, the shops
would be hard hit because all the customers were bulls and
happened to be right. Then the bucket shop would deduct
both buying and selling commissions and if you bought a
stock at $20 the ticket would read 20-¼. You thus had
only ¾ of a point's run for your money.
But the Cosmopolitan was the finest in New England. It
had thousands of patrons and I really think I was the only
man they were afraid of. Neither the killing premium nor
the three-point margin they made me put up reduced my
trading much. I kept on buying and selling as much as
they'd let me. I sometimes had a line of 5,000 shares.
Well, on the day the thing happened that I am going to
tell you, I was short thirty-five hundred shares of Sugar. I
had seven big pink tickets for five hundred shares each.
17

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

The Cosmopolitan used big slips with a blank space on
them where they could write down additional margin. Of
course, the bucket shops never ask for more margin. The
thinner the shoestring the better for them, for their profit
lies in your being wiped. In the smaller shops if you
wanted to margin your trade still further they'd make out a
new ticket, so they could charge you the buying
commission and only give you a run of ¾ of a point on
each point's decline, for they figured the selling
commission also exactly as if it were a new trade.
Well, this day I remember I had up over $10,000 in
margins.
I was only twenty when I first accumulated ten
thousand dollars in cash. And you ought to have heard my
mother. You'd have thought that ten thousand dollars in
cash was more than anybody carried around except ol'
John D. Rockefeller, and she used to tell me to be satisfied
and go into some regular business. I had a hard time
convincing her that I was not gambling, but making money
by figuring. But all she could see was that ten thousand
dollars was a lot of money and all I could see was more
margin.
I had put out my 3,500 shares of Sugar at 105-¼. There
was another fellow in the room, Henry Williams, who was
short 2,500 shares. I used to sit by the ticker and call out
the quotations for the board boy. The price behaved as I
thought it would. It promptly went down a couple of
points and paused a little to get its breath before taking
another dip. The general market was pretty soft and
everything looked promising. Then all of a sudden I didn't
like the way Sugar was doing its hesitating. I began to feel
uncomfortable. I thought I ought to get out of the market.
Then it sold at $103—that was low for the day but instead
of feeling more confident I felt more uncertain. I knew
something was wrong somewhere, but I couldn't spot it
