
70

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

explanation invoking universal forces that shape, not only the physical
world, but mass psychology, culture, and society as well. Moreover, it has
high retrofit power. By employing a large number of nested waves that can
vary in both duration and magnitude, it is possible to derive an Elliott
wave count (Le., fit) for any prior segment of historical data. However, except for one objective version95 of Elliott waves, the method does not generate testable/falsifiable predictions.
Let's consider the first element, an elaborate causal explanation. TA
methods that are based on intricate causal stories are able to withstand
empirical challenges because they speak to the deeply felt human need to
make sense of the world. Because we are compelled to explain our experience, we have highly developed abilities to generate plausible stories after
the fact. "To live, it seems, is to explain, to justify, and to find coherence
among diverse outcomes, characteristics and causes. With practice we
have learned to perform these tasks quickly and effectively. "96 Studies in
which people are encouraged to form erroneous beliefs and then requested to construct rationales for those beliefs are more resistant to belief change than subjects who were not asked to formulate explanations. 97
Subjects who developed reasons to explain their beliefs became so stuck
in their opinions that, even after they were told that they had been manipulated into adopting a false belief, they continued to believe. 98 In fact, they
continued to believe almost as strongly as other subjects who were manipulated to form false beliefs but were not told of the manipulation.
The second and third elements that make a TA method immune to evidentiary challenge is a high capacity to retrofit past market movements combined with an inability to make testable (falsifiable) predictions of future
movements. The ability to bring all past market movement into conformity
with the method has the effect of eliminating any contradictory evidence.
When forecast errors do occur because outcomes are so completely out of
whack with forecasts that even subjective evaluation is unable to hide the error, the standard explanation is that the error was caused by a misapplication of the method rather than a flaw in the method itself. This fallacious
reasoning is then supported by reapplying the method so it fits the discordant outcome. The ability to always obtain a good retrospective fit combined
with the inability to make testable predictions eliminates the possibility that
any evidence will ever surface that contradicts the method.
In science, the rationale for eliminating an erroneous theory is the
fact that its predictions of future observations are shown to conflict with
those observations. This is the scientist's signal that the theory needs to
be eliminated or reformulated. If the latter, the new version of the theory
is then tested against a subsequent set of future observations. This essential mechanism for pruning away false theories is illustrated in Figure 2.14
and is discussed in depth in Chapter 3.

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

Prediction
Compared with
New Observation

71

Revise or
Abandon Theory

Conflict

Agreement
Provisional Acceptance of Theory
FIG HE 2.14

How science eliminates bad theories.

The entire motivation for revising or abandoning a TA method, or any
theory for that matter, comes from seeing clear examples where its predictions are wrong. If it is easy to make after-the-fact adjustments that
eliminate all errors, the rationale to abandon the method is lost.
Other research suggests that some people are more prone to the confirmation bias than others. Strangely, they are the most intelligent people.
Harvard psychologist David Perkins conducted an interesting study showing that the higher a person's intelligence (measured in IQ points), the better they are able to construct articulate rationales for their beliefs and
defend them. 99 However, Perkins also found that because of their strong
ability to rationalize existing beliefs, highly intelligent people are less able
to consider alternative explanations and points of view. Hence they are
more apt to form beliefs that are resistant to change. Social scientist Jay
Stuart Snelson calls this ideological immunity. He claims that intelligent
and successful adults rarely change their most fundamental presuppositions. 1OO This effect is most pronounced in people who have accumulated
significant knowledge in a particular area. This suggests that the most intelligent and experienced subjective practitioners will be the least able to
abandon a method in which they previously believed.

72

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

ILLUSORY CORRElATIONS
The studies discussed up to this point have dealt with people's erroneous
beliefs about themselves and their abilities. We now consider studies that
examined people's beliefs about the world at large, specifically whether a
predictive relationship exists between a pair of variables. 101 These have
shown that people have a tendency to perceive illusory correlation. An illusory correlation is the false perception of a relationship between a pair
of variables. It is a significant problem for subjective TA practitioners.
Subjective TA Methods Represented
as Binary Variables

A pair of variables is said to be correlated when one, referred to as the
predictor, can be used to predict the other, referred to as the outcome or
dependent variable. Although subjective TA methods are not usually described in these terms, all such methods can be viewed as asserting the
existence of a correlation between a pair of variables. The predictor is a
TA pattern or signal such as the head-and-shoulders top pattern. The outcome is the post-pattern price movement the pattern is purported to predict. A head-and-shoulders top pattern is supposed to predict a downtrend
upon the pattern's completion. In fact, the entire enterprise of TA, both
objective and subjective, can be viewed as the search for such correlations. These are then used individually, though more often in combination,
to forecast market trends.
It can also be said of subjective patterns, that both the predictor and
the outcome are binary variables. That is to say, they assume only two
possible values. With respect to the predictor variable, the pattern or signal is either (1) currently present or (2) not present. 102 With respect to the
outcome variable, the future price movement the pattern or signal is purported to predict, either (1) occurs or (2) does not occur.
For example, the head-and-shoulders top pattern is purported to be
correlated with (predictive of) a postpattern downtrend. At a given point
in time, a head-and-shoulder top pattern and neckline break signal is either present on the chart or it is not. 103 Following the signal the downtrend
either occurs or it does not. All subjective patterns and signals can be interpreted within this framework.
The central contention of this chapter is that subjective TA knowledge possesses only illusory validity. This section examines a specific
illusion of validity-illusory correlation. An illusory correlation is the
perception of a correlation between two variables that are not truly
related.

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

73

Why We Are Prone to Illusory Correlations
A substantial body of research indicates that people easily fall prey to
the illusion of correlation. 104 These illusions seem to result from faulty
information processing. The specific fault is paying too much attention
to instances that confirm the existence of the correlation while paying
too little attention to cases that either do not confirm the presumed correlations or that outrightly contradict its existence. In TA, confirmatory
instances are those cases in which the pattern/signal occurs and the
outcome that the pattern/signal is purported to predict also occurs. For
example, the head-and-shoulders top pattern occurs and then a downtrend ensues. If you believe in the efficacy of a particular subjective pattern/signal, ask yourself if your belief is not entirely or primarily
founded upon having seen instances in which the pattern has been successful (confirmatory examples). Now ask yourself if you are similarly
aware of examples where it failed (false positive or false negative
signals 105).
However, confirmatory instances constitute only one type out of four
possible types of outcomes that can occur between a pair of binary variables. The other three types are (2) the pattern/signal does occur but the
market trend the pattern is supposed to predict does not occur, (3) the
pattern/signal does not occur but the outcome the pattern is supposed to
predict occurs anyway, and (4) the pattern/signal does not occur and the
outcome the pattern/signal purports to predict does not occur either.
Types one and four are correct predictions. Types two and three are prediction errors. Type two is called a false signal or false positive. Type three
is called a failure to signal or false negative.

The Allure of the Upper Left Cell

The four possible outcomes between a pair of binary variables can be illustrated with a two-by-two (2 x 2) contingency table (Figure 2.15). This
common data analysis tool is composed of four cells, one for each of the
four possible outcome types. Into each cell goes a count of the number of
instances of that type of outcome occurring within a sample of observations. Such a table would be useful to represent subjective TA patterns
and their outcomes were it not for the fact that their subjectivity precludes obtaining the counts.
Studies show that people fall prey to illusory correlations because
they pay excessive attention to the number of confirmatory instances,
those falling into the upper-left cell of the table. 106 At the same time, they
fail to take proper account of the number of cases falling into the other

74

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Predicted
Outcome
Occurs

Predicted
Outcome
Does NOT Occur

Pattern/Signal
Occurs

Correct
Prediction
Confirmatory
Instances

Error
False Signal

Pattern/Signal
Does NOT
Occur

Error
Failure to
Signal

Correct
Prediction
No opportunity

E'IGURE 2. J 5

2 x 2 contingency table.

three cells. We make this mistake for two reasons. The first has to do with
the salience of the confirmatory instances, and the second has to do with
a faulty intuitive notion of what constitutes sufficient evidence to conclude that a correlation exists.
The salience of evidence refers to how noticeable, vivid, or outstanding it is. Salient evidence is attention grabbing. Confirmatory examples are salient because they confirm a suspected hypothesis. In other
words they are rewarding. When subjective technicians think they have
discovered a useful pattern or signal, they typically will examine historical data to see if their initial supposition was correct. Thus, they are engaged in informal hypothesis testing. In this situation, confirmatory
instances, examples in which the pattern occurred and it made a correct
prediction, will be highly noticeable because they reward the analyst's
initial conjecture. Consider what it might have been like for R. N. Elliott
just after formulating his initial hunch that all market movements conform to the same fundamental pattern-a five-segment impulse wave followed by a three-segment corrective wave (5-3 pattern). At that point,
his hypothesis had not yet attained the status of a strong belief. It was
merely a suspicion. However, once that hypothesis was born in Elliott's
mind, it motivated a search for additional confirming cases. In other
words it was Elliott's initial conjecture itself that made confirmatory
cases salient.

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

75

Necessary versus Sufficient Evidence

Once the confirmatory instances take front stage, a faulty intuition that is
quite common enters the picture. This intuition, which is responsible for
producing the illusion of a correlation, concerns the amount of evidence
that is thought to be sufficient to establish a valid correlation. It is commonly thought that confirmatory evidence, by itself, is sufficient. This is
incorrect!
It's not that this intuition is wrong so much as it is incomplete. Intuition correctly tells us that confirmatory instances (events in the upper left
cell) are indeed necessary to establish the existence of a correlative relationship. If the head-and-shoulders pattern, or any pattern or signal for
that matter, is a valid predictor, then there ought to be instances in which
the pattern occurred and the expected outcome also occurred. However,
it is a mistake to assume that a goodly number of confirmatory instances
are sufficient to establish a correlative relationship. In other words, although confirmatory instances are necessary, they are not by themselves,
sufficient to establish the existence of a correlative relationship. In reality,
the number of instances falling into all four cells of the contingency table
must be taken into account to determine if valid correlation exists.
It is because we fail to realize that a given belief is not supported by
sufficient evidence that it takes on an illusion of validity. Thus we come to
see it not as an opinion or an article of faith but as a reasonable inference
from objective evidence. 107 Numerous studies lO8 have shown that, when
people rely on informal analysis to determine if there is a relationship between two variables, they tend to make two kinds of errors. They fail to
detect correlations that are, in fact, valid, even when the correlation is relatively strong lO9 (invisible correlations), and they falsely perceive correlations that are invalid (illusory correlations). Both errors are related to the
observer's expectations stemming from pre-existing beliefs.
First, let's consider what happens when people are shown data for
two variables) 10 that are in fact related but which are not expected to be
correlated. Experiments have shown that they are unable to detect the
relationships unless the correlation exceeds approximately 0.70, on a
scale of 0 to 1.0, where 1.0 represents a perfect correlation and zero represents no correlation. A correlation of 0.70 is far stronger than anything
likely to be encountered within the domain of TA. ))) This finding suggests
that subjective TA analysts relying on informal/intuitive data analysis
methods will be prone to missing valid correlations that they do not expect to exist.
What is even more relevant to the problem of illusory TA knowledge
is the tendency to perceive correlations that do not exist. When observers
have a prior belief that a relationship exists between pattern and outcome,

76

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

or there is a motivation to find one, the confirmation bias, discussed previously, makes it likely that a correlative relationship will be detected even
if none exists. It is hard to imagine a TA analyst who is not impacted either
by prior belief, motivation, or both.
Even if there is no prior belief or no motivation to believe, people
still display a pronounced tendency to perceive illusory correlations.
Smedslund performed one of the earliest experiments showing this tendency. Jl2 Nurses were shown 100 cards that were supposed to represent
actual patients. Each card indicated if the patient manifested a particular
symptom or not (the binary predictor) and whether that patient was ultimately diagnosed with a specific disease (the binary outcome). The
nurses' task was to determine if the symptom was truly correlated with
the disease. The data shown to the nurses is summarized in the contingency table in Figure 2.16.
Over 85 percent of the nurses said the symptom was correlated with
the disease. They were persuaded by the 37 salient confirmatory instances
falling in the upper left cell (symptom present and disease present). However, their conclusion was not supported by the data. A proper analysis of
this data, which takes all cell counts into consideration, indicates that the
symptom is not correlated with the disease.

True Diagnosis

Symptom
Present

Symptom
NOT Present

Disease
Present

Disease
NOT Present

Cell A

Cell B

37

17

instances

instances

Cell C

Cell D

33

13

instances

instances

FIGURE 2.16 Data evaluated by nurses-Smedslund study (1963).

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

77

Giving All Cells Their Due
A formal statistical test that considers all cell counts would be the rigorous way to determine if the nurses' data was indicative of a valid correlation. However, one need not even resort to a formal test to see that there
is no correlation between the symptom and the disease. All cells can be
taken into consideration by computing some simple ratios of the cell
counts. For example, the proportion of patients that manifested the symptom and who ultimately proved to have the disease was approximately
0.69 (cell A divided by [cell A + cell B], 37/54 = 0.685). However, the proportion of patients that did not have the symptom that ultimately were diagnosed with the disease was almost the same or 0.72 (cell C divided by
[cell C + Cell D], 33/46 = 0.717). This quick-and-dirty calculation shows
that likelihood of having the disease was about the same (.69 and .72) regardless of whether the symptom was present. Had the symptom really
been correlated with the disease, the two proportions would have been
quite different, such as 0.90 of those with the symptom had the disease
whereas only 0.40 of those without the symptom had the disease. This
would not necessarily suggest that the symptom was a cause of the disease but only that it was a valid predictor of it.
In light of the fact that even simple ratios showed no correlation between symptom and disease, it is surprising that 85 percent of the nurses
concluded that the symptom was a reliable predictor of the disease. The
nurses were presented with other data sets as well. Overall, the factor that
best explained whether the nurses perceived a correlation was simply the
number of confirmatory instances (cell A: symptom and disease both occur). Their judgments were unaffected by the relative proportions that
went into the calculation done earlier. In other words, the nurses did
not pay attention to the number of cases in the other three cells. As previously noted, many psychological studies have supported Smedslund's
findings. 113
The statistically correct way to detect a correlation between two binary variables is the Chi-square test. 114 The test determines whether the
number of instances falling into each cell differs significantly from the
number that would be expected in each cell if there were no correlation
between the variables. In other words, the test determines if cell counts
depart significantly from a random sprinkling of the instances among the
four cells. When cell counts do depart significantly 1l5 from a random pattern, the Chi-square statistic takes on a large value. This is legitimate evidence of a correlation.
In Figure 2.17 the data from the nurses' study have been altered to illustrate how cell counts might appear for a symptom that is correlated
with the disease. Each cell also contains the number of instances that

78

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Final Diagnosis

Symptom
Present

Symptom
NOT Present

Disease
Present

Disease
NOT Present

Cell A

Cell B

47
Expected = 37.8

7
Expected = 16.2

Cell C

Cell D

23

46

Expected = 32.2

23
Expected = 13.8

70

30

100

54

FIGURE 2.17 Evidence of valid correlation.

would be expected if there were no predictive relation between symptom
and disease (the random pattern). For example, in cell B, there were only
7 occurrences of disease with the symptom present (a false signal). If the
instances conformed to a random pattern, one would expect about 16
false signals. Thus, the relative proportion of disease, if symptom is present, is 0.87 versus 0.50 when the symptom is not present. The difference
in the proportions shows that the symptom is correlated with the disease.

The Role of Asymmetric Binary Variables
in lIIusory Correlation
Illusory correlations are especially likely to emerge when the variables
involved are binary variables of a particular type-asymmetric binary
variables. 116 Binary variables can be either symmetric or asymmetric. A
binary variable is said to be of the symmetric type if each of its possible
values is associated with the presence of an attribute (redlblue or Republican/Democrat) or the occurrence of an event (rain/snow or

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

79

flood/fire). However, in the case of an asymmetric binary variable, one of
the variable's two values depicts the absence of an attribute or the
nonoccurrence of an event. For example, (attribute present/attribute not
present) or (event occurred/event did not occur). In other words, one of
the variable's states represents something not happening or a feature not
being present.
Research l17 shows that when both the predictor and outcome variables are of the binary asymmetric type, the confirmatory instances (pattern occurs and expected outcome occurs) are extraordinarily salient and
especially likely to consume the attention of the informal data analyst.
This attentional shift to the upper left cell strongly encourages the perception of illusory correlations. Recall that when the variables are asymmetric binaries, the other three cells of the contingency table contain
instances in which one or both of the variables are registering the absence
of the pattern, the nonoccurrence of the expected outcome or both pattern absence and outcome nonoccurrence.
The nonoccurrence of an event, or the absence of an attribute, is easily overlooked, because people have difficulty conceptualizing and evaluating this kind of evidence. The research just alluded to has shown it takes
more cognitive effort to evaluate instances where something does not occur than instances where something does. To illustrate the extra cognitive
effort required to process a statement involving the nonoccurrence of an
event or the absence of an attribute, consider the following two statements. Although they both convey the same information, the meaning of
the first, which is given in an affim1ative form, is intuitively obvious. However, the meaning of the second, which is given in the negative forn1, requires some thought.
Statement 1: AU humans are mortal.
Statement 2: AU nonmortals are nonhumans.
Many of the propositions of subjective TA assert the existence of a
correlation between a pair of asymmetric binary variables: a signal/pattern that is either present on the chart or not and an outcome that the signal/pattern is supposed to predict, which either occurs or does not. Thus
the psychological research described earlier suggests that subjective TA
practitioners will be especially likely to fall prey to illusory correlations.
They will tend to be overly impressed with confirmatory instances, in
which the pattern/signal did occur and the expected outcome also occurred, and give too little attention and weight to the three other types of
instances. Some examples of subjective patterns along with their expected outcomes are illustrated Table 2.1.
