
xiv

It’s important to have a
plan, remain disciplined
in executing that plan,
and pay attention to what
is actually happening
rather than what you
expect to happen. We try
to be as objective as
possible in our
analyses…It’s not always
easy for people who are
involved every day to stay
with a plan when
misfortune occurs for a
time. You always
encounter the unexpected
and this can push
discipline right out of the
way in the name of
prudence. But prudence
almost always dictates
staying with the
approach that has made
you successful. I see that
as one of my primary
roles. I often encourage
everyone during difficult
days to remain patient. I
don’t blame people for the
unexpected.
John W. Henry
CME Magazine, Premier Issue

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Back in the 1970s, most of the guys I knew traded individual
markets. The ones who traded wheat did not talk to the guys who
traded sugar. And, the guys who invested stocks did not care to talk
to either one, because commodities were for “speculators” and not
“investors.” Further, the bond crowd thought the stock guys were
cowboys. Each group had developed its own superiority complexes
and fundamentally believed that only industry experts like them
could understand the subtle dynamics of their markets. I guess
that’s part of the reason that no one cared much for trend followers
like me—I viewed every market the same way and each represented
nothing more than a trade to me. Today, for all the different facets,
I believe everyone has come to speak the same language. It’s the
language of risk.
In my early days, there was only one guy I knew who seemed to
have a winning track record year after year. This fellow’s name was
Jack Boyd. Jack was also the only guy I knew who traded lots of
different markets. If you followed any one of Jack’s trades, you
never really knew how you were going to do. But, if you were like
me and actually counted all of his trades, you would have made
about 20 percent a year. So, that got me more than a little curious
about the idea of trading futures markets “across the board.”
Although each individual market seemed risky, when you put them
together, they tended to balance each other out and you were left
with a nice return with less volatility.
I could always see, after I got to Wall Street, how, for all the
confusion, markets were driven by people and their emotions. That
was what all of these markets had in common—people—and people
just don’t change. So, I set out to understand similarities in the way
that markets moved. When I added up Jack’s trades, only a few big
trades made him all the money. For each of these big winners, I was
there when “experts” told Jack that these markets couldn’t go any
higher, but they did. Then, when I looked at Jack’s losses, they
tended to be relatively small. Although it took me many years to put
it all together—remember, there were no books like this back
then—these seemingly small observations became the foundation
for me of two important, intertwined investment themes: trend
following and risk management. Jack was not so much a trend
follower, but he did practice the first rule of trend following: Cut
your losers and let your winners run.

Foreword

Most of the guys that I knew who lost a lot of money actually
tended to be more right than wrong. They just lost a lot on a few big
losers. I believe that people put too much of a premium on being
right. In some ways, it’s one of the drawbacks for people who went
to the best schools and always got straight As—they are too used to
always being right. It gets back to people and emotions. Everyone is
happy to take lots of little winners—it makes them feel good. When
their trades go against them, on the other hand, they hold on
because they don’t want to accept being wrong. Many times, these
trades come back and they are able to capture their small profit. To
me, that kind of trading is a little bit like picking up nickels in front
of a steamroller.
Thankfully, the markets don’t care about me or you or where
we went to school. They don’t care if you’re short or tall. I was never
very good in school and I wasn’t a good athlete either. With my
background, the way I saw it, I never had any problem with the idea
that I could be wrong. So, I have always built in an assumption of
wrongness to anything that I do. We now kindly refer to this
practice as risk management, but I just wanted to answer the
question: “What’s the worst thing that could happen to me?” I never
wanted to do anything that could kill me. Knowing that I was not
likely to be right that often, I had to trade in a way that would make
me a lot of money when I was right and not lose me a lot of money
when I was wrong. If that wasn’t enough, it also had to be simple
enough for me to understand.
After many years of searching and learning things the hard way,
I evolved my own version of trend following. The idea made sense
and I had some good examples to follow. Still, I wanted to prove to
myself that it worked without betting real money. I had to test what
would have happened had I traded that way in the past. These were
the early days of computers and we even had to “borrow” time on
university computers to test and prove our theories. It was a
painstaking task, but it gave me the comfort that I needed. Now, in
reading Trend Following, the do-it-yourselfers might argue that
having a book that illustrates these same basic principles takes
some of the fun out of it.
Actually, Covel, like any good trend follower, has not focused
solely on the endpoint. He gives you a deep understanding of the
most important part: the path. Unlike so many other books that

xv

A prudent investor’s best
safeguard against risk
is not retreat, but
diversification. [And]
true diversification is
difficult to achieve by
[simply] spreading an
investment among
different stocks (or
different equity
managers), or even by
mixing stocks and bonds,
because the two are not
complementary.
David Harding
Winton Capital

xvi

[Trend following firm]
Aspect Capital is aptly
named. Its group of
physics-trained leaders
took it from the aspect
ratio of plane design, that
is, the wider the wing
span, the more stable the
plane. As such, Aspect
trades not only futures of
its early roots but
European equities, bonds
and currencies in various
forms, covering a socalled wider wing span.
The London-based hedge
fund was the brainchild
of Martin Lueck, Eugene
Lambert and Anthony
Todd. Founded in 1997,
the principals were
involved in the
development of AHL (now
owned by Man) with a
track record stretching
back to 1983. Aspect’s
disciplined approach has
successfully generated
returns from both longs
and shorts in difficult
markets environments.
Futures Magazine and
Aspect Capital

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

have been written about investing, Trend Following goes beyond
the results to explore the journey of this outstanding group of
traders.
For my staff at Hite Capital, Covel’s Trend Following is required
reading. For my daughters at home, it has finally settled the
question I seemed never to have been able to clearly answer myself,
“Daddy, what do you do for a living?” This book captures and
conveys what so many traders have taken careers and large losses
to learn. And lucky for all of us, you don’t have to be Phi Beta Kappa
to understand it.
We no longer live in that world of wheat guys, sugar guys, and
stock guys. Trend following trading is an important force in every
market and should be a part of any diverse investment portfolio. For
me, the discipline of trend following goes beyond trading and
money management. Trend following is a way of thinking that can
be employed in many parts of life as we all tend to continue to do
the things that work for us and stop doing those activities that don’t.
The way I see it, you have two choices—you can do what I did
and work for 30-plus years, cobbling together scraps of information,
seeking to create a money-making strategy, or you can spend a few
days reading Covel’s book and skip that three-decade learning
curve.

About Larr y Hite
Larry Hite founded Mint Investments in 1983. By 1990, Mint
Investments had become the largest commodity trading advisor in
the world in terms of assets under management. Mint’s achievements won Hite and his team industry-wide acclaim, and in 1990,
Jack Schwager dedicated an entire chapter of his bestselling book,
Market Wizards, to Hite’s trading and risk management philosophy.

Preface
“Men wanted for hazardous journey. Small wages.
Bitter cold. Long months of complete darkness.
Constant danger. Safe return doubtful. Honor and
recognition in case of success.”1

This book is the result of a 14-year “hazardous journey” for the
truth about trend following trading. It fills a void in a marketplace
inundated with books about buying low and selling high, index
investing, and all other types of fundamental analysis, but lacking
any resource or, for that matter, practically any reference to what I
believe is the single best strategy to consistently make money in the
markets. That strategy is known as trend following. Author Van
Tharp has described it succinctly:

“Let’s break down the term ‘trend following’ into its components. The first part is ‘trend.’ Every trader needs a
trend to make money. If you think about it, no matter
what the technique, if there is not a trend after you buy,
then you will not be able to sell at higher prices … ‘following’ is the next part of the term. We use this word because
trend followers always wait for the trend to shift first, then
‘follow’ it.”2
Trend following trading seeks to capture the majority of a
market trend, up or down, for profit. It aims for profits in all major
asset classes—stocks, bonds, currencies, and commodities. Unfortunately, however simple the basic concepts about trend following
are, they have been widely misunderstood by the public. My desire
to correct this state of affairs is what, in part, launched my research.
xvii

When it is a question of
money, everyone is of the
same religion.
Voltaire

xviii

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

I wanted to be as objective as possible, so I based my writing on all
available data:
• Trend followers’ month-by-month performance histories
• Trend followers’ published words and comments over the last
30 years
• News accounts of financial disasters
• News accounts of the losers in those financial disasters
• Charts of markets traded by trend followers
• Charts of markets traded by losers in the financial disasters
Education rears disciples,
imitators, and routinists,
not pioneers of new ideas
and creative geniuses.
The schools are not
nurseries of progress and
improvement, but
conservatories of
tradition and unvarying
modes of thought.
Ludwig von Mises

If I could have written a book comprising only numbers, charts,
and graphs of trend following performance data, I would have.
However, without any explanation, few readers would have
appreciated the ramifications of what the data alone showed.
Therefore, my approach to writing Trend Following became similar
to the one Jim Collins describes in his book Good to Great, in
which a team of researchers generated questions, accumulated data
in their open-ended search for answers, and then energetically
debated it.
However, unlike Collins who was writing about generally well
known public companies, trend followers form a sort of underground network of relatively unknown traders who, except for an
occasional article, the mainstream press has virtually ignored. What
I have attempted to do is lift the veil, for the first time, on who these
enormously successful traders are, how they trade, and what is to
be learned from their approach to trading that we might all apply to
our own portfolios.
Trend Following challenges much of the conventional wisdom
about successful trading and traders. To avoid the influences of
conventional wisdom, I was determined to avoid being influenced
by institutionalized knowledge defined by Wall Street and was
adamant about fighting “flat earth” thinking. During my research,
starting with an assumption and then finding data to support it was
avoided. Instead, questions were asked and then, objectively,
doggedly, and slowly, answers were revealed.
If there was one factor that motivated me to work in this
manner, it was simple curiosity. The more I uncovered about trend
followers, the more I wanted to know. For example, one of the
earliest questions (without an answer already) was learning who

Preface

profited when Barings Bank collapsed. My research unearthed a
connection between Barings Bank and trend follower John W.
Henry (now the majority owner of the Boston Red Sox). Henry’s
track record generated new questions, such as, “How did he
discover trend following in the first place?” and “Has his approach
changed in any significant way in the past 30 years?”
I was also curious about who won the $1.9 billion hedge fund
Long Term Capital Management lost during the summer of 1998.
Why did the biggest banks on Wall Street invest $100 billion in an
options pricing model with so much inherent risk? Further,
considering what mutual fund and hedge fund managers lost during
October 2008 and what successful trend followers earned during
the same time, I could not understand why so few investors were
oblivious to even the existence of trend following trading. Other
questions quickly appeared:
• How do trend followers win in the zero-sum game of trading?
• Why has trend following been the most profitable style of
trading?
• What is the philosophical framework of trend followers’
success?
• What are the timeless principles of trend following trading?
• What are trend followers’ worldview of market behavior?
• What are the reasons why trend following is enduring?
Many of the trend followers studied are reclusive and extremely
low key. Some discovered trend following on their own and used it
to make their fortunes out of home offices. Bill Dunn, a successful
trend follower who has beaten the markets for over 30 years, works
out of a quiet, Spartan office in a Florida coastal town. For Wall
Street, this approach to trading is tantamount to sacrilege. It goes
against all the customs, rituals, trappings, and myths we have grown
accustomed to with Wall Street success. In fact, it is my hope that
my profiles of trend followers will correct the public’s misconception of a successful trader as a harried, intense workaholic who
spends 24/7 in the labyrinth of a Wall Street trading firm,
surrounded by monitors and screaming into a phone.
When the first edition of Trend Following hit the streets in
April 2004 I hoped to assemble the first comprehensive look at
trend following trading. Almost five years since initial publication,

xix

The important thing in
science is not so much to
obtain new facts as to
discover new ways of
thinking about them.
Sir William Bragg

xx

Fish see the bait, but not
the hook; men see the
profit, but not the peril.
Chinese proverb

To be aware how fruitful
the playful mood can be
is to be immune to the
propaganda of the
alienated, which extols
resentment as a fuel of
achievement.
Eric Hoffer

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

that goal was realized. How do I know? Since the first edition of
Trend Following, I have met literally dozens of trend following
traders managing collectively billions upon billions of dollars. Their
feedback has been the validation. I never would have expected that
an obscure book put together five years ago would lead me to having
conversations with the likes of Nobel Prize winner Harry Markowitz
and hedge fund managers Boone Pickens and David Harding, but
it did.
Validation aside, October and November 2008 made me want
another bite at the apple, another chance to “work” on this book.
And lucky for me, the 2008 market chaos gave me that window.
There is no doubt that October and November 2008 were the most
historic market months since the Great Depression. Most people,
most mutual funds, and most hedge funds lost unimaginable sums
of money. It has long been said that “genius is leverage in a rising
market,” and when the bubble popped in 2008 clearly people who
had long been positioned as genius weren’t that smart after all.
Already guessed where I am headed with this rant? Yes, while the
rest of the world got creamed in 2008, trend followers made
fortunes. Performance numbers for top trend following traders for
October 2008 alone ranged from +5 percent to +40 percent. Making
that much in one month when much of the rest of the world was
losing big time is noteworthy to say the least. My publisher Jim
Boyd agreed with me.
This new edition of Trend Following includes many new
sections and insights, surrounding the same core timeless lessons
from the first edition. I updated the book throughout and worked to
make material accessible and interesting enough so it might give an
occasional “aha” experience. However, if you’re looking for trading
“secrets,” you need to look elsewhere. There is no such thing. If
you’re in the mood for stories about what it’s like inside a typical
Wall Street firm (at least in those firms before they all went under
in 2008!) or how greedy traders sow the seeds of their own
destruction, your needs will not be met with my writing. But if you
are looking for something different, looking for something to fill a
void in your understanding of how big returns are actually made
year after year, but didn’t know where to turn for honest
information, I hope my insights give you the confidence that
ultimately helps you to make some big money.

Acknowledgments
It is a pleasure to recognize the traders, colleagues, mentors,
writers, and friends who contributed directly and indirectly to
Trend Following.
Justin Vandergrift and William W. Noel, III must be singled out
for special mention. This book would not have come together
without their hard work.
I am particularly grateful to those traders—Ed Seykota, Bill
Dunn, Daniel Dunn, Mark Rzepczynski, Jason Russell, Easan Katir,
Jonathan Hoenig, Cole Wilcox, Eric Crittenden, Michael Martin,
Salem Abraham, Ajay Jani, and Paul Mulvaney—who were generous
with their feedback under tight writing deadlines. Thanks also to
Martin Bergin for the initial introduction to Bill Dunn.
The support of Charles Faulkner must be acknowledged as well.
He shared his intellect, enthusiasm, and most of all, his time,
reading and critiquing various drafts. Additionally, John O’Donnell
of Online Trading Academy was gracious with his time and energy.
I also want to thank Peter Borish, Bill Miller of Legg Mason,
Michael Mauboussin of Legg Mason, Richard Cripps of Legg Mason,
David Harding of Winton Capital, William Fung, Toby Crabel of
Crabel Capital, Grant Smith of Millburn Corporation, Mark
Abraham, Bernard Drury of Drury Capital, Larry Hite of Hite
Capital Management, Michael Clarke of Clarke Capital Management, Mark Rosenberg of SSARIS Advisors, LLC, Jon Sundt of
Altegris, Christian Baja of Superfund, David Beach of Beach Capital,
and Alejandro Knoepffler of Cipher Investment Management for
their generous personal time and consideration. I want to especially
thank Jerry Parker of Chesapeake Capital for answering questions
early on.

xxi

xxii

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Additionally, Celia Straus, Jeff Kopiwoda, Chris Koomey, Jerry
Mullins, Molly Alton Mullins, Beneva Schulte, Withers Hurley,
Elizabeth Ellen, Justice Litle, Barry Ritholtz, Mark Rostenko,
Arthur Maddock, Brett Steenbarger, Austin Guu, and Bob Spear all
made valuable contributions.
Throughout years of research, I’ve benefited repeatedly from
the trading wisdom and experience of John W. Henry, Jonathan
Craven, Mark Hawley, John Hoade, Shaun Jordan, Carol Kaufman,
Jane Martin, Leo Melamed, Larry Mollner, Kim Hunter, Gibbons
Burke, Chuck LeBeau, and Leon Rose. A sincere thank you also goes
out to Oliver Alliker, James Altucher, Gerald Appel, Aspect Capital,
Hunter Baldwin, Tom Basso, John Boik, Bob Brooks, Wade Brorsen,
Ursula Burger, Jake Carriker, Celeste Cave, Art Collins, Cory Colvin,
Allan Como, Larry Connors, Chip Dempsey, Tim Dempsey, Rolf
Dobelli, Edward Dobson, David Dolak, Woody Dorsey, David Druz,
Patrick Dyess, Stephen Eckett, William Eckhardt, Marc Faber, Mark
Fitzsimmons, Ed Foster, Nelson Freeburg, Mitsuru Furukawa, Dave
Goodboy, Jayanthi Gopalakrishnan, Stephanie Haase, Scott Hicks,
James Holter, Scott A. Houdek, Robert (Bucky) Isaacson, Christian
Jund, MaryAnn Kiely, Eddie Kwong, Pete Kyle, Eric Laing, Elina
Manevich, Bill Mann, Jon Markman, Michael Martin, John Mauldin,
Timothy M. McCann, Lizzie McLoughlin, James Montier, Georgia
Nakou, Peter Navarro, Gail Osten, Michael Panzner, Bob Pardo,
Baron Robertson, Jim Rogers, Murray Ruggiero, Michael Seneadza,
Takaaki Sera, Tom Shanks, Howard Simons, Barry Sims, Aaron
Smith, Michael Stephani, Richard Straus, Nassim Nicholas Taleb,
Stephen Taub, Ken Tower, Ken Tropin, Tomoko Uchiyama, Thomas
Vician, Jr., Robert Webb, Kate Welling, Gabriel Wisdom, Brent
Wood, and Patrick L. Young for all of their efforts and support.
And thank you to the following publications and writers who
generously allowed me to quote from their work: Sol Waksman and
Barclay Managed Futures Report, Futures Magazine, Managed
Account Reports, Michael Rulle of Graham Capital Management,
and Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities Magazine.
I am also indebted to the following authors whose works
continue to be treasure troves of information and insight: Morton
Baratz, Peter Bernstein, Clayton Christensen, Jim Collins, Jay
Forrester, Tom Friedman, Gerd Gigerenzer, Daniel Goleman,
Stephen Jay Gould, Alan Greenberg, Larry Harris, Robert Koppel,
Edwin Lefevere, Michael Lewis, Jesse Livermore, Roger Lowenstein,

Acknowledgments

Ludwig von Mises, Lois Peltz, Ayn Rand, Jack Schwager, Denise
Shekerjian, Robert Shiller, Van Tharp, Edward Thorp, Peter Todd,
Brenda Ueland, and Dickson Watts.
This book could only have come to fruition with the editorial
guidance of Jim Boyd at FT Press, as well as the able assistance and
attention to detail of Dennis Higbee. I also want to thank Donna
Cullen-Dolce, Lisa Iarkowski, Stephen Crane, John Pierce, and
Lucy Petermark. To Paul Donnelly at Oxford University Press, I owe
a special debt of gratitude for seeing potential in my initial
proposal—even though he passed!
—Michael W. Covel
January 2009

xxiii

About the Author
Michael Covel is a highly respected author, director, and
entrepreneur who founded the internationally known website
TurtleTrader.com in 1996. Covel’s first book was the best selling
Trend Following: How Great Traders Make Millions in Up or
Down Markets (FT Press April 2004 and November 2005 Expanded
Edition). The book profiles great trend following traders who have
won millions, if not billions, in the market. The original edition,
expanded edition, and paperback edition have sold 100,000 plus
copies. It is also available in German, Japanese, Chinese (complex
and simplified), Korean, French, Arabic, Turkish, and Russian.
Covel’s second book The Complete TurtleTrader: The Legend,
the Lessons, the Results (Collins, October 2007) is the definitive
inside look at the legendary trader Richard Dennis and his student
traders, ‘The Turtles.’ The book has received wide acclaim and is
headed toward bestseller status. It is also available in German,
Korean, and Chinese (complex and simplified).
Building off his book success, Covel wrote, directed, and
produced a theatrical release documentary titled Broke: The New
American Dream, built around the subject of behavioral finance,
specifically investigating the 2007–2008 market crisis and crash.
Face-to-face interviews with Nobel Prize winners Dr. Harry
Markowitz and Dr. Vernon Smith, famed mutual fund investor Bill
Miller of Legg Mason, David Harding of hedge fund Winton Capital,
plus dozens of other Wall Street pros, along with average investors
were conducted over 2007 and 2008. The film was shot in New
York, DC, Miami, Dallas, San Diego, Baltimore, Las Vegas,
Richmond, London, Tokyo, Singapore, Macau, and on a sheep farm
outside of Harrisonburg, Virginia.
