
ATM Trigger FT
ATM FT is used in risk management of a trade and moves from oversold/overbought to overbought/oversold on an average of eight bars (see
Figure 6.15). In addition, the FT potential turns are represented by short

304
FIGURE 6.15

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
ATM Fast Trigger

dashes above/below the current price bar when the price is near enough to
change the direction of the FT.
So if you have bought a bullish or bearish market, you are expecting price
to move—of course. You should also expect the chart bars to change color
and the other study lines to begin changing colors.
Using Time as Part of Your Risk Management

Begin utilizing time as part of your risk management. Adjustments to time
and expectation of events over a period of time will help you manage trades.
The ATM Trade Velocity projects the potential proﬁt and loss of your
trade. It is based on the current volatility of the security with standard deviation
conﬁdence lines drawn outward from the new Trend or X Signal. Using this
study, ATM provides you with an understanding of the initial risk of the trade
over a selected period of time, plus the expected proﬁt line.
Here is a simple example. You enter the market, place your stop, but price
does not move over your given period (we use a half-cycle of the FT). Then,
the market is telling you your trade is not working. Go ahead and move out
of the trade before your stop is hit. Why wait on the stop, if the trade is not
working? You must read the market, and ATM allows for that interpretation.
We can be wrong, of course. And sometimes, you will exit your position and
the market will take off in your original direction. You will be upset, but if you
stay with this type of risk management, you will be improving your overall
performance.
The next section is an illustration of the ATM Trade Velocity study and
how it can help you with risk.

Advanced Trading Methods
FIGURE 6.16

305

ATM Trade Velocity Applied to the 10-Year U.S. Future

ATM Trade Velocity
The ATM Trade Velocity study is based on direction and volatility (see Figure 6.16). It represents the potential proﬁt over a continued 34 bars and the
initial eight bars of risk based on the standard deviation of the current volatility. On the proﬁt side of your trade, expect the market to move to and above
the light-blue proﬁt line. Should price over time hang below the light-blue
area, most likely your security is weak and you should consider reducing or
exiting your position. However, if your security moves above the darker blue
line, you have an extremely strong market and you should consider ways to
add to your positions. On the risk side of your trade, consider the yellow and
red line areas to represent your risk potential. Be sure you don’t place initial
stops within these two areas, as price can and often does trade within it.

The 3:1 Risk/Reward Myth
The “risk $1 for a $3 dollar reward” theory is an ineffective money management rule that suggests you could always predetermine where to get out, but
could not determine anything else. In this risk strategy, you accept whichever
event comes ﬁrst: if your goal was hit, you have a proﬁt; if your stop was hit,
you lose. It also suggests that with no additional understanding or talent, you
are able to skillfully manage a winning trade to its maximum potential.
Over all the years that I spent learning from great traders, not one of
them used this approach. In fact, they often laughed at traders who did. They
suggested that I learn how to manage my trades, because they will rarely follow
this pattern. And if the pattern is utilized, it will always result in a $1.00 loss.
ATM encourages you to learn how to manage with expectation and time.

306

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

Learning to Control Your Emotions

One of the most interesting traders I met was Ed Sakota. His entire focus was
centered on his ability to control his emotions. Ed taught me how important
this subject was, especially when it related to trading money. There is no way
I can do this subject justice in a few sentences; however, I can tell you that
without this skill, you will not necessarily fail at trading, but you will never
be as successful as you could be.
The Hardest Part of Any Strategy Is the Exit

By far the most difﬁcult decisions you will make will involve when to exit
your trade. As I mentioned earlier, the traders I observed had an ability to
understand when time was running out on the position. ATM believes your
positions should be monitored at all times for the following attributes.
New positions must make some price movement in your favor within a
preset amount of time. Should you not get any signiﬁcant price movement
within that time limit, exit. You can always reestablish the position later. If you
are buying/selling exhaustion, the condition of the market must change to the
direction of your position within a preset amount of time. Should no change
in condition occur within that time limit, exit. If you are buying/selling with
the trend, your trade location may not be ideal, so you must have quick
acceleration of price and maintain the current condition of the market within
a smaller preset amount of time. Should no quick movement in price occur
or should you observe a change in the overall market condition, exit.
As the trend ages, the price movement has two effects. Higher trending
price, particularly in equities, brings in additional buyers. Monitor for the
conditions of your security on longer timeframes. Make sure the longertimeframe condition concurs with the shorter. Plus, be aware of the longer
timeframe getting oversold/overbought as it relates to the ATM Trigger FT
line, as a change in direction of the FT in the longer timeframe will put
pressure on price.
Lower trending price of a fundamentally sound company encourages
buying (dollar cost averaging) all the way down. So be careful as you reach
downside ATM Targets or certain trend exhaustion indicators. Expect a good
company to return to an uptrend. And the lower you go, expect the lower
prices to attract investors. Lower trending price of a fundamentally ﬂawed
company does not usually have the catalyst of dollar cost averaging. Therefore,
it must have a positive fundamental change to bring about a fresh new set

Advanced Trading Methods

307

of buyers. If you are short this type of company, monitor for changes in the
ATM Trend Bars, ATM Trend Lines, and ATM Trigger–TSB line. When you
begin to see the end of the TSB line, begin to consider exiting. Deﬁnitely
exit once you see the TSB line in green condition and new buy signals
emerging.
Some ATM customers use the ATM Exhaustion Alerts to exit or trade
around positions, but not to reverse. Exhaustion Alerts should be used mostly
to exit from existing positions and not necessarily to establish new positions
from a single timeframe. If you do reverse utilizing an ATM Exhaustion Alert,
the market must move very rapidly for you and the condition of the market
must change within a short period of time—usually within six to eight bars.
Otherwise, the market will resume its trend. In addition, the issue with trading
around your position requires you to reenter your original position, often at
a worse price.
Constantly monitor the ATM Trigger–TSB line for ending action, transitions, or a new beginning. This is one of the most important studies within
ATM. The end of the TSB is an early indication that the trend is entering a
transition that may reverse the current trend. When in the transition phase,
the market should be monitored for a new TSB line in the opposite direction,
plus changes in the ATM Trend Line and ATM Trend Bars.
Putting It All Together: Two Examples

The following examples take a look at the long, intermediate, and short-term
trend of the 10-Year U.S. Future and Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. As discussed
earlier, this is my preferred way of determining the direction of trend: starting
with the long-term chart, then considering the intermediate term, and ﬁnally
the short term.

Ten-Year
From August 2009 until October 2009, the ATM FT downturning points
were moving closer to the current price. Once price closes below one of these
turning points, the ATM FT will turn down (see Figure 6.17). Based on
our research, this will move price sideways to down for approximately eight
months. Once the monthly ATM FT appears, we begin to monitor a lower
timeframe for its alignment.
As price is moving closer to the monthly ATM FT turning point, we
begin monitoring the weekly for its ATM FT turning point, which would

308
FIGURE 6.17

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
Monthly Chart of the U.S. 10-Year Future

place its new move in the same direction as the monthly (see Figure 6.18). In
this case, we chose the weekly. The weekly began aligning with the monthly
during the weeks of November 5 and November 12, 2010.
As each of the longer timeframes aligns, we await the next daily ATM
FT turning point to act (see Figure 6.19). With the monthly close to turning in October 2009, the weekly moved to its position during November
5 to November 12, and the daily ATM FT turned down on November 9,
2010, within the week of November 12. Once the trade is made utilizing
the daily turn in the ATM FT, we begin trading the weekly ATM FT overbought/oversold conditions in the direction of the monthly background for
the next eight months.

FIGURE 6.18

Weekly Chart of the U.S. 10-Year Future

Advanced Trading Methods
FIGURE 6.19

309

Daily Chart of the U.S. 10-Year Future

Goldman Sachs Group
In Figure 6.20, the thick dashed lines on the upper price chart represent the
price levels that would cause a bearish or bullish turn in the ATM FT line.
During May 10 and June 10, the ATM FT upturning point was moving closer
to the current price. Once price closes above one of these turning points, the
ATM FT will turn up. Based on our research, this will move price sideways
to up for approximately eight months. Once the monthly ATM FT appears,
we begin to monitor a lower timeframe for its alignment.
As price is moving closer to the monthly ATM FT turning point, we
begin to monitor the weekly for its ATM FT turning points, which would
place its new move in the same direction as the monthly (see Figure 6.21). In
this case, we chose the weekly. The weekly aligned with the monthly during
the weeks of May 21 through June 4, 2010.
FIGURE 6.20

Monthly Chart of Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.

310
FIGURE 6.21

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
Weekly Chart of Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.

As each of the longer timeframes aligns, we await the next daily ATM FT
turning point before acting. With the monthly near its turning between May
and June 10, the weekly moved to its position during the weeks of May 21
and June 4 and the daily ATM FT turned up on June 15, 2010—after the FT
turn-up of the week of June 4. Once the trade is made utilizing the daily turn
in the ATM FT, we begin monitoring and trading the weekly in the direction
of the monthly background over the next eight months (see Figure 6.22).

Picking Up the Right Tools

Once you have a successful trading method, add the tools that can help
you, but keep your general principles intact. The best idea for you to trade
FIGURE 6.22

Daily Chart of Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.

Advanced Trading Methods

311

and manage should always be your own idea. However, successful traders
continue to update themselves and their approach. The traders who keep
learning might not be the most successful in any given situation, but can keep
trading and adapting as conditions change.
My life experience with trading has been unique. For years I have stayed
in the background, while I have enjoyed the friendship and insights of several
great traders and analysts. Some traders I was able to help, but mostly I was
the one being helped. Recall the guidance given to me by an anonymous
trader at the CBOE CBOT: “There are people willing to help you. Just look
for them.” And now—with the help of my friends at Bloomberg and with
encouraging words from Tom DeMark and others—I am stepping out from
behind the curtain with all my experiences and tools to help you with these
guidelines and examples of using ATMs.

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis: Effective Tools
and Strategies for Trading and Investing
by Paul Ciana
Copyright © 2011 Paul Ciana

Recommended Reading
Throughout this book, we’ve mentioned several publications and web sites
where you can go to learn more about a particular trading method or tool.
Here we list some of those publications and web sites mentioned in the book,
as well as a few new ones to help you on your journey.
Appel, Gerald, and Edward Dobson. Understanding MACD (Moving Average Convergence/Divergence). Greenville, SC: Traders Press, Inc., 2008.
Bollinger, John. Bollinger on Bollinger Bands. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
Brown, Connie. Technical Analysis for the Trading Professional. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1999.
Elliott, Nicole. Ichimoku Charts: An Introduction to Ichimoku Kinko Clouds. Petersﬁeld, UK:
Harriman House, 2007.
Hamzei, Fari. Master Traders: Strategies for Superior Returns from Today’s Top Traders. Hoboken,
NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
Kase, Cynthia A. Trading with the Odds. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1996.
Kase, Cynthia A. “The Kase DevStop: Accounting for Volatility, Variance, and Skew in Managing Trading Risk.” Journal of Technical Analysis (Summer 1993).
Kase, Cynthia A. “Simpliﬁed Momentum Filters Improve Trading.” Futures (December 1993).
Kase, Cynthia A. “Putting the Odds on Your Side.” Futures (April 1996).
Kase, Cynthia A. “Managing Trade Risk.” Trader’s Catalog & Resource Guide (July 1999).
Kase, Cynthia A. “The Two Faces of Momentum.” Stocks, Futures, and Options (October 2003).
Kase, Cynthia A. “Proof That Technical Analysis Really Works.” Commodities Now (March
2005).
Kirkpatrick, Charles, and Julie Dahlquist. Technical Analysis: The Complete Resource for Financial
Market Technicians, Second Edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: FT Press, 2010.
Lane, George. Using Stochastics, Cycles, & R.S.I. . . . to the Moment of Decision . . . . G.C. Lane,
published under the auspices of Investment Educators, 1986.
Levy, Robert A. The Relative Strength Concept of Common Stock Price Forecasting. Investors
Intelligence, 1968.
Markman, Jon D. Swing Trading: Power Strategies to Cut Risk and Boost Proﬁts. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons, 2005.
Murphy, John. Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets: A Comprehensive Guide to Trading
Methods and Applications. New York: New York Institute of Finance, 1999.
Nison, Steve. Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques, Second Edition. Upper Saddle River:
Prentice Hall Press, 2001.
Wilder, J. Welles. New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems. Trend Research, 1978.

313

314

Recommended Reading

Online Resources
The Bloomberg Professional Service web site: www.bloomberg.com/professional/
Information on Launchpad and Charts: www.bloomberg.com/professional/charts_launchpad/
ATM Homepage: ATM<GO>
Erlanger Homepage: ERLA<GO>
Kase Homepage: KASE<GO>
Relative Rotation Graph Homepage: RRGS<GO> and RRG<GO>
Research Reports: FKST<GO>
TAS Professional Homepage: TASP<GO>
Capital Markets Research, ATM Studies web site: www.atmstudies.com/
“Erlanger Chart Room: The Squeeze Play Advantage” web site: www.erlangerchartroom.com
“Good Morning, Wall St.: Perfecting the Art of Squeezeplay” web site for free educational
videos: www.goodmorningwallst.com
Kase and Company, Inc., web site: www.kaseco.com
Phil Erlanger Research web site: www.erlanger.com
Phil Erlanger Research web site (for Bloomberg Terminal Content): www.erlangerresearch.
com/BB/BBerlanger.asp
Phil Erlanger Research web site (for institutional clients): www.erlangerresearch.com
Relative Rotation Graphs web site: www.relativerotationgraphs.com
TAM Research web site: www.tamresearch.com
TAS Professional, LLC web site: www.tasprofessional.com
Talergroup Fiduciary Management web site: www.talergroup.com
Trade Angle Strategies (TAS) web site: www.tradeangle.com

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis: Effective Tools
and Strategies for Trading and Investing
by Paul Ciana
Copyright © 2011 Paul Ciana

About the Authors
Paul Ciana, CMT

Paul is an Application Specialist in Technical Analysis at Bloomberg LP. He
started his career with Bloomberg LP in 2005 and his multifaceted role interacts with many areas of the ﬁrm. He is Director of Core Product Training for
In-Depth Technical Analysis Education, a weeklong internal program he created that is being instituted all over the world. He works with the Bloomberg
Core Terminal Sales division by meeting with current and prospective clients
to assist them with creating and implementing a technical strategy. He is
the Product Development contact for the Americas where he researches and
presents which technical tools may be added to the Bloomberg Terminal. He
is also involved with the Marketing group where he inﬂuences the branding
of charts and Bloomberg LP through new initiatives like Bloomberg Chart
Day, a full day of technical analysis themed seminars in large cities around
the world.
He is the author of the Bloomberg Global Technical Strategy, a subscriptionbased report discussing various areas of the ﬁnancial markets. He also writes
quarterly in the “Strategy” section of Bloomberg Markets magazine. Paul has
guest presented for Bloomberg, the CFA, MTA, NYSSA, Traders Expo, and
some MBA programs that offer Technical Analysis courses. He is involved in
the Market Technician Association as the Chair of the New York Chapter and
as an instructor in the CMT Institute. Paul graduated from the State University at Albany–SUNY with honors, majoring in Finance and Management,
with a minor in Economics.
Phil Erlanger, CMT

Phil is the president of Phil Erlanger Research and has been providing research
to institutions since the early 1990s. Prior to starting Phil Erlanger Research,
Phil was Senior Technical Analyst for Fidelity Management & Research. Phil
315

316

About the Authors

came to Fidelity from Advest, where he was Chief Technical Analyst through
most of the 1980s.
Phil has developed Erlanger Chart Room, a technical analysis platform
that focuses on advanced technical indicators that include in-depth sentiment
and seasonal studies. This platform runs on Bloomberg, eSignal, and MB
Trading. He developed the www.goodmorningwallst.com educational and
research video series that includes tutorials on how to use technical analysis in
the real world. He is also a two-time past president of the Market Technicians
Association, and in 1997 he won the MTA Best of the Best Award for
Computer Assisted Analysis.
Phil has lectured at universities such as Rutgers, MIT, Boston University,
Howard University, and Emory, and as an adjunct professor at Bentley College,
where he taught a course in Technical Analysis. He is a graduate of Boston
University with a degree in Economics.
Cynthia A. Kase, CMT, MFTA

Cynthia Kase taught herself technical analysis in the mid-1980s when electronic charting ﬁrst began. She is now president of Kase and Company, Inc.,
a leader in charting algorithm innovation and the energy market’s premier
boutique trading and hedging consultancy. With a BS and ME in chemical
engineering, she spent 10 years in the energy ﬁeld. In 1983, Cynthia joined
Chevron International and became an oil trader in New York. Not far from
the NYMEX and its newly introduced oil contract, she discovered technical
analysis, ﬁnding trading techniques that made engineering sense.
After Chevron, Cynthia worked for Chemical Bank as a commodity
derivatives trader, and then consulted with the Saudi’s Petronal ofﬁce on
technical analysis and risk management. In 1992, she founded Kase and
Company, Inc., where she combined her engineering and trading experience
to develop her groundbreaking indicators, now known as StatWare, and a
new bar type, KaseBars.
She won the MTA Best of the Best Award in 1997, received the Key
Women in Energy Award twice, and was the ﬁrst American awarded the
Master of Technical Financial Analysis designation from IFTA, 2007.
Julius de Kempenaer

After completing his studies in economics at the Royal Military Academy
in Breda (1987), Julius served as an ofﬁcer in the Dutch Royal Air Force,

About the Authors

317

and later moved to the ﬁnancial sector in 1990. Initially he was a portfolio manager for Equity & Law Life Assurance (now AXA). However,
he gained most of his experience as a technical and quantitative analyst at
the Robeco Group, Rabobank International, and, most recently, Kempen &
Company.
Julius is a regular speaker at international conferences, a frequent guest on
CNBC and Bloomberg Television, and has written many articles on technical
analysis. He is best known for his weekly column, “Het Financieele Dagblad,”
which appeared for six years in the Saturday edition of the leading ﬁnancial
newspaper in the Netherlands.
Julius is co-owner of Relative Rotation Graphs Ltd., and is currently associated with Taler Asset Management Ltd. as director of quantitative strategies.
Julius is engaged in the development and maintenance of quantitative models
that are used in the management of the Taler funds, managed accounts, and
Investment Consulting Services. Julius also provides speciﬁc technical and
quantitative research to a select number of institutional clients.
Andrew Kezeli

With over 16 years of active trading experience and hundreds of thousands
of trades to his credit, Andrew is a managing partner at Trade Angle Securities Professional LLC, a leading provider of institutional-quality trading
tools, automation, signal generation, proprietary trading, and leading-edge
educational courses for traders and market technicians in all markets.
R
and Volume Analysis, Andrew
A recognized expert in Market Proﬁle
is also Director of Education at TAS Professional and developer of many
of Trade Angle’s proprietary trading tools and trading strategies. Andrew
brings business operations, leadership, and master-trainer expertise to the
TAS Professional product team by training product specialists, clients, and
business alliances.
Andrew’s prior experience includes a successful career as a multidimensional trader in equities, index futures, and commodities. He was a software
engineer and Senior Systems Analyst with Hewlett Packard. He appeared as a
featured panelist and speaker at the Market Technician’s Association Annual
Symposium in May 2010. He is also the founder and director of the Flora
Foundation, a nonproﬁt animal rescue organization that has the mission of
fostering, treating, and healing unwanted, abandoned, neglected, and abused
dogs in “third-world” Asian countries, operated by a network of volunteer
veterinarians and afﬁliate organizations.
