
The total profit on the hedge is therefore:
+$24,075 -$13,425 -$2,962.63 -$814.34 +$1,400 +$9.21 = +$8,282.24

versus a theoretical profit of 100 x ($300 - $217) = 100 x $83 = +$8,300.

As in our last example, our profit depended on our knowing the volatility of the
underlying contract over the life of the option. This “known” volatility of 32.4%
represents the actual volatility associated with the ten stock price changes in Figure 5-2.

While we continue to assume that markets are frictionless, we noted in our futures
option example that this is not necessarily true. In a locked futures market it is not
always possible to freely buy and sell the underlying contract. A similar type of


Using an Option’s Theoretical Value 93

restriction can occur in stock option trading. In our example we established the initial
hedge by selling calls and purchasing stock. If, however, the calls had been underpriced,
we might have chosen to buy calls and sell stock, stock which we might not necessarily
own. This type of short sale, the sale of stock which is borrowed rather than owned, is
prohibited in some markets. This makes it difficult to hedge certain types of option
positions. As we shall see later, if we choose to sell puts it is necessary to hedge the
position by selling stock. If we are not able to sell stock to hedge the sale of puts, we
might hesitate to sell puts, even at a price greater than the theoretical value. Indeed, in
markets where short sales are prohibited, puts tend to trade at inflated prices compared
to calls,

The short sale of stock is not totally prohibited in U.S. markets, but it is subject to
an up-tick rule. This rule specifies that a short sale is always prohibited at a price lower
than the price at which the previous trade took place (a down-tick). A short sale is
always permitted at a price higher than the price at which the previous trade took place
(an up-tick). Finally, a short sale may take place at the same price at which the previous
trade took place if the previous trade took place on an up-tick (also an up-tick). The
up-tick rule was instituted following the market crash of 1929, with the intent of
preventing a similar crash by prohibiting the sale, at continuously lower prices, of stock
not actually owned. Below are ten consecutive trade prices (reading from left to right]
for a stock with the accompanying ticks (a positive sign for an up-tick; a negative sign
for a down-tick}.

4812 +48%% +4854 —4814 -48%% -481/%4 4814 +48% +4826 +4852

Not only might a short sale not be possible because of the up-tick rule, but many
brokerage firms which execute short sales of stock for their customers do not pay full
interest on the proceeds from a short sale. This can further distort the interest
component used in a theoretical pricing model.

Taking one last look at our examples, what enabled us to make a profit approxi-
mately equal to that predicted by the theoretical pricing model? A simple way of
interpreting the results is to realize that, according to the model, the option’s cash flow
can be replicated through the adjustment process. If we know the conditions of an
option contract and the characteristics of the underlying contract, we can replicate the
characteristics of the option, and therefore replicate the cash flow resulting from a
position in the option, through an adjustment process in the underlying contract. In our
examples, because we knew the exact market conditions which would prevail over the
life of the options (primarily, this means knowing volatility), we knew we could replicate
the option by continuously calculating the delta and taking an appropriate offsetting
position in the underlying contract. According to the model, at expiration the total cash
flow from this dynamic hedge should exactiy equal the value of the option. But in our
examples we either bought the option at less than theoretical value (our futures option
example} or sold the option at more than theoretical value (our stock option example).
Since the cash flow from the adjustment process exactly replicated the option’s
theoretical value, we were left with a profit equal to the difference between the option’s
price and its theoretical value.


94 Chapter 5

This type of option replication, using the cash flow from continuous hedging in the
underlying contract, is the basis for many strategies which make use of option charac-
teristics but do not actually involve options. We will discuss the best known of these
strategies, portfolio insurance, in Chapter 13.


6 &

Option Values and Changing
Market Conditions

Every trader who enters the marketplace must balance two opposing considerations,
reward and risk. A trader hopes that his analysis of market conditions is correct, and
that this will lead to profitable trading strategies. But no intelligent trader can afford to
ignore the possibility of error. If he is wrong, and market conditions change in a way
that adversely affects his position, how badly might the trader get hurt? A trader who
fails to consider the risks associated with his position is certain to have a short and
unhappy career.

Consider the trader who goes into the marketplace and purchases a futures
contract. What is he worried about? Obviously he is worried that the market will fall.
Indeed, anyone who takes a position in an underlying contract has only one real
concern, that the market will move in the wrong direction. If a trader has a long
position, he is at risk from a decline in the market; if he has a short position, he is at risk
from a rise in the market.

Unfortunately, the risks with which an option trader must deal are not one-dimen-
sional. A wide variety of forces can affect an option’s value. If a trader uses a theoretical
pricing model to evaluate options, any of the inputs into the model can represent a risk
since there is always a chance that the inputs have been incorrectly estimated. Even if
the trader has correctly estimated current market conditions, it’s possible that over time
conditions will change in a way that will adversely affect the value of his option position.
Because of the many forces affecting an option’s value, prices can change in ways which
May surprise even the most experienced trader. Since decisions must often be made
quickly, and sometimes without the aid of a computer, much of an option trader’s
education consists of learning how changing market conditions are likely to change an
option’s value and the risks associated with an option position.

First, let’s consider the general effects of changing market conditions on an option’s
value. These changes are summarized in Figure 6-1.

As the price of the underlying rises or falls, options are more or less likely to finish
in-the-money, and their values rise and fall accordingly. As volatility rises, extreme
outcomes in the underlying contract become more likely, and this increases an option’s
value. As volatility falls, or as time to expiration grows shorter, extreme outcomes
become less likely, and this reduces an option’s value.

95


96 Chapter 6

Figure 6-1: The Effect of Changing Market Conditions on an Option’s
Theoretical Value

If... Call values will... Put values willl...
The price of the underlying contract rises rise fall
The price of the underlying contract falls fall rise
Volatility rises rise rise
Volatility falls falt falt
Time passes tall” fall”

* In some unusual cases it may be possible for an option to rise in value as time passes. The
circumstances which can cause this will be discussed later.

Note that we have not considered the effect of changes in interest rates on option
values. Since interest rates affect options differently depending on the underlying
instrument and the settlement procedure, it is not possible to generalize about the effect
of changing interest rates. However, we can logically deduce the effect of changing
interest rates on option values by thinking of a call as a substitute for purchasing the
underlying contract, and a put as a substitute for selling the underlying contract. For
example, suppose we want to purchase a certain stock. The alternative is to purchase a
call option. If interest rates are high, we will prefer the call since the outright purchase
of stock requires a much larger cash outlay, and therefore a greater carrying cost. On
the other hand, if interest rates are low, the carrying cost associated with stock is not as
great, and calls become a less attractive alternative to purchasing the stock. Hence,
rising interest rates cause stock option calls to rise in value, and falling interest rates
cause stock option calls to fall in value.

The effect is just the opposite for stock option puts. If we are considering the sale
of stock, the alternative is the purchase of a put. In a high interest rate environment the
sale of stock will be more desirable since the cash credit resulting from the sale will earn
greater interest. In a low interest rate environment puts become more attractive since
the earnings on any cash credit resulting from the sale of stock is reduced. Hence, rising
interest rates cause stock option puts to fall in value, and falling interest rates cause stock
option puts to rise in value.

The situation is more complex when it comes to options on foreign currencies
because a trader must deal with two interest rates, a domestic rate and a foreign rate.
The effect of changes in domestic interest rates will be the same as the effect on stock
options: a call will avoid the cash outlay required to purchase the currency, and a put
will forego the cash credit resulting from the sale of the currency. However, the effect
of a change in the foreign interest rate will be just the opposite. If foreign interest rates
are high, rather than purchase a call one will always prefer to purchase the currency
outright in order to earn the higher interest rate. Hence, higher (lower) foreign interest
rates lead to lower (higher) call values. But if foreign rates are high, a put becomes a


Option Values and Changing Market Conditions 97

more desirable alternative to selling the foreign currency since one will want to continue
to earn a high rate on the foreign currency. Hence, higher (lower) foreign interest rates
lead to higher (lower) put values.

Stock and foreign currency options are always assumed to be subject to stock-type
settlement (immediate cash payment for the option). But the settlement procedure for
options on futures contracts may vary, depending on the exchange. Sometimes such
options are settled like stock and sometimes they are settled like futures. While there is
no carrying cost associated with a futures contract, there will be a carrying cost
associated with an option if it is subject to stock-type settlement. In such a case, option
values will fall when interest rates are high (the option becomes a less desirable
alternative to a position in the futures contract} and rise when interest rates are low (the
option becomes a more desirable alternative to a futures position). The effect, however,
wil! be small since the value of the option, unless it is very deeply in-the-money, is small
relative to the value of the underlying contract. Futures options are therefore much less
sensitive to changes in interest rates than options on stocks and foreign currencies.
When futures options are subject to futures-type settlement, changes in interest rates
have no effect at all on option values since there is no carrying cost associated with either
the underlying contract or the option.

The general effects of a change in interest rates are shown in Figure 6-2. In each
case, the reader can intuitively arrive at the correct conclusion if he asks himself
whether a call (put) is a better or worse substitute for the outright purchase (sale) of the
underlying contract.

The dividend which is expected to be paid on stock during the life of a stock option
may also affect the value of the option. In a simple sense, we can equate a dividend
payment with the foreign interest rate on a currency option. If we own the foreign
currency we can earn interest on it. In the same way, if we own the stock we will receive
whatever dividend is paid on the stock. If dividends increase, we will prefer to take a
long position by purchasing the stock rather than purchasing a call. The call therefore
becomes a less desirable alternative to owning the stock. In the case of puts, if dividends
increase we will prefer to take a short position by purchasing a put rather than selling
the stock, since the sale of the stock will result in the loss of the dividend. Hence, rising
dividends will cause stock option calls (puts) to fall (rise) in value, and falling dividends
will cause stock option calls (puts) to rise (fall) in value. This is summarized in Figure
6-3.

We can generalize about the effects of changing market conditions on the value of
options, but we must still consider the magnitude of the changes. Will the changes be
large or small, representing either a major or minor risk, or something in between?
Fortunately, along with the theoretical value, pricing models also generate several other
numbers which enable a trader to assess not only the direction of the change, but also
the relative magnitude of the change. While these numbers will not answer all our
questions concerning changing market conditions, they will help us to better assess the
risks associated with both individual and complex option positions.


Chapter 6

98

(afqealdde jou)
(ajqeoydde you)
(ajqeolidde you)

(alqeoldde you)
ONILA Ul [12h
anjea ul esu

{eIqeoljdde you)

(ajqeaydde you)

ley soyey
ysauequy

ubjo1os J

(ajqeoydde jou)
(ajqeoydde jou)
(ajqeoydde jou)

(ajqeoydde you)
@njeA Ul esu
ON{BA U! {TE}

(a|qeorydde you)

(e}qeoydde you)

asiy seyey
ySeJo} tj
uBbsaios JI

peBueyoun ulewal
peBueyoun ulewel
anjea ul asu

en|eA Ul esu
ONjeA Ul OSU
OnfeA Ut Tey
@Nn|BA ul esL
ANyeA ul [et

les soyey
ysouoTuj
ofsewog jy

peBueyoun urewes

peBueyoun urewie

anyen uj jes

enten Ul {fe}
anjeA Ut |e]
anjeA ul esu
ane ui |e}
@N/eA ul OSU

9osty Seley
ysale]4]
afiseuiog JI

(juewenjes edAy seunjn})
++? HM J9e2]U09 Senn} B UO S]Nd

(juawealjes edAy seunjny)
IM JOBNUOD SOINjNj B UO sI]BO

(Uawaes adAy YOo}s)
* "HIM YORIJUOD SAINjNj e UO s]nd

Quawapes ad 400;s)
“** HIM JORNUOD SaIN|N{ B UO SED

“++ pm Aouaune UBieloj & UO s]Nd
"+ WM AQUaUNS UBIasO} B UO s]eO
IM 490}s UO s]Nd
IM YOO}S UO S}BO

ySos0} Uj

senje, uoido UO soyey yse10} BuiBueys jo joey ey) :2-9 eunBl4



Option Values and Changing Market Canditions 99

Figure 6-3: The Effect of Changing Dividends on Stock Options

If... Call values will... Put values will...
The dividend is increased fall rise
The dividend is decreased rise fall

THE DELTA

We touched on the delta (A) in the last chapter as needed to determine the number of
underlying contracts to option contracts required to establish a neutral hedge. The delta
has several other interpretations, any of which may be useful to a trader.

Rate of Change

Figure 6-4! shows what happens to the theoretical value of a call as the price of the
underlying contract changes. Under some conditions, when the call is very deeply
in-the-money, its value changes at a rate almost identical to that of the underlying. If the
underlying price moves up or down one point, the call’s value will change by an equal
amount. Under other conditions, when the call is far out-of-the-money, its value may
change only slightly, even with a large change in the price of the underlying. The delta
is a measure of how an option’s value changes with respect to a change in the price of
the underlying contract.

In theory, an option can never gain or lose value more quickly than the underlying,
so the delta of a call always has an upper bound of 100. (Again, we will retain the
common practice of writing the delta without the decimal point. Hence, a delta of 1.00
will be written as 100, This is sometimes referred to as the percent format.) An option
with a delta of 100 will move up or down one full point for each full point move up or
down in the price of the underlying. It is moving at 100% of the rate of the underlying.
In theory, a call also cannot move in the opposite direction of the underlying market,
so the delta of a call has a lower bound of zero. A call with a delta of zero will move
negligibly, even if the underlying contract makes a relatively large move.

Most calls, of course, will have deltas somewhere between zero and 100 and will
move at a slower rate than the underlying. A call with a delta of 25 can be expected to
change its value at 25% of the rate of the underlying. If the underlying rises (falls) 1.00,
the option can be expected to rise (fall) .25. A call with a delta of 75 can be expected
to change its value at 75% of the rate of the underlying. If the underlying rises (falls)
.60, the option can be expected to gain (lose} .45 in value. Call options which are
at-the-money have delta values close to 50. They rise or fall in value at just about half
the rate of the underlying.

Thus far our discussion of deltas has focused only on calls. Puts have characteristics
similar to calls, except that put values move in the opposite direction of the underlying
market, In Figure 6-5 we can see that when the underlying rises, puts lose value; when

1. In order to generalize characteristics of the option sensitivities, which in most cases are similar
regardless of the type of underlying instrument, we assume an interest rate of zero in Figures 6-4
through 6-21.


100

Chapter 6

Figure 6-4: Call Theoretical Value vs. Underlying Price

30
Time = 60 days
Volatility = 20%
257
o 207
2
G
>
8 154
2
6
®
com
F 404 o
54
80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120
Underlying Price
Figure 6-5: Put Theoretical Value vs. Underlying Price
3075
Time = 60 days °
254 NS Volatility = 20%
@ 207.
$ *x110
8 15- NS :
2 .
5 a °
= ~ 10
F104 ;
90 7 Se
80 85 90 95 100 105 110 14 120

Underlying Price



Option Values and Changing Market Conditions 101

the underlying fails, puts gain value. For this reason, puts always have negative deltas,
ranging from zero for far out-of the money puts to —100 for deeply in-the-money puts.
Just like a call delta, a put’s delta is a measure of the rate of change in the put’s value
with respect to a change in the price of the underlying, but the negative sign indicates
that the change will be in the opposite direction of the underlying market. A put with
a delta of -10 can be expected to change its value at 10% of the rate of the underlying,
but in the opposite direction. If the underlying moves up (down) .50, the put can be
expected to lose (gain) .05 in value. At-the-money puts will have deltas of approximately
50, and can be expected to change their value at approximately half the rate of the
underlying, but in the opposite direction.

Hedge Ratio

As discussed in Chapter 5, if we wish to hedge an option position against the underlying
contract, the delta tells us the proper ratio of underlying contracts to options required
to establish a neutral hedge. An underlying contract always has a delta of 100, so the
proper hedge ratio can be determined by dividing 100 by the option’s delta. An
at-the-money option has a delta of 50, so the proper hedge ratio is 100/50, or 2/1. For
every two options purchased, we need to sell one underlying contract to establish a
neutral hedge. A call with a delta of 40 requires the sale of two underlying contracts for
each five options purchased, since 100/40 = 5/2,

Since puts have negative deltas, the purchase of puts will require us to hedge the
position by purchasing underlying contracts. A put with a delta of -75 will require the
purchase of three underlying contracts for each four puts purchased, since 100/75 = 4/3.

Thus far, all the hedges we have looked at have consisted of options and underlying
contracts. But any hedge, whether options versus underlying contracts, or options
versus options, is delta neutral as long as all the deltas in the hedge add up to zero, For
example, suppose we buy four calls with a delta of 50 each, and ten puts with a delta
of —20 each. Our position is delta neutral since (+4 x +50) + (+10 x -20) = 0. A position
can be highly complex, consisting of underlying contracts, calls, and puts, with different
exercise prices and expiration dates, but as long as the deltas add up to approximately
zero we say that the position is delta neutral.

Theoretical or Equivalent Undertying Position

Many option traders come to the option market after trading in the underlying
instruments. Futures option traders often start their careers by trading futures contracts;
stock option traders often start by trading stock. If a trader has become accustomed to
evaluating his risk in terms of the number of underlying contracts bought or sold (either
futures contracts or shares of stock), he can use the delta to equate the directional risk
of an option position with a position of similar size in the underlying market.

Since an underlying contract always has a delta of 100, each 100 deltas in an option
position represents a theoretical position equivalent to one underlying contract. A trader
who owns an option with a delta of 50 is long, or controls, approximately 4 of an
underlying contract. If he owns ten such contracts, he is long 500 deltas or, in
equivalent terms, five underlying contracts. If the underlying is a futures contract, he is


102 Chapter 6

theoretically long five such contracts. If the underlying is a stock contract consisting of
100 shares of stock, he is theoretically long 500 shares of stock. The trader has a similar
theoretical position if he sells 20 puts with a delta of -25 each, since -20 x -25 = +500.

It is important to emphasize the theoretical aspect of the delta interpretation as an
equivalent to an underlying position. An option is not simply a surrogate for an
underlying position. An actual underlying position is almost exclusively sensitive to
directional moves in the underlying market. An option position, while also sensitive to
directional moves, is also sensitive to other changes in market conditions. An option
trader who looks only at his delta position may be ignoring other risks which could have
a far greater impact on his option position. He must realize that the delta represents an
equivalent underlying position only under very narrowly defined market conditions.

The reader may have already noted that our three interpretations of delta—the
hedge ratio, the rate of change in the theoretical value, and the equivalent underlying
position—are all essentially the same. How a trader interprets a delta position depends
primarily on his trading strategy. For example, suppose a trader has a delta position of
+500. If the trader intends to maintain a delta neutral position, he must sell five
underlying contracts (the hedge ratio interpretation). However, if he believes the market
will rise and wants to maintain his delta position, he knows that in theory he is long five
underlying contracts (the equivalent underlying position interpretation). And finally, if
he does maintain his delta position of +500, the value of his position will change at five
times the rate, or 500%, of the underlying market (the rate of change interpretation).
Even though a trader may interpret the delta differently at different times, each
interpretation is mathematically the same.
