
TRADING

135

When the weekly trend is down, look for daily oscillators to rise,
giving sell signals. Shorting during upwaves is safer than selling new
lows. When daily oscillators give buy signals, you may use them to
take profits on shorts but not to buy. The choice of oscillators depends
on your trading style.
For conservative traders, choose a relatively slow oscillator, such as
daily MACD-Histogram or Stochastic, for the second screen. When the
weekly trend is up, look for daily MACD-Histogram to fall below zero
and tick up, or for Stochastic to fall to its lower reference line, giving
a buy signal.
Reverse these rules for shorting in bear markets. When trendfollowing indicators point down on the weekly charts, but daily MACDHistogram ticks down from above its zero line, or Stochastic rallies to
its upper reference line, they give sell signals.
A conservative approach works best during early stages of major
moves, when markets gather speed slowly. As the trend accelerates,
pullbacks become more shallow. To hop aboard a fast-running trend,
you need faster oscillators.
For active traders, use the two-day EMA of Force Index (or longer,
if that’s what your research suggests for your market). When the
weekly trend is up and daily Force Index falls below zero, it flags a
buying opportunity.
Reverse these rules for shorting in bear markets. When the weekly
trend is down and the two-day EMA of Force Index rallies above zero,
it points to shorting opportunities.
Many other indicators can work with Triple Screen. The first screen
can also use Directional System or trendlines. The second screen can
use Momentum, Relative Strength Index, Elder-ray, and others.
The second screen is where we set profit targets and stops and make
a go–no go decision about every trade after weighing the level of risk
against the potential gain.
Set the stops. A stop is a safety net, which limits the damage from any
bad trade. You have to structure your trading in such a way that no
single bad loss, or a nasty series of losses, can damage your account.
Stops are essential for success, but many traders shun them. Beginners
complain about getting whipsawed, stopped out of trades that eventually would have made them money. Some say that putting in a stop
means asking for trouble because no matter where you put it, it will
be hit.

136

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

First of all, you need to place stops where they are not likely to be
hit, outside of the range of market noise (see SafeZone on page 173).
Second, an occasional whipsaw is the price of long-term safety. No
matter how great your analytic skills, stops are always necessary.
You should move stops only one way—in the direction of the trade.
When a trade starts moving in your favor, move your stop to a breakeven level. As the move persists, continue to move your stop, protecting some of your paper profit. A professional trader never lets a profit
turn into a loss.
A stop may never expose more than 2% of your equity to the risk of
loss (see Chapter 7, “Money Management Formulas”). If Triple Screen
flags a trade but you realize that a logical stop would risk more than
2% of your equity, skip that trade.
Set profit targets. Profit targets are flexible and depend on your goals
and capital. If you are a well-capitalized, long-term-oriented trader, you
may build up a large position at an early stage of a bull market, repeatedly taking buy signals from the daily charts, as long as the weekly
trend is up. Take your profits after the weekly EMA turns flat. The reverse applies to downtrends.
Another option is to take profits whenever prices on the daily
charts hit their channel line. If you go long, sell when prices hit the
upper channel line and look to reposition on the next pullback to the
daily moving average. If you go short, cover when prices fall to their
lower channel line and look to reposition short on the next rally to
the EMA.
A short-term-oriented trader can use the signals of a two-day EMA
of Force Index to exit trades. If you buy in an uptrend when the twoday EMA of Force Index turns negative, sell when it turns positive. If
you go short in a downtrend after the two-day EMA of Force Index
turns positive, cover when it turns negative.
Beginners often approach markets like a lottery—buy a ticket and sit
in front of the TV to find out whether you have won. You will know
that you are becoming a professional when you start spending almost
as much time thinking about exits as looking for entries.
SCREEN THREE

The third screen helps us pinpoint entry points. Live data can help savvy
traders but hurt beginners who may slip into day-trading.

TRADING

137

Use an intraday breakout or pullback to enter trades without realtime data. When the first two screens give you a buy signal (the weekly
is up, but the daily is down), place a buy order at the high of the previous day or a tick higher. A tick is the smallest price fluctuation permitted in any market. We expect the major uptrend to reassert itself and
catch a breakout in its direction. Place a buy order, good for one day
only. If prices break out above the previous day’s high, you will be
stopped in automatically. You do not have to watch prices intraday,
just give your order to a broker.
When the first two screens tell you to sell short (the weekly is down,
but the daily is up), place a sell order at the previous day’s low or a
tick lower. We expect the downtrend to reassert itself, and try to catch
the downside breakout. If prices break below the previous day’s low,
they will trigger your entry.
Daily ranges can be very wide, and placing an order to buy at the
top can be expensive. Another option is to buy below the market. If
you are trying to buy a pullback to the EMA, calculate where that EMA
is likely to be tomorrow and place your order at that level. Alternatively,
use the SafeZone indicator (see page 173) to find how far the market is
likely to dip below its previous day’s low and place your order at that
level. Reverse these approaches for shorting in downtrends.
The advantage of buying upside breakouts is that you follow an
impulse move. The disadvantage is that you buy high and your stop is
far away. The advantage of bottom fishing is that you get your goods
on sale and your stop is closer. The disadvantage is the risk of getting
caught in a downside reversal. A “breakout entry” is more reliable, but
profits are smaller; a “bottom-fishing entry” is riskier, but the profits are
greater. Make sure to test both methods in your markets.
Use real-time data, if available, for entering trades. When the first
two screens give you a buy signal (the weekly is up, but the daily is
down), use live data to get long. You could follow a breakout from
the opening range, when prices rally above the high of the first 15 to
30 minutes of trading, or apply technical analysis to intraday charts
and finesse your entry. When trying to short, you may enter on a
downside breakout from the opening range. You could also monitor
the market intraday and use technical analysis to enter into a short
trade, using live charts.
The techniques for finding buy and sell signals on real-time charts are
the same as on daily charts, only their speed is much higher. If you use

138

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

weeklies and dailies to get in, use them also to get out. Once a live chart
gives an entry signal, avoid the temptation to exit using intraday data.
Do not forget that you entered that trade on the basis of weekly and
daily charts, expecting to hold for several days. Do not be distracted by
the intraday chop if you are trading swings that last several days.

DAY-TRADING
Day-trading means entering and exiting trades on the same day. Watching money flow from the screen into your account is extremely appealing. Surely we are smart enough to use modern technology to outrun
slow-moving folks who follow their stocks through the newspapers.
Every partial truth contains a dangerous lie. Day-trading can bring
profits to professionals, but it is also a common last stop for losers who
blow what little is left of their accounts. Day-trading offers advantages
and disadvantages, while placing extreme demands on its practitioners.
Day-trading offers one of the markets’ greatest challenges, but it
is amazing how little literature on it exists. There are several “daytrading for dummies” types of books, a few get-rich-quick jobs, but
not a single definitive volume on day-trading. Bad day-traders write
bad books and good day-traders are too action-oriented to sit down
to write.
A good day-trader is a street-smart person with fast reflexes. He is
quick, confident, and flexible. Successful day-traders are so focused on
the immediate results that they do not make good writers. I hope one
of them will rise to the challenge of writing a book, but in the meantime, here are a few notes, even though each of them deserves its own
chapter in a thick book on day-trading.
The late 1990s saw an explosion of interest in day-trading. Even
housewives and students were pulled in by the bull market and the
easy reach of the Internet. Brokers advertise for more people to come
in to day-trade, knowing full well most will bust out.
The advantages of day-trading include:
Trading opportunities are more frequent. If you can trade with daily
charts, you’ll see similar trades more often on intraday charts.
You can cut losses very quickly.
There is no overnight risk if a major piece of news hits your market
after the close.

TRADING

139

The disadvantages of day-trading include:
You miss longer-term swings and trends.
Profits are smaller because intraday swings are shorter.
Expenses are higher because of more frequent commissions and
slippage. Day-trading is a very expensive game, which is why vendors love it.
Day-trading makes several hard demands on its practitioners:
You must act instantly—if you stop to think, you’re dead. With daily
charts you have the luxury of time, but intraday charts demand
immediate action.
Day-trading chews up a great deal of time. You have to ask yourself
whether the hourly pay is better in longer-term trading.
Day-trading plays into people’s gambling tendencies. If there are any
gaps in your discipline, day-trading will find them fast.
There are three main groups of day-traders: floor traders, institutional traders, and private traders. They have different agendas and use
different tools. Imagine three persons coming to the beach—one goes
for a swim, another stretches in the sun, and the third goes jogging and
runs head on into a tree. Floor traders and institutional traders tend to
do better than private traders. Let us see what we can learn from them.

Lessons from Floor Traders
Floor traders stand in the pit, trading with each other, but more often
against the public. They scalp, spread, and take directional trades.
Scalping is based on the fact that there are two prices for any stock
or future. One is a bid—what the pros are offering to pay. The other
is an ask—what the pros are willing to sell for. You may bid below the
market, but as a friend said, “You can’t excite the market with a flaccid bid.” When in a hurry, you buy at the ask and pay what sellers
demand. If you want to sell, you may place a limit order above the
market or “hit the bid” and accept what buyers are willing to pay.
For example, the last trade in gold was at 308.30, but now it is
quoted as 308.20 bid, 308.40 ask. This means there are willing buyers
at 308.20, while sellers are asking for 308.40. When a market order to
buy comes into the pit, a floor trader goes short by selling at 308.40.
The outsider has paid the ask price, and the floor trader is now short

140

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

and needs to buy. When a market order to sell comes to the floor, he
buys at 308.20, and pockets 20 cents profit. Floor traders pay no commissions, only clearing costs, and can afford to trade even for single
ticks. They stand on their feet all day, yelling to all passersby that they
want to buy a tick below the market and sell a tick above. It is the
highest paid form of manual labor.
This is a simplified example. The reality is less orderly, as floor
traders try to widen the spread and make more than one or two ticks.
They compete with one another, shouting, jumping, and getting into
each other’s faces. It helps to be tall and muscular and have a big
voice. You get stabbed with pencils and splattered with saliva. There
is a story about a floor trader who died of a heart attack on the floor
but remained upright, squeezed in by the crowd.
A floor trader can get stuck if he buys a tick below the market but
the market falls by two ticks, and puts him underwater. Half of all floor
traders disappear in their first year. One of the Chicago exchanges puts
red circular badges on the chest of new traders, making them look like
shooting targets. Lest you start feeling sorry for floor traders, keep in
mind that many of them make a very good living and some make a
great deal of money from hitting you for a tick or more on every trade.
Before electronic trading became a serious threat, seats on some exchanges sold for a million dollars.
Floor traders also get involved in spreading—buying and selling
related markets when their relationships get out of line. Spread traders
tend to be more cautious and better capitalized than scalpers. Finally,
some of the wealthiest floor traders get involved in directional trading.
They put on trades that last days or weeks, closer to the timeframe of
public traders.
What lessons can we learn from the floor? If you are a position trader,
you should use limit orders whenever possible. Buy and sell at specified prices, and don’t let the floor scalp you. Put those fellows on a diet.
Another lesson is to stay away from scalping. When a crowd of athletic
young men starts fighting for ticks, jumping, salivating, and screaming,
you have no business reaching into that crowd to grab a few ticks for
yourself because they’ll take off your fingers. If you day-trade away
from the floor, forget about scalping. Look for the longer-term daytrades, where the competition tapers off a bit. Go to the middle ground
between scalpers who chase ticks and position traders with their
end-of-the-day charts. Try to find one or two trades a day, longer than
scalping but shorter than position trades.

TRADING

141

