
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

GOOD RECORD-KEEPING

143

■■Rating Yourself
0–3 correct: poor.
Good record-keeping is at the heart of trading success. Please reread the relevant
chapters, and retake the test before going any further.
4–6 correct: fairly good.
Good record-keeping is directly linked to better trading. It is a fairly simple but essential skill—don’t settle for a “fairly good” rating. Review your answers to the questions you missed, reread the relevant chapters, and retake this test a few days later.
7–9 correct: excellent.
You have a working knowledge of record-keeping. Please be sure to implement it—
start keeping a trading diary. It’ll repay your efforts and serve you well for years
ahead.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

Afterword

N

ow that you have tested your knowledge of trading by using this book, you’re
better prepared for the biggest test of all—trading in the markets. Financial
trading is a never-ending test of your ability to think straight under stress, make intelligent and unemotional decisions, and stay in control of the money in your account.
This book has given you several rating scales for measuring your skills; it has
provided a reading list and has allowed you to retake the tests that you failed at first.
The main rating scale of your market performance will be the slope of your equity
curve. The best curves show a steady growth of an account, with small drawdowns.
You need to keep track of your equity and stop trading for the rest of the month if it
drops more than 6 percent from the end-point of the preceding month.
Be sure to keep a diary of your trades, including not only dates, tickers, and sizes
but also charts and your personal comments. This will help you learn from your experiences and improve your performance.
I keep all my records in a Trade Journal at SpikeTrade.com, whose format has
been sharpened and polished over the years. Even if you want to design your own
record-keeping system, take a good look at the Trade Journal to see how a good system should look and work.
Keep quiet about your trades while they are open. Talking about open positions is
dangerous because it puts your ego on the line. Once a trade is closed out, you can
benefit from the opinions of friends you respect.

145

146

AFTERWORD

The fact that you invested the time and energy in studying and taking the tests in
this book shows that you are serious about trading. Continue to study the markets,
keep your cool, and focus on growing your account equity with minimal drawdowns.
I wish you success in fulfilling your dream—trading for a living.
Dr. Alexander Elder
NewYork–Vermont, 2014.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

Sources

T

his Study Guide is based on the author’s book The New Trading for a Living (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2014). In addition, the following books contain
useful information for a deeper understanding of these questions and answers:
Belveal, L. Dee, Charting Commodity Market Price Behavior (1969) (Homewood, IL:
Business One Irwin, 1985).
Douglas, Mark, The Disciplined Trader (New York: New York Institute of Finance,
1990).
Edwards, Robert D., and John Magee, Technical Analysis of Stock Trends (1948) (NewYork:
New York Institute of Finance, 1992).
Elder, Alexander & Kerry Lovvorn, The New High–New Low Index (Alabama:
SpikeTrade, 2012).
Kaufman, Perry, Trading Systems and Methods (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
2013).
LeBon, Gustave, The Crowd (1897) (Atlanta, GA: Cherokee Publishing, 1982).
Lefevre, Edwin, Reminiscences of a Stock Operator (1923) (Greenville, SC: Traders
Press, 1985).
Mackay, Charles, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds (1841)
(New York: Crown Publishers, 1980).
Murphy, John J., Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets (New York: New York
Institute of Finance, 1999).
147

148

SOURCES

Neill, Humphrey B., The Art of Contrary Thinking (1954) (Caldwell, ID: Caxton
Printers, 1985).
Pring, Martin J., Technical Analysis Explained, 5th edition (New York: McGraw-Hill,
2013).
Vince, Ralph, Portfolio Management Formulas (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 1990).

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

About the Author

A

lexander Elder, MD, is a professional trader and teacher of traders. He is the
author of several best-sellers, considered modern classics among traders. He
has also written books about Russia and New Zealand.
Dr. Elder was born in Leningrad and grew up in Estonia, where he entered medical school at the age of 16. At 23, while working as a ship’s doctor, he jumped a
Soviet ship in Africa and received political asylum in the United States. He worked as
a psychiatrist in New York City and taught at Columbia University. His experience
as a psychiatrist provided him with unique insight into the psychology of trading.
Dr. Elder is an active trader, but he continues to teach and is a sought-after speaker at conferences in the United States and abroad. Dr. Elder is the originator of Traders’ Camps—week-long classes for traders. He is the founder of SpikeTrade group,
a community of traders whose members share their best stock picks each week in
competition for prizes.
Dr. Elder’s websites are www.elder.com and www.spiketrade.com.

149

WILEY END USER LICENSE
AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook
EULA.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

