
Delta Divergence
Let’s take a closer look at what this thing is actually doing and how it works. The indicator looks for a current low or a new tick low and calculates whether the buyers
are more aggressive than the sellers. If they are, then that gives you the edge when you’re trying to buy lows. I don’t know if you have ever tried to catch a falling
knife, but it’s no fun, to say the least.

398

Figure 20.14

1. In Figure 20.14, is a current low or a new low being made? Yes.
2. Is the indicator telling you that buyers are aggressive? Yes. Whenever the indicator spikes higher with a blue bar like at point 2, it indicates that buyers are being
aggressive. Special note: The indicator is blue, not black, in real life. The publishers make you use black-and-white in all the charts.
1. In Figure 20.15, is a current high or a new high being made? Yes.
2. Is the indicator telling you that sellers are aggressive? Yes. Whenever the indicator spikes lower with a purple bar, it indicates that sellers are aggressive. Special note:
The indicator is purple, not black, in real life. The publishers make you use black-and-white in all the charts.

Darvas: How to Make 2 Million Dollars in the Stock Market
This is the strategy made famous by the book, How I Made 2 Million Dollars in the Stock Market, by Nicolas Darvas. His stair-stepping strategy, the Darvas Box
Trading M ethod, is discussed here with a modern twist.

399

Figure 20.15

400

Figure 20.16

1. Figure 20.16 shows a price break below the Darvas box, which means to get short.
2. Place a stop at or above the top of the box.
3. Calculate the distance or height of the box.
4. Use the height of the box as your target.

Figure 20.17

1. Figure 20.17 shows a price break above the Darvas box, which means get long.
2. Place a stop at or below the bottom of the box.
3. Calculate the distance or height of the box.
4. Use the height of the box as your target.
That’s a wrap for me. I hope you enjoyed it, and I hope you get a ton of value from it. Remember, the best way to learn how to trade is to trade. Good luck on your
journey, and I really hope this helps. Never ever, ever quit, and make the commitment to being a lifetime learner who is always in pursuit of excellence. For updates for
my setups, you can visit www.tradethemarkets.com/gold, where I’ve placed a free video for you.
401

21
Our Live Trading Room and
Streaming Real Time Analysis
It’s All About the Timing
One of our favorite things we like to do at www.tradethemarkets.com is run a live Internet-based virtual trading room. This is where a group of us takes turns
throughout the day and week sharing our charts and our execution platforms … live. There is no “genius in hindsight” trading here. It’s a chance for people to see how
a group of trading room moderators does under live market conditions, trading their real accounts. Why do this? Why subject ourselves to the scrutiny? The badgering?
Well, if you think trading in private is fun, trading on a stage gets even more intense. Why waste precious time berating yourself for making a mistake when hundreds
of people can do it for you?
I’ve already discussed the use of “anchor charts” as a significant way to filter out the weak setups. This statement should not be taken lightly. As full-time
professional traders one of our greatest trading tools includes using the power of multitime-frame analysis (M TFA) to significantly increase our probabilities for
success. In our day-trading room, in addition to the TTM squeeze, TTM wave, TTM trend, pivots, gaps, and market internals, two important tools in our day-trading
arsenal are the TTM momentum and TTM trigger, which were introduced into our room by Rob Hoffman. As a trader, no two days and no two trades are ever alike,
and the market is always there to remind us not to get too comfortable, no matter how long we have been doing this for a living. This is why it’s key to have adaptive
tools at your disposal to handle today’s ever-changing market conditions.
The M TFA concept is fairly straightforward. We’re looking for alignment of buy- and sell-side opportunities on not only the time frame we’re looking to trade, but
also the longer time frames. We want to identify areas of agreement between larger players moving bigger positions over hours or days and generally smaller traders
moving in and out quickly on shorter time frames. The more in alignment we are with institutional money flows, the more successful we are likely to be. For interval
charts, we typically use 5-, 15-, 30-, and 60-minute charts, as well as a daily chart, for intraday and overnight short-term trading analysis. We also use various tick
charts, such as the 987 tick chart, for intraday analysis.

Let’s Dig into the Setups
There are many ways a trader can utilize the TTM momentum and TTM trigger. For the sake of space, I’ll discuss two in this chapter and then provide a link to a free
video at the end of this chapter where you can watch the remaining setups and get a deeper exploration of this versatile tool set as well as other setups we use in the
live trading room. The primary setup we’re looking for with the TTM momentum and TTM trigger indicators are to have them fire off in the same direction on any
individual chart that we’re looking to trade off of. To significantly increase our probability of success, we’ll want to have the next higher time frames firing off in the
same direction as well.

Getting Familiar with the TTM Momentum and TTM Trigger
The TTM momentum can be found as two bars (slow and fast) at the top and the bottom of the price chart, and the TTM trigger is found as a histogram down below
price. See Figure 21.1.

402

403

Figure 21.1

1. The slow sell momentum bar can be found at the very top of the price section of the chart.
2. The fast sell momentum bar can be found toward the top of the price section of the chart at point 2, right below the slow sell momentum bar.
3. The fast buy momentum bar can be found toward the bottom of the price section of the chart, at point 3.
4. The slow buy momentum bar can be found at the very bottom of the price section of the chart at point 4, right below the fast buy momentum bar.
5. The buy-side trigger appears as vertical bars above the center line of the histogram below the price chart, as seen at point 5.
6. The sell-side trigger appears as vertical bars below the center line of the histogram below the price chart. This takes place at point 6, turning a buy-side trigger into a
sell-side trigger.

These Are the TTM Momentum and TTM Trigger “Crossover” Play Trading Rules for Sells/Shorts on Single-Chart
Analysis (Buys Are Reversed)
1. For all futures markets, this is set up as a 24-hour time chart (equity and ETF charts use regular trading hours).
2. The slow sell momentum bar should be firing off sell signals, and the TTM trigger should be crossing over from the buy side to the sell side.
3. Entry takes place at the close of the bar where the TTM trigger closed below the zero line.
4. Initial stop losses are currently set to those outlined in Chapter 10. However, make sure to assess the current volatility and average true range of the instrument
you’re trading. For instance, as of this writing, several instruments are experiencing 100 to 200 percent increases in their average true ranges. Therefore, using stops
associated with “normal” market conditions will lead to “death by a thousand cuts” in more volatile environments. When in doubt, cut position size in half and
double your stop. This way you are risking the same amount of money while also giving your setup a chance to survive the normal back and forth price action.
5. We prefer profit targets set to exit on a close back above the 13-period simple moving average (SM A); another favorite for this is a trailing stop.

Mini-Sized S&P—December 2011 Contract, September 13, 2011
1. The slow sell momentum bar has kicked in (see Figure 21.2).
2. The TTM trigger crosses over to the sell side.
3. Entry takes place at the close of the bar at 1161.75.
4. Exit takes place at the close of the first bar above the 13-period SM A at 1153.25.

Mini-Sized Russell—December 2011 Contract, September 23, 2011
1. The slow sell momentum bar has kicked in (see Figure 21.3).
2. The TTM trigger crosses over to the sell side.
3. Entry takes place at the close of the bar at 644.80.
4. Exit takes place at the close of the first bar above the 13-period SM A at 632.60.

404

405

Figure 21.2

406

407

Figure 21.3

Mini-Sized Dow—September 2011 Contract, August 4, 2011
1. The slow sell momentum bar has kicked in (see Figure 21.4).
2. The TTM trigger crosses over to the sell side.
3. Entry takes place at the close of the bar at 11,761.

408

409

Figure 21.4

4. The trade was almost stopped out at 11,733, but it continues until it closes fully above the 13-period SM A.
5. Exit takes place at the close of the first bar above the 13-period SM A at 11,354.

These Are the TTM Momentum and TTM Trigger “Crossover” Play Trading Rules for Buys/Longs using Multi-TimeFrame Analysis (Sells Are Reversed)
1. For all futures markets, this is set up as a 24-hour time chart (equity and ETF charts use regular trading hours).
2. On the time frame you’re looking to trade, the slow buy momentum bar should be firing off buy signals, and the TTM trigger should be crossing over from the sell
side to the buy side.
3. In the background, for the next two higher time frames you monitor, the TTM triggers should both be showing buy-side signals. Note: if the slow buy momentum
bar is also appearing, that strengthens the probability of success for the trade.
4. Entry takes place at the close of the bar where the TTM trigger closes above the zero line.
5. Initial stop losses are currently set to those outlined in Chapter 10. However, see the earlier note about using the ATR.

410

411

Figure 21.5

6. We prefer profit targets set to exit on either a close back below the 13-period SM A or a trailing stop.

Mini-Sized S&P—December 2011 Contract, September 26, 2011
1. The slow buy momentum bar has kicked in on the chart we’re looking to trade in the example (five minutes; see Figure 21.5).
2. The TTM trigger crosses over to the buy side.
3. The 15-minute and 30-minute chart TTM triggers are rising, as shown at point 3 on these charts.
4. Entry takes place at the close of the bar at 1143.00.
5. Exit takes place at the close of the first bar below the 13-period SM A at 1157.50.

Mini-Sized Russell—September 2011 Contract, August 23, 2011
1. The slow buy momentum bar has kicked in on the chart we’re looking to trade in the example (five minutes; see Figure 21.6).

412

413

Figure 21.6

2. The TTM trigger crosses over to the buy side.
3. The 15-minute and 30-minute chart TTM triggers are rising, as shown at point 3 on these charts.
4. Entry takes place at the close of the bar at 660.10.
5. Exit takes place at the close of the first bar below the 13-period SM A (at 671.00) at 670.90, so 1 tick lower.

Mini-Sized Dow—September 2011 Contract, August 15, 2011
1. The slow buy momentum bar has kicked in on the chart we’re looking to trade in the example (five minutes; see Figure 21.7).
2. The TTM trigger crosses over to the buy side.
3. The 15-minute and 30-minute chart TTM triggers are rising, as shown at point 3 on these charts
4. Entry takes place at the close of the bar at 11,311.

414

415

Figure 21.7

5. Exit takes place at the close of the first bar below the 13-period SM A at 11,371.

These Are the TTM Momentum and TTM Trigger “Trigger-Reversal” Play Trading Rules for Sells/Shorts on SingleChart Analysis (Buys Are Reversed)
1. For all futures markets, this is set up as a 24-hour time chart (equity and ETF charts use regular trading hours).
2. The slow sell momentum bar should be firing off sell signals, and the TTM trigger should be reversing from a rising buy-side trigger to a falling buy-side trigger.
3. Entry takes place at the close of the bar where the TTM trigger closed lower than the previous bar and where the slow sell momentum bar has appeared.
4. Initial stop losses are currently set to those outlined in Chapter 10. However, see the previous note about using the ATR.
5. We prefer profit targets set to exit on either a close back above the 13-period SM A or a trailing stop.

Mini-Sized S&P—September 2011 Contract, August 10, 2011
1. The slow sell momentum bar is firing off sell signals (see Figure 21.8).

416

417

Figure 21.8

2. The TTM trigger is reversing from a rising buy-side trigger to a falling buy-side trigger.
3. Entry takes place at 1163.50 with the close of the bar where the TTM trigger closed lower than the previous bar and where the slow sell momentum bar has
appeared.
4. Exit takes place at the close of the first bar above the 13-period SM A at 1135.75.

Mini-Sized Russell—December 2011 Contract, September 20, 2011
1. The slow sell momentum bar is firing off sell signals (see Figure 21.9).
2. The TTM trigger is reversing from a rising buy-side trigger to a falling buy-side trigger.
3. Entry takes place at 701.40 with the close of the bar where the TTM trigger closed lower than the previous bar and where the slow sell momentum bar has
appeared.
4. Exit takes place at the close of the first bar above the 13-period SM A at 687.10.

Mini-Sized Dow—September 2011 Contract, August 19, 2011
1. The slow sell momentum bar is firing off sell signals (see Figure 21.10).
2. The TTM trigger is reversing from a rising buy-side trigger to a falling buy-side trigger.
3. Entry takes place at 10,882 with the close of the bar where the TTM trigger closed lower than the previous bar and where the slow sell momentum bar has
appeared.
4. Exit takes place at the close of the first bar above the 13-period SM A at 10,780.

418

419

Figure 21.9

420

421

Figure 21.10

These Are the TTM Momentum and TTM Trigger “Trigger-Reversal” Play Trading Rules for Buys/Longs Using MultiTime-Frame Analysis (Sells Are Reversed)
1. For all futures markets, this is set up as a 24-hour time chart (equity and ETF charts use regular trading hours).

422

423

Figure 21.11

2. On the time frame you’re looking to trade, the slow buy momentum bar should be firing off buy signals, and the TTM trigger should be reversing from a falling sellside trigger to a rising sell-side trigger.
3. In the background, for the next two higher time frames you monitor, either both the TTM triggers should be firing off buy signals or the sell-side trigger should be
rising toward the center line.
4. Entry takes place at the close of the bar where the TTM trigger closed higher than the previous bar and where the slow buy momentum bar has appeared.
5. Initial stop losses are currently set to those outlined in Chapter 10. However, see the previous note about using the ATR.
6. We prefer profit targets set to exit on a close back below the 13-period SM A; another favorite for this is a trailing stop.

Mini-Sized S&P—September 2011 Contract, August 8, 2011
1. The slow buy momentum bar is firing off buy signals on the five-minute chart we’re looking to trade (see Figure 21.11).

424

425

Figure 21.12

2. The TTM trigger is reversing from a falling sell-side trigger to a rising sell-side trigger on the five-minute chart.
3. The 15-minute and 30-minute chart TTM triggers are both rising bar over bar higher toward the centerline from the sell side, as shown at point 3 on these charts.
4. Entry takes place at 1094.75 with the close of the bar where the TTM trigger closed higher than the previous bar and where the slow buy momentum bar has
appeared.
5. Exit takes place at the close of the first bar below the 13-period SM A at 1129.75.

Mini-Sized Russell—September 2011 Contract, September 12, 2011
1. The slow buy momentum bar is firing off buy signals on the five-minute chart we’re looking to trade (see Figure 21.12).
2. The TTM trigger is reversing from a falling sell-side trigger to a rising buy-side trigger on the five-minute chart.

426

427

Figure 21.13

3. The 15-minute and 30-minute chart TTM triggers are already above the buy-side centerline and rising from the sell side, respectively, as shown at point 3 on these
charts.
4. Entry takes place at 667.60 with the close of the bar where the TTM trigger closed higher than the previous bar and where the slow buy momentum bar has
appeared.
5. Exit takes place at the close of the first bar below the 13-period SM A at 678.00.

Mini-Sized Dow—September 2011 Contract, August 8, 2011
1. The slow buy momentum bar is firing off buy signals on the five-minute chart we’re looking to trade (see Figure 21.13).
2. The TTM trigger is reversing from a falling sell-side trigger to a rising sell-side trigger on the five-minute chart.
3. The 15-minute and 30-minute chart TTM triggers are both rising bar over bar higher toward the centerline from the sell side, as shown at point 3 on these charts.
4. Entry takes place at 10,571 with the close of the bar where the TTM trigger closed higher than the previous bar and where the slow buy momentum bar has
appeared.
5. Exit takes place at the close of the first bar below the 13-period SM A at 10,874.

Strategies for Those Who Can’t Trade Full-Time
In the current economy, it can be tough to find a great job with a great boss, a quick commute, and a salary that makes us happy. This is one of the reasons that many
budding traders want to enter trading. But to achieve a sufficient level of proficiency to do this full time takes time and effort. We personally know what it’s like to
have first and even second careers ahead of trading, but with trading and independence being our primary dream and goal. This is one of the reasons we’ve made our
Live Trading Room available through various portable media, such as iPads and iPhones: to allow you to take the room on the road and to work with you so that you
can learn while you earn at your other career. In the meantime, until you can make the full transition to professional trader status, one option that can be available to
you in your off-hours is swing trading. The good news is that all of the TTM momentum and TTM trigger concepts just covered can be very effective for swing
trades. The only difference is that for swing trading, we’re focusing on daily and weekly charts for our analysis. See the following examples.

PCLN, July 12, 2010
1. The slow buy momentum bar is firing off buy signals on the daily chart we’re looking to trade (see Figure 21.14).
2. The TTM trigger is reversing from a falling sell-side trigger to a rising sell-side trigger on the daily chart.
3. The weekly TTM trigger is already on the buy side, as shown at point 3.
4. Since this is a daily chart, entry takes place at 207.10 with the open of the next bar after the TTM trigger closes higher than the previous bar and where the slow buy
momentum bar has appeared.
5. Exit takes place at the close of the first bar below the 13-period SM A at 291.80.

AAPL, June 29, 2011
1. The slow buy momentum bar is firing off buy signals on the daily chart we’re looking to trade (see Figure 21.15).
2. The TTM trigger is reversing from a falling sell-side trigger to a rising sell-side trigger on the daily chart.
3. The weekly TTM trigger is already on the buy side, as shown at point 3.

428

429

Figure 21.14

4. Since this is a daily chart, entry takes place at 334.70 with the open of the next bar after the TTM trigger closes higher than the previous bar and where the slow buy
momentum bar has appeared.
5. Exit takes place at the close of the first bar below the 13-period SM A at 377.37.

Summing Up the Trades
The TTM momentum/trigger setup is designed to detect and validate a trend as early as possible and to keep traders on the right side of the market for the primary
piece of the trend and pullbacks within the trend. It was not designed to be a more risky top-catching and bottom-catching tool. It was developed many years ago, and
it has stood the test of time through many market cycles.
We have set up a free video at www.tradethemarkets.com/tradingroom that discusses additional setups utilized with these indicators as well as examples of the
types of trades taken in our live trading room.

430

431

Figure 21.15

432

22
Propulsion Plays—
Swing Plays Using Stocks,
Single-Stock Futures, and
Stock Options
Setting Up for the Bigger Moves in Individual Stocks
To me, some of the greatest risk takers on Wall Street are long-term investors. They will stubbornly hold on to a stock that they bought three years ago because they
have a “long-term view.” It doesn’t matter that the company is beating off its creditors with a lead pipe. It doesn’t matter that the stock is down more than 80 percent
from the entry price. It doesn’t even matter if the CFO was recently seen sharing an 8 × 8 cell with M artha Stewart. What matters is that, come hell or high water, they
have blind faith that if they step back and take the long-term view, all will be well in the end. All’s well that ends well, right? Of course. Unfortunately, this ain’t
Shakespeare’s play; this is Wall Street.
This came to me in glaring full color in early 2000. First, there was the Super Bowl. I don’t even remember who played in that game, but I do remember the 18
commercials that played advertising various dot-com companies that were blowing their whole annual marketing wad on this one 30-second spot. I also remember that
this was the time the first ever “day-trading expo” took place in southern California. Finally, I remember my refrigerator breaking down. It wasn’t the actual breaking
down that was significant, but the man I called out of the Yellow Pages who came to fix it for me was. The job took him exactly 84 minutes. The first 12 minutes were
spent fixing the refrigerator. The rest of the time he spent preaching to me about his favorite stocks in the Nasdaq and why Cisco was worth $500 a share. I tried to
stop him halfway through his lecture to let him know that a fleck of saliva was hanging off his chin, but he wouldn’t let up. As he preached the gospel of the Internet, I
realized that there was so much excitement in this current market that it really didn’t matter how far down it went when the crash finally came—people were now
believers, and they would hold on until they got their margin call. By the time he left, I started looking at my charts for any breaks of the low of the high day. There
weren’t any that day, but a month later there were plenty.
I do focus some of my efforts on finding newer companies that have the potential to make a big splash with a new product. I look at Investor ’s Business Daily to
find these candidates. It’s the new companies that have the potential for big gains. There are many long-term trend-following opportunities in the markets, on both the
long and the short side. However, finding the next M icrosoft is not my trading niche. If I do find it, great, but in the meantime, I’m going to keep looking for setups.
Therefore, most of my “long-term” efforts in the stock market involve swing trading, and one of my favorite setups is what I call propulsion plays. This is a
systematic approach to getting positioned in stocks over a few days to a few weeks. Some 70 percent of the time, individual stocks spend their days backing and filling
in a tight range, building up steam for their next major move. This approach looks for stocks that are done with their “resting period” and are getting ready to spurt
higher (or lower) once again.
The idea is to already be in the stock when it makes a push higher (for longs) or lower (for shorts), instead of trying to chase it intraday. The reason I like to do this
is that there are many times in the market when very few intraday trading opportunities in the stock indexes set up. Some of the sectors are up and some are down,
resulting in a very choppy and quiet overall market. However, during these times, there are always going to be individual stocks that are making a move. When I am
positioned in these stocks over the course of a few days to a few weeks, I don’t feel forced to get into intraday trades in the stock index futures when nothing is really
setting up. This is because I already have positions on that are set up to take advantage of the next “mini-move.”
For this setup, I’m focusing mostly on individual stocks. However, on individual stocks that also trade single-stock futures (SSFs) and stock options, I will consider
plays in those instruments as well. Because SSFs are new and because most people play options incorrectly, I’m going to spend a little time reviewing how they work
and how I use them. Let’s review.
