
1

c01.indd 1

11/2/07 12:13:50 PM

2

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

marathon blanket, T-shirt, goody bag, and sore legs that won’t be
back to normal for at least two weeks.
Why is it that the same person who wouldn’t dream of running a
marathon without a complete plan will manage their finances without so much as a thought about how they’ll achieve their objectives?
Take it a step further—many of these same people run through their
investments without even defining their objectives! The reason we
open this book with a discussion of a trading plan is that it will set the
foundation for everything we do. One of the fatal flaws of trading is
that it lets us enter the game without a trading plan. Worse, we may
even be successful for a time.
It is not at all uncommon for a new trader to place a trade and
make a profit. The new trader is especially careful to analyze the
trade prior to opening the position. Then they step through the trade
with the care that one takes when treading new territory. Before they
know it, the trade is profitable and they close the position with a net
gain. They start thinking, “Hey, this is easier than I thought!” and
they move to the next trade. Before long, they’re taking positions with
more confidence and the assumed risk increases with each trade.
This same trader may have a stretch of profitable trading but then
falls into a losing pattern. Or they experience “The Trade”; the single trade that cures them of any remaining vestige of confidence as
it falls below every support and drains their account into a maintenance call. The problem is that this trader may not even realize that
they have fallen into a period of net losses or, if they do recognize
it, they don’t understand the reasons for their change in fortune. As
a last resort, they’ll change their trading style; opening exceptionally large positions to try to exact revenge on the market, trading
options without proper training or becoming a long-term investor by
holding on to positions that were originally meant to be short-term
trades. All of this is the result of not having a trading plan and holding yourself accountable to the objectives that you’re trading toward.
In this chapter, we’ll discuss in detail some of the key components of
a trading plan and then conclude with a trading plan checklist.

Trading Is No Longer a Team Sport
Retail trading really came into its heyday in the mid-1990s with the
explosive growth of day trading. In 1997, two guys from Houston,
Chris Block and Jeff Burke, made the cover of Inc. magazine with the

c01.indd 2

11/2/07 12:13:50 PM

Blueprint for Success

3

teaser headline “Bad Boys of Wall Street.” The article started with this
opening line: Their aim: move fast, make money, have fun. Who knew they
would threaten a whole industry in the process? With talk about fast cars, new
offices, and armies of traders who were practically siphoning money
from the market in mere seconds, the phenomenon of retail day trading was launched. One example refers to Jeff Burke’s biggest day in
the market when he made $50,000. $50,000 in one day! People were
flocking to the Block Trading headquarters in Houston and dropping
$25,000 just for the right to lock down a city for opening a franchise
at some point in the future. Block Trading is no longer around, but
there are some lessons to be learned from those early days.
First of all, in the mid-1990s the state of technology required
that people find a retail trading office to trade. Sure, there were
some choices that allowed for trading remotely, but the quality
of information and trade execution wasn’t nearly as high as what
was available in a trading office. These offices created an atmosphere of anticipation and played on the trader’s ego. They were
often dimly lit with the shades pulled over the windows. Multiple
television monitors constantly played CNBC and other networks
for immediate market commentary. Other monitors displayed realtime news feeds, which scrolled through headlines too fast to allow
for any analysis but served to let the traders know they were still
plugged into the action. Banks of trading computers sat side by
side, with traders coming and going throughout the day. It wasn’t
unusual to see a highly respected heart surgeon trading next to
a college dropout and the two of them speaking to each other as
colleagues. Occasionally, a trader would enter the room with one
of the subscription-based split pagers. These creative devices did
exactly what the name suggests. Whenever news hit the wires of a
company announcing a stock split, the pager would send an alert
with the information. For a time, the fortunate trader could take a
position before the news was fully digested by the market and then
sell into the crowd’s buying.
The technology also allowed traders on the floor to access Level 2
data. In addition to the National Best Bid and Offer (NBBO), with
Level 2 you could see all of the price and volume levels below the high
bid and above the low offer (see Figure 1.1). This was something
that most brokers hadn’t seen at that time. Finally, these traders often
traded before the market opened at 9:30 A.M. and traded well past the
market’s close at 4:00 P.M. Using the new kids on the technology block,

c01.indd 3

11/2/07 12:13:51 PM

4

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 1.1

Level 2 National Best Bid and Offer (NBBO)

electronic communication networks (ECNs), retail traders could buy
and sell to each other even when the rest of the market was closed.
Finally, these rooms were often separated from the lobby area by an
attentive gatekeeper, who let only the chosen traders through a door
that bore the sign, “ Trading Room—Traders Only.”
While these retail trading rooms had many faults that are outside
both the scope and objective of this book, there was one key benefit that they provided to the trader. An esprit de corps developed
between traders because they were trading day after day with the
same people. This camaraderie caused traders to help each other
through education and accountability. One of the common practices of day traders in these retail offices was to call out fills. Let’s say
several traders wanted to buy 1,000 shares each of Microsoft. The
first trader to get his buy order filled would call out the details of
the fill: which market maker filled his order, how many shares they
sold, and whether the order was filled on the bid or offer. All of this
information would be helpful to the other traders as they managed
their orders. For example, if a key market maker (often called the
Axe) filled the order very quickly on the bid, that told the other
traders that there may be heavy selling pressure and they could lower
their buy order or cancel it altogether in anticipation of a price drop.
The point to be made here is that the group of traders as a whole
had more information than individual traders alone.

c01.indd 4

11/2/07 12:13:51 PM

Blueprint for Success

5

The mechanics of a trade were also much easier to learn in the
retail trading rooms. There are seemingly endless details that a new
trader must learn about the trading software, types of trades, when
to place trades, position sizing, and so forth. In the isolation of one’s
own home office, finding the answers to these questions or learning
the nuances of the minor details can be difficult at best, impossible
at worst. However, in the retail trading offices, these issues were discussed throughout the day, and a new trader would very quickly pick
up the salient points of the game.
Besides the learning environment that trading floors offered,
the accountability that naturally resulted from trading elbow to
elbow was another significant benefit. If you took a position and
called out the fill as we described a moment ago, everyone around
you knew what you were trading. That meant they knew if you were
making money—or losing money! There was a peer pressure that
grew if you stayed in a losing position. Nobody likes to have to
admit that they’re losing money, so it was easier to close out a position for a small loss than to hold on to a loser and have to continually explain to your fellow traders why you thought this trade was
going to be different. In today’s trading environment, we trade with
almost total anonymity. Often, a trader’s own spouse isn’t aware of
the activity in the trading account. This situation makes it very easy
to rationalize bad trades in our heads and continue holding a bad
position.
To accommodate these deficiencies in the contemporary trading
environment, a trading plan needs to include both points: education and accountability. It’s imperative that the trader recognize that
while the market is generally simple to enter, there are many facets
of trading that require a sequential education plan. For example,
any new trader can step in and place a buy order, followed by a sell
order. But understanding how to properly analyze chart patterns
prior to entering the trade isn’t intuitive. Learning to read a chart is
very similar to learning a new language. Both require some formal
education followed by practice using the new language. The market
is also constantly changing, and the education plan should include
continuing education. In the past decade we’ve seen such changes as
decimalization of pricing, increasing interest in options trading, and
expanded capabilities of trading software platforms. If you hide your
head in the sand and fail to advance with the market and technology,
you will eventually be left at a disadvantage.

c01.indd 5

11/2/07 12:13:52 PM

6

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

When a trading plan is developed, it becomes the benchmark for
accountability. The plan will become the surrogate for the trader who
once sat by your side and knew if you were following your defined
strategy. Let’s assume that your plan is to be a day trader. By definition, a day trader opens the day and closes the day in cash. Long
or short positions are opened and closed during market hours, and
the price moves are measured in minutes or hours. Because your
plan includes a strategy for your time horizon, you’ll know when that
strategy is broken. We’ll take a look at an example of how this would
work. After analyzing the opening of the market, you see that the
stock price gapped down and dropped to support. You decide to buy
the stock on support based on the expectation that it will bounce off
support in the next hour and you’ll capture a profit from the quick
rally. After entering the position, the stock languishes on the support
line for the rest of the day. It neither bounces up to new highs nor
drops below support to new lows. At this point, you have a decision
to make. Based on your trading plan, you should exit the position
and close the day in cash. You could always reestablish the long position tomorrow if the stock is still holding on to support. However,
you decide to hold the position overnight by rationalizing that it
could gap up tomorrow in the same way it gapped down today and
you don’t want to miss the move. This type of decision is really based
on hope rather than any proper analysis. The worst-case scenario
occurs the next day when the stock gaps down below support. Having rationalized the first departure from the trading plan, you now
continue with reasons why the drop shouldn’t continue. Two weeks
later you find that you’re spending every moment in the market staring at this open position as the stock continues on its downward
course, searching for any semblance of support that you can hang
your hopes upon. How did you get here? Simple—you broke the
rules that you established in your trading plan. Even if the position
had not moved into a loss, it didn’t reach your objective (a bounce
off of support) in the time frame that your strategy requires. Most
traders find themselves in this situation because they don’t have a
trading plan, though, not because they ignored their trading plan.
The point here is that a trading plan will highlight for you the proper
course of action and help to hold you accountable to your decision.
Before we move on, we should take a closer look at the issue
of trading time horizons. When The Market Guys present at trading expos, we’ll often jokingly advise people to avoid becoming

c01.indd 6

11/2/07 12:13:52 PM

Blueprint for Success

7

investors because they’re bad traders. But the painful truth is that
many people have long-term positions in their portfolio that were
originally meant to be short-term trades. In fact, the U.S. Internal
Revenue Service recognizes “worthless stock” when a stock price has
dropped to the point that there is no reasonable hope of recovery.
Isn’t it ironic that the IRS will recognize the truth in a trade before
we will? Don’t raise your hand as you read this paragraph (especially
if you’re reading this on an airplane or sitting next to your wife at
an antiques auction), but how many of you still have Webvan Group
(see Figure 1.2) somewhere in your account? At what point should
you have recognized that maybe this stock wasn’t going to return to
its previous highs? At one time, this stock was a popular trading stock
among retail day traders. Many of these traders made good profits
over time on this stock, too. Somewhere along the way, though, the
position they bought didn’t behave the way it had in the past. For the
unfortunate trader who held the position in the hope that it would
recover, the stock never met their expectation. By the end of 2001,
the price had dropped below a penny and has rested comfortably
there ever since.
The reason we’re spending additional time on this point is that
it is one of the most common mistakes made by novice and experienced traders alike. As long as the position is open, there is hope
for recovery, however remote. Once the position is closed, we’ve
locked in our loss. There is a misleading belief that a loss isn’t a loss

Figure 1.2 Webvan (Ticker: WBVNQ) 1999–2001

c01.indd 7

11/2/07 12:13:52 PM

8

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

until the trade is closed. Nonsense! Don’t ever use this fool’s logic
on yourself. Whether a trade is open or closed, if the stock price is
lower now than when you bought it, you have a loss! One of the characteristics of trading options is that it forces you to admit your loss
by a predetermined date when the option expires. Stock traders can
fool themselves ad infinitum because a stock doesn’t expire unless
the company finally declares bankruptcy and reorganizes. Your trading plan should define your time horizon—whether it’s intraday,
short-term swing trading over one to two weeks, or position trading
over a number of months. Your analysis of the trade should be based
on that time horizon, and then you need to be diligent in holding yourself accountable to that plan. If you’ve opened a position
and found that the trade has started to exceed your time horizon,
close the trade and find a new position. You may not be losing
money in the stock itself, but if you’ve locked your cash into a nonperformer, you’re experiencing a loss of opportunity. Remember,
you could always place your cash into a certificate of deposit and get
a nominal interest return.

Beware the Siren Song of Gurus
We’d like to have a dollar for every time someone asked The Market
Guys about our opinion on the “ winning stock market system du
jour.” There are some common traits that may be found in the claims
of these systems:
• They’ll show you how to make money with unrealistically
low risk.
• The founder has “discovered” a secret to the market that somehow evaded millions of other traders.
• The system will teach you what only the professionals know
and don’t want you to know.
• Their disciples will march before a camera with claims of
having made thousands or millions in a relatively short time
period.
• They’ll tell you that you’re not making money because you’re
trading the wrong product—for example, currencies are more
profitable than stocks, gold is more profitable than mutual
funds, and so on.

c01.indd 8

11/2/07 12:13:52 PM

Blueprint for Success

9

We’ll assume that we’re not surprising you here with anything
that you haven’t already seen on late-night infomercials or pop-up
banners on your favorite search engine. One of the questions that
comes to our minds each time we see these is: Why do they always
include the caveat “Results Not Typical” when their followers are
onscreen making claims of riches? If the system really works, shouldn’t
the results be typical? Let’s be clear about the purpose of The Market
Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success—we’re not showing you anything
new or revolutionary. We especially don’t claim to hold a “secret” that
we’ll tell you for the right price. We’re offering this guide as a collection of best practices that are known to retail and professional traders alike. If you’ve reached this point in your reading with the belief
that by the end of this book you’ll have the secret to fast riches, then
please stop now and discard those thoughts. The markets reward the
patient and disciplined, not the greedy and careless.
Looking at this phenomenon from another angle, consider the
following credentials and decide if you would listen to this person as
a financial guru. Ben was diligent in attending to his financial plan.
At least once a week, he would review the numbers and make the
appropriate buy decisions. One thing about Ben, though, is that he
never sold. He had been working with the same strategy for years
and he stuck to his plan. As Ben would tell it, he didn’t get caught
up in complex investments. He never touched options, currencies,
or futures. He had a single objective and pursued it with unassuming patience. Just a few years ago, Ben had less than $100,000 cash.
Last year, Ben decided to retire at 52 years old with over $66 million
in his account. Again we’ll pose the question: Would you consider
this person as a role model for your financial planning? Take it a
step further. If you saw the previous biographical description under
a sales banner advertising “Ben’s Secrets to Wealth and Financial
Security,” a five-CD set along with accompanying workbooks for only
$99, would you drop the $99? Well, it would certainly make sense
until we give you the final piece of the profile puzzle. Ben Chason
had just won the annuitized $163 million Mega Millions jackpot, a
multistate lottery. The $66 million was his after-tax check from his
winning numbers. Interestingly, we also see lottery winners in the
markets. These are the people who, for example, had stock options
loaded into their employee retirement accounts during the 1990s’
tech boom and woke up to find seven- or eight-figure account equities. While we can admire them for their good fortune, we need to be

c01.indd 9

11/2/07 12:13:53 PM

10

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

careful about setting them on a pedestal as the model of mastering
the markets.

Chatter Box—AJ
While Rick and I are traveling around the world, it is not uncommon for
us to meet people who are excited about the opportunities in trading
the U.S. markets. If you are just starting out with your own trading plan,
be sure your excitement doesn’t get in the way of making good, sound
investment decisions. If you are at the basic levels of trading, everyone
you meet at the trade shows will look like an expert. Don’t be fooled by
the bells and whistles; simply check the resumes of those who claim to
be experts and you will have a better chance of avoiding the “noise.”
We will be talking more about this in the chapters that follow.

When you look at others who exhibit the outward appearance
of having mastered the markets, you’ll be tempted to trade what
they’re trading. Take a look to your left and you’ll see the gold trader
and decide that gold is where you need to be. So you load up on
gold stock, gold funds, gold futures, and rare coins. But then it hits
you that gold can drop in price, too. You then look to the right and
hear that options are the way to make consistent money. After all,
you’ve always heard that the most you can lose is the price you pay
for the option, right? Because you don’t understand how to trade
options, you still aren’t making money but at least you’re losing it
more slowly. It may take longer, but the strategy will still deplete your
account. It’s a bit like getting nibbled to death by a duck; it doesn’t
really hurt along the way but the end result is the same. Finally, you
decide that your real problem is that your analysis isn’t comprehensive enough. Having pored through all the trading magazines
and books you can find, you realize that you’re only using less than
5 percent of the possible technical indicators. If the Fibonacci
retracements, fans, and circles aren’t important, then why are they
discussed by the experienced traders? Surely, that’s the reason why
your trading isn’t profitable. You decide to purchase the complete
course on Elliott waves and get yourself to the point where you can
discuss Fibonacci as if you’d discovered the Golden Ratio yourself.

c01.indd 10

11/2/07 12:13:53 PM

Blueprint for Success

11

Now your pretrade analysis includes a combined convergence of
retracements, wave analysis, Bollinger Bands, and three stochastics.
But you’re still losing money.
Here’s where your trading plan comes into play. Your plan includes
a definition of what you plan to trade. If you’re going to trade stocks,
then ignore the calls to chase the riches of gold. If you want to trade
gold, fine—then develop a new plan. Don’t ignore your existing plan
because you stayed up too late in the hotel room and the only entertainment on TV was an infomercial for collectible coins. The Market
Guys are great believers in the power of options as a trading product. But if you don’t have a plan to learn how to trade them properly
and what your strategy looks like, then don’t touch them! Your plan
should also outline your trading objectives. If you’ve decided that your
goal is to beat the broad market performance by 10 percent, then you
should be working toward an 11 percent return when the Dow or S&P
500 is up 10 percent. That’s a reasonably conservative goal for a trader
who is approaching retirement age and can’t sustain large drops in his
account value. Now if you see a banner scrolling across your computer
screen with claims of 700 percent returns in the market, your response
should be to smile and move on. That’s not your goal, and you’re fooling yourself if you think that those kinds of returns don’t come with a
corresponding increase in risk.
