they would one day have much larger sums of money to distribute, their parents had decided to give them this
gift to train them in philanthropy. Within two years of Warren’s or Susie’s death, thirty, forty, fifty billion
dollars or more—depending on Berkshire’s stock price at the time—would sluice into the foundation, and the
law required that shortly thereafter the foundation begin giving away five percent each year. Buffett did not
believe in perpetual foundations that entrusted money to the whims of future generations of trustees. But
with only a couple of employees, the Buffett Foundation was woefully ill-equipped to ramp up fast enough to
give away a billion dollars a year.5 Warren had been giving this problem a lot of thought, and it occurred to
him that one way Susie could choose to deal with it was to turn some of the Buffett Foundation money over
to the Gates Foundation. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation had grown since its establishment in 2000 to
a multibillion-dollar philanthropy. Gates said that 4.2 billion people in the world, most of the earth’s
population, made less than $2 a day. Yet each of their lives was worth as much as any American’s. These
people lived in the here and now, not in some generation far in the future.
“Bill Gates is the most rational guy around in terms of his foundation. He and Melinda are saving more
lives in terms of dollars spent than anybody else. They’ve worked enormously hard on it. He thinks
extremely well. He reads thousands of pages a year on philanthropy and health care. You couldn’t have two
better people running things.
“They have done incredible work, they’ve thought it through, their values are right, their logic is right.”
Warren was still assuming that Susie ultimately would be the one to make these decisions, however.
“Susie gets all the money. And she is in total charge of everything. My will just gives it to her, and her will
just gives it to me.
“It’s crazy to try and write complicated instruments; you don’t need to do it. Now, she could give it all to
my kids’ foundations if she wants. She is not restricted. But Susie doesn’t care whether she has one share of
Berkshire or a hundred thousand shares of Berkshire.6 She will probably just put it all in the foundation.
Not a share needs to be sold. In the first year or two, while they were ramping up on other things, if they
just matched what the Gateses did and gave them two billion instead of one billion a year, that’d be
perfectly appropriate. Don’t get proprietary about it. I’m perfectly willing to let other people do all the
work at Berkshire. But they would hate that at the Buffett Foundation. It seems so lacking in imagination
and innovativeness. Even though it’s terribly logical.
“Now, that isn’t what people want to do. I mean, the normal human institution reacts enormously against
that. But that is not a crazy system. It’s like doubling your position on a stock.
“He’s got people in place. And if we gave some money to him, the last half of the money would be used as
intelligently as the first half. There would be very little falloff in utility of the last dollar versus the first
dollar. Giving money to other foundations, it’s just not what foundations like to do. But there’s nothing
wrong with copying good people.”
Coattailing by giving some of the money to the Gates Foundation while the Buffett Foundation was ramping
up to give away its tens of billions might be completely logical. What wasn’t completely logical, given the
current circumstances, was for Warren to assume that Susie would be the one making these decisions, rather
than himself or his daughter—and to operate under this scenario without a backup plan. Although maybe he
was starting to have the embryo of a backup plan.
Over the holidays, Susie grew despondent again about her radiation. She threatened to discontinue it. Buffett
went through another stretch of spending hours and hours convincing her that she had gone this far and it
didn’t make sense to stop. No matter what Susie decided, however, the radiation schedule would have two
interruptions—at Christmas and New Year’s. Warren steamed. “It bothers me that they take off for the
holidays as well as weekends. She’s had eight radiation treatments. It just doesn’t seem right. And the
radiologist acknowledged to me that dropping the schedule to four days a week is somewhat marginal.”
Susie was still not well enough to receive any new visitors. Neither of her sons had even seen their mother

since the surgery. But Howie, his wife, Devon, and their son, Howie B., finally joined Warren in San
Francisco for a couple of days. Howie, still a one-man chorus line of Rockettes when it came to energy, saw
Susie “just a touch.” But the family was still not allowing other people to visit.
“She’d just as soon conserve her strength as see anybody. Frankly, there’s a number of people that are just
dying to get at her. Some of them she’s a huge crutch for, and all they’ll do is drain her if they get close,
because she can’t stop being their resident psychiatrist or professor or whatever. She feels a little safer
when I’m there, but she knows that if she starts seeing other people, they’ll basically try to draw energy
from her. With me or with Little Sooz she doesn’t feel that way. But even with my sister or her best friend,
Bella, she can’t help but go back into the mode where she’s giving and they’re receiving.”
Susie Jr. had instructed everyone around her mother to keep things upbeat. There were things that her mother
was unaware of, that had to be kept from her, and which Susie Jr. monitored the fax machine to make sure
her mother didn’t see. Susie didn’t know that Larry Tisch had died of cancer or that Bill Ruane had called
Warren to say that he had been diagnosed with lung cancer.
Ruane was doing chemo at Sloan-Kettering, where Susie had gotten her second opinion. Warren got tears in
his eyes every time Ruane’s name was mentioned. The combination of this and Susie was too much. He had
some time ago abandoned the thousand-calorie-a-day diet.
“Susie’s weight has been quite stable for the past two weeks. We keep a chart of it. I eat a chocolate
sundae, she eats a little bit of the chocolate sundae. And since my diet is naturally fattening, it helps her.
I’m gaining weight, and she’s stayed stable. She’s in no danger of becoming anorexic.”
On New Year’s Eve, Nancy Munger was throwing Charlie a big eightieth-birthday party. Buffett flew down
to Los Angeles for the celebration. He desperately needed the distraction, though it obviously bothered him
that he would be attending the party alone, just as it had bothered him to show up at the Buffett Group
meeting alone.
He had ordered an oversize cardboard cutout of Benjamin Franklin for a stand-up routine satirizing Munger’s
fascination with Franklin. Buffett had to ship the cardboard cutout to California in advance. Although he
obsessed about whether it would arrive on time, it did, and he put on a classic performance, which included
his singing “What a Friend I Have in Charlie.”
Munger closed the festivities with a speech. He began by giving advice to the audience, in the latest iteration
of various commencement and other speeches he had given elsewhere. Charlie’s friends and relatives and
members of the Buffett Group all had copies of these speeches, now collected into a book, Poor Charlie’s
Almanack.7 Munger’s favorite construct was to invoke Carl Jacobi: “Invert, always invert.” Turn a situation
or problem upside down. Look at it backward. What’s in it for the other guy? What happens if all our plans
go wrong? Where don’t we want to go, and how do you get there? Instead of looking for success, make a list
of how to fail instead—through sloth, envy, resentment, self-pity, entitlement, all the mental habits of
self-defeat. Avoid these qualities and you will succeed. Tell me where I’m going to die, that is, so I don’t go
there.
Munger’s other favorite theorem accused every academic discipline—biology, physics, economics,
psychology, and so forth—of developing certain useful models, then applying them indiscriminately, wearing
blinders. He advocated a “multidisciplinary model approach” to avoid the proverbial “man with a hammer
syndrome”—the man who thinks everything is a nail. Munger collected models and laid them out as useful
tools for life. He had a devoted following who appreciated the way he sliced through the Gordian knot of
difficult problems, often by saying the unspeakable. They found his synthesis enlightening; some in this camp
felt that Munger’s genius was underrecognized because he was swallowed up in the showman Buffett’s
shadow. In recent years, however, Munger had become a more visible advocate for his views. He was always
coming up with mind-boggling arcana as illustrations. Right now, he was fascinated with the lay magistrate
system of England as a model for properly incentivizing ethical behavior, and various aspects of that system
were invoked in his birthday speech. Munger wandered off on a brief detour to praise his wife for her many
wonderful qualities, then returned to giving advice to the audience about the models of life that led to success

and happiness. He seemed convinced, however, that he (and Buffett) now lived on some elevated plane. He
invoked his independence, and Buffett’s, as reasons for their success, but then said it would probably be
unwise for others—including his own children—to try to emulate the two of them.
Nancy Munger, who was standing next to Buffett, asked, “How do I get him to stop?”
Charlie started going into his windup. “In the end,” he said, “I’m like old Valiant-for-Truth in The Pilgrim’s
Progress, who said, ‘My sword I leave to him who can wear it.’” Good Lord, thought some of the Buffett
Group members.
Eventually Nancy went out onto the stage and gently led Charlie away.
Buffett went straight back from Charlie’s party to San Francisco to see Susie, who had just finished her
twelfth treatment. The radiation schedule drew out his protective instincts.
“Four and a half weeks left. Martin Luther King Day is in January. Those radiology technicians—oh,
believe me, they take every holiday there is. But, anyway, I would say so far so good. They’re saying that
this week is when it starts hitting her hard, but it hasn’t hit her hard yet. She drinks what she calls this
motor oil, and that’s protecting her throat.”
Nonetheless, Susie was spending most of her time in bed. “It’s just amazing how little she is up. She’s either
asleep, or getting ready to go to sleep, or getting up from being asleep, I would say seventeen or so hours
out of twenty-four. We make it a point, no matter what—we walk for six blocks or so every day. The rest of
the time, I just hold her, basically.”
The man who had always been on the receiving end was now learning to give. Rather than being taken care
of by his wife, he was taking care of her. Buffett, of course, had not become some other person. But by
acting out his values—loyalty, stewardship—he seemed, in his own way, to have incorporated some of the
lessons of Susie’s life into his own.

60
Frozen Coke
Omaha and Wilmington, Delaware • Spring 2004

Toward the end of her radiation, Susie’s mouth was so burned and dry that some days she could not eat or
drink. The doctors put her back on the feeding tube because her throat was choked with a thick, dry mucus.
She spent most of the time sleeping. But every day, she and her daughter or Kathleen walked a few blocks on
Sacramento Street. As spring stole over San Francisco, Susie stayed bundled in a coat, gloves, scarf, and
earmuffs to stay warm.
She hated to be alone. “Can’t you just sit on the couch and look at magazines while I’m awake?” she asked
Susie Jr. Then she scribbled, “WHT,” her father’s initials, on a piece of paper, a wry reference to the family
trait of becoming anxious when alone.
She was cared for by her nurses, Kathleen, her daughter, and John McCabe, her former tennis coach, who
after many years of looking after her once they had both moved to San Francisco, was well-schooled in
acting in a one-hundred-percent supportive role. Anyone else, however, was likely to trigger her “giving”
impulses and to drain her of energy.1 On the weekends, when Warren came, he sat with Susie in the TV room
watching old episodes of Frasier, or simply hung around in his bathrobe, reading the paper. Susie was

comfortable with him there; he made her feel secure—but decades of her “giving” and his receiving didn’t
disappear overnight. Sometimes Susie was so sick from the radiation that even Warren had to leave. But he
was doing his best to immerse himself in the day-to-day needs of his family in a way that he had never done
before. To give his daughter a break from endless days in Susie’s apartment, Warren would take her to
Johnny Rockets for a burger. The rest of the time he spent with Sharon.
He had even gotten involved in the minutiae of Susie’s radiation treatment, however. “Her taste buds aren’t
gone yet. I talked to the radiation oncologist, and it’s conceivable that some of the tongue won’t get hit by
what they’re doing, which could presumably mean a fair number of taste buds would stick around.”
Warren Buffett—the man who ducked the subject of a common cold and used terms like “not feeling up to
par” as euphemisms for illness; the man who changed the subject uneasily whenever anyone spoke of
physical complaints and who professed ignorance of the most basic points of anatomy—was using terms like
“radiation oncologist” and doing medical homework for his wife.
But as he grew more optimistic about Susie’s recovery, he started to become more irritable and needy. The
business events of the year 2004 began to consume him, in between the trips he made back and forth to San
Francisco every weekend. Unlike the ascending journey to glory of 2003, this would be a very different kind
of year. Moreover, early in 2004 he was deprived of his regular source of support. Sharon Osberg had gone
on a lengthy trip to Antarctica with his sister Bertie. On a ship cutting through the ice, she was reachable only
by occasional e-mails. He filled the hours by scribbling away at his letter to shareholders, e-mailing it back
and forth to Carol Loomis, and by serving as teacher and unpaid father confessor to corporate America. He
had become the elder statesman of the business world. Buffett always said, Be long-term greedy, not
short-term greedy. People turned to him because they trusted his direct way of getting to the heart of things
and his sense of right and wrong. Although rich beyond even his own wildest dreams, he had passed up a lot
of opportunities to make more money or to make it faster. This had brought him power and respect of a
different sort. He was not feared like so many businessmen. He was admired.
Prominent people made the pilgrimage to Omaha or sought him out at events to ask for his influence and
help. Sports figures like Michael Jordan, LeBron James, Cal Ripken Jr., and Alex Rodriguez came for advice.
Bill Clinton stopped by for lunch to get advice on fund-raising for his new charity. Buffett was also pals with
Mike Bloomberg, got along with John McCain, and maintained a good relationship with the senior Bushes
and other Republicans like Chris Shays. He endorsed Senator John Kerry for president, but Kerry was not
The Candidate, and unlike the entertaining triumph of the Schwarzenegger campaign for governor of
California—Schwarzenegger most definitely was The Candidate—Buffett found himself associated with a
respected senator who had no charisma.
The less-than-electrifying Kerry campaign meant that Buffett focused far more on his business relationships
during 2004. CEOs like Jeffrey Immelt of General Electric, Anne Mulcahy of Xerox, and Jamie Dimon of JP
Morgan showed up in Omaha to pick his brain.2 The Internet-search firm Google was going public that
summer, and its cofounders, Sergey Brin and Larry Page, were stopping in to see him because they admired
his shareholder letters. The previous fall, after her indictment for lying to the government in connection with
allegations of insider trading—for which she was never charged—Martha Stewart and her CEO Sharon
Patrick had come out to Omaha to visit him. Buffett bought Stewart and Patrick a steak dinner, but couldn’t
solve Stewart’s legal problems.
The environment for prosecution of white-collar fraud was changing rapidly, partly because there was just so
much white-collar fraud to prosecute these days. New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer, who had
launched a merciless attack on corruption in business and on Wall Street, now led the SEC and the
Department of Justice in a three-legged race to see which agency could prosecute most zealously. The others
hopped along desperately trying to keep up with Spitzer’s pace; all their charges got bundled into one trial or
settlement in the end. Spitzer was diabolically inventive at using the new electronic tools of the Internet
—especially e-mail—as evidence, at harnessing an accommodating press as a weapon, and at wielding an
arcane New York statute, the Martin Act, that gave him virtually unlimited powers, checked only by his
personal—and virtually nonexistent—sense of prosecutorial discretion.

With these tools, he had forced two prominent CEOs to resign—Buffett’s business colleague Hank
Greenberg, who was now the former CEO of AIG, and his son, Jeffrey Greenberg, the former CEO of
insurance broker Marsh & McLennan. A pall of fear hung over corporate America; Spitzer was so successful
at execution-by-media that the bitter joke had become that he was saving the government the cost of
indictment and trial. Juries that formerly treated white-collar malefactors with deference were now routinely
sending them to prison like any other criminal; under new mandatory sentencing guidelines, judges were
imposing harsh sentences on them. Some of this mayhem was well-deserved. Greed, hubris, and lack of
enforcement had given many people in business the impression that the rules did not apply to them. Just as
stock options and the Internet bubble had engorged the senior echelons of business’s wallets at an
exponential speed, so had the backlash arrived in gargantuan proportions. Buffett—like most of corporate
America—had not fully adjusted to this new environment; his view of proportion was shaped by the earlier
era: defined by the careful prosecutorial calibrations of former SEC Enforcement Chief Stanley Sporkin and
U.S. Attorney Otto Obermaier; by the travails of Salomon, when even Paul Mozer, who nearly brought down
the whole financial system after Gutfreund failed to report his crime, had only served four months in prison.
His viewpoint would eventually be revised, however, by the outcome of events that had occurred at
Berkshire Hathaway itself.
Buffett usually arrived at the airport to pick up his guests personally. He took them on a nerve-racking ride to
the office (if, that is, they were not too dazzled by him to notice), spent a couple of hours listening to their
issues and throwing out ideas, then usually escorted them to Gorat’s and treated them to a T-bone and
hash-brown meal. He told them to be plainspoken with shareholders in annual reports, to pay employees in
alignment with shareholders, not to run their business according to the whims of Wall Street analysts, to deal
with problems forthrightly, not to engage in accounting shenanigans, and to choose good pension-plan
advisers. Sometimes people asked how to manage their own money, but while he gave them some basic ideas,
he didn’t hand out stock tips.
To all those who felt the life of a CEO under scrutiny was not what it used to be, Buffett talked about “the
ninety-eighth floor” in terms a CEO could understand. People who were looking down from the top at
everybody else had to keep things in perspective. So what if they got knocked down a few pegs or lost some
of their money? Those who still had their family, their health, and a chance to do something useful for the
world should try to count their blessings, not their curses.
“If you go from the first floor to the hundredth floor of a building and then go back to the ninety-eighth,
you’ll feel worse than if you’ve just gone from the first to the second, you know. But you’ve got to fight that
feeling, because you’re still on the ninety-eighth floor.”
He considered himself on the hundredth floor most of the time. However, during the spring, 2004 was
definitely shaping up to be a ninety-eighth-floor kind of year. He waited with impatience as Susie suffered
through her radiation until the moment later in the spring when her doctors would perform an MRI to
determine whether the treatment had knocked out the cancer cells. Business was also problematic on various
fronts: Buffett felt that he had “struck out” when it came to bringing home the gingersnaps: new acquisitions
and new stocks to buy. Berkshire had around $40 billion in cash or the equivalent, which was “not a happy
position.”3
Most of the companies within Berkshire Hathaway were doing well—even the beleaguered General Re had
finally but truly reversed course and posted an underwriting profit in 2003. But GEICO had just emerged
from a bitter price war and was locked in a battle for customers with its archrival, Progressive. GEICO had
run a commercial in 1999 featuring a popular new character, the GEICO gecko. But GEICO’s Internet
presence was lagging behind Progressive’s Web page, which let customers comparison-shop. Buffett had
been thinking about the Internet and auto insurance for a decade now; he went to meetings at the company’s
headquarters near Washington and repeated one statement over and over: “He who wins the Internet, wins
the war.” He waited impatiently for the Internet business to reach its potential. Berkshire had appointed a
new board member, Charlotte Guyman, a former Microsoft executive. The board now had its first woman,
who also lowered the average age. Buffett said, however, that he did not seek board members for their
demographics. He wanted “owner-oriented, business-savvy, interested, and truly independent” board
members.4 Now Buffett sent Sharon Osberg and Guyman to Washington to help GEICO speed up its Web
