
book_c10.qxd

12/20/06

1:51 PM

Page 87

Charlie Flank Meets His Match

87

“Well, at least you didn’t lose ten million dollars of your company’s
trading capital on the trade.”
Speaking of a firm’s trading capital made me think of Sam Wilson.
What was he buying or selling today? Had he seen enough on Friday to
make his decisions today? Was he trading at all? What about Doorecker?
Had he bought or sold?
“That’s a ton of money. Ten million dollars lost on a trade. You would
think that he would just know better.”
“He and his friends. Right. He told his friends he had this hot tip from a
famous Wall Street trader—couldn’t name him, of course—but it was a
sure thing. And those guys all together loaded up even more. Man, they really put themselves in a bad spot. When I saw the buying pressure just
shoot upward for the dollar, and I saw the British Pound fall, that was all I
needed to know. I sold Pounds and took my profit and I was done. I’ve had
my days of listening to other people and then losing. Those days are over.”
“Replaced by calmly following the charts after an economic report is
released.”
“That sums it up nicely.”
“And you learned all this with the help of your friend. Your trading
mentor.” Perhaps now was the right time for Craig to introduce me to his
teacher.
“Winklestein? Oh, you’ll meet him. For sure. I told him about you.”
“Really?” This was excellent news!
“Winklestein is his name?”
“Yep. Harvey Winklestein.” Craig paused, which told me that he was reflecting back on some good times with his teacher. “He is the best teacher
of traders in the world. No one like him anywhere else. I think he’s interested in helping you. You’re lucky. He doesn’t work with very many people
anymore.”
Now it was my turn to pause. How was I going to pay this teacher?
“Craig, I have no way to pay him,” I admitted. “It’s the embarrassing
truth.”
He laughed. “Oh, Harvey doesn’t want your money up front.”
This didn’t make a lot of sense. “He wants my money later on?” I asked.
“Sort of. I’ll let him describe it to you. When the time is right, you can
meet him. I am excited for you.”
“Me too.” My mind raced: Who was this guy Winklestein? Where was
he from? He had trained Craig and Doorecker, so obviously he’d been
around for a long time.
“I gotta go in a second. The Institute for Supply Management, or ISM
Services report is going to be released in half an hour. But before I hang up,
who is this guy you met at U.S. National? What’s his name again?”
“Samuel Wilson.”

book_c10.qxd

88

12/20/06

1:51 PM

Page 88

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

“Never heard of him. What does he trade?”
“Apparently anything he wants. He’s been there for 40 years. Said that
he started in the mailroom. Worked his way up.”
“Now that’s the kind of guy Harvey would love. And it looks like those
guys over there at U.S. National are hungry for more U.S. Dollars. I see on
my terminal that U.S. National is selling the Euro against the U.S. dollar in
a big way. They have orders stacked out even higher up than where they
had first traded after the report.”
“Orders stacked out?”
“Right. Orders to buy U.S. Dollars. Orders to sell the Euro. They can’t
unload two hundred fifty million Euros on top of someone at the current
price, so they offer to sell Euros at a price outside the market. Let’s say that
the EUR/USD is trading right now at—” he broke off to check his computer
screen—“1.2020. That’s the bid price it’s trading at now. They could probably push though an order for fifty million dollars near that price right now.
But if they want to unload a quarter of a billion Euros, then they might have
to offer to sell them at 1.2000 or so.”
“That means that the buyer gets the Euros at a great price.”
“Right. Unless it is going to fall a long, long way.”
I imagined this in my mind. Hank Doorecker and Samuel Wilson
wanted to sell Euros. They couldn’t sell as many as they wanted to sell in
one chunk unless they agreed to give the buyer a sweet immediate profit.
This would entice a buyer to do the transaction. But if the price then fell
hard, the buyer would be left holding Euros at a higher price than they
could sell them for. U.S. National would make a huge profit and the buyer
would be screwed.
“And other traders accept that offer?” I asked. “Knowing that they are
going to get screwed?”
“Sure. All the time. Keep in mind that the other side of the trade—some
other major bank or a hedge fund—thinks that it’s buying a ton of Euros
cheap. Because their computer programs or high-paid analysts tell them
that the Euro is going up.” This made sense to me. Craig continued: “The
Euro is so heavily traded. This type of big transaction happens all the time.
For every buyer, there are lots of sellers, and vice versa. For the bigger orders, like I just described, traders might have to put up orders outside the
market price, but that’s okay. They know what they want to do.”
It seemed to me that whatever Samuel Wilson, Hank Doorecker, and
U.S. National wanted to do would be a good idea. I asked: “What price are
they offering to sell at?”
An idea brewed in the back of my mind. This might be the best idea I’d
had yet.
Obviously I couldn’t see Craig, but I imagined a wide smile on his face.
“I think I know where you’re going with this.”

book_c10.qxd

12/20/06

1:51 PM

Page 89

Charlie Flank Meets His Match

89

“Yes. I want to sell at the same price.” I was already logging into my online bank account, and setting up a wire transfer to send $5,000 more to my
trading account. That would increase the size of the account to $5,500 total.
I decided that if I only had one chance to take advantage of piggybacking
on a trade with U.S. National Bank, I was going to take it. When I had completed the wire online, I asked Craig: “What price are they selling at?”
“They have a huge sell order at 1.2200.”
“That’s nearly 200 points away. And it’s upward. Why sell when it is rising? And why not just sell down at 1.2000?”
“They’ve got their own reasons. I don’t know. Listen, I gotta go.”
I told him how grateful I was for his time. The wire transfer would hit
my trading account within a day, and then I would plug in an order to sell
the EUR/USD at the same price as Samuel and the dudes down at the bank.
“You’re welcome,” he said. “Don’t make any trades just yet. Maybe
watch that 1.2200 level for a sell trade. But keep the risk down this time.
You can get killed on these long-term trades. It could move 100 pips against
you before it turns around. Understood?”
I agreed to play it safe.
“And we should have lunch in a couple of weeks,” he told me. “When
this whole missing Anderson file thing blows over.”
Missing file? So they’d fired me over a missing file, just as I had presumed. A file that Herbie had probably misplaced.
“A couple of weeks? You sure we can’t meet sooner? I was thinking I
could take you to lunch later this week. I checked the economic calendar,
nothing’s really coming out.”
“Well, actually, that’s true,” he replied. “You did your homework. Okay,
call me back in a few days and we’ll see if we can hook up, even if it’s just
for a few minutes. And be on the lookout for Winklestein. He can show up
at anytime, anywhere.”
I looked forward to the meeting with Harvey. In the mean time,
I thought I’d just run downtown and see if I could meet up with Mr. Sam
Wilson.

U.S. NATIONAL BANK ALMOST KILLS ME
When I showed up at the front desk on the trading level of U.S. National
Bank, the secretary recognized my face but not my name. No matter, it
wasn’t good news.
“May I help you?” she asked it in a way that let me know clearly that
she had no intention of helping me at all. Instead, I had the feeling that she
might have already called security. She looked just the way my mom did

book_c10.qxd

90

12/20/06

1:51 PM

Page 90

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

when she had caught me stealing the pennies from the free penny dish at
the convenience store. This was not going to be a happy conversation:
ME: I have an appointment with Samuel Wilson.
SKEPTICAL RECEPTIONIST: Sure you do, Mr., uh, Charles Flank, who no
longer works for Wakeman, Butterman, and Bailey. You have a special
meeting with, um, Samuel Wilson, who doesn’t work here?
ME: [protesting] No, really, I do have an appointment with him. He does
work here. My name is Harry Banes.
SKEPTICAL RECEPTIONIST: No, really, you don’t have any appointments
here, Mr. Banes. There’s no Samuel Wilson at U.S. National Bank. Never
was. And there’s no Harry Banes here, either.
ME: Yes! Yes there is a Harry Banes at U.S. National Bank. And if you double-check, there is a Samuel Wilson here, too.
SKEPTICAL RECEPTIONIST: Should I call Mr. Sutherland and see what he
thinks about your appointment with Mr. Wilson?
ME: [looking dumb]
This left me with very little to say. I most certainly did not want to
miss any news about how Samuel and Harvey and the rest of the U.S. National Bank trading crew were handling the trade to sell the EUR/USD at
1.2200. When would that trade open? It could happen today, for sure—
even though the currency pair would have to move 200 points upward to
get to the entry. Why were they selling all the way up there? Craig had
said they could get an order sooner than that. Why wait that long? And
where was Mr. Wilson? How could I get in there without her calling the
police?
Worse than calling the police would be to call Mr. Sutherland. Pissing
him off would end my chances forever of seeing the trading floor here, or
anywhere else, for that matter. Mr. Wilson was probably waiting for me, expecting me, and I was going to ruin the opportunity if I didn’t get in there.
So I decided that I would beg.
“I promise. Last time I didn’t see Mr. Sutherland. I know. I lied. I lied to
you, I lied to my wife earlier last week, I lied to my boss and to some other
people that I can’t remember right now. But you gotta let me in that door. I
swear Mr. Wilson works here.”
She had transformed suddenly into the Angry Receptionist. “I’ve already called security,” she told me very matter-of-factly. “Don’t you think I
know who works here? Don’t you think I would have checked first? Now
would be a good time to turn around and leave.”
I heard a ding and the sound of elevator doors opening, and heavy footsteps behind me.

book_c10.qxd

12/20/06

1:51 PM

Page 91

Charlie Flank Meets His Match

91

“Would you please call Mr. Wilson and tell him that I am here? If he says
that he doesn’t know me, then I will go. You can handcuff me or arrest me.
You can just page out to the trading floor, or look up your directory again.”
Now I was really hoping that Mr. Wilson did not suffer from any form
of senility. I mean, he had looked older than anyone else on the trading
floor, and it was possible that he had forgotten all about me. For sure, he
would have left my name at the front desk. Wait a minute! He hadn’t told
them that I was coming! No wonder I was having all this trouble. Certainly
he had forgotten about the appointment. Just as I imagined—he was generous and helpful but not very bright.
It was now just one minute before noon and I was positive that I was
never going to get in—he would probably not even be at his desk any
longer, since he worked shorter days. He was an old man. Needed a nap or
whatever.
By then, two security guards were standing by my side and I must have
been giving the Angry Receptionist the most pitiful look ever, because she
did pick up her phone.
“Judy, there’s a psychopath out here in the lobby and he wants to know
if we have a Samuel Wilson at the firm.” Then a pause.
“No, not a real psychopath. He’s just demanding to see a man named
Samuel Wilson, says he works on the trading floor.” Another pause and I
thought my bladder would explode from the tension. I held on, knowing
that I only needed a few more seconds before she’d realize her mistake, I
could use the restroom, and then I’d be whooshed through the giant mahogany doors, where I’d find a happy Mr. Wilson ready to instruct me in the
ways of secretive, rich, master traders who would take me in as their own
and raise me up to be the greatest trader who ever lived.
Or not.
I felt a hand grip my right arm. Then another grabbed my left elbow.
They were huge, meaty hands that could crush a man’s dream of going
onto the trading floor at U.S. National Bank. I looked to my left and right—
within 10 feet there were windows on either side. We were 20 floors above
ground. I wondered from which side they were going to throw me out. This
is not how I had planned to die, but it was possible that I was going to leave
this world never having seen more than one Non-Farm Payroll jobs report.
And with a planned order to gain glorious, innumerable pips from a sell
trade on the Euro!
PRIEST: Dearly beloved, we gather here this grey and cloudy morning to
celebrate the life of Harold Banes.
No, wait. That wasn’t it.

book_c10.qxd

12/20/06

1:51 PM

92

Page 92

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

PRIEST : Dear friends, Mr. Governor, Senators, Members of Congress,
Mr. Sutherland, Mr. Taylor, Mr. Wilson, and Mr. Herbie Johnson: We
meet this sorry, rainy morning to mourn the pitiful life of Harry Banes,
destined to be the greatest trader who ever lived, et cetera, and stuff
like that.
[weeping]
PRIEST: Our only consolation is that the Angry Receptionist at U.S. National Bank was fired yesterday for not knowing the names of the
traders at the firm.
[more weeping]
The hands gripped tighter on my arms.
“There is no Samuel Wilson at the firm.”
She was now Angry and Happy Receptionist, as if she at once took
great pleasure in the fact that I would die a sorry heap of human flesh at
the corner of Broad and Wall Streets below; and at the same time had been
deeply offended at my insistence that she did not know the names of the
people that she worked for.
“Goodbye, Mr. Banes.”
Oh, double-crap. My entire plan was now totally backfiring. I did the
only thing that I could, as the grip on my elbow tightened and I started to
move backward against my will. My feet were dragging on the floor as I
was pulled into the elevator. I called out:
ME: [yelling] I am Charlie Flank, too! Mr. Wilson, it’s me, Charlie Flank,
and Harry Banes! We are here to see you!
She hung up her phone and turned back to her work. Of course, she
could claim no hand in my murder, especially now that she was not paying
attention to the situation. The World Wrestling Federation had nothing on
these guys who were now pressing the buttons for the first floor, while
holding on to me tightly, as if I could get away once locked inside the elevator. Thankfully, I had not been thrown from a window. But would the police be waiting for me outside? Would I have to call my wife to bail me out?
How much of my severance package would now disappear in legal fees?
On the first floor, the doors to the elevator parted, and they pushed me
out. Then they walked me out to the main doors and shoved me onto the
sidewalk on Wall Street. I fell down. People just walked over me, or kicked
me. Luckily, no one tripped. My head popped up, and I could see the New
York Stock Exchange down the street. I put my head back down.

book_c10.qxd

12/20/06

1:51 PM

Page 93

Charlie Flank Meets His Match

93

I was never going to be a trader, I told myself.
“Sure you are going to be a trader,” a familiar voice called down to me.
I lifted my head and saw an old, wrinkled hand offered to help me.
I looked up. It was Samuel Wilson.
“Harry Banes?” He grinned. “Charlie Flank?” An even wider grin. “Is
that you?”
I did not smile back. I wasn’t angry either. Just totally relieved that he
was there. I looked up into his eyes.
“Help!” was all I could say. My eyes started to well up with tears. Why
hadn’t he told them I was coming to see him that day? Why did I have to
struggle so much just to get ahead? I imagined that my trading platform
had self-generated a Euro trade and that it was now opening, that I was
now selling EUR/USD at 1.2200, and it was just racing upward in a climb
that would suck up all the remaining funds in my trading account. My wife
would leave me, take all the furniture except my favorite reclining chair,
which would then break, then the last lightbulb in our apartment would
burn out, and I would sit in the dark until I died.
“No, Harry,” he told me, stretching his hand out again. “That is not
going to happen. You are going to be a great trader. Perhaps the best ever. I
promise that.”
How did he know what I was thinking?
How had he shown up at just the right moment?
Samuel Wilson knew who I was!
And he wanted to help me! In that moment I handed myself completely
over to him, to do his bidding, to learn whatever he had to teach me. He
was my friend in the darkest moment and that was enough; it was plenty
enough to know that he wasn’t going to leave me to die an embarrassing
death on the street that symbolized all my unrealized hopes. That he would
stand up for me when I couldn’t stand up for myself. That he would appear
at the exact moment when I was letting go of all of my impossible dreams.
And then I realized, with a shudder of adrenaline that raced from the tip of
my head, through my entire body, and down to my feet: This man wasn’t
who I thought he was. This wasn’t Samuel Wilson.
This was Harvey Winklestein.

book_c11.qxd

12/20/06

2:16 PM

Page 94

CHAPTER 11

Coming Clean

arvey’s grip was strong. He pulled me up from the sidewalk with
one arm.
“What are you doing lying around here?”
“I thought this is where all the future currency trading superstars got
their start,” I replied, dusting myself off.
He chuckled. “You’re more right than you might think.”
When he led me back through the doors and into the elevator, I was
skeptical. “Do you think they will let me back in? They were not very happy.”
“I am sure they weren’t.”
“Why didn’t you let them know I was coming?”
He paused. Looked me straight in the eyes: “You weren’t honest the
last time you were here. You also didn’t keep your promise to visit again.”
He stopped. All I could hear was the sound of the elevator moving up. The
truth stung me. “You needed a lesson.”
“I got the lesson.”
Then he placed both hands on my shoulders and turned me to him. It
felt like he could pick me up right off the floor. “This is the lesson, Harry:
Don’t ever lie to me. Or to anyone else. Ever. Lying will kill you in trading.”
I looked him back in the eye. “I promise. I promise to be honest from
this point forward. About everything.”
With that, he said, “Good,” and we stepped off into the reception area
of the trading floor. The secretary was not happy to see me again, but she
did smile when she saw Harvey. “Hi, Harvey,” she chirped. “He’s with you, I
suppose?”

H

94

book_c11.qxd

12/20/06

2:16 PM

Page 95

Coming Clean

95

He nodded. “Thanks, Valerie. He’s now okay here anytime. No more
calling security.” She nodded back. I could tell that she wished that security had thrown me out the window. When we sat down at his desk, I noticed that most of the traders had left for the day.
“Where is everyone?” I asked.
“Gone. They’re done for now. They can go home and get the same information about their trades as they can get at the office. We’re not filling
client orders here or anything.”
“How would that make a difference?”
“Well, if we were at a major Wall Street desk, clients would be calling
here and asking for us to quote a price on Sterling or Euros or Yen. And
we’d give them a price and so on. They can call all day long.”
“What do you do here that is so different?”
“We trade the firm’s capital.”
“Does anyone quote prices for clients here?”
“Yes. But they’re on a different floor. Here, we are all prop traders. Proprietary. We trade for the firm, to make the firm money. Well, I don’t. But
everyone else here does.”
“What do you do here?”
“Whatever I want. I look at my long-term charts. I make some trades.
But this is just a desk that I’m allowed to use whenever I want.”
“For conversations like this?”
He shook his head. “You’re the first trader that I’ve brought here.”
I squinted my eyes at him. “I got here myself.”
He laughed. “You didn’t do anything yet that I didn’t already know
about. You got in the first day because of me. Just like you are here now.”
I wondered how he knew all this. For now it did not matter, but I made
a mental note to interview him about how he knew so much about me. It
was like he could read my mind. But first I had lots of questions. “You were
going to talk with me about honesty,” I told him.
“Yes. Let’s get right into that. This is one of the most important laws of
trading: Traders must always be honest.”

HOW HONESTY RELATES TO TRADING
ME: You said that honesty is one of the most important laws of trading.
Why? Why aren’t we talking about the trades you are taking? I
think I heard you are about to take a long-term position on the
EUR/USD. Why don’t we start by talking about that trade? Shouldn’t I
dive right in?
HARVEY: You already dove in. You dove in when you took totally irresponsible trades. That was diving in. We don’t want to do that. To build on the

book_c11.qxd

96

12/20/06

2:16 PM

Page 96

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

analogy about diving, I want to teach you to test the water first. To make
sure that there isn’t a riptide. To prevent you from drowning.
ME: Walk before I run.
HARVEY: More like prevent you from diving into shallow water. That’s
what you were doing before.
ME: So how does honesty fit in with all this?
HARVEY: It’s the first step. It’s actually one of the most important lessons. I
have three most important lessons, each of them equally critical to your
progression as a trader.
ME: I’m ready. For anything you say.
HARVEY: Okay. How many times have you lied in the past month?
ME: [silence]
HARVEY: All right, I’ll repeat the question in a different way. In the past
month, did you ever lie to Herb Johnson? Or anyone at the office?
ME: Yes.
HARVEY: How many times?
ME: I’m not sure that I know how to answer that. It wasn’t that many.
HARVEY: That is not an acceptable answer. You’ll have to do better than
that.
ME: Okay. This is not very comfortable for me. I thought I was going to be
asking you all the questions.
HARVEY: We’ll mostly learn by me asking you questions. That’s because
everything you need to learn is already inside you—I am just going to pull
it out of you. Like an infected tooth, or a burst appendix.
ME: How pleasant.
HARVEY: So what’s the answer? How many times did you lie at work?
ME: At least ten times. At least. I lied about where I was. I lied about Anderson wanting to give me a job. I lied to an attorney about who I was
talking to on the phone. I lied to cover myself a few times.
HARVEY: Is that all? Just the spoken lies?
ME: Just the spoken ones? What does that mean?
HARVEY: It means that you can lie by your actions, too. Not just your
words. This is important. So important, that what I told you in the elevator is true. Don’t ever lie to me again. Or anyone. I’ll cut off your training
and we’ll see how you do. I don’t have time to mess around.
ME: But what do you mean when you say that I can lie through my actions?
HARVEY: I mean that you can steal time from your employer. Did you ever
do that?
ME: Steal time? Gosh, it seems to me that anyone working in a law firm is
there to steal time.
