
and therefore he had a good opinion of them. Lilly assured him that the art of astrology
was quite consonant to the Scriptures; and confidently predicted from his knowledge of
the stars, that the parliamentary army would overthrow all its enemies. In Oliver's
Protectorate, this quack informs us that he wrote freely enough. He became an
Independent, and all the soldiery were his friends. When he went to Scotland, he saw a
soldier standing in front of the army, with a book of prophecies in his hand, exclaiming to
the several companies as they passed by him, "Lo! hear what Lilly saith: you are in this
month promised victory! Fight it out, brave boys! and then read that month's prediction!"
After the great fire of London, which Lilly said he had foretold, he was sent for by the
committee of the House of Commons appointed to inquire into the causes of the calamity.
In his "Monarchy or no Monarchy," published in 1651, he had inserted an hieroglyphical
plate, representing on one side persons in winding sheets digging graves; and on the other
a large city in flames. After the great fire some sapient member of the legislature
bethought him of Lilly's book, and having mentioned it in the house, it was agreed that
the astrologer should be summoned. Lilly attended accordingly, when Sir Robert Brooke
told him the reason of his summons, and called upon him to declare what he knew. This
was a rare opportunity for the vain-glorious Lilly to vaunt his abilities; and he began a
long speech in praise of himself and his pretended science. He said, that after the
execution of Charles I, he was extremely desirous to know what might from that time
forth happen to the parliament and to the nation in general. He, therefore, consulted the
stars and satisfied himself. The result of his judgment he put into emblems and
hieroglyphics, without any commentary, so that the true meaning might be concealed
from the vulgar, and made manifest only to the wise; imitating in this the example of
many wise philosophers who had done the like.
"Did you foresee the year of the fire?" said a member. "No!" quoth Lilly, "nor was I
desirous: of that I made no scrutiny." After some further parley the house found they
could make nothing of the astrologer, and dismissed him with great civility.
One specimen of the explanation of a prophecy given by Lilly, and related by him with
much complacency, will be sufficient to show the sort of trash by which he imposed upon
the million. "In the year 1588," says he, "there was a prophecy printed in Greek
characters, exactly deciphering the long troubles of the English nation from 1641 to
1660;" and it ended thus:-- "And after him shall come a dreadful dead man, and with him
a royal G, of the best blood in the world, and he shall have the crown, and shall set
England on the right way, and put out all heresies." The following is the explanation of
this oracular absurdity:-"Monkery being extinguished above eighty or ninety years, and the Lord General's name
being Monk, is the dead man. The royal G. or C, [it is gamma in the Greek, intending C.
in the Latin, being the third letter in the Alphabet] is Charles II, who for his extraction
may be said to be of the best blood of the world."
In France and Germany astrologers met even more encouragement than they received in
England. In very early ages, Charlemagne and his successors fulminated their wrath

against them in common with sorcerers. Louis XI, that most superstitious of men,
entertained great numbers of them at his court; and Catherine de Medicis, that most
superstitious of women, hardly ever took any affair of importance without consulting
them. She chiefly favoured her own countrymen; and during the time she governed
France, the land was overrun by Italian conjurors, necromancers, and fortune-tellers of
every kind. But the chief astrologer of that day, beyond all doubt, was the celebrated
Nostradamus, physician to her husband, King Henry II. He was born in 1503, at the town
of St. Remi, in Provence, where his father was a notary. He did not acquire much fame
till he was past his fiftieth year, when his famous "Centuries," a collection of verses,
written in obscure and almost unintelligible language, began to excite attention. They
were so much spoken of in 1556, that Henry II. resolved to attach so skilful a man to his
service, and appointed him his physician. In a biographical notice of him prefixed to the
edition of his "Vraies Centuries," published at Amsterdam in 1668, we are informed that
he often discoursed with his royal master on the secrets of futurity, and received many
great presents as his reward, besides his usual allowance for medical attendance. After
the death of Henry, he retired to his native place, where Charles IX. paid him a visit in
1564, and was so impressed with veneration for his wondrous knowledge of the things
that were to be, not in France only, but in the whole world for hundreds of years to come,
that he made him a counsellor of state, and his own physician, besides treating him in
other matters with a royal liberality. "In fine," continues his biographer, "I should be too
prolix were I to tell all the honours conferred upon him, and all the great nobles and
learned men that arrived at his house, from the very ends of the earth, to see and converse
with him as if he had been an oracle. Many strangers, in fact, came to France for no other
purpose than to consult him."
The prophecies of Nostradamus consist of upwards of a thousand stanzas, each of four
lines, and are to the full as obscure as the oracles of They take so great a latitude, both as
to time and space, that they are almost sure to be fulfilled somewhere or other in the
course of a few centuries; A little ingenuity like that evinced by Lilly, in his explanation
about General Monk and the dreadful dead man, might easily make events to fit some of
them.
Let us try. In his second century, prediction 66, he says,-- '
"From great dangers the captive is escaped. A little time, great fortune changed. In the
palace the people are caught. By good augury the city is besieged."
"What is this," a believer might exclaim, "but the escape of Napoleon from Elba -- his
changed fortune, and the occupation of Paris by the allied armies?" -- Let us try again. In
his third century, prediction 98, he says,-"Two royal brothers will make fierce war on each other; So mortal shall be the strife
between them, That each one shall occupy a fort against the other; For their reign and life
shall be the quarrel."

Some Lillius Redivivus would find no difficulty in this prediction. To use a vulgar
phrase, it is as clear as a pikestaff. Had not the astrologer in view Don Miguel and Don
Pedro when he penned this stanza, so much less obscure and oracular than the rest?
He is to this day extremely popular in France and the Walloon country of Belgium, where
old farmer-wives consult him with great confidence and assiduity.
Catherine di Medicis was not the only member of her illustrious house who entertained
astrologers. At the beginning of the fifteenth century, there was a man named Basil,
residing in Florence, who was noted over all Italy for his skill in piercing the darkness of
futurity. It is said that he foretold to Cosmo di Medicis, then a private citizen, that he
would attain high dignity, inasmuch as the ascendant of his nativity was adorned with the
same propitious aspects as those of Augustus Caesar and the Emperor Charles V.
[Hermippus Redivivus, p. 142.] Another astrologer foretold the death of Prince
Alexander di Medicis; and so very minute and particular was be in all the circumstances,
that he was suspected of being chiefly instrumental in fulfilling his own prophecy; a very
common resource with these fellows, to keep up their credit. He foretold confidently that
the Prince should die by the hand of his own familiar friend, a person of a slender habit of
body, a small face, a swarthy complexion, and of most remarkable taciturnity. So it
afterwards happened; Alexander having been murdered in his chamber by his cousin
Lorenzo, who corresponded exactly with the above description. [Jovii Elog. p. 320.] The
author of Hermippus Redivivus, in relating this story, inclines to the belief that the
astrologer was guiltless of any participation in the crime, but was employed by some
friend of Prince Alexander, to warn him of his danger.
A much more remarkable story is told of an astrologer, who lived in Romagna, in the
fifteenth century, and whose name was Antiochus Tibertus. [Les Anecdotes de Florence
ou l'Histoire secrete de la Maison di Medicis, p. 318.] At that time nearly all the petty
sovereigns of Italy retained such men in their service; and Tibertus having studied the
mathematics with great success at Paris, and delivered many predictions, some of which,
for guesses, were not deficient in shrewdness, was taken into the household of Pandolfo
di Malatesta, the sovereign of Rimini. His reputation was so great, that his study was
continually thronged, either with visitors who were persons of distinction, or with clients
who came to him for advice, and in a short time he acquired a considerable fortune.
Notwithstanding all these advantages he passed his life miserably, and ended it on the
scaffold. The following story afterwards got into circulation, and has been often
triumphantly cited by succeeding astrologers as an irrefragable proof of the truth of their
science. It was said, that long before he died he uttered three remarkable prophecies; one
relating to himself, another to his friend, and the third to his patron, Pandolfo di
Malatesta. The first delivered was that relating to his friend, Guido di Bogni, one of the
greatest captains of the time. Guido was exceedingly desirous to know his fortune, and so
importuned Tibertus, that the latter consulted the stars, and the lines on his palm, to
satisfy him. He afterwards told him with a sorrowful face, that according to all the rules
of astrology and palmistry, he should be falsely suspected by his best friend, and should
lose his life in consequence. Guido then asked the astrologer if he could foretell his own
fate; upon which Tibertus again consulted the stars, and found that it was decreed from

all eternity that he should end his days on the scaffold. Malatesta, when he heard these
predictions, so unlikely, to all present appearance, to prove true, desired his astrologer to
predict his fate also; and to hide nothing from him, however unfavourable it might be.
Tibertus complied, and told his patron, at that time one of the most flourishing and
powerful princes of Italy, that he should suffer great want, and die at last, like a beggar,
in the common hospital of Bologna: and so it happened in all three cases. Guido di Bogni
was accused by his own father-in-law, the Count di Bentivoglio, of a treasonable design
to deliver up the city of Rimini to the papal forces, and was assassinated afterwards, by
order of the tyrant Malatesta, as he sat at the supper-table, to which he had been invited in
all apparent friendship. The astrologer was, at the same time, thrown into prison, as being
concerned in the treason of his friend. He attempted to escape, and had succeeded in
letting himself down from his dungeon window into a moat, when he was discovered by
the sentinels. This being reported to Malatesta, he gave orders for his execution on the
following morning.
Malatesta had, at this time, no remembrance of the prophecy; and his own fate gave him
no uneasiness: but events were silently working its fulfilment. A conspiracy had been
formed, though Guido di Bogni was innocent of it, to deliver up Rimini to the Pope; and
all the necessary measures having been taken, the city was seized by the Count de
Valentinois. In the confusion, Malatesta had barely time to escape from his palace in
disguise. He was pursued from place to place by his enemies, abandoned by all his
former friends, and, finally, by his own children. He at last fell ill of a languishing
disease, at Bologna; and, nobody caring to afford him shelter, he was carried to the
hospital, where he died. The only thing that detracts from the interest of this remarkable
story is the fact, that the prophecy was made after the event.
For some weeks before the birth of Louis XIV, an astrologer from Germany, who had
been sent for by the Marshal de Bassompierre and other noblemen of the court, had taken
up his residence in the palace, to be ready, at a moment's notice, to draw the horoscope of
the future sovereign of France. When the Queen was taken in labour, he was ushered into
a contiguous apartment, that he might receive notice of the very instant the child was
born. The result of his observations were the three words, diu, dure, feliciter; meaning,
that the new-born Prince should live and reign long, with much labour, and with great
glory. No prediction less favourable could have been expected from an astrologer, who
had his bread to get, and who was at the same time a courtier. A medal was afterwards
struck in commemoration of the event; upon one side of which was figured the nativity of
the Prince, representing him as driving the chariot of Apollo, with the inscription "Ortus
solis Gallici," -- the rising of the Gallic sun.
The best excuse ever made for astrology was that offered by the great astronomer,
Keppler, himself an unwilling practiser of the art. He had many applications from his
friends to cast nativities for them, and generally gave a positive refusal to such as he was
not afraid of offending by his frankness. In other cases he accommodated himself to the
prevailing delusion. In sending a copy of his "Ephemerides" to Professor Gerlach, he
wrote that they were nothing but worthless conjectures; but he was obliged to devote
himself to them, or he would have starved. "Ye overwise philosophers," he exclaimed, in

his "Tertius Interveniens;" "ye censure this daughter of astronomy beyond her deserts!
Know ye not that she must support her mother by her charms? The scanty reward of an
astronomer would not provide him with bread, if men did not entertain hopes of reading
the future in the heavens."
NECROMANCY was, next to astrology, the pretended science most resorted to, by those
who wished to pry into the future. The earliest instance upon record is that of the Witch
of Endor and the spirit of Samuel. Nearly all the nations of antiquity believed in the
possibility of summoning departed ghosts to disclose the awful secrets that God made
clear to the disembodied. Many passages in allusion to this subject, will at once suggest
themselves to the classical reader; but this art was never carried on openly in any country.
All governments looked upon it as a crime of the deepest dye. While astrology was
encouraged, and its professors courted and rewarded, necromancers were universally
condemned to the stake or the gallows. Roger Bacon, Albertus Magnus, Arnold of
Villeneuve, and many others, were accused, by the public opinion of many centuries, of
meddling in these unhallowed matters. So deep-rooted has always been the popular
delusion with respect to accusations of this kind, that no crime was ever disproved with
such toil and difficulty. That it met great encouragement, nevertheless, is evident from
the vast numbers of pretenders to it; who, in spite of the danger, have existed in all ages
and countries.
GEOMANCY, or the art of foretelling the future by means of lines and circles, and other
mathematical figures drawn on the earth, is still extensively practised in Asiatic countries,
but is almost unknown in Europe.
AUGURY, from the flight or entrails of birds, so favourite a study among the Romans, is,
in like manner, exploded in Europe. Its most assiduous professors, at the present day, are
the abominable Thugs of India.
DIVINATION, of which there are many kinds, boasts a more enduring reputation. It has
held an empire over the minds of men from the earliest periods of recorded history, and
is, in all probability, coeval with time itself. It was practised alike by the Jews, the
Egyptians, the Chaldeans, the Persians, the Greeks, and the Romans; is equally known to
all modern nations, in every part of the world; and is not unfamiliar to the untutored
tribes that roam in the wilds of Africa and America. Divination, as practised in civilized
Europe at the present day, is chiefly from cards, the tea-cup, and the lines on the palm of
the hand. Gipsies alone make a profession of it; but there are thousands and tens of
thousands of humble families in which the good-wife, and even the good-man, resort to
the grounds at the bottom of their teacups, to know whether the next harvest will be
abundant, or their sow bring forth a numerous litter; and in which the young maidens
look to the same place to know when they are to be married, and whether the man of their
choice is to be dark or fair, rich or poor, kind or cruel. Divination by cards, so great a
favourite among the moderns, is, of course, a modern science; as cards do not yet boast
an antiquity of much more than four hundred years. Divination by the palm, so
confidently believed in by half the village lasses in Europe, is of older date, and seems to
have been known to the Egyptians in the time of the patriarchs; as well as divination by

the cup, which, as we are informed in Genesis, was practised by Joseph. Divination by
the rod was also practised by the Egyptians. In comparatively recent times, it was
pretended that by this means hidden treasures could be discovered. It now appears to be
altogether exploded in Europe. Onomancy, or the foretelling a man's fate by the letters of
his name, and the various transpositions of which they are capable, is a more modern sort
of divination; but it reckons comparatively few believers.
The following list of the various species of Divination formerly in use, is given by Gaule,
in his "Magastromancer," and quoted in Hone's "Year Book," p. 1517.
Stareomancy, or divining by the elements. Aeromancy, or divining by the air.
Pyromancy, by fire. Hydromancy, by water. Geomancy, by earth. Theomancy, pretending
to divine by the revelation of the Spirit, and by the Scriptures, or word of God.
Demonomancy, by the aid of devils and evil spirits. Idolomancy, by idols, images, and
figures. Psychomancy, by the soul, affections, or dispositions of men. Antinopomancy,
by the entrails of human beings. Theriomancy, by beasts. Ornithomancy, by birds.
Icthyomancy, by fishes. Botanomancy, by herbs. Lithomancy, by stones. Kleromancy, by
lots. Oneiromancy, by dreams. Onomancy, by names. Arithmancy, by numbers.
Logarithmancy, by logarithms. Sternomancy, by the marks from the breast to the belly.
Gastromancy, by the sound of, or marks upon, the belly. Omphelomancy, by the navel.
Chiromancy, by the hands. Paedomancy, by thee feet. Onchyomancy, by the nails.
Cephaleonomancy, by asses' heads. Tuphramancy, by ashes. Kapnomancy, by smoke.
Livanomancy, by the burning of incense. Keromancy, by the melting of wax.
Lecanomancy, by basins of water. Katoxtromancy, by looking-glasses. Chartomancy, by
writing in papers, and by Valentines. Macharomancy, by knives and swords.
Crystallomancy, by crystals. Dactylomancy, by rings. Koseinomancy, by sieves.
Axinomancy, by saws. Kaltabomancy, by vessels of brass, or other metal. Spatalamancy,
by skins, bones, &c. Roadomancy, by stars. Sciomancy, by shadows. Astragalomancy, by
dice. Oinomancy, by the lees of wine. Sycomancy, by figs. Typomancy, by cheese.
Alphitomancy, by meal, flour, or bran. Krithomancy, by corn or grain. Alectromancy, by
cocks. Gyromancy, by circles. Lampadomancy, by candles and lamps.
ONEIRO-CRITICISM, or the art of interpreting dreams, is a relic of the most remote
ages, which has subsisted through all the changes that moral or physical revolutions have
operated in the world. The records of five thousand years bear abundant testimony to the
universal diffusion of the belief, that the skilful could read the future in dreams. The rules
of the art, if any existed in ancient times, are not known; but in our day, one simple rule
opens the whole secret. Dreams, say all the wiseacres in Christendom, are to be
interpreted by contraries. Thus, if you dream of filth, you will acquire something
valuable; if you dream of the dead, you will hear news of the living; if you dream of gold
and silver, you run a risk of being without either; and if you dream you have many
friends, you will be persecuted by many enemies. The rule, however, does not hold good
in all cases. It is fortunate to dream of little pigs, but unfortunate to dream of big
bullocks. If you dream you have lost a tooth, you may be sure that you will shortly lose a
friend; and if you dream that your house is on fire, you will receive news from a far
country. If you dream of vermin, it is a sign that there will be sickness in your family; and

if you dream of serpents, you will have friends who, in the course of time, will prove
your bitterest enemies; but, of all dreams, it is most fortunate if you dream that you are
wallowing up to your neck in mud and mire. Clear water is a sign of grief; and great
troubles, distress, and perplexity are predicted, if you dream that you stand naked in the
public streets, and know not where to find a garment to shield you from the gaze of the
multitude.
In many parts of Great Britain, and the continents of Europe and America, there are to be
found elderly women in the villages and country-places whose interpretations of dreams
are looked upon with as much reverence as if they were oracles. In districts remote from
towns it is not uncommon to find the members of a family regularly every morning
narrating their dreams at the breakfast-table, and becoming happy or miserable for the
day according to their interpretation. There is not a flower that blossoms, or fruit that
ripens, that, dreamed of, is not ominous of either good or evil to such people. Every tree
of the field or the forest is endowed with a similar influence over the fate of mortals, if
seen in the night-visions. To dream of the ash, is the sign of a long journey; and of an
oak, prognosticates long life and prosperity. To dream you strip the bark off any tree, is a
sign to a maiden of an approaching loss of a character; to a married woman, of a family
bereavement; and to a man, of an accession of fortune. To dream of a leafless tree, is a
sign of great sorrow; and of a branchless trunk, a sign of despair and suicide. The eldertree is more auspicious to the sleeper; while the fir-tree, better still, betokens all manner
of comfort and prosperity. The lime-tree predicts a voyage across the ocean; while the
yew and the alder are ominous of sickness to the young and of death to the old.
It is quite astonishing to see the great demand there is, both in England and France, for
dream-books, and other trash of the same kind. Two books in England enjoy an
extraordinary popularity, and have run through upwards of fifty editions in as many years
in London alone, besides being reprinted in Manchester, Edinburgh, Glasgow, and
Dublin. One is "Mother Bridget's Dream-book and Oracle of Fate;" the other is the
"Norwood Gipsy." It is stated on the authority of one who, is curious in these matters,
that there is a demand for these works, which are sold at sums varying from a penny to
sixpence, chiefly to servant-girls and imperfectly-educated people, all over the country,
of upwards of eleven thousand annually; and that at no period during the last thirty years
has the average number sold been less than this. The total number during this period
would thus amount to 330,000.
Among the flowers and fruits charged with messages for the future, the following is a list
of the most important, arranged from approved sources, in alphabetical order:Asparagus, gathered and tied up in bundles, is an omen of tears. If you see it growing in
your dreams, it is a sign of good fortune.
Aloes, without a flower, betoken long life: in flower, betoken a legacy.
Artichokes. This vegetable is a sign that you will receive, in a short time, a favour from
the hands of those from whom you would least expect it.
