
In the mean time, innumerable joint-stock companies started up everywhere. They soon
received the name of Bubbles, the most appropriate that imagination could devise. The
populace are often most happy in the nicknames they employ. None could be more apt
than that of Bubbles. Some of them lasted for a week, or a fortnight, and were no more
heard of, while others could not even live out that short span of existence. Every evening
produced new schemes, and every morning new projects. The highest of the aristocracy
were as eager in this hot pursuit of gain as the most plodding jobber in Cornhill. The
Prince of Wales became governor of one company, and is said to have cleared 40,000
pounds by his speculations. [Coxe's Walpole, Correspondence between Mr. Secretary
Craggs and Earl Stanhope.] The Duke of Bridgewater started a scheme for the
improvement of London and Westminster, and the Duke of Chandos another. There were
nearly a hundred different projects, each more extravagant and deceptive than the other.
To use the words of the "Political State," they were "set on foot and promoted by crafty
knaves, then pursued by multitudes of covetous fools, and at last appeared to be, in effect,
what their vulgar appellation denoted them to be -- bubbles and mere cheats." It was
computed that near one million and a half sterling was won and lost by these
unwarrantable practices, to the impoverishment of many a fool, and the enriching of
many a rogue.
Some of these schemes were plausible enough, and, had they been undertaken at a time
when the public mind was unexcited, might have been pursued with advantage to all
concerned. But they were established merely with the view of raising the shares in the
market. The projectors took the first opportunity of a rise to sell out, and next morning
the scheme was at an end. Maitland, in his History of London, gravely informs us, that
one of the projects which received great encouragement, was for the establishment of a
company "to make deal-boards out of saw-dust." This is, no doubt, intended as a joke; but
there is abundance of evidence to show that dozens of schemes hardly a whir more
reasonable, lived their little day, ruining hundreds ere they fell. One of them was for a
wheel for perpetual motion -- capital, one million; another was "for encouraging the
breed of horses in England, and improving of glebe and church lands, and repairing and
rebuilding parsonage and vicarage houses." Why the clergy, who were so mainly
interested in the latter clause, should have taken so much interest in the first, is only to be
explained on the supposition that the scheme was projected by a knot of the foxhunting
parsons, once so common in England. The shares of this company were rapidly
subscribed for. But the most absurd and preposterous of all, and which showed, more
completely than any other, the utter madness of the people, was one, started by an
unknown adventurer, entitled "company for carrying on an undertaking of great
advantage, but nobody to know what it is." Were not the fact stated by scores of credible
witnesses, it would be impossible to believe that any person could have been duped by
such a project. The man of genius who essayed this bold and successful inroad upon
public credulity, merely stated in his prospectus that the required capital was half a
million, in five thousand shares of 100 pounds each, deposit 2 pounds per share. Each
subscriber, paying his deposit, would be entitled to 100 pounds per annum per share.
How this immense profit was to be obtained, he did not condescend to inform them at
that time, but promised, that in a month full particulars should be duly announced, and a
call made for the remaining 98 pounds of the subscription. Next morning, at nine o'clock,

this great man opened an office in Cornhill. Crowds of people beset his door, and when
he shut up at three o'clock, he found that no less than one thousand shares had been
subscribed for, and the deposits paid. He was thus, in five hours, the winner of 2,000
pounds. He was philosopher enough to be contented with his venture, and set off the
same evening for the Continent. He was never heard of again.
Well might Swift exclaim, comparing Change Alley to a gulf in the South Sea,-Subscribers here by thousands float, And jostle one another down, Each paddling in his
leaky boat, And here they fish for gold, and drown.
Now buried in the depths below, Now mounted up to heaven again, They reel and stagger
to and fro, At their wit's end, like drunken men
Meantime, secure on Garraway cliffs, A savage race, by shipwrecks fed, Lie waiting for
the foundered skiffs, And strip the bodies of the dead.
Another fraud that was very successful, was that of the "Globe Permits," as they were
called. They were nothing more than square pieces of playing cards, on which was the
impression of a seal, in wax, bearing the sign of the Globe Tavern, in the neighbourhood
of Exchange Alley, with the inscription of "Sail Cloth Permits." The possessors enjoyed
no other advantage from them than permission to subscribe, at some future time, to a new
sail-cloth manufactory, projected by one who was then known to be a man of fortune, but
who was afterwards involved in the peculation and punishment of the South Sea
directors. These permits sold for as much as sixty guineas in the Alley.
Persons of distinction, of both sexes, were deeply engaged in all these bubbles, those of
the male sex going to taverns and coffee-houses to meet their brokers, and the ladies
resorting for the same purpose to the shops of milliners and haberdashers. But it did not
follow that all these people believed in the feasibility of the schemes to which they
subscribed; it was enough for their purpose that their shares would, by stock-jobbing arts,
be soon raised to a premium, when they got rid of them with all expedition to the really
credulous. So great was the confusion of the crowd in the alley, that shares in the same
bubble were known to have been sold at the same instant ten per cent. higher at one end
of the alley than at the other. Sensible men beheld the extraordinary infatuation of the
people with sorrow and alarm. There were some, both in and out of Parliament, who
foresaw clearly the ruin that was impending. Mr. Walpole did not cease his gloomy
forebodings. His fears were shared by all the thinking few, and impressed most forcibly
upon the government. On the 11th of June, the day the Parliament rose, the King
published a proclamation, declaring that all these unlawful projects should be deemed
public nuisances, and prosecuted accordingly, and forbidding any broker, under a penalty
of five hundred pounds, from buying or selling any shares in them. Notwithstanding this
proclamation, roguish speculators still carried them on, and the deluded people still
encouraged them. On the 12th of July, an order of the Lords Justices assembled in privy
council was published, dismissing all the petitions that had been presented for patents and
charters, and dissolving all the bubble companies. The following copy of their lordships'

order, containing a list of all these nefarious projects, will not be deemed uninteresting at
the present day, when there is but too much tendency in the public mind to indulge in
similar practices :"At the Council Chamber, Whitehall, the 12th day of July, 1720. Present, their
Excellencies the Lords Justices in Council.
"Their Excellencies, the Lords Justices in council, taking into consideration the many
inconveniences arising to the public from several projects set on foot for raising of joint
stock for various purposes, and that a great many of his Majesty's subjects have been
drawn in to part with their money on pretence of assurances that their petitions for patents
and charters, to enable them to carry on the same, would be granted: to prevent such
impositions, their Excellencies, this day, ordered the said several petitions, together with
such reports from the Board of Trade, and from his Majesty's Attorney and Solicitor
General, as had been obtained thereon, to be laid before them, and after mature
consideration thereof, were pleased, by advice of his Majesty's Privy Council, to order
that the said petitions be dismissed, which are as follow :-"1. Petition of several persons, praying letters patent for carrying on a fishing trade, by
the name of the Grand Fishery of Great Britain.
"2. Petition of the Company of the Royal Fishery of England, praying letters patent for
such further powers as will effectually contribute to carry on the said fishery.
"3. Petition of George James, on behalf of himself and divers persons of distinction
concerned in a national fishery; praying letters patent of incorporation to enable them to
carry on the same.
"4. Petition of several merchants, traders, and others, whose names are thereunto
subscribed, praying to be incorporated for reviving and carrying on a whale fishery to
Greenland and elsewhere.
"5. Petition of Sir John Lambert, and others thereto subscribing, on behalf of themselves
and a great number of merchants, praying to be incorporated for carrying on a Greenland
trade, and particularly a whale fishery in Davis's Straits.
"6. Another petition for a Greenland trade.
"7. Petition of several merchants, gentlemen, and citizens, praying to be incorporated. for
buying and building of ships to let or freight.
"8. Petition of Samuel Antrim and others, praying for letters patent for sowing hemp and
flax.

"9. Petition of several merchants, masters of ships, sail-makers, and manufacturers of
sail-cloth, praying a charter of incorporation, to enable them to carry on and promote the
said manufactory by a joint stock.
"10. Petition of Thomas Boyd, and several hundred merchants, owners and masters of
ships, sailmakers, weavers, and other traders, praying a charter of incorporation,
empowering them to borrow money for purchasing lands, in order to the manufacturing
sail-cloth and fine Holland.
"11. Petition on behalf of several persons interested in a patent granted by the late King
William and Queen Mary, for the making of linen and sail-cloth, praying that no charter
may be granted to any persons whatsoever for making sail-cloth, but that the privilege
now enjoyed by them may be confirmed, and likewise an additional power to carry on the
cotton and cotton-silk manufactures.
"12. Petition of several citizens, merchants, and traders in London, and others,
subscribers to a British stock, for a general insurance from fire in any part of England,
praying to be incorporated for carrying on the said undertaking.
"13. Petition of several of his Majesty's loyal snbjects of the city of London, and other
parts of Great Britain, praying to be incorporated, for carrying on a general insurance
from losses by fire within the kingdom of England.
"14. Petition of Thomas Burges, and others his Majesty's subjects thereto subscribing, in
behalf of themselves and others, subscribers to a fund of 1,200,000 pounds, for carrying
on a trade to his Majesty's German dominions, praying to be incorporated, by the name of
the Harburg Company.
"15. Petition of Edward Jones, a dealer in timber, on behalf of himself and others, praying
to be incorporated for the importation of timber from Germany.
"16. Petition of several merchants of London, praying a charter of incorporation for
carrying on a salt-work.
"17. Petition of Captain Macphedris, of London, merchant, on behalf of himself and
several merchants, clothiers, hatters, dyers, and other traders, praying a charter of
incorporation, empowering them to raise a sufficient sum of money to purchase lands for
planting and rearing a wood called madder, for the use of dyers.
"18. Petition of Joseph Galendo, of London, snuff-maker, praying a patent for his
invention to prepare and cure Virginia tobacco for snuff in Virginia, and making it into
the same in all his Majesty's dominions."
LIST OF BUBBLES.

The following Bubble Companies were by the same order declared to be illegal, and
abolished accordingly :-1. For the importation of Swedish iron.
2. For supplying London with sea-coal. Capital, three millions.
3. For building and rebuilding houses throughout all England. Capital, three millions.
4. For making of muslin.
5. For carrying on and improving the British alum works.
6. For effectually settling the island of Blanco and Sal Tartagus.
7. For supplying the town of Deal with fresh water.
8. For the importation of Flanders lace.
9. For improvement of lands in Great Britain. Capital, four millions.
10. For encouraging the breed of horses in England, and improving of glebe and church
lands, and for repairing and rebuilding parsonage and vicarage houses.
11. For making of iron and steel in Great Britain.
12. For improving the land in the county of Flint. Capital, one million.
13. For purchasing lands to build on. Capital, two millions.
14. For trading in hair.
15. For erecting salt-works in Holy Island. Capital, two millions.
16. For buying and selling estates, and lending money on mortgage.
17. For carrying on an undertaking of great advantage, but nobody to know what it is.
18. For paving the streets of London. Capital, two millions.
19. For furnishing funerals to any part of Great Britain.
20. For buying and selling lands and lending money at interest. Capital, five millions.
21. For carrying on the Royal Fishery of Great Britain. Capital, ten millions.

22. For assuring of seamen's wages.
23. For erecting loan-offices for the assistance and encouragement of the industrious.
Capital, two millions.
24. For purchasing and improving leasable lands. Capital, four millions.
25. For importing pitch and tar, and other naval stores, from North Britain and America.
26. For the clothing, felt, and pantile trade.
27. For purchasing and improving a manor and royalty in Essex.
28. For insuring of horses. Capital, two millions.
29. For exporting the woollen manufacture, and importing copper, brass, and iron.
Capital, four millions.
30. For a grand dispensary. Capital, three millions.
31. For erecting mills and purchasing lead mines. Capital, two millions.
32. For improving the art of making soap.
33. For a settlement on the island of Santa Cruz.
34. For sinking pits and smelting lead ore in Derbyshire.
35. For making glass bottles and other glass.
36. For a wheel for perpetual motion. Capital, one million.
37. For improving of gardens.
38. For insuring and increasing children's fortunes.
39. For entering and loading goods at the custom-house, and for negotiating business for
merchants.
40. For carrying on a woollen manufacture in the north of England.
41. For importing walnut-trees from Virginia. Capital, two millions.
42. For making Manchester stuffs of thread and cotton.
43. For making Joppa and Castile soap.

44. For improving the wrought-iron and steel manufactures of this kingdom. Capital, four
millions.
45. For dealing in lace, Hollands, cambrics, lawns, &c. Capital, two millions.
46. For trading in and improving certain commodities of the produce of this kingdom,
&c. Capital, three millions.
47. For supplying the London markets with cattle.
48. For making looking-glasses, coach glasses, &c. Capital, two millions.
49. For working the tin and lead mines in Cornwall and Derbyshire.
50. For making rape-oil.
51. For importing beaver fur. Capital, two millions.
52. For making pasteboard and packing-paper.
53. For importing of oils and other materials used in the woollen manufacture.
54. For improving and increasing the silk manufactures.
55. For lending money on stock, annuities, tallies, &c.
56. For paying pensions to widows and others, at a small discount. Capital, two millions.
57. For improving malt liquors. Capital, four millions.
58. For a grand American fishery.
59. For purchasing and improving the fenny lands in Lincolnshire. Capital, two millions.
60. For improving the paper manufacture of Great Britain.
61. The Bottomry Company.
62. For drying malt by hot air.
63. For carrying on a trade in the river Oronooko.
64. For the more effectual making of baize, in Colchester and other parts of Great Britain.

65. For buying of naval stores, supplying the victualling, and paying the wages of the
workmen.
66. For employing poor artificers, and furnishing merchants and others with watches.
67. For improvement of tillage and the breed of cattle.
68. Another for the improvement of our breed of horses.
69. Another for a horse-insurance.
70. For carrying on the corn trade of Great Britain.
71. For insuring to all masters and mistresses the losses they may sustain by servants.
Capital, three millions.
72. For erecting houses or hospitals, for taking in and maintaining illegitimate children.
Capital, two millions.
73. For bleaching coarse sugars, without the use of fire or loss of substance.
74. For building turnpikes and wharfs in Great Britain.
75. For insuring from thefts and robberies.
76. For extracting silver from lead.
77. For making China and Delft ware. Capital, one million.
78. For importing tobacco, and exporting it again to Sweden and the north of Europe.
Capital, four millions.
79. For making iron with pit coal.
80. For furnishing the cities of London and Westminster with hay and straw. Capital,
three millions.
81. For a sail and packing cloth manufactory in Ireland.
82. For taking up ballast.
83. For buying and fitting out ships to suppress pirates.
84. For the importation of timber from Wales. Capital, two millions.
85. For rock-salt.

86. For the transmutation of quicksilver into a malleable fine metal.
Besides these bubbles, many others sprang up daily, in spite of the condemnation of the
Government and the ridicule of the still sane portion of the public. The print-shops
teemed with caricatures, and the newspapers with epigrams and satires, upon the
prevalent folly. An ingenious card-maker published a pack of South Sea playing-cards,
which are now extremely rare, each card containing, besides the usual figures, of a very
small size, in one corner, a caricature of a bubble company, with appropriate verses
underneath. One of the most famous bubbles was "Puckle's Machine Company," for
discharging round and square cannon-balls and bullets, and making a total revolution in
the art of war. Its pretensions to public favour were thus summed up, on the eight of
spades :-A rare invention to destroy the crowd Of fools at home, instead of fools abroad. Fear not,
my friends, this terrible machine, They're only wounded who have shares therein.
The nine of hearts was a caricature of the English Copper and Brass Company, with the
following epigram :-The headlong fool that wants to be a swopper Of gold and silver coin for English copper,
May, in Change Alley, prove himself an ass, And give rich metal for adulterate brass.
The eight of diamonds celebrated the Company for the Colonization of Acadia, with this
doggrel :-He that is rich and wants to fool away A good round sum in North America, Let him
subscribe himself a headlong sharer, And asses' ears shall honour him or bearer.
And in a similar style every card of the pack exposed some knavish scheme, and ridiculed
the persons who were its dupes. It was computed that the total amount of the sums
proposed for carrying on these projects was upwards of three hundred millions sterling, a
sum so immense that it exceeded the value of all the lands in England at twenty years'
purchase.
It is time, however, to return to the great South Sea gulf, that swallowed the fortunes of
so many thousands of the avaricious and the credulous. On the 29th of May, the stock had
risen as high as five hundred, and about two-thirds of the government annuitants had
exchanged the securities of the state for those of the South Sea Company. During the
whole of the month of May the stock continued to rise, and on the 28th it was quoted at
five hundred and fifty. In four days after this it took a prodigious leap, rising suddenly
from five hundred and fifty to eight hundred and ninety. It was now the general opinion
that the stock could rise no higher, and many persons took that opportunity of selling out,
with a view of realising their profits. Many noblemen and persons in the train of the
King, and about to accompany him to Hanover, were also anxious to sell out. So many
sellers, and so few buyers, appeared in the Alley on the 3rd of June, that the stock fell at

once from eight hundred and ninety to six hundred and forty. The directors were alarmed,
and gave their agents orders to buy. Their efforts succeeded. Towards evening confidence
was restored, and the stock advanced to seven hundred and fifty. It continued at this
price, with some slight fluctuation, until the company closed their books on the 22nd of
June.
It would be needless and uninteresting to detail the various arts employed by the directors
to keep up the price of stock. It will be sufficient to state that it finally rose to one
thousand per cent. It was quoted at this price in the commencement of August. The
bubble was then full-blown, and began to quiver and shake, preparatory to its bursting.
Many of the government annuitants expressed dissatisfaction against the directors. They
accused them of partiality in making out the lists for shares in each subscription. Further
uneasiness was occasioned by its being generally known that Sir John Blunt, the
chairman, and some others, had sold out. During the whole of the month of August the
stock fell, and on the 2nd of September it was quoted at seven hundred only.
The state of things now became alarming. To prevent, if possible, the utter extinction of
public confidence in their proceedings, the directors summoned a general court of the
whole corporation, to meet in Merchant Tailors' Hall, on the 8th of September. By nine
o'clock in the morning, the room was filled to suffocation; Cheapside was blocked up by
a crowd unable to gain admittance, and the greatest excitement prevailed. The directors
and their friends mustered in great. numbers. Sir John Fellowes, the sub-governor, was
called to the chair. He acquainted the assembly with the cause of their meeting, read to
them the several resolutions of the court of directors, and gave them an account of their
proceedings; of the taking in the redeemable and unredeemable funds, and of the
subscriptions in money. Mr. Secretary Craggs then made a short speech, wherein he
commended the conduct of the directors, and urged that nothing could more effectually
contribute to the bringing this scheme to perfection than union among themselves. He
concluded with a motion for thanking the court of directors for their prudent and skilful
management, and for desiring them to proceed in such manner as they should think most
proper for the interest and advantage of the corporation. Mr. Hungerford, who had
rendered himself very conspicuous in the House of Commons for his zeal in behalf of the
South Sea Company, and who was shrewdly suspected to have been a considerable gainer
by knowing the right time to sell out, was very magniloquent on this occasion. He said
that he had seen the rise and fall, the decay and resurrection of many communities of this
nature, but that, in his opinion, none had ever performed such wonderful things in so
short a time as the South Sea Company. They had done more than the crown, the pulpit,
or the bench could do. They had reconciled all parties in one common interest; they had
laid asleep, if not wholly extinguished, all the domestic jars and animosities of the nation.
By the rise of their stock, monied men had vastly increased their fortunes; countrygentlemen had seen the value of their lands doubled and trebled in their hands. They had
at the same time done good to the Church, not a few of the reverend clergy having got
great sums by the project. In short, they had enriched the whole nation, and he hoped they
had not forgotten themselves. There was some hissing at the latter part of this speech,
which for the extravagance of its eulogy was not far removed from satire; but the
