
Y: have some money in the bank. You decide you would like to



Clues from the Past 35

part of the twentieth century, a number of big fortunes and many small
ones were made largely by betting on the business cycle. In a period
when an unstable banking system caused recurring boom and bust, buy-
ing stocks in bad times and selling them in good had strong elements of
value. This was particularly true for’ those with good financial connec-
tions who might have some advance information about when the bank-
ing system was becoming a bit strained.

But perhaps the most significant fact to be realized is that even in
the stock market era which started to end with the coming of the Fed-
eral Reserve System in 1913 and became history with the passage of the
securities and exchange legislation in the early days of the Roosevelt
administration, those who used a different method made far more
money and took far less risk. Even in those earlier times, finding the
really outstanding companies and staying with them through all the
fluctuations of a gyrating market proved far more profitable to far more
people than did the more colorful practice of trying to buy them cheap
and sell them dear.

If this statement appears surprising, further amplification of it may
prove even more so. It may also provide the key to open the first door
to successful investing. Listed on the various stock exchanges of the
nation today are not just a few, but scores of companies in which it
would have been possible to invest, say, $10,000 somewhere between
twenty-five and fifty years ago and today have this purchase represent
anywhere from $250,000 to several times this amount. In other words,
within the lifetime of most investors and within the period in which
their parents could have acted for nearly all of them, there were avail-
able scores of opportunities to lay the groundwork for substantial for-
tunes for oneself or one’s children.'l'hese opportunities did not require
purchasing on a particular day at the bottom of a great panic. The shares
of these companies were available year after year at prices that were to
make this kind of profit possible. What was required was the ability to
distinguish these relatively few companies with outstanding investment
possibilities from the much greater number whose future would vary all
the way from the moderately successful to the complete failure.

Are there opportunities existing today to make investments that in
the years ahead will yield corresponding percentage gains? The answer
to this question deserves rather detailed attention. If it be in the affirma-
tive, the path for making real profits through common stock investment
starts to become clear. Fortunately, there is strong evidence indicating


36 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

that the opportunities of today are not only as good as those of the first
quarter of this century but are actually much better.

One reason for this is the change that has occurred during this peri-
od in the fundamental concept of corporate management and the cor-
responding changes in handling ‘corporate affairs that this has brought
about. A generation ago, heads of a large corporation were usually mem-
bers of the owning family. They regarded the corporation as a personal
possession. The interests of outside stockholders were largely ignored. If
any consideration at all was given to the problem of management con-
tinuity—that is, of training younger men to step into the shoes of those
whose age might make them no longer available—the motive was large-
ly that of taking care of a son or a nephew who would inherit the job.
Providing the best available talent to protect the average stockholder’s
investment was seldom a matter in the forefront of the minds of man-
agement. In that age of autocratic personal domination, the tendency of
aging management was to resist innovation or improvement and fre-
guently to refuse even to listen to suggestions or criticism. This is a far
cry from today’s constant competitive search to find ways of doing
things better. Today’s top corporate management is usually engaged in
continuous self-analysis and, in a never-ending search for improvement,
frequently even goes outside its own organization by consulting all sorts
of experts in its effort to get good advice.

In former days there was always great danger that the most attrac-
tive corporation of the moment would not continue to stay ahead in its
field or, if it did, that the insiders would grab all the benefits for them-
selves. Today, investment dangers like these, while not entirely a thing of
the past, are much less likely to prove a hazard for the careful investor.

One facet of the change that has come over corporate management
is worthy of attention. This is the growth of the corporate research and
engineering laboratory—an occurrence that would hardly have benefit-
ed the stockholder if it had not been accompanied by corporate man-
agement’s learning a parallel technique whereby this research could be
made a tool to open up a golden harvest of ever-growing profits to the
stockholder. Even today, many investors seem but slightly aware of how
fast this development has come, how much further it is almost certain-
ly going, and its impact on basic investment policy.

Actually, even by the late 1920%, only a half dozen or so industrial
corporations had significant research organizations. By today’s standards,
their size was small. It was not until the fear of Adolf Hitler accelerated



Clues from the Past 37

this type of activity for military purposes that industrial research really
started to grow,

It has been growing ever since. A survey made in the spring of 1956,
published in Business Week and a number of other McGraw-Hill trade
publications, indicated that in 1953’private corporate expenditures for
research and development were about $3.7 billion. By 1956 they had
grown to $5.5 billion and present corporate planning called for this to
be running at the rate of better than $6.3 billion by 1959. Equally star-
tling, this survey indicated that by 1959, or in just three years, a number
of our leading industries expect to get from 15 per cent to more than
20 per cent of their total sales from products which were not in com-
mercial existence in 1956.

In the spring of 1957 the same source made a similar survey. If the
totals revealed in 1956 were startling in their significance, those revealed
just one year later might be termed explosive. Research expenditures
were up 20 per cent from the previous year’s total to $7.3 billion! This
represents almost a 100 per cent growth in four years. It means the actu-
al growth in twelve months was $1 billion more than only a year before
had been expected as the total growth that would occur in the ensuing
thirty-six months. Mcanwhile, anticipated research expenditures in
1960 were estimated at $9 billion! Furthermore, all manufacturing
industries, rather than just a few selected industries as represented in the
earlier survey, expected that 10 per cent of 1960 sales would be from
products not yet in commercial existence only three years before. For cer-
tain selected industries, this percentage—from which sales representing
merely new model and style changes had been excluded—was several
times higher.

The impact of this sort of thing on investment can hardly be over-
stated. The cost of this type of research is becoming so great that the cor-
poration which fails to handle it wisely from a commercial standpoint
may stagger under a crushing burden of operating expense. Furthermore,
there is no quick and easy yardstick for either management or the
investor to measure the profitability of research. Just as even the ablest
professional baseball player cannot expect to get a hit much more often
than one out of every three times he comes to bat, so a sizable number
of research projects, governed merely by the law of averages, are bound
to produce nothing profitable at all. Furthermore, by pure chance, an
abnormal number of such unprofitable projects may happen to be
bunched together in one particular span of time in even the best-run


38 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

commercial laboratory. Finally, it is apt to take from seven to eleven years
from the time a project is first conceived until it has a significant favor—
able effect on corporate earnings. Therefore, even the most profitable of
research projects is pretty sure to be a financial drain before it eventual-
ly adds to the stockholder’s profit.

But if the cost of poorly organized research is both high and hard
to detect, the cost of too little research may be even higher. During the
next few years, the introduction of many kinds of new materials and
new types of machinery will steadily narrow the market for thousands
of companies, possibly entire industries, which fail to keep pace with the
times. So will such major changes in basic ways of doing things as will
be brought about by the adoption of electronic computers for the keep-
ing of records and the use of irradiation for industrial processing. How-
ever, other companies will be alert to the trends and will maneuver to
make enormous sales gains from such awareness. The managements of
certain of such companies may continue to maintain the highest stan-
dards of efficiency in handling their day-to-day operations while using
equally good judgment in keeping ahead of the field on these matters
affecting the long-range future. Their fortunate stockholders, rather than
the proverbial meck, may well inherit the earth.

In addition to these influences of the changed outlook in corporate
management and the rise of research, there is a third factor likewise
tending to give today’s investor greater opportunities than those exist-
ing in most past periods, Later in this book—in those sections dealing
with when stocks should be bought and sold—it would seem more
appropriate to discuss what, if any, influence the business cycle should
have on investment policies. But discussion of one segment of this sub-
ject seems called for at this point. This is the greater advantage in own-
ing certain types of common stocks, as a result of a basic policy change
that has occurred within the framework of our federal government,
largely since 1932.

Both prior to and since that date, regardless of how little they had to
do with bringing it about, both major partics took and usually received
credit for any prosperity that might occur when they were in power.
Similarly, they were usually blamed by both the opposition and the gen-
eral public if a bad slump occurred. However, prior to 1932 there would
have been serious question from the responsible leadership of either
party as to whether there was any moral justification or even political
wisdom in deliberately running a huge deficit in order to buttress ailing



Clues from the Past 39

segments of business. Fighting unemployment by methods far more cost-
ly than the opening of bread lines and soup kitchens would not have
been given serious consideration, regardless of which party might have
been in office.

Since 1932 all that is reversed. The Democrats may or may not be
less concerned with a balanced federal budget than the Republicans.
However, from President Eisenhower on down, with the possible
exception of former Secretary of the Treasury Humphrey, the responsi-
ble Republican leadership has said again and again that if business
should really turn down they would not hesitate to lower taxes or make
whatever other deficit-producing moves were necessary to restore pros-
perity and eliminate unemployment. This is a far cry from the doctrines
that prevailed prior to the big depression.

Even if this change in policy had not become generally accepted,
certain other changes have occurred that would produce much the same
results, though possibly not so quickly. The income tax only became legal
during the Wilson administration. It was not a major influence on the
economy until the 1930's. In earlier years, much of the federal revenue
came from customs duties and similar excise sources. These fluctuated
moderately with the level of prosperity but as a whole were fairly stable.
Today, in contrast, about 80 per cent of the federal revenue comes from
corporate and personal income taxes. This means that any sharp decline
in the general level of business causes a corresponding decline in federal
revenue.

Meanwhile, various devices such as farm price supports and unem-
ployment compensation have become imbedded in our laws. At just the
time that a business decline would be greatly reducing the federal gov-
ernment’s income, expenditures in these fields made mandatory by leg-
islation would cause governmental expenses to mount sharply. Add to
this the definite intention of reversing any unfavorable business trend by
cutting taxes, building more public works, and lending money to vari-
ous hard-pressed business groups, and it becomes increasingly plain that
ifa real depression were to occur the federal deficit could easily run at
a rate of $25 to $30 billion per annum. Deficits of this type would pro-
duce further inflation in much the same way that the deficits resulting
from wartime expenditures produced the major price spirals of the
postwar period.

This means that when a depression does occur it is apt to be shorter
than some of the great depressions of the past. It is almost bound to be


40 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

followed by enough further inflation to produce the type of general price
rise that in the past has helped certain industries and hurt others. With this
general economic background, the menace of the business cycle may well
be as great as it ever was for the stockholder in the financially weak or
marginal company. But to the’ stockholder in the growth company with
sufficient financial strength or borrowing ability to withstand a year or
two of hard times, a business decline under today’s economic conditions
represents far more a temporary shrinking of the market value of his hold-
ings than the basic threat to the very existence of the investment itself that
had to be reckoned with prior to 1932.

Another basic financial trend has resulted from this built-in infla~
tionary bias having become imbedded so deeply in both our laws and
our accepted concepts of the economic duties of government. Bonds
have become undesirable investments for the strictly long-term holdings
of the average individual investor. The rise in interest rates that had been
going on for several years gained major momentum in the fall of 1956.
With high-grade bonds subsequently selling at the lowest prices in
twenty-five years, many voices in the financial community were raised
to advocate switching from stocks which were selling at historically
high levels into such fixed-income securities. The abnormally high yield
of bonds over dividend return on stocks—in relation to the ratio that
normally prevails—would appear to have given strong support to the
soundness of this policy. For the short term, such a policy sooner or later
may prove profitable. As such, it might have great appeal for those mak-
ing short- or medium term investments—that is, for “traders” with the
acuteness and sense of timing to judge when to make the necessary buy-
ing and selling moves. This is because the coming of any significant
business recession is almost certain to cause an easing of money rates and
a corresponding rise in bond prices at a time when equity quotations
are hardly likely to be buoyant. This leads us to the conclusion that high-
grade bonds may be good for the speculator and bad for the long-term
investor. This seems to run directly counter to all normally accepted
thinking on this subject. However, any understanding of the influences
of inflation will show why this is likely to be the case.

In its letter of December 1956, the First National City Bank of
New York furnished a table showing the worldwide nature of the
depreciation in the purchasing power of money that occurred in the
ten years from 1946 to 1956. Sixteen of the major nations of the free
world were included in this table. In every one of them the value of



Clues from the Past 41

money significantly declined. These declines ranged from a minimum
in Switzerland, where at the end of the ten-year period money would
buy 85 per cent of what could be purchased ten years before, to the
other extreme in Chile, where in ten years it had lost 95 per cent of
its former value. In the United States this decline amounted to 29 per
cent and in Canada to 35 per cent. This means that in the United
States the annual rate of monetary depreciation during the period was
3.4 per cent, and in Canada it was 4.2 per cent. In contrast, the yield
offered by United States Government bonds bought at the beginning
of the period, which admittedly was one of rather low interest rates,
was only 2.19 per cent. This means that the holder of this type of
high-grade, fixed-income security actually received negative interest
(or loss) of better than 1 per cent per annum if the real value of his
money is considered.

Suppose, however, that instead of acquiring bonds at the rather low
rates that prevailed at the beginning of this period, the investor could
have bought them at the rather high interest rates that prevailed ten
years later. The First National City Bank of New York in the same arti-
cle also supplied figures on this matter. At the end of the period covered
in the article, they estimated the return on United States Government
bonds at 3.27 per cent, which still would leave no return whatever, actu-
ally a slight loss, on the investment. However, six months after this arti
cle was written, interest rates had risen sharply, and were above 3.5 per
cent. How would the investor actually have fared if he had had the
opportunity at the beginning of this period to invest with the highest
returns that have prevailed in over a quarter of a century? In the great
majority of cases he would still have gotten no real return on his invest-
ment. In many instances he would have had an actual loss, This is
because nearly all such bond purchasers would have had to pay at least
a 20 per cent income tax on the interest received before the genuine
rate of their return on the investment could have been calculated. In
many cases the bondholder’s tax would have been at a considerably
higher rate, since only the first $2000 to $4000 of taxable income qual-
ifies at this 20 per cent level. Similarly, if an investor had purchased tax-
free municipal bonds at this all-time high, the somewhat lower interest
tate that these tax-free securities carry would again not have provided
any real return on his investment.

Of course, these figures are only conclusive for this one ten-year
period. They do indicate, however, that these conditions are worldwide


42 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

and therefore not too likely to be reversed by political trends in any one
country. What is really important concerning the attractiveness of bonds
as long-term investments is whether a similar trend can be expected in
the period ahead. It seems to me that if this whole inflation mechanism
is studied carefully it becomes clear that major inflationary spurts arise
out of wholesale expansions of credit, which in turn result from large
government deficits greatly enlarging the monetary base of the credit
system. The huge deficit incurred in winning World War II laid such a
base. The result was that prewar bondholders who have maintained their
positions in fixed-income securities have lost over half the real value of
their investments.

As already explained, our laws, and more importantly our accepted
beliefs of what should be done in a depression, make one of two courses
seem inevitable. Either business will remain good, in which event out-
standing stocks will continue to out-perform bonds, or a significant
recession will occur. If this happens, bonds should temporarily out-
perform the best stocks, but a train of major deficit-producing actions
will then be triggered that will cause another major decline in the true
purchasing power of bond-type investments. It is almost certain that a
depression will produce further major inflation; the extreme difficulty
of determining when in such a disturbing period bonds should be sold
makes me believe that securities of this type are, in our complex economy,
primarily suited either to banks, insurance companies and other institu-
tions that have dollar obligations to offset against them, or to individu-
als with short term objectives. They do not provide for sufficient gain
to the long-term investor to offset this probability of further deprecia-
tion in purchasing power.

Before going further, it might be well to summarize briefly the var-
ious investment clues that can be gleaned from a study of the past and
from a comparison of the major differences, from an investment stand-
point, between the past and the present. Such a study indicates that the
greatest investment reward comes to those who by good luck or good
sense find the occasional company that over the years can grow in sales
and profits far more than industry as a whole. It further shows that when
we believe we have found such a company we had better stick with it
for a long period of time. It gives us a strong hint that such companies
need not necessarily be young and small. Instead, regardless of size, what
really counts is a management having both a determination to attain fur-
ther important growth and an ability to bring its plans to completion.



Clues from the Past 43

The past gives us a further clue that this growth is often associated with
knowing how to organize research in the various fields of the natural sci-
ences so as to bring to market economically worthwhile and usually
interrelated product lines. It makes clear to us that a general characteris-
tic of such companies is a managemént that does not let its preoccupa-
tion with long-range planning prevent it from exerting constant vigi-
lance in performing the day-to-day tasks of ordinary business
outstandingly well. Finally, it furnishes considerable assurance that in spite
of the very many spectacular investment opportunities that existed twenty-
five or fifty years ago, there are probably even more such opportunities
available today.


2

What “Scuttlebutt”
Can Do

s a general description of what to look for, all this may be helpful.

But as a practical guide for finding outstanding investments, it

obviously contributes relatively little. Granted that this furnishes a
broad outline of the type of investment that should be sought, how does
the investor go about finding the specific company which might open
the way to major appreciation?
