
r “Speculative” ﬂow (without an underlying attached asset)
r Equity ﬂow
r Fixed income ﬂow
r Direct investment ﬂow
r Trade ﬂow
By far, speculative ﬂow is the main driver of exchange rates over the short term. It is not
sufﬁcient to suggest that speculative ﬂows follow a “random walk” for the simple reason that
both technical and ﬂow analysis have discovered consistent patterns in short-term exchange
rates which should not exist under random walk theory. Within asset market ﬂow, equity
and ﬁxed income ﬂows continue to do battle for pre-eminence. For instance, from 1998 to

Fundamental Analysis

45

mid-2000, net inﬂows to the US equity markets were a key driver of dollar strength. Equally,
as the US equity market began to falter, the resulting equity outﬂows from the US market
weighed on the US dollar. Eventually, however, these ﬂows were more than made up for by
ﬁxed income inﬂows to the US ﬁxed income markets as the Federal Reserve continued to cut
interest rates to support the economy. Direct investment is also an increasingly important driver
of exchange rates, both in the developed economies and in the emerging markets, as barriers
to inward investment have also fallen away. In 2001, the top ﬁve performing currencies in the
world against the USD were the Mexican peso, Polish zloty, Czech koruna, Hungarian forint
and Peruvian sol, all of which beneﬁted from substantial direct investment inﬂows which had
a signiﬁcant impact on their exchange rates.
The importance of all of these ﬂow types continues to ﬂuctuate in line with market trends.
What is clear however, is that until there is a speciﬁc exchange rate model which focuses on
the main ﬂow dynamic of the currency market, namely speculative ﬂow, it is unlikely that
exchange rate models in general will be able to improve upon their current accuracy to any
signiﬁcant degree. In the next chapter, this is in fact what we will try and do — to build a simple
exchange rate model which focuses on speculative ﬂow. In addition, we also examine how to
use “currency economics”, or the bits of economic theory that are relevant to the currency
market, in a practical manner for currency forecasting, trading and investing.

@Team-FLY

2
Currency Economics:
A More Focused Framework
In the previous chapter, we had a pretty detailed look at traditional exchange rate models.
Signiﬁcant research went into these models and indeed they are valuable in trying to predict long-term exchange trends. Where they fall down is their ability to predict short-term
moves.
The reaction of economists to this realization in truth has been mixed. Of late, however,
there seems to have been a gradual recognition that a greater focus is needed in applying the
general rules of economics to the speciﬁc dynamics of the currency market. For want of a
better term, I have called this greater focus “currency economics”. I should say at the outset
this is not an attempt to create an entirely new ﬁeld of currency analysis. Rather, it is to
create a more focused framework, using those existing economic principles that are relevant to
the currency market and when necessary adding on other analytical disciplines to provide an
integrated approach to currency analysis. After all, analysis is the means to an end. It should
not be viewed as the end in itself. A certain degree of ﬂexibility is needed to modify the
theory to ﬁt better the practice. As John Maynard Keynes himself is reputed to have said,
“when things change, we change”. To a trader, this is only common sense. However, to the
modern economic community, such ﬂexibility appears frequently elusive. Further, while the
more ﬂexible economists have pondered how to make the traditional exchange rate models
more accurate in predicting exchange rate moves, other disciplines appear to have got there
before them. To a considerable degree, technical and ﬂow analysis have succeeded where
classical economics has yet to. We will look at these in detail in Chapters 3 and 4, but for now
the point has to be acknowledged that these disciplines have had success precisely because
they have focused on solving the problem of predicting short-term exchange rate moves.
Yet, if exchange rates are only subject to random walk theory over short-term periods, how
can this be so? The answer is obvious and it is this — they are not subject to random walk
theory, but instead can over short time periods demonstrate clear and identiﬁable patterns,
patterns that can be used to predict their movements. This is not to say they will be predicted
every time, but it is to say trying to forecast short-term exchange rate moves need not be the
equivalent of a blind monkey throwing a dart at a dartboard, as random walk theory might
suggest.
Suggesting that other types of analysis have succeeded to a degree in predicting short-term
exchange rate moves does not mean we abandon the attempt to improve economic analysis to
make it better able to do the same thing. To do this however, we have to get past the stage of
relying solely on the traditional exchange rate models and focus more on the speciﬁc dynamics
of the currency market. Only when we understand these can we hope to get measurably better
results in applying economic analysis to the prediction of short-term exchange rates. Before
that, we need to have a much better idea of the speciﬁc dynamics that are at work in the currency
market itself.

48

Currency Strategy

2.1 CURRENCIES ARE DIFFERENT
The ﬁrst thing to say about the currency market is that it possesses and obeys a different set of
dynamics to other ﬁnancial markets. Unlike in the case of equity or ﬁxed income markets, the
vast majority of currency market practitioners are speculators of one sort or another. Global
merchandise trade going through the currency market makes up around 1–2% of total volume.
Let’s say we more than double that to allow for foreign direct investment, making a volume
contribution of around 5%. Asset market volumes have risen sharply over the past 20 years
as barriers to capital have fallen. Having made up only a small proportion of currency market
volume before the end of the Bretton Woods exchange rate system, they probably now make up
as much as 35% of total currency market volume on a daily basis. That still leaves 60% of daily
currency market volume, which has to ascribe to “speculation”. Granted, these are very rough,
back-of-the-envelope ﬁgures, but they give a good idea of the proportions that are involved.
Given this, is it any wonder that many of the traditional exchange rate models that are based
on the current account and therefore on trade ﬂows are poor predictors of exchange rates over
the short term?! Equally, this gives some clue as to why the portfolio balance approach to
exchange rates also achieves unsatisfactory results.
2.1.1 (In)Efﬁcient Markets
As we know from Chapter 1, economic theory approaches the issue of exchange rates by trying
to ﬁnd a theoretical equilibrium level, against which one can measure over- or undervaluation
relative to the actual exchange rate. Such theory relies on a number of important premises with
regard to the information that might affect exchange rates:

r Exchange rates reﬂect all available knowledge at any one time
r There is perfect knowledge dispersal (such that no-one has an advantage)
While it is debatable whether or not these exist in other ﬁnancial markets, we do know that these
are not the reality in the currency market. Many people think of the currency or FX market as
the “perfect market”, being that in which knowledge dispersal is optimum and which responds
with perfect efﬁciency to stimulus. This simply isn’t the case. Information is not perfect and
some market participants can indeed gain a knowledge advantage over their counterparts. Why
is this so?

r The sheer weight of information affecting exchange rates at any one time is so huge that all
currency market practitioners cannot possibly absorb all of it all of the time.

r Knowledge dispersal is not perfect and some do have an advantage over others. Such advantages may include knowledge about speciﬁc ﬂows that may occur, a bank’s own “order
book” and ﬁnally the ability to do larger currency market transactions than other market
participants.
If knowledge is power, then such power in the currency market is not distributed equally. This
is no accident. Indeed, it is the very intention of normal and healthy competition to try to gain
advantage over other market participants. While news information has never been as freely
available as now, at some point that very availability swamps the ability of the users of such
information to absorb it all. To some, we appear closer to a state of perfect knowledge than we
have ever been, yet I would liken this to the speed of transportation. In 1900, the average speed
of the leading mode of transportation in the city of London (the horse) was 11 miles an hour.

Currency Economics

49

In 2000, the average speed of the now leading mode of transportation (the turbo fuel-injected
car) was . . . 11 miles an hour. Progress begets more progress until you progress so far that you
go nowhere. The more information that is available to us, the less we actually have the time
(or the willingness) to read. If the good news is that we are closer to perfect knowledge than
we have ever been, then the bad news is that we are never likely to get there!
Information costs money to deliver and therefore there is not “perfect” information delivery
because not everyone gets it, either at all or at the same time. Even if it were free, “information
overload” still means that not everyone reads and uses it at the same time. If you don’t believe
me, just think of your e-mail inbox! In sum, there is neither perfect information nor perfect
information dispersal — and there never will be. In response, an economist might argue that
we have “good” information, if not perfect information. It would be tough to argue with this,
but then “good” is not “perfect” and “perfect” is a necessary aspect of the equilibrium concept.
Furthermore, this supposed equilibrium level is rarely ever reached. Real life is surely a
constant state of ﬂux and imbalance, so why should ﬁnancial markets be any different? In turn,
if one assumes that the economic fundamentals that can affect exchange rates are themselves
in a constant state of ﬂux, one must equally assume that the equilibrium itself is in a constant
state of ﬂux — which to an extent calls into question the idea of it being an “equilibrium” in
the ﬁrst place. In truth, it is a signpost on a road. It points you in the right direction, but it gives
you no idea of when you will get there or where you might have to turn off along the way.
2.1.2 Speculation and Exchange Rates: Cause, Effect and the Cycle
As with the supposed efﬁciency of markets, which does not actually work in practice, so there
is the idea that supply and demand are completely independent of one another. If this were so,
price trends could not exist because markets would instantly work to eliminate any supply or
demand imbalances. The fact that this does not happen and that price trends do occur suggests
that there are lags, sometimes substantial lags, before such imbalances can be eliminated. In
addition, supply and demand are not completely objective concepts. Rather, at least in part,
they reﬂect the views expressed by those market participants that make up that supply and
demand. In other words, supply and demand are both cause and effect.
So much for the theory, what does this mean in practice? Actually, to a market practitioner,
these ideas are relatively obvious. Currency interbank dealers know full well that particular
ﬂows will have more effect than others and thus will materially affect the supply/demand
dynamics. Say a large multinational corporation transacts an end-of-quarter hedge in the Euro–
dollar exchange rate. Granted, this is the most liquid currency pair in the world, but if the ﬂow
is large enough it may affect both current market pricing and future market thinking. Of course
the term “future” means different things to different people. To the multinational, it means
months at least if not years. To the interbank dealer transacting the ﬂow in the market place it
means minutes or hours at most. Currency markets are essentially ﬂow-driven over short time
frames, and therefore it is vital to understand the relationship between supply and demand
dynamics.
Just as supply and demand are not independent of one another and are both cause and
effect, so the relationship between “speculation” and economic fundamentals is also not just
one-way. Economic theory requires that markets eliminate “speculative excess”, thus restoring
equilibrium. However, we have already established that “equilibrium” is actually a moving
target. If the “speculative excess” is the extent to which markets diverge from equilibrium,
then that “speculative excess” is also a moving target. Finally, the presumption of economists

50

Currency Strategy

is that economic fundamentals drive market pricing and thus to an extent speculative excess.
Even if we accept this, it has also to be acknowledged that speculative excess can in turn affect
economic fundamentals. This is best proven by example.
Example
Let’s use an example from the emerging markets. From October 2000 through June 2001, the
Polish zloty was one of the top three strongest currencies in the world, powering ahead on the
back of the irresistible combination of portfolio and direct investment inﬂows. It is probably
safe to assume that on the back of this trend — said trend proving that supply and demand are
not independent — speculative ﬂows also bought the Polish zloty to proﬁt from anticipated
capital and carry gains. Here, we deﬁne “speculative” ﬂow as that which has no underlying
commercial or ﬁnancial market transaction behind it but instead is purely a currency market
transaction for the purpose of a directional bet. For our example, we have used the Polish
zloty’s “basket” value, which is made up of 55% Euro and 45% US dollar against the zloty.
In Figure 2.1, the apparent “downtrend” in the Polish zloty against its basket actually represents currency appreciation rather than depreciation. It should be immediately obvious from
this chart that the Polish zloty has been a highly volatile currency over the last few years.
Equally clear should be the idea that as the Polish zloty has gradually “fallen” on a trend basis
towards the right-hand side of the chart, so this reﬂects trend appreciation. As the price trend
lasted for so long — October 2000 to June 2001 — then we should assume that this trend is
fundamentally based. If this were not so, one must presume it would have ended a lot more
quickly as an increasing number of market participants would have viewed it as unjustiﬁable.
Yet, this trend of Polish zloty appreciation took place over a period of some nine months,
apparently conﬁrming that the sum of currency market participants viewed it as fundamentally
justiﬁed.
To return to the theory, this states that exchange rates may diverge from their equilibrium
levels, that speculative excess is responsible for this and that resulting extreme (under- or over-)
valuation relative to the equilibrium will be corrected over time due to economic fundamentals.
In our Polish zloty example, we see a rather different picture. In 2000, the Polish economy was
still relatively strong, growing by 4.0%. In addition, Polish interest rates were still extremely
high at around 20%. Investment ﬂow seeks out the highest returns available and thus we must
assume that strong growth and high interest rates were powerful incentives for both fundamental
and speculative inﬂows into Poland at the time. For this purpose, we deﬁne “fundamental” ﬂow
as that related to underlying ﬁnancial or commercial transactions — stocks, bonds, trade and
direct investment.
Yet, those same high growth and interest rate levels which were attracting large capital
inﬂows also reﬂected a signiﬁcant tightening of monetary conditions by the National Bank of
Poland to temper inﬂationary pressure. There are two aspects to overall monetary conditions.
There is the cost of money — the interest rate — and the price of money — the exchange rate.
As a currency appreciates, this also reﬂects a tightening of overall monetary conditions. Thus,
in the last quarter of 2000, we had a situation whereby interest rates were extremely high and
the Polish zloty also appreciated signiﬁcantly. In effect, monetary conditions were tightened
twice! The combination of interest rate- and exchange rate-related tightening of monetary
conditions hurt Poland’s economic growth, triggering a recession the following year in 2001.
However, to accept this fact is also to accept the suggestion that currency moves and this
“speculative excess” can actually affect economic fundamentals, that they can both be cause
@Team-FLY

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec Jan99 Feb

Mar
Apr

May
Jun
Jul
Aug

Sep
Oct
Nov

Dec Jan00 Feb

Mar

Apr

PLNbasket [Line] Daily

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Figure 2.1 Polish zloty basket chart (up-moves reﬂect depreciation, down-moves appreciation)
Source: Reuters.

May 98 Jun

PLNbasket , Line
15Oct01 -9.46928

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec Jan01 Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

06Apr98 - 09Nov01

−17

−16

−15

−14

−13

−12

−11

−10

−9

−8

−7

−6

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

3

Pr

Currency Economics
51

52

Currency Strategy

and effect, as is the case with supply and demand. Looking at this example, we can also see that
the way “speculative excess” affects economic fundamentals follows a clear and discernible
pattern. Indeed, if we compare how Poland’s economy performed relative to the trend in
currency appreciation of the Polish zloty, we see the following pattern or “cycle” at work:

r Fundamental market participants (e.g. corporations and asset managers) apparently deemed
Polish zloty ﬁxed income securities as good value around October 2000 and started buying
them on a sustained basis, creating a trend in the Polish zloty itself.
r As the zloty continued to appreciate, this tightened overall monetary conditions even further,
in addition to already high interest rates. Meanwhile, the longer the zloty trend continued the
more self-perpetuating it became, with speculators joining their fundamental counterparts,
anticipating more or less guaranteed returns.
r However, the longer the Polish zloty’s trend appreciation continued, the more monetary
conditions were tightened and the more this hurt Poland’s economy. Exporters were hurt
by the increasingly uncompetitive currency, while the domestic economy was hurt by high
borrowing costs and cheap imports resulting from the currency’s strength.
r As the currency trend extended and continued therefore, fundamental market participants
became increasingly concerned about economic fundamental deterioration in the form of
fading economic growth and widening current account deﬁcits, and thus increasingly started
to take proﬁt on their positions.
r For a time, this fundamental selling was more than offset by speculative buying. Eventually,
however, the combination of increasing selling pressure and clear and increasing evidence of
major fundamental deterioration in the Polish economy proved too much and the speculative
ﬂow capitulated (as reﬂected by the sudden and dramatic spike higher in the Polish zloty
basket chart in June–July 2001, reﬂecting a collapse in the zloty’s value).

This cycle or pattern is not just reﬂective of one single example, but instead of a broader
relationship between speculative ﬂows and economic fundamentals within freely ﬂoating exchange rates. To some extent, this reﬂects the reaction of the current account to changes in
national income, as shown in the external balance and balance of payments models, however,
the advantage of this is that it speciﬁcally focuses on how speculative ﬂows, which make up
the majority of overall currency market ﬂows, affect economic fundamentals. As a result, an
appropriate title for this model would appear to be the “speculative cycle of exchange rates”,
which we can break down into four key phases:

r Phase I — Fundamental market participants deem a currency good (poor) value and start
buying (selling) it on a sustained basis, thus creating a currency trend.

r Phase II — The longer the trend continues, the more speculative it becomes in nature, as
more and more speculative market participants (i.e. no underlying asset in the transaction)
buy (sell) the currency trend.
r Phase III — However, as the trend of currency appreciation (depreciation) continues it creates
increasing economic deterioration (improvement), encouraging an increasing number of
fundamental market participants to sell (buy) their positions.
r Phase IV — For a time, speculative inﬂows (outﬂows) more than offset those fundamentals
outﬂows (inﬂows), but eventually in the face of increasing economic deterioration (improvement) they capitulate and the currency collapses (rallies).
Economists may note that this model is not that dissimilar in essence from the belief that
speculative excess will be corrected by fundamentals, back towards an equilibrium level. The

Currency Economics

53

crucial difference however is that the relationship between speculation and fundamentals is
not one-way but two-way. What the two ideas have in common however is that they believe in
a cycle. The cycle of foreign exchange activity may or may not be the same as the economic
cycle, depending on a number of factors such as positional risk and investor asset allocation.
In addition, there is no telling how long it will last. It could take weeks, months or even years.
However, it is a discernible pattern, reﬂecting the key dynamics of the currency market and
focusing speciﬁcally on speculative ﬂows. In addition, it can be used as a framework for the
analysis and prediction of exchange rates over the short to medium term.
2.1.3 Risk Appetite Indicators and Exchange Rates
