
Fibonacci Drawings

433

FIGURE 15.26 The Chinese stock market had remarkable behavior with respect
to the Fibonacci fan lines.

FIGURE 15.27 Symbol AEP oﬀered good long and short opportunities for those
watching its fan lines.

434

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 15.28 The fan lines shown here were based on two points that were
more than 23 years apart.

was at the bottom range of a fan line pair would have been repeatedly
profitable.
By their nature, the space between fan lines gets larger, as illustrated
in Figure 15.29, which is for Apple Computer (AAPL). Although prices are
obviously able to escape the ranges defined by the pairs of lines eventually,
these ranges make helpful trading guideposts. Take note in particular of the
earlier part of the chart, which shows how well-bounded the prices were.
In the rightmost part of the fan lines, the range is much wider, which was
appropriate, given Apple’s steady rise from the upper $70s to over $200.
Certainly the most import foreign exchange graph a trader wants to
monitor is the EUR/USD (Figure 15.30), measuring the ratio of the euro
to the U.S. dollar. Fibonacci fans have shown themselves to be instructive
on this instrument, which tends to have a positive correlation with U.S.
equities. During 2008’s financial crisis, the EUR/USD plunged to its 61.8
percent fan line and seemed to firm up there. This was a good indication
that equities were turning safer. Although the ultimate low in some indexes
took place four months later, November 2008 would have been an excellent
medium-term entry point for equities, as suggested by the EUR/USD’s relationship to its fan lines.

FIGURE 15.29 Apple Computer’s fan lines were helpful in providing likely ranges
for price movement.

FIGURE 15.30 The EUR/USD was in a free fall from July to November 2008, at
which time it stabilized at its 61.8 percent fan line. This proved to be a good turning
point for some major stock indexes.

436

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 15.31 Fibonacci fans can be customized for color, opacity, whether certain lines are shown, and many other parameters.

The dialog box to customize Fibonacci fans is virtually identical to,
although somewhat simpler than, the one for retracements. Because the
lines are diagonal, there is no need to display a price level (since it is
changing constantly). Figure 15.31 shows all the adjustments available in
the dialog box, which can be accessed either by right-clicking a fan object and choosing Customize Fibonacci or by selecting the same choice by
clicking and holding down the mouse button on top of the Fibonacci Fans
button.
One of the most extraordinary charts in this entire book is shown
in Figure 15.32. What is shown is quite simple: the Dow Jones Industrial
Average from 1900 to 2006 and two Fibonacci fans. The first fan is drawn
between the low in 1903 (the Rich Man’s Panic) and the peak in 1929
(the Roaring Twenties). The second fan is drawn between the low in the

Fibonacci Drawings

437

FIGURE 15.32 The point marked 1 is where these two fans intersected, which
corresponded to a perfect prediction of the low of the 1973–1974 bear market. Point
2 was the beginning of the gigantic 1980s and 1990s bull market. And point 3,
amazingly, was the very top of the bull market, predicted by a Fibonacci fan nearly
a century old.

summer of 1932 (the Great Depression) and the peak in 2000 (the Internet
bubble).
Just as combining different kinds of drawn objects can yield new insights, combining multiple instances of the same object (using different
time frames) can do the same. The reason is that the multiple objects can
agree with one another, emphasizing similar levels of support or resistance,
and their intersections can be indicative of major turning points in the
market.
In the graph there are three particular points of interest, labeled 1,
2, and 3. Point 1 marks where the two lower fan lines cross. This is an
extremely important point in this chart, because it is the only place the two
lower fans cross. The location that they cross is December 1974, which,
remarkably, is the exact bottom of the tremendous 1973–1974 bear market
(which bottomed on December 9, 1974).
This is positively remarkable. A fan that was started in the same year
that Orville and Wilbur Wright flew at Kitty Hawk and a fan that was started

438

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

when Herbert Hoover was still in office coincided with one of the most
pivotal points in the century’s market history, decades later.
Point 2 is the last time that the price touched the lower fan line. It also
turns out to be the exact point where the tremendous secular bull market
of the 1980s and 1990s began.
Finally, point 3 is the last time the price touched the upper fan and,
amazingly, marked the exact peak of the stock market. At the risk of driving
the point too heavily, it should be noted that this peak was predicted by a
fan that was commenced 97 years earlier. And unlike some other instances,
this fan was in place since 1929. Therefore, a person watching the broad
stock market would have had a very useful insight as to where the peak
might be.

FIBONACCI ARCS
The other two Fibonacci studies, arcs and time zones, warrant a somewhat
briefer look, principally because the instances when they provide strong
predictive power are less common. They are still useful, however, particularly in conjunction with other Fibonacci studies. Using fans and arcs together, for instance, is a common technique.
As with retracements and fans, the arcs are drawn by clicking on two
points (an extreme low and extreme high), thus creating a reference line.
Instead of straight lines based on these points, concentric circles are drawn
using the Fibonacci ratios, basing the distance on the difference between
the two extreme points.
Figure 15.33 shows the line being drawn from the autumn of 1998 (low)
to the winter of 2000 (high). Three arcs are drawn automatically, suggesting possible support and resistance levels. The circled areas (which do not
appear on the chart but are shown here for clarity) illustrate the price behavior proximal to these arcs.
In the case of Figure 15.33, a trader would have had helpful information about how high the stock might be going before reversing direction. In three instances after the major tumble the stock took in 2001, the
stock pushed up to the retracement arc, either pausing or reversing after
touching it.
The dialog box for the arcs is identical to the one for the fans. Figure
15.34 shows that only three levels have been selected for display, which is
what was used for Figure 15.33. This makes a cleaner, easier-to-read chart.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average is shown in Figure 15.35 with arcs
based on points between October 11, 2007, and March 6, 2009. Tinted in
yellow are the areas where prices clung to the arcs, indicating support (on
the way down) or resistance (on the way up).

Fibonacci Drawings

439

FIGURE 15.33 Arcs are used in a similar fashion, with each arc representing a
locus of support or resistance.

FIGURE 15.34 Arcs can be customized in much the same way that fans can.

440

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 15.35 Fibonacci arcs, based on extreme minimum and maximum price
points, can suggest areas of strong support and resistance.

Even more remarkable is the fact that extensions of these arcs, accessed via the customization dialog box, can also amplify the importance
of a particular arc formation by showing how price movements in the distant past still clung to these levels. In Figure 15.36, a greatly expanded view
of the Dow Jones illustrates past prices climbing the long-term arcs.

FIBONACCI TIME ZONES
The Fibonacci time zones is the only Fibonacci study that requires the
selection of one (instead of two) data point. It is also the only one that
expresses itself as a series of vertical lines meant to measure time instead
of price. The purpose of time zones is to predict major turning points for a
given financial instrument.
To draw a Fibonacci time zone, you need only choose the Fibonacci
time zones tool (the third from the right on the tool bar) and click on an

Fibonacci Drawings

441

FIGURE 15.36 Sometimes Fibonacci arcs show a relationship to prices even from
years earlier.

extreme low or high on a graph. When you do, a series of vertical lines,
each of which is farther to the right than the previous one, will be drawn.
As with other studies, the time series does not work equally well with all
graphs. Judging how friendly the study is by assessing its past predictive
value will dictate how useful the study is on a forward-looking basis.
Figure 15.37 provides a superb example of an excellent time series.
The graph is the S&P 500, and the low selected is at the deepest level of the
Great Depression in the early 1930s. The four downward-pointing arrows
(provided on this chart for easy interpretation of the graph) show that the
time series study did a prophetic job in pinpointing four crucial peaks in the
market that took place over a 70-year period. Having affirmed the accuracy
of these turning points, you could expand the chart’s time scale to look into
the future to see when the next turning point would be. Of course, there
may be turning points before then, but this study would offer at least one
forthcoming major turning point with a strong likelihood of taking place.
As with the other three Fibonacci studies, the time series can be customized (Figure 15.38), but the customization choices are limited to its
color, its opacity, and whether you want a reference line displayed.
When a time zone study is placed, a large number of vertical lines
are drawn, especially near the placement point. Most of the time, the leftmost vertical lines don’t correspond to any particular turning point (Figure
15.39). Do not let this dissuade you from the predictive power of a given
study. As long as the rightmost vertical lines appear to correlate with major
turning points in the market, the study should be perceived as having value
when used with whatever security you are analyzing.

442

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 15.37 This time zones chart, started at the low point of the early 1930s,
accurately predicted the turning point at four major junctures.

COMBINING OBJECTS
Fibonacci studies are at their best when they are paired. The intersection
points of studies can be exponentially more powerful since they offer affirmation from two different perspectives of a support or resistance level.
Figure 15.40 shows the Dow Jones Industrial Average with two Fibonacci

FIGURE 15.38 The simplicity of the time zones also means its customization
choices are very limited.

Fibonacci Drawings

443

FIGURE 15.39 Earlier time zones do not tend to be as useful and should typically
be ignored.

FIGURE 15.40 Combining Fibonacci studies can yield greater insight. Here the
fans and retracements are being used as a combination.

444

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

studies on it: a retracement and fan lines. The six rounded rectangles drawn
for emphasis show major turning points anticipated by the studies. The leftmost three rectangles show turning points predicted by the retracement
lines. The rightmost three rectangles have the benefit of being affirmed by
both the fans and the lines. Whenever you are approaching an area where
two studies agree, you should consider that an especially potent price
level.
There is no reason to limit yourself to Fibonacci studies when analyzing a graph, of course. Although you do not want to apply so many drawn
objects that the chart becomes too noisy with information, the judicious
application of well-drawn studies can improve your predictive powers over
a stock, index, or any other financial instrument.
In Figure 15.41, a variety of trend lines, channels, Fibonacci retracements, and Fibonacci fan lines have been applied against the S&P 500 index. Working together, these studies are helpful in monitoring and predicting the price behavior on both a large time scale and, as seen on the right
side of the chart, a shorter-term time scale.

FIGURE 15.41 Trend lines, channels, retracements, and fans are all being used
on this graph of the S&P 500.

Fibonacci Drawings

445

SUMMARY
We have now completed our journey through the four Fibonacci drawn objects. As you have seen, the Fibonacci studies are some of the most amazing and, used correctly, powerful predictive tools in your trading arsenal.
To round out our knowledge of the ProphetCharts system, the next chapter will address the newest power features that have been introduced to
ProphetCharts.

CHAPTER 16

Power Features

ecause it is a web-based product, ProphetCharts can be updated
with new features automatically for all its users. It is therefore very
much a living product and has a steady stream of new features being
added to it.
A printed book, on the other hand, is a snapshot in time, and by the
time you read this, ProphetCharts will surely be capable of doing some
things not mentioned on these pages. However, since the first edition of
Chart Your Way to Profits was published, some major new features have
been introduced, and we can learn about them here. These include the
ability to apply multiple labels to symbols, create customized ratio charts,
observe four charts at a time in grid mode, and look at charts flipped
upside down.

B

LABELS
As you know, watch lists are a crucial part of keeping your trading world
organized. Built correctly, watch lists give you the opportunity to maximize
the observations and opportunities you take from the market.
However, a list of symbols is a one-dimensional way of organizing
things, because you are simply putting stocks (or other financial instruments) into folders (that is, watch lists) of a certain name. If you want
to earmark symbols in a more meaningful way, you would formerly have
to make a large number of watch lists, each of which had the very
446

Power Features

447

specific category or classification you sought. In addition, one particular
symbol—GLD, for instance—might have to be put into multiple watch lists
(such as “Precious Metals,” “Commodities,” and “ETFs”), making things
messy.
With the new Labels feature, there is a much more elegant approach
available to you. Using Labels, you can assign any given symbol as many
properties as you like. A property—in ProphetCharts parlance, this is synonymous with label—can be any meaningful attribute. Some possibilities
might be:

r Highly Liquid.
r Commodities-Related.
r Local Stock.
r Easy to Short.
r Excellent Dividend.
r Non-Marginable.
r Triple-Bullish Fund.
The symbols in your watch lists can have zero labels (the default) to
multiple labels. If you take the time to assign labels to your securities, you
will benefit later by being able to view only the items of specific interest to
you at any given moment.
Applying a label to a symbol is very easy, and there are a couple of
ways to do it. The most direct approach is to right-click on the symbol,
as shown in Figure 16.1, and click the Apply Label item. A sub-menu appears, showing all the labels available. Note that when you first start using
ProphetCharts, these are the default labels that are available to you, just
to get you started. You will be able to add and delete from this list to your
liking, as you shall soon see.
There are a few things to keep in mind about labels:

r You can apply as many labels as you like to each given symbol. A check
mark will appear next to each label that has been applied to any given
symbol. (Figure 16.1 shows a symbol with no labels applied to it and
thus with no check marks.) The whole beauty of labels is that they
add an entirely different dimension to how you organize your watch
lists.
r The vast majority of work involved in labeling takes place when you
initially go through your symbols and mark them. It is very timeconsuming, but you will probably find that the investment of time pays
off handsomely since it will make viewing your lists a much richer
experience.

448

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 16.1 The most direct way to apply labels is right-clicking a symbol in a
watch list.

r You don’t necessarily have to label all your symbols. Label as few or as
many as you want, and try to work with a list that is long enough to be
detailed but not so overly long as to be redundant (e.g., having a label
for Gold, another for Silver, and another for Precious Metals would be
a waste; you might simply want to use Precious Metals instead).
There is a much faster, more efficient way to apply labels, though, and
that is through the labels editor, shown in Figure 16.2. The labels editor lets
you do several useful things:

r Add or remove multiple labels quickly for a given symbol with just a
mouse click.

r Scroll through all the symbols, one at a time, to make applying labels
to a large group of symbols faster.

r Add customized labels.

Power Features

449

FIGURE 16.2 The labels editor is the most powerful way of applying labels to
symbols.

To access this editor, right-click on any symbol and choose Labels
Editor.
Here are the various things you can do with this editor:

r Apply a label—Double-click on the label you want to use, and it will
show up in the right side of the dialog box, indicating that the label is
now applied to this symbol.
r Remove a label—Click on the red X next to the label name on the
right side of the dialog box; it will instantly be deleted.
r Add a custom label—Type in the label you want to use in the box
with the word “New.” Once you are done, click the Add button. Not
only will this label be added to the right side, showing it is used for this
symbol, but it will also be permanently added to your list of labels so
you can access it for other symbols as well.
r Go to the next symbol in the Watch list—Click the Next button.

450

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 16.3 This is what the Labels Editor looks like after two labels have been
applied to a symbol.

r Go to the prior symbol in the Watch list—Click the Previous
button.

r Accept all the changes—Click the OK button.
r Ignore all the changes—Click the Cancel button.
Figure 16.3 illustrates what the Labels Editor looks like after a couple
of labels have been applied. You will see a red X next to the labels in the
right column, which would delete them.
There might be labels that you never use and therefore want to delete.
If you want to delete a label, choose Delete Label from the Watch Lists
menu, and a Delete Label dialog box will appear, as shown in Figure 16.4.
When you do, a warning box states that deleting the label will remove it
from all the symbols and watch lists, giving you a chance to change your
mind if you realize that you do in fact want to retain that label.
As mentioned earlier, if you follow a lot of symbols, then labeling them
properly will take a lot of time. In the end, though, it will be worth it,

Power Features

451

FIGURE 16.4 You can delete any labels that you decide you will not be using.

since—like the index of a book—they will make finding things much easier
for you.
To make use of the labels, go to the Apply Label Filters dialog box. You
can access it by choosing Apply Label Filters from the Watch Lists menu or
by right-clicking any watch list item. The dialog box, shown in Figure 16.5,
has a number of elements:

r The Label column—Shows, in alphabetical order, all the labels used.
r The Include column—Lets you put a check mark next to any label
whose affiliated symbols you want to view; for instance, if you only
want to see symbols with the label Easy to Short, check the checkbox
next to that label. You can check as many checkboxes as you like, and
all the symbols that have any of those labels would be displayed in
the end.
r The Exclude column—The opposite of the Include column, it eliminates symbols that include the label in question. So, for example, if
you did not want to see any symbols that had the Index label, you could
click Exclude on the row corresponding to the Index label.
r The Select All button—Puts a check mark next to all the labels. If you
have, for instance, 20 labels, and you want to apply 18 of them, it would
save you time by letting you select all of them and then removing the
check marks for the two labels that don’t interest you.

452

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 16.5 The Labels Filter lets you choose which labels you do and do not
want applied to your watch lists.

r The Clear All button—Removes all the check marks from both the Include and Exclude columns.
If you have selected some items to include or exclude and click OK, the
labels filters will be applied at once. You will notice a couple of big changes
in your watch list module. First, any labels you have decided to include will
be displayed at the very top of your watch list module in green, and any
labels you have decided to exclude will be immediately below that, shown
in red. The green and red labels at the top are shown in attention-getting
colors to make it very clear that labels are being applied. The other change,
obviously, is that only the symbols that comply with the parameters you
have laid out are displayed.
So, for instance, if you have decided to include all the items with the
label “Precious Metals” and exclude all the items labeled “Thinly Traded,”
you would only see (assuming you have done a good job of labeling) financial instruments related to precious metals that have decent volume. You
would also see, at the top of the watch list module, “Precious Metals” in
green and “Thinly Traded” in red.

Power Features

453

Also take note of the X next to each of these labels shown in the module. You can instantly eliminate the application of any of these by clicking
on the X, which is quicker than making the same change in the Labels Filter
dialog box.
Used properly, the labels feature in ProphetCharts will dramatically increase the organization and utility of watch lists and make you more comfortable following even a large number of stocks, since you can home in on
those items that are of greatest interest to you at any particular moment.

GRID CHARTS
If you follow a lot of stocks, one way to speed up viewing these stocks is
with the grid mode. In this mode, you can view four charts at a time instead
of just one.
There are a couple of reasons you might want to do this. One is to reduce the amount of time it takes you to look at all your charts. Of course,
your examination of the charts is going to be somewhat less thorough,
since you are looking at charts one-fourth the normal size, and you will
probably be giving them a more cursory examination than you normally
would.
The second reason is if you want to look at one stock at a time but
using four different time periods or studies. This might give you a richer
perspective on what a chart might do next.
As shown in Figure 16.6, there is a menu dedicated to this function
called Grid Charts. Choosing the first item, Grid Mode, changes the regular
ProphetCharts screen into one with four equally-sized panes.
