
physical skills as well as mental skills in the form of strategies. If opponents are not evenly matched in
the skills department, the one with superior skills usually ("but not always) wins. When an underdog
beats a superior opponent, what's the determining factor? When two opponents are evenly matched,
what's the factor that tips the balance one way or the other? In both cases, the answer is attitude.
What makes trading so fascinating and, at the same time, difficult to learn is that you really don't need
lots of skills; you just need a genuine winning attitude. Experiencing a few or more winning trades can
make you feel like a winner, and that feeling is what sustains the winning streak. This is why it is
possible for a novice trader to put on a string of winning trades, when many of the industry's best
market analysts would give their right arms for a string of winning trades. The analysts have the skills,
but they don't have the winning attitude.
They're operating out of fear. The novice trader experiences the feeling of a winning attitude because
he's not afraid. But that doesn't mean he has a winning attitude; it only means he hasn't experienced any
pain from his trading activities to make him afraid. Eventually, our novice trader will experience a loss
and being wrong, regardless of how positive he's feeling. Losing and being wrong are inevitable
realities of trading. The most positive attitude imaginable coupled with the best analytical skills can't
prevent a trader from eventually experiencing a losing trade. The markets are just too erratic and there
are too many variables to consider for any trader to be right every time.
What happens when the novice trader finally does lose? What effect will it have on his carefree state of
mind? The answers will depend on his expectations going into the trade and how he interprets the
experience. And how he interprets the experience is a function of his beliefs and attitudes.
What if he is operating out of a belief that there's no possible way to avoid a loss, because losing is a
natural consequence of trading — no different from, let's say, a restaurant owner incurring the expense
of having to buy food? Furthermore, suppose that he has completely accepted the risk, meaning that he
has considered and accounted for all of what would otherwise be the unacceptable possibilities in the
market's behavior, both financially and emotionally.
With these beliefs and expectations, it is unlikely that he would experience a deterioration of his
attitude, and would simply go on to the next trade. By the way, this is an example of an ideal set of
trading beliefs and attitudes.
Now suppose that he hasn't completely accepted the risk. What if his expectations didn't take into
account any market behavior other than what he wanted? From this mental perspective, if the market
doesn't do what he wants, he is going to feel pain—emotional pain.
Expectations are our mental representations of how some future moment in the environment is going to
look, sound, feel, smell, or taste. Depending upon how much energy is behind the expectation, it can
hurt a lot when it isn't fulfilled. Of the two different perspectives I just described, which one is likely to
be held by our novice trader? The latter, of course. Only the very best traders have acquired the
perspective described in the first scenario. And, as I indicated in Chapter 1, unless these very best
traders grew up in successful trading families or had super traders for mentors (where appropriate

attitudes about risk and loss were instilled in them from the very beginning of their careers), virtually
every one of them had the common experience of losing one or more fortunes before they realized how
they needed to think in order to be consistently successful.
It's a fundamental shift in attitude that accounts for their success, not some brilliant realization about
the market, as most people erroneously assume. This erroneous assumption is prevalent among traders
simply because very few of them really understand, at the deepest levels, just how critical a component
attitude is in determining one's success.
We can safely assume that after a loss, our novice trader will be in a state of emotional pain. As a
result, his trading will take on a whole new quality. He'll definitely lose that carefree state of mind, but
more important, he will feel that the market did this to him: The market caused him to feel the pain he
is experiencing; the market took away his winning feeling by subjecting him to a loss.
Notice how our trader is blaming the markets for losing or what he didn't get. Notice, too, how natural
it is to feel the way he does. Think about how many times in our lives, especially as children, we were
doing something we really enjoyed, like playing with a toy or with our friends, and someone with more
power and authority forced us to stop what we were doing and do something we didn't want to do. All
of us have lost things, had things taken away from us, been denied things we wanted or believed we
deserved, been prevented from continuing an activity we were in the middle of, or been blocked from
pursuing an idea we were passionate about. The point is that in many of these situations, we did not
need to take personal responsibility for what happened to us or for the pain we experienced, because we
were powerless to do anything about it.
We didn't choose to be forced out of a state of joy and happiness, into a state of emotional pain. The
decision was out of our hands, against our will, and usually quite abrupt. Even though we may have
been told we were responsible for what was happening to us, we may not have believed it or
understood what it meant. What's tangible, and what we can most easily relate to, is that we were
having fun, and someone or something took us out of that fun and into pain. It wasn't our choice. The
cause of our pain came to us from the outside; therefore, whatever force acted upon us in that moment
was to blame. We learned not only that feeling good can instantly be replaced with feeling bad through
no fault of our own; we also learned about betrayal. We felt betrayed because many of these situations
were completely unexpected or unanticipated, meaning, we were unprepared for how some people in
our lives had the potential to behave. If their behavior caused us to flip into a state of emotional pain,
then we quite naturally would have felt betrayed.
As a side note, I feel it is important to say that many of our past, emotionally painful experiences were
the result of well-meaning parents, teachers and friends, many of whom were only doing what they
K/^lie»i7QH of fho fimo ix7oc Vv^ct fcir nc Trip nn<;t pyamrtle is a child playing with a toy that is
inherently dangerous. Take the toy away, and the child will cry to express the emotional pain he is
experiencing, and, if we are dealing with a very young or immature child, in all likelihood he will not
listen to anything reasonable that we say about why he cannot play with that toy.

But, at the same time, many people are born to immature and unreasonable parents, or encounter
emotionally disturbed teachers, coaches, and employees who subconsciously or intentionally inflict
their personal problems on anyone they perceive as having less power. What's even worse is many of
the people who have a tendency toward victimizing others are also clever enough to do it in a way that
makes their victims believe they caused their own pain. In any case, whether our painful experiences
are the result of an act of love or intentionally inflicted is something each of us will have to determine
for ourselves. The bottom line is that, as adults when we get into a trading mode, we don't realize how
natural it is to associate the instantaneous shift from joy to pain that we experienced so often as
children with the same instantaneous shift from joy to pain that occurs when we trade. The implications
are that if we haven't learned to accept the inherent risks of trading and don't know how to guard
against making these natural connections between our past and the present, we will end up blaming the
market for our results instead of taking responsibility for them.
Even though most people who trade consider themselves responsible adults, only the very best traders
have reached a point where they can and do accept complete responsibility for the outcome of any
particular trade. Everyone else to one degree or another assumes they are taking responsibility; but the
reality is that they want the market to do it for them. The typical trader wants the market to fulfill his
expectations, his hopes, and dreams.
Society may work this way but the markets certainly don't. In society, we can expect other people to
behave in reasonable and responsible ways. When they don't, and if we suffer as a result, society makes
remedies available to rectify the imbalance and make us whole again. The market, on the other hand,
has no responsibility to give us anything or do anything that would benefit us. This may not be the way
markets are advertised and certainly not the impression they want to project, but the reality is, every
trader who participates in the markets does so for his own benefit. The only way one trader can benefit
is if some other trader loses, whether the loss is in actual dollars as in a futures trade, or lost
opportunity as in a stock trade. When you put on a trade, it is in anticipation of making money. Every
other trader in the world who puts on a trade does so for the same reason. When you look at your
relationship with the market from this perspective, you could say that your purpose is to extract money
from the markets, but, by the same token, the market's sole purpose is to extract money or opportunity
from you.
If the market is a group of people interacting to extract money from one another, then what is the
market's responsibility to the individual trader? It has no responsibility other than to follow the rules it
has established to facilitate this activity. The point is, if you have ever found yourself blaming the
market or feeling betrayed, then you have not given enough consideration to the implications of what it
means to play a zero-sum game. Any degree of blaming means you have not accepted the reality that
the market owes you nothing, regardless of what you want or think or how much effort you put into
your trading.
In the market, typical social values of exchange do not come into play. If you don't understand this and

find a way to reconcile the differences between the social norms you grew up with and the way the
market works, you will continue to project your hopes, dreams, and desires onto the market believing
it's going to do something for you. When it doesn't, you'll feel angry, frustrated, emotionally distraught,
and betrayed.
Taking responsibility means acknowledging and accepting, at the deepest part of your identity, that
you—not the market—are completely responsible for your success or failure as a trader. Granted, the
market's purpose is to separate you from your money; but in the process of doing so, it also provides
you with an endless stream of opportunities for you to take money from it. When prices move, that
movement represents the collective actions of everyone narticioating at that moment. The market also
generates information about itself, and makes it extremely easy to enter and exit trades (depending, of
course, on the number of people participating).
From the individuals perspective, price movement, information, and the ability to enter and exit trades
represent opportunities to see something and to act on what you perceive. During each moment the
markets are open, you have an opportunity to enter a position, lighten up a position, add to a position,
or exit a position. These are all opportunities to enrich yourself by taking profits or, at least, cutting
your losses. Let me pose a question. Do you feel responsible for fulfilling some other traders
expectations, hopes, dreams, and desires? Of course you don't. It sounds absurd to even ask. However,
if you ever find yourself blaming the market and feeling betrayed, that is essentially what you are
doing. You are expecting the collective actions of everiyone participating in the market to make the
market act in a way that gives you what you want. You have to learn for yourself how to get what you
want out of the markets. The first major step in this learning process is taking complete and absolute
responsibility.
Taking responsibility means believing that all of your outcomes are self-generated; that your results are
based on your interpretations of market information, the decisions you make and the actions you take
as a result. Taking anything less than complete responsibility sets up two major psychological obstacles
that will block your success.
First, you will establish an adversarial relationship with the market that takes you out of the constant
flow of opportunities. Second, you will mislead yourself into believing that your trading problems and
lack of success can be rectified through market analysis.
Let's consider the first obstacle. When you project any degree of responsibility onto the market for
giving you money or cutting your losses, the market can all too easily take on the quality of an
adversary or enemy. Losing (when you expected the market to do something different from what it did)
will tap you into the same childlike feelings of pain, anger, resentment, and powerlessness that all of us
felt when someone took something away from us, didn't give us what we wanted, or wouldn't let us do
what we wanted.
No one likes to feel denied, especially if we believe that getting what we want will make us happy. In
each of these situations, something or someone outside of us prevented us from expressing ourselves in

some particular way. In other words, some outside force was acting against the inner force of our
desires and expectations. As a result, it feels natural to assign the market the power of an outside force
that either gives or takes away. But consider the fact that the market presents its information from a
neutral perspective. That means the market doesn't know what you want or expect, nor does it care,
unless, of course, you trade the kind of position that can have a major impact on prices. Otherwise,
each moment, each bid, and each offer gives you the opportunity to do something. You can put on a
trade, take profits, or take off a loser. This is also true for those of you who are floor traders and are
personally known to other floor traders, who may also know your position and, to your detriment,
purposely take advantage of that knowledge. It just means that you have to be faster and more focused,
or take whatever limitations you have in these areas into consideration and trade accordingly.
From the market's perspective, each moment is neutral; to you, the observer, every moment and price
change can have meaning. But where do these meaning exist? The meanings are based on what you've
learned, and exist inside your mind, not in the market. The market doesn't attach meanings or interpret
the information it generates about itself (although there are always individuals who will offer an
interpretation if you're willing to listen). Furthermore, the market doesn't know how you define an
opportunity or a loss. The market doesn't know whether you perceive it as an endless stream of
opportunities to enter and exit trades for both profits and losses at each and every moment, or whether
you perceive it as a greedy monster ready and willing in any given moment to devour your money.
If you perceive the endless stream of opportunities to enter and exit trades without self-criticism and
regret, then you will be in the best frame of mind to act in your own best interest and learn from your
experiences. On the other hand, if what you perceive in market information is painful in some way,
then you will naturally try to avoid that pain by either consciously or subconsciously blocking that
information from your awareness. In the process of blocking that information, you'll systematically cut
yourself off from any number of opportunities to enrich yourself. In other words, you cut yourself off
from the opportunity flow Furthermore, it will feel like the market is against you but only if you expect
it to do something for you, or if you believe that it owes you something. If someone or something is
against you and causes you pain, how are you likely to respond? You'll feel compelled to fight, but
what exactly are you fighting? The market is certainly not fighting you. Yes, the market wants your
money, but it also provides you with the opportunity to take as much as you can. Although it may feel
as if you are fighting the market, or it is fighting you, the reality is you are simply fighting the negative
consequences of not fully accepting that the market owes you nothing; and that you need to take
advantage of the opportunities it presents by yourself, 100 percent and not one degree less.
The way to take maximum advantage of a situation where you are being offered unlimited
opportunities to do something for yourself is to get into the flow. The market does have a flow. It is
often erratic, especially in the shorter time frames, but it does display symmetrical patterns that repeat
themselves over and over again. Obviously, it's a contradiction to flow with something you are against.
If you want to start sensing the flow of the market, your mind has to be relatively free of fear, anger,

regret, betrayal, despair, and disappointment.
You won't have a reason to experience these negative emotions when you assume absolute
responsibility. Earlier, I said that when you don't take responsibility, one of the major psychological
obstacles that can block your success is that you will mislead yourself into believing that your trading
problems and lack of consistency can be rectified through market analysis. To illustrate this point, let's
go back to our novice trader who started out with a carefree state of mind until he experienced his first
loss. After winning with such ease and effortlessness, the abrupt shift to emotional pain can be quite
shocking—not shocking enough, however, to quit trading. Besides, in his mind the situation wasn't his
fault anyway; the market did it to him. Instead of quitting, the great feeling that he experienced when
he was winning will be fresh in his mind, and will inspire him with a sense of determination to continue
trading.
Only now he's going to be smarter about it. He's going to put some effort into it and learn everything he
can about the markets. It's perfectly logical to think that if he can win not knowing anything, he'll be
able to clean up when he does know something. But there's a big problem here that very few, if any,
traders will have any awareness of until long after the damage is done. Learning about the markets is
fine and doesn't cause a problem in itself. It's the underlying reason for learning about the market that
will ultimately prove to be his undoing.
As I said a moment ago, the sudden shift from joy to pain usually creates quite a psychological shock.
Very few people ever learn how to reconcile these kinds of experiences in a healthy way.
Techniques are available, but they aren't widely known. The typical response in most people, especially
in the type of person attracted to trading, is revenge. For traders, the only way to extract that revenge is
to conquer the market, and the only way to conquer the market is through market knowledge, or so they
think. In other words, the underlying reason for why the novice trader is learning about the market is to
overcome the market, to prove something to it and himself, and most important, to prevent the market
from hurting him again. He is not learning the market simply as a means to give himself a systematic
way of winning, but rather as a way to either avoid pain or prove something that has absolutely nothing
to do with looking at the market from an objective perspective. He doesn't realize it, but as soon as he
made the assumption that knowing something about the market can prevent him from experiencing
pain or can help satisfy his desire for revenge or to prove something, he sealed his fate to become a
loser.
In effect what he has done is set up an irreconcilable dilemma.
He is learning how to recognize and understand the market's collective behavior patterns, and that's
good. It even feels good. He's inspired because he assumes he's learning about the market in order to
become a winner. As a result, he will typically go on a knowledge quest, learning about trend lines,
chart patterns, support and resistance, candlesticks, market profiles, point and line charts, Elliott waves,
Fibonacci retracements, oscillators, relative strength, stochastics, and many more technical tools too
numerous to mention.

Curiously, even though his knowledge has increased, he now finds that he's developed problems
executing his trades. He hesitates, second guesses himself, or doesn't put on a trade at all, in spite of
any number of clear signals to do so. It's all frustrating, even maddening, because what's happened
doesn't make sense. He did what he was supposed to do—he learned—only to find that the more he
learned, the less he took advantage of. He would never believe that he did anything wrong by devoting
himself to learning; he simply did it for the wrong reasons.
He won't be able to trade effectively if he is trying to prove something or anything for that matter. If
you have to win, if you have to be right, if you can't lose or can't be wrong, you will cause yourself to
define and perceive categories of market information as painful. In other words, you will view as
painful any information the market generates that is in opposition to what will make you happy.
The dilemma is that our minds are wired to avoid both physical and emotional pain, and learning about
the markets will not compensate for the negative effects our pain-avoidance mechanisms have on our
trading. Everybody understands the nature of avoiding physical pain. Accidentally set your hand on a
hot burner, and your hand moves away from the heat automatically; its an instinctive reaction.
However, when it comes to avoiding emotional pain and the negative consequences it creates,
especially for traders, very few people understand the dynamics. Its absolutely essential to your
development that you understand these negative effects and learn how to take conscious control in a
way that helps you fulfill your goals.
Our minds have a number of ways to shield us from information that we have learned to perceive as
painful. For example, at a conscious level, we can rationalize, justify, or make a case for staying in a
losing trade. Some of the more typical ways we do this are to call our trading buddies, talk to our
broker, or look at indicators we never use, all for the express purpose of gathering nonpainful
information in order to deny the validity of the painful information. At a subconscious level, our minds
will automatically alter, distort, or specifically exclude information from our conscious awareness. In
other words, we don't know at a conscious level that our pain-avoidance mechanisms are either
excluding or altering the information being offered by the market.
Consider the experience of being in a losing trade when the market is making consistently higher highs
and higher lows or lower highs and lower lows against your position, while you refuse to acknowledge
you are in a losing trade because you have focused all your attention on the tics that go in your favor.
On the average, you are only getting one out of four or five tics in your direction; but it doesn't matter
because every time you get one, you are convinced the market has reversed and is coming back. Instead
the market keeps going against you. At some point, the dollar value of the loss becomes so great that it
cannot be denied and you finally exit the trade. The first reaction that traders universally have when
looking back at such a trade is, "Why didn't I just take my loss and reverse?"
The opportunity to put on a trade in the opposite direction was easily recognized once there was
nothing at stake. But we were blinded to this opportunity while we were in the trade, because at that
time the information indicating it was an opportunity was defined as painful, so we blocked it from our
