
There are many days when three of the stocks are trading under 30,000 shares and another stock will be trading 95,000 shares. In these cases, I will first check to see
whether there is specific news on that stock. If there is, I will throw it out. If there isn’t, I will then take an average, call this a “moderate” gap, and play it accordingly
— meaning that my target on the first half will be 50 percent of the gap fill instead of holding on to the entire position for a full gap fill. For moderate gap plays, I do
not trail down the original stop, even when I get out of half my position.

What Are the Best Days of the Week to Take This Trade?
We keep a tab on raw gap data, meaning the percentage of the time that a gap fills, regardless of how big the gap was or how much premarket volume traded. Just the
clean, raw, “it is what it is” data. In Table 7.2, these data are sorted by day of the week and show what percentage of the time the markets filled their opening gaps on
the same day in which they were created.
Table 7.2

129

As is evidenced by these data, gaps in and of themselves have a very high probability of being filled on the same day on which they are created. If a person could get
these same odds at a blackjack table, Las Vegas would be put out of business in three months. That said, it is important to note that M ondays are the days with the
lowest percentage of filled gaps. The main reason for this is that most breakaway gaps happen on M ondays—there are a lot of developments that can happen over the
weekend. On M ondays, I typically pass on the gaps; in fact, I typically just let the markets open without me, in order to give them a chance to “settle in” before I
start looking for setups.
Finally, I’ve noticed that expiration day (the third Friday of every month) and the first trading day of the month have low probabilities, in the range of 55 to 60
percent. I generally pass on fading the gaps on these two days. The only exception is if the premarket volume is very low. The bottom line is that if the premarket
volume gets confusing and a trader doesn’t understand the reading on any given day, the odds are still there, and the trade is worth taking.

What Are the Trading Rules for Gaps?
Trading Rules for Gap Down Buys (Gap Up Sells Are Reversed)
This set of rules for gap down buys is based on a gap with low premarket volume. If the volume is moderate, then I will do exactly the same thing, except that I will
take off half my position when the markets reach the price level that represents 50 percent of the gap fill. If the premarket volume is high, then I pass on this trade
setup. Remember, this is a fade play. I will buy a gap down and short a gap up. The following set of rules is for a gap down:
1. I first set up a special intraday gap chart that starts collecting data at 9:30 a.m. eastern and stops at 4:15 p.m. eastern. This is so that I can view the gaps. These gaps
won’t appear on charts that carry 24 hours’ worth of data or as “regular session” data on the futures markets.
2. A gap must be at least 10 YM points or 1 ES point—otherwise I will pass.
3. If a gap is more than 70 YM points or 7 ES points, I pay careful attention to the premarket volume. M ost breakaway gaps are big gaps. However, if the premarket
volume is low to moderate, I will still take these.
4. With a gap down, when the regular cash market opens at 9:30 a.m. eastern, I buy the YM or ES at the market. The DIA and SPY can also be used. It doesn’t really
matter which market is utilized, with two exceptions. First, if one of the stocks in the Dow is “out of whack,” then I will play the gap in the S&Ps. By this I mean
that if a stock like IBM is up 10 points on earnings, then this index is going to be out of whack with the rest of the markets. The other exception is if I am
specifically using the Dow in another setup, say a squeeze or a pivot play (these are discussed in upcoming chapters). Then I will take the gap in the S&Ps. This
way, if I am still in the gap play when this next setup fires off, I can just take it in the Dow and leave my gap trade on.
5. Once filled, I set up a protective sell stop with the following parameters:
130

• For gaps that are under 40 YM or 4 ES points, I use a 1½:1 risk/reward ratio. (For example, for a 20-point gap, I use a 30-point stop.)
• For gaps that are over 40 YM or 4 ES points, I use a 1:1 risk/reward ratio. (For example, for a 45-point gap, I use a 45-point stop.)
6. M y target is the gap fill itself. If yesterday’s closing price was 1058.50 on the S&Ps, then that is my target for the gap fill. For a moderate-volume gap, I will split
this order up, having half my target at 50 percent of the gap fill and leaving on the remaining half for a potential full gap fill.
7. I don’t trail stops for this setup.
8. If I’m stopped out, then the gap play is over for the day.
9. If neither the target nor the stop is hit by the closing bell, I exit my position at the market.
10. For the gap play, there is only one potential setup per trading day.

Who Is Getting Hurt on This Trade?
One of the most important steps for traders is to understand why they are making money in a particular trade—which also means understanding who exactly is losing
money on the other side of the trade. Who is getting hurt and why?
When markets gap down, there are generally two groups that are going to get hurt. First, there are the people who are long from the day before. When the markets
gap down, these people are either getting stopped out or panicking and selling. Second, there are people who are flat, see the gap down, think it is the end of the world,
and start shorting. In this setup, I want to be on the opposite side of the trade from both these groups, because both of them are having a strong emotional reaction to
the market, and this emotion is causing them to get into a trade. Therefore, when they are selling, I am buying. These same groups will provide the fuel for the rally
through, in the case of the first group, panic buying in trying to make back their early losses and, in the case of the second group, short covering via the stops they
placed when they put on their short trade. Let’s take a look. The charts that follow are numbered in specific places where price action is taking shape. Each of the lists
that refer to the chart is numbered so that the text following “2” describes point 2 in the chart to which the text is referring.

What Are Some Specific Examples of Trading the Gap?
Mini-Sized Dow—December 2003 Contract, October 15, 2003
1. The mini-sized Dow contract closes at 9717 on October 14 (see Figure 7.1).

131

Figure 7.1

2. On October 15, the opening trade at 9:30 a.m. eastern is 9762, producing an opening gap of +45 points. I “fade the gap” right at the open and short the YM at the
market. M y protective stop is 45 points away from my entry, at 9807, and my target is the gap fill, which is the previous day’s close at 9717.
3. The gap fill is complete once the price levels reach the previous day’s close. This occurs 35 minutes after the opening bell. This is a relatively smooth trade. I refer
to these quick fill gaps as “Bahamas gaps” because they are relatively smooth, quick, and stress-free. This trade nets a profit of $225 per contract.

Mini-Sized Dow—December 2003 Contract, October 16, 2003
132

1. The market closes at 9704 on October 15 (see Figure 7.2).

Figure 7.2

2. The opening trade at 9:30 a.m. eastern on October 16 is 9645, creating a 59-point gap down. I buy at these levels and place a stop at 9586.
3. M any people who play gaps would get stopped out right here at point 3, as they would trail up their stop to breakeven to protect their gains. For these people, the
gap play is now over.
4. Yet by holding on to this play with parameters that were made especially for gaps, I end up staying in profitable trades that shake many other traders out (see
133

Figure 7.3). The reason for this is that the other traders are using blanket types of parameters for every play, instead of utilizing specific parameters that are
tailored for specific plays. Although many gaps are filled within the first hour, many can take a couple of hours or more. I like to set the parameters and focus on
something else while the market “does its thing.” I refer to gaps of this type as “Somalia gaps.” Unlike Bahamas gaps, they tend to cause a lot of stress in the
people who are watching them. It’s okay to feel stress; professional traders simply don’t act on it, maintaining the parameters they have set for themselves. This
trade nets out a profit of $295 per contract.

Figure 7.3
Note that one of the best signs of an amateur trader is a person who uses only tight stops or a 3:1 risk/reward ratio on every trade. M ost beginning traders are taught
by their brokers to use this tight stop formula, risking 1 point to get 3 points. As the traders wonder why they always get stopped out just before the market turns,

134

their broker is tallying up the commissions generated on the day. In general, wider stops produce more winning trades. The key with wider stops, of course, is to play
only setups that have a greater than 80 percent chance of winning. The gap play I’m describing, with the parameters that I use, has a greater than 80 percent chance of
winning with the risk/reward ratios that I utilize. When you use a tight stop on a gap play, the probabilities of the trade’s working out fall dramatically—to less than
30 percent. In essence, one of the reasons many traders fail to make it in this business is that they are using stops that are too tight. This might seem like a
contradiction, but if almost every trade is stopped out, it’s tough to make any money.
What is also important to remember for gap plays is that an active program of trailing stops will negatively affect your win/loss ratio. Once the parameters are set in
place, the best thing a trader can do is to walk away and let the orders do their job. Although tweaking is a good thing to do when giving a car a tune-up, tweaking the
parameters of a gap trade won’t work.

Figure 7.4

135

Mini-Sized Dow—September 2004 Contract, August 2, 2004
I’ve found that most traders get too caught up in the reasons for the gap. In reality, the reason is meaningless. Gaps happen because a flurry of emotion hits the tape at
the opening bell. However, the reason for the gap has little significance with regard to whether or not the gap fills. On Sunday, August 1, 2004, the U.S. government
issued a terrorist warning claiming that there was chatter on the airwaves about a plan to blow up a large financial institution. The markets got nervous, and the markets
gapped down in a big way on M onday morning, August 2 (see Figure 7.4).
1. On Friday, July 30, 2004, the mini-sized Dow futures closes at 10,142.
2. On M onday, August 2, 2004, the markets open for trade at 10,091, down 51 points. I buy here right at the 9:30 a.m. eastern open. I place a stop at 10,040. The
markets spend a good part of the day chopping around, and I talk with other traders who are nervous about the terrorist threat news. Do I let this “nervousness”
get into my own trading? Should I listen to the reasons for the gap?
3. Later that same day, the markets grind higher, and I am out at the gap fill (see Figure 7.5). Gaps are the ultimate contrarian play; don’t get caught up with the crowd.
This trade nets a profit of $255 per contract.

136

Figure 7.5

E-mini S&P—September 2004 Contract, August 24, 2004
1. On August 23, the ES closes at 1097.00 (see Figure 7.6).

137

Figure 7.6

2. The next morning, the 9:30 a.m. opening trade prints at 1101.00, 4 points above its close. I short at the open, placing a stop at 1105.00.
3. A little over an hour later, my target is hit as the E-mini S&Ps fill their gap, for a total gain of $200 per contract.

E-mini S&P—September 2004 Contract, August 4, 2004
1. On August 3, the ES closes at 1097.50 (see Figure 7.7).

138

Figure 7.7

2. The next morning, the market gaps down and opens at 1094.25. This gap is 3.25 points, so I use a 1½:1 risk/reward ratio and place my stop at 1089.25.
3. I buy at the open. The market chops up, then pushes down to new lows. A little over an hour later, the market has firmed, and I’m out of my position at the gap fill.
The markets spend a good portion of the day in a tight, choppy range, rallying only in the final half-hour of trading. On many days, the gap play is not only the
safest, but really the only trade to take. We call the market choppy when it trades in a narrow, low-volume range because it chops up newer traders to death. This
trade nets a total of $162.50 per contract.

E-mini S&P—September 2004 Contract, July 14, 2004
139

1. On July 13, the E-mini S&Ps closes at 1114.75 (see Figure 7.8).

Figure 7.8

2. The next morning, the market opens down 5.75 points at 1109.00.
3. I buy at the open and place a stop at 1103.25.
4. The gap fills in a little under an hour. This is another example of a Bahamas gap, as it is very relaxing to trade with a minimum of false moves. This trade nets a total
profit of $287.50 per contract.

What’s the Secret to Unfilled Gaps?
140

One important thing to remember: if 80 percent of these plays win, that means that 20 percent of them lose. I actually like losing trades for one main reason: this leaves
an “open gap” in the markets. An open gap is like a black hole or a tractor beam, eventually sucking prices back to their opening gap levels. Whenever the markets leave
an open gap, I mark that level on a Post-it note and place it on my computer. Let’s look at an example (see Figure 7.9).
Let’s get a little more specific on how to play this, using a $100,000 account and utilizing nine contracts for a full position, or approximately one contract for every
$11,100 in the account. Yes, a person can trade a lot more contracts than that in a $100,000 account, and many brokers will encourage a person to trade more than that.
With some brokers, a trader can get enough leverage to trade 100 contracts on a $100,000 account. This is purely and simply insane. Just because people can do
something doesn’t mean they should. The leverage here is far too much. Traders who are using a modest 2-point stop on the S&Ps could get stopped out four times in
a row. Where does this leave them? 2 points × $50 × 100 contracts = $10,000. Four stops in a row = $40,000. I’ve seen more than my fair share of people do this, and
it is just inexcusable. There are many things people can do in life. They can drink one glass of wine or the whole bottle. They can drink one cup of coffee or the whole
pot. They can go to the gym each day or sit and watch TV. It all comes down to choice. Just because people can do something doesn’t mean that it’s a good idea.
Choose with your best interests in mind. Let’s go back to the example.

141

142

Figure 7.9
On August 18, we gapped up a modest 44 points in the Dow prior to some economic numbers. I shorted at the open. We rallied, sold off into the economic
numbers, and then shot higher once the numbers were released. I had a 44-point stop, and the markets rallied just through that level, producing a loss of $220 per
contract, or $1,980.
I headed into the next trading day knowing that there was now a “black hole” gap below. I could actually hear the sucking sound. The next day we had a modest lowvolume 13-point gap higher that worked out quickly for $65 per contract ($585). The day after, we got a nice 52-point gap lower that took a few hours to fill, but
created few headaches, for $260 per contract ($2,340). The next day we got a 44-point gap higher that was on moderate volume. It came close to our stop, but
eventually filled the gap for $255 per contract on four contracts. I covered the first five contracts when we got to 50 percent of the gap fill level, which was 22 points.
4 contracts × 44 points × $5 = $880, and 5 contracts × 22 points × $5 = $550, for a total of $1,430 on the play. Finally, on August 22, we got the “sucker gap” when
Intel announced “cautious upside earnings revisions.” The market exploded and gapped up 62 points, right into key resistance—on low premarket volume.
I shorted the gap. Six bars later, my target was hit for 62 points, or $310 per contract ($2,790). The sucking sound of the black hole below was getting louder. During
the afternoon session, we got a bear flag consolidation. I set up a sell stop at 9392 to let the market take me into a breakdown of that flag formation. I got the fill and
set my stop above intraday resistance at 9455. M y target was the August 18 black hole open gap at 9304. The market spent the rest of the day on its hands and knees,
dry heaving, trying to hold back the internal pressure. This pressure proved to be too much, and, like a freshman college student during his first year away from home,
the market eventually fell over and vomited. The gap filled for an 88-point gain, or $440 per contract ($3,960).
When there are open gaps left in the market, I always write them down and mark them on my chart. The markets will take them out eventually, usually within 5 to
10 trading days.

What Are the Best Strategies for People Who Can’t Trade Full Time?
Gaps are one of the best strategies for people who are holding down a full-time job. On the West Coast, this is particularly easy, as the markets are open well before
most people have to head to the office. The main consideration to keep in mind is that a person will want a trading platform (see Chapter 4) that will automatically
cancel a stop once the target is hit. Another, often overlooked alternative is to have a broker who can be called with the parameters. Typically these brokers will cost a
little more in commissions, but it is worth it to have someone watching out for the trade. The biggest advantage of doing this trade as a part-time trader is that you
won’t be prone to making the very mistakes most full-time traders make while watching the trade progress. They get antsy, they get fidgety, and they end up bailing
out too soon. Someone who is at the office and doesn’t have time to watch the trade actually has a big edge over most of the traders who haven’t learned to control
their emotions.

How Does a Trader Position Size for This Setup?
One frequent question I get is, “How many contracts or shares are you trading with this strategy?” These same plays can be executed in five different markets. There
are the mini-sized Dow and E-mini S&P futures, the SPY and DIA ETF shares, and also futures on the DIA available through One Chicago. Table 7.3 shows the
different instruments and the number of shares or contracts I would trade on a $100,000 account using this setup. The DIA futures are nice if a trader is using a smaller
account. They are a happy medium between having a lot of leverage with the minisized Dow and E-mini S&P futures and having no leverage with the DIA and SPY
stock. The example shown in Table 7.3 is with a gap that occurred on July 24.
Table 7.3

143

Summing Up the Gaps
Gaps are the one moment of the trading day where all the players have to show their poker hand, and this creates the single biggest advantage for the short-term trader.
Understanding the psychology behind the gaps is paramount for playing them successfully on a daily basis. The gaps are so powerful that many traders make a nice
living playing these setups alone. The key is to know how they work and to develop a solid methodology and set of rules to trade them. One consideration to keep in
mind while playing gaps is the 50 percent retracement level. At the beginning of this chapter, I mentioned that I would take half of my position off when there is
moderate premarket volume. The reality is, the 50 percent retracement level is the highest-probability exit on any gap. It is okay to modify your trading plan to take
off half your profits on any gap that reaches the 50 percent retracement level, regardless of whether premarket volume was moderate or low.
After reading about this setup and understanding the specifics behind it, the serious trader will have a better foundation for a plan to trade the markets successfully
on a full-time basis: a proven setup to play, markets that best fit that setup, and a plan of action to maximize the play. That is pretty much all a trader needs in order
to survive and thrive in this greatest of professions.
For updated information on gap plays, visit www.tradethemarkets.com/gaps for a series of free videos with any updates to the gap play, live gap trading videos, and
current examples.

144

8
Pivot Points:
Why Are These Good
Pausing Points for Trending
Days and Great Fading
Points for Choppy Days?
What Is the Best Way to Beat Indicator-Based Traders?
One of the simplest and most effective position entry techniques that I use is based on what I call the multipivot levels, which consist of the daily, weekly, and
monthly pivot points, along with the midpoints between the daily levels. This is a setup I use primarily on the stock index futures, although they can also be utilized
on some individual stocks (the big names), as well as the corresponding stock index ETFs via the DIA, SPY, QQQ, and IWM . In addition, I like to use the weekly
pivots on most other futures contracts, such as gold, currencies, oil, and so forth. The daily pivots on these are okay, but I’ve found that the weekly levels hold much
better on these other commodities. Like the gap play, the pivot play hasn’t changed much since this book first came out, and I’ve left the examples here intact that still
ring true today.
The main advantage of this system is that it is price-based rather than indicator-based. By the time most indicators generate a buy or a sell signal, the move is already
well under way. By following this price-based methodology, I will get into a trade before the indicator-based traders, and I usually end up handing off my position
soon after a buy or sell signal is being generated on a stochastic or other oscillator type of system. This is especially true on choppy days. Just as the Johnnycomelatelies are jumping in, I’m closing out my position and looking for the next setup. On choppy days, it’s the indicator-based traders who get taken out back and shot.
Their buy signals get them in at the top of the move, and their sell signals get them in at the dead lows, leading to a frustrating day with a negative P&L. Pivots are set
up to naturally take advantage of their mistakes, essentially siphoning money from these trading accounts into your own.
This is also a good system for traders who don’t have time to stare at the charts all day long or, not surprisingly, for traders who have a bad habit of chasing the
market higher and lower. Playing the pivots automatically creates trader discipline, because the entries and exits are determined before the trading day even starts.
The other thing I like about the pivots is that they can be used as a tool to quickly determine what kind of trading day it’s going to be. On a trending day, markets
will move to a pivot level, consolidate for 15 to 20 minutes, and then continue to march in the direction of the trend. On these days, I wait for the move through the
pivot level and then buy the first pullback to that level. On choppy days, however, the markets will move up to a pivot level, hang around for a short time, and then
drift back in the direction whence they came. M any traders get “chopped up” during these types of trading days, losing money and making their brokers rich in the
process. The pivots are naturally set up to be faded on these days and are one of the few profitable ways to trade the low-volume, narrow-range chop.
There are two very easy ways to tell whether the market is trending or chopping. The first is to look at how the market reacts to the pivot levels once it reaches
them. The second is to set up a five-minute chart of the E-mini S&Ps and see what kind of volume is coming into the market after 10:00 a.m. eastern (see Chapter 6). If
the volume is more than 25,000 contracts on each bar, then the market has power and volatility behind it. These types of days usually have wide ranges and strong
trends. However, if the volume after 10:00 a.m. eastern is consistently below 25,000 contracts on a five-minute chart, then there is little power to move the beast, and
the end result will be a slow, choppy day. On the first type of day, I wait for the markets to move through pivot levels, and then I set up an order to get in on the first
retracement. On the choppy days, I place open buy and sell orders against the pivots and have standing orders to fade these moves throughout the day. There is
nothing to watch on these types of days, so I generally let my orders do the work for me while I spend some quality time at the driving range. Is there a bonus play?
On a choppy day, a high or low $TICK reading (+1,000 or –1,000) right into a pivot level. That is, the market rallies right into a key pivot, and during that rally, a
+1,000 $TICK reading is reached, exhausting all of the buying pressure. Bingo. That is the short setup of the day.
