
Burniske 02.indd 164

9/9/17 1:46 PM

“It’s Just a Ponzi Scheme, Isn’t It?”

165

voluted rationale that a rising gold price would be for the nation’s benefit.32
Corbin eventually succeeded, getting word from Grant on September 2 that he
planned to stop gold sales for the month.33
Gould had been stockpiling gold throughout August in anticipation of this
favorable verdict, and upon receiving the news, he kicked it into overdrive.
He enlisted a wealthy ally, Jay Fisk, with whom he had pulled off other illegal
market feats. With the added funds of Fisk, Gould pumped even more money
into the gold market, driving up the price.34
In mid-September, however, the cabal overplayed its hand. They first tried
to bribe the president’s private secretary, and when that failed Corbin wrote
a letter to Grant, checking to see if the president planned to continue with
his strategy of not selling gold through the month. Upon getting the letter on
September 19, Grant became suspicious of foul play and instructed his wife to
write to Mrs. Corbin to convince her husband to steer clear of the ruse.35
Unsurprisingly, Mr. Corbin was dismayed that Grant was catching on to the
plot. Upon learning of the situation, Gould knew he could no longer depend
on Grant to hold the nation’s gold. Under the cover of Fisk’s continued buying,
Gould started unloading the gold he had acquired.
While the Gold Exchange had been rising continuously throughout
September, on September 24, 1869, it peaked and would go down as “Jay
Gould’s Black Friday.” Gould had employed a dozen brokers to continue
quietly selling his gold, while his partner Fisk pushed the gold market to
$160, a 20 percent rise from its bottom earlier in the year. Shortly thereafter,
Butterfield’s broker started selling gold, which alerted those at the exchange
that the federal government was likely on its way to a sale. Sure enough, an
hour after gold hit $160, an order came in from the federal government to sell
$4 million of gold. While Gould and Fisk quietly slipped out of the exchange,
panic ensued, as detailed by Chancellor: “The rapid fluctuations bankrupted
thousands of margin holders, mobs formed in Broad Street and outside
Gould’s brokerage office, and troops were put on alert to enter the financial
district.”36
As with most panics, the contagion spread from the Gold Exchange. Because
of Gould’s cornering of the market, stock prices dropped 20 percent, a variety
of agricultural exports fell 50 percent in value, and the national economy was
disrupted for several months.37 Gould exited with a cool $11 million profit
from the debacle, and scot-free from legal charges.38 It is all too common that
characters like Gould escape unscathed by the havoc they create, which then
allows them to carry on with their machinations in other markets.

Burniske 02.indd 165

9/9/17 1:46 PM

166 CRYPTOASSETS

In the cryptoasset markets, characters toying with asset prices can often
obfuscate their identity through the veil of the Internet, which unfortunately
makes it even easier for them to escape. Often, they will target small and relatively unknown assets, which makes it important for the innovative investor
who ventures into these smaller markets to pay particular attention to the
details of those assets and the characters associated with them.
Beyond the Gold Exchange in 1869, examples of the cornering of commodities markets have continued to surface. In 1980, the Hunt brothers, who
had been left billions by their wealthy oil-mogul father, attempted to corner
the silver market. With inflation levels starting the year off at 14 percent, one
of the highest levels on record,39 the brothers believed silver would become a
haven against inflation the way gold was, and they intended to own as much
of it as they possibly could. Using the commodities markets and leverage, the
brothers rapidly amassed $4.5 billion worth of silver (much of it being flown
to Switzerland in specially designed planes under armed guard),40 pushing the
price to nearly $50 per ounce. Ultimately, the U.S. government had to step in to
prevent further manipulation, which ultimately ruined the brothers’ ploy and
fortunes, as silver dropped back to $11 per ounce on March 27, 1980.41
Other notable instances of cornering markets reveal that this vulnerability
spans asset classes:
•
•
•

•

In 1929 over a hundred companies listed on the NYSE were cornered.42
From April 1987 to March 1989, the Tokyo Stock Exchange estimated
that one out of every 10 companies listed on its exchange was cornered.43
In the middle of 1991, Salomon Brothers was caught trying to manipulate U.S. Treasuries, widely regarded as one of the safest investment
instruments in the world.44
In the mid-1990s, Yasuo Hamanaka pushed the cost of copper on the
London Metals Exchange up by over 75 percent to $3,200 and was
rewarded with a seven-year prison sentence.

Pumping, Dumping, and Cornering Cryptoassets
Cryptoassets that have small network values are particularly susceptible to
the cornering of their markets. For example, at the start of April 2017, the
200 smallest cryptoassets had markets of less than $20,000. Therefore, a bad
actor could come in with $10,000 and buy up half the assets outstanding. This
increased buying pressure will drive up the price of the asset, which tends to

Burniske 02.indd 166

9/9/17 1:46 PM

“It’s Just a Ponzi Scheme, Isn’t It?”

167

draw curiosity from others. If several speculators are in collusion, then they
will work together to drive up the price of these small cryptoassets, while
spreading hype on different social media platforms (a tweet or two from an
“influencer” is enough).
The intent is to lure unknowing speculators to take the bait and buy the asset
based on what they think is genuine market interest. The innovative investor
who does due diligence would never buy solely based on market interest, and
for good reason. The colluders will slowly work to exit their positions, while
the inertia of enthusiasm leads more unknowing speculators to continue buying, as we saw with Gould. These pump-and-dumps, or P&Ds, are unfortunately becoming common in the smaller cryptoassets.
Cornering is also important to consider in crowdsales, especially if the
founding team has given itself a significant chunk of the assets. While crowdsales will be further detailed in Chapter 16, the key takeaway for now is that if
the founding team gives themselves too much of the assets outstanding, then
they have immense power over the market price of the cryptoasset and this is
potentially concerning.
Control over the asset supply goes beyond crowdsales and founders, as it can
spread to the miners or other entities required to support a cryptoasset. This
is where it becomes important to consider the monetary policy of a crypto­
asset. For example, one of the concerns with Dash is that it created a supply
structure prone to cornering. In addition to miners, in Dash there are entities
called masternodes, which are also controlled by people or groups of people.
Masternodes play an integral role in performing near instant and anonymous
transactions with Dash. However, as a security mechanism, the entity has to
bond at least 1,000 dash to be a masternode.45 Bond is a fancy word for hold,
but it’s a term commonly used in the cryptoasset space to imply that those assets
can’t move. If the masternode moves those bonded dash, and subsequently holds
less than 1,000 dash, then that person or group can no longer be a masternode.
Given that there were over 4,000 masternodes in March 2017, that means
4 million dash were bonded, or illiquid. With just over 7 million dash available
on the market, that 4 million means that roughly 60 percent of the supply is
unavailable. Add to that the nearly 2 million dash that were instamined in the
first 24 hours, and it implies that 6 million of the 7 million dash available are
likely under the control of power players in the space, leaving only 15 percent
of the remaining dash in free-floating markets.
The situation is arguably only worsening, as masternodes receive 45 percent
of each block reward, which means that of the new supply of dash, they are

Burniske 02.indd 167

9/9/17 1:46 PM

168 CRYPTOASSETS

receiving almost 50 percent. Since they already own 60 percent of the supply
outstanding, this gives the masternodes significant ability, and since they hold
lots of dash, incentive, to corner the market.
The innovative investor needs to carefully examine the supply schedules
and who newly minted cryptoassets are being issued to. Fortunately, once the
blockchain is live, because it’s a distributed and transparent ledger, it’s easy to
see address balances. Often there are sites that will show the amount held by
the top addresses, such as the Bitcoin Rich List.46 For Bitcoin, two addresses
hold between them 227,618 bitcoin, or roughly 1.4 percent of the total outstanding. Another 116 addresses hold a total of 2.87 million bitcoin, or 19
percent of the total outstanding, which is sizeable. Unlike dash, however, these
holders aren’t necessarily receiving nearly half of the newly minted bitcoin,
and so their ability to push the price upward is less. Lastly, it should be noted
that a single person can have multiple bitcoin addresses, so each address is not
necessarily a distinct entity.
•

•

•

In closing, there are many tricks of the trade, whether it be mass speculation,
misleading asset issuers, Ponzi finance, or cornering, with much of it justified
by “this time is different” thinking. However, these are not new tricks—they
have existed for centuries and in all asset classes. The best way for innovative
investors to avoid these traps when considering cryptoassets for their portfolio is to perform proper due diligence on the fundamentals and ignore the
whims of the crowd. Understanding which fundamentals are most important
for long-term growth takes us to the next chapter on a framework for investigating cryptoassets.

Burniske 02.indd 168

9/9/17 1:46 PM

Part III

HOW

Burniske 03.indd 169

9/9/17 2:41 PM

This page intentionally left blank

Burniske 03.indd 170

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Chapter 12
Fundamental Analysis and
a Valuation Framework for
Cryptoassets

W

ith an awareness of the many tricks that can be played on investors
in emerging markets, it’s time to develop a framework for innovative investors to evaluate a cryptoasset for their portfolio. Each
cryptoasset is different, as are the goals, objectives, and risk profiles of each
investor. Therefore, while this chapter will provide a starting point, it is by no
means comprehensive. It’s also not investment advice. Since this space is moving at light speed, our intent is not to say, “Buy this, sell that.” Remember, in
the process of writing this book, we watched the aggregate network value of
cryptoassets jump from approximately $10 billion to north of $100 billion and
hundreds of new cryptoassets come to market.1
Investors need to judge for themselves what to do. Our goal is to provide
a basis for what to look for when first investigating cryptoassets. Then, using
knowledge from chapters past, how to begin contemplating whether a specific
cryptoasset fits their risk-profile and overall investment strategy and if it will
help them achieve their financial goals and objectives.
In Chapter 15, we discuss investment products that take the bulk of operational weight off the investor. If someone wants exposure to this new asset
class but doesn’t want his or her fingers in the wires all the time, a growing
number of investment options are becoming available, like cryptoasset managers and publicly traded vehicles like the Bitcoin Investment Trust. Even with
those products, innovative investors will need to know enough to ask the right

171

Burniske 03.indd 171

9/9/17 2:41 PM

172 CRYPTOASSETS

questions and be assured that the vehicle they’ve put their hard-earned money
into is an appropriate investment.
Fortunately, many of the same tools for assessing any investment can be
used for individual cryptoassets as well. Fundamental analysis will reveal if an
investment is worthy of long-term capital allocation, while technical analysis
will assist with the timing of buys and sells. Much has been written about these
two schools of investing thought, and they’re often pitched as being diametrically opposed.2 We believe they can be used together, especially if innovative
investors want to be actively involved in their portfolios.
Fundamental analysis involves looking at the intrinsic value drivers of an
asset. For example, with stocks, fundamental analysis involves the evaluation
of a company’s operating health through close examination of its income statement, balance sheet, and cash flow statement, while placing these factors in
the context of its long-term vision and macroeconomic exposure. Metrics like
price to earnings, price to sales, book value, and return on equity are derived
through fundamental analysis to determine the value of a company and compare it with its peers.
Fundamental analysis can be a time-consuming process that requires access
to the latest data not only for a company but also as it relates to an industry
and the economy overall. Many times, an investor and even a financial advisor
will depend on analysts to crunch these numbers to provide insights into relevant assets. In the traditional capital markets, an entire industry is based on
this process, known as sell-side research. Currently, there is no such thing as
sell-side research for cryptoassets, and this will require innovative investors to
scour through the details on their own or rely on recognized thought leaders
in the space. We’ll do our best to arm investors with the resources to do this
analysis so they aren’t scared away from the effort.
As it pertains to evaluating cryptoassets, the process of conducting fundamental analysis is different from stocks because cryptoassets are not companies. The assets may have been created by a company or group of individuals,
and an understanding of that company or those individuals is vital, but the
crypto­assets themselves should be valued more as commodities, with markets
priced by the balance of supply and demand.
In this chapter we discuss applying fundamental analysis to the founding
characteristics of a cryptoasset. This includes examining:
•

Burniske 03.indd 172

White paper

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Fundamental Analysis and a Valuation Framework for Cryptoassets

•
•
•
•
•

173

Decentralization edge
Valuation
Community and developers
Relation to digital siblings
Issuance model

In the next chapter, we focus on applying fundamental analysis to the ongoing network health of these assets, including metrics on miners, developers,
companies, and users. Together, these foundational and network fundamentals generate a unique fundamental analysis approach to cryptoassets that will
help the innovative investor make well-informed investment decisions. We’ll
round out these framework chapters by including an examination of how technical analysis can be used for further benefit, specifically to identify appropriate times to invest or liquidate.

WHERE TO START: THE WHITE PAPER
Since cryptoassets are supported by open-source code, with transparent and
accessible communities, there is typically an abundance of information available on an asset. Any cryptoasset worth its mustard has an origination white
paper. A white paper is a document that’s often used in business to outline a
proposal, typically written by a thought leader or someone knowledgeable on
a topic. As it relates to cryptoassets, a white paper is the stake in the ground,
outlining the problem the asset addresses, where the asset stands in the competitive landscape, and what the technical details are.
Satoshi outlined Bitcoin in his white paper, and since then most creators of
cryptoassets have followed the same process. Some of these white papers can
be highly technical, though at the very least, perusing the introduction and
conclusion is valuable. White papers can often be found on the website created
for the cryptoasset.
VAGUENESS IS NOT YOUR FRIEND
A cryptoasset white paper may include a lot of technical information and be
difficult to read all the way through. Many times, the team developing the
cryptoasset will have a website that has a brief description of what the asset
intends to do and how it intends to do it. Even if not everything described
is understood, if the description lacks specificity and seems intentionally

Burniske 03.indd 173

9/9/17 2:41 PM

174 CRYPTOASSETS

vague, that may be a sign to avoid the asset. Investors should feel comfortable briefly explaining the asset in some manner to a friend who may or may
not be knowledgeable on the subject. If the investor can’t do that, it may be
appropriate to consider a different cryptoasset.

DECENTRALIZATION EDGE
When reading the white paper, the first question to ask is: What problem does
it solve? In other words, is there a reason for this cryptoasset and its associated architecture to exist in a decentralized manner? There are lots of digital
services in our world, so does this one have an inherent benefit to being provisioned in a distributed, secure, and egalitarian manner? We call this the decentralization edge. Put bluntly by Vitalik Buterin, “Projects really should make
sure they have good answers for ‘why use a blockchain.’”3
A number of cryptoasset-based projects focus on social networks, such as
Steemit4 and Yours,5 the latter of which uses litecoin. While we admire these
projects, we also ask: Will these networks and their associated assets gain
traction with competitors like Reddit and Facebook? Similarly, a cryptoasset
service called Swarm City6 (formerly Arcade City) aims to decentralize Uber,
which is already a highly efficient service. What edge will the decentralized
Swarm City have over the centralized Uber?
In the case of Steemit and Yours, we understand content creators will get
directly compensated. This may draw more quality content to the platform,
which will thereby drive more use. In the case of Swarm City, the drivers won’t
be losing 20 to 30 percent of every fare to a centralized service, so over time,
more drivers may come to the platform. As more drivers come to the platform,
there may be increased availability of Swarm City cars, and therefore the service may be more beneficial to the end user. Just as with Steemit and Yours, a
greater volume of providers and consumers increases the value of the platform
over time.
However, are these factors enough to gain traction over Reddit, Facebook,
and Uber over the long term? The innovative investor should perform similar
thought experiments with any cryptoasset under consideration and be convinced that its associated architecture will provide long-term value and isn’t
simply riding a hype-wave7 with the intent of gaining funding while providing
little value over time.

Burniske 03.indd 174

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Fundamental Analysis and a Valuation Framework for Cryptoassets

175

THE POWER OF AGE: THE LINDY EFFECT
The Lindy effect is often used to gauge the potential life expectancy of technologies. Unlike humans, where the longer someone lives, the more likely
that death is approaching, the longer technologies live, the less likely they
are to die soon. The reason is that technologies build momentum, and over
time many other technologies are built around them, which continues to drive
underlying support. The most important technologies become intractable to
our daily lives, or at least sticky on a decadal scale. Even culturally, it will
take time for the technology to fade deep into obsolescence.
The same applies to cryptoassets. The longest-lived cryptoasset, bitcoin,
now has an entire ecosystem of hardware, software developers, companies,
and users built around it. Essentially, it has created its own economy, and
while a superior cryptocurrency could slowly gain share, it would have an
uphill battle given the foothold bitcoin has gained.
On the other hand, a newly launched cryptoasset is little known, making
the community supporting it much more fragile. If a major flaw is exposed,
or the cryptoasset undergoes some other form of duress, the community may
quickly disperse. Many members may move to support other cryptoassets,
while others may try again, launching a slightly altered cryptoasset, applying
the lessons learned. In other words, with a new cryptoasset there is much less
sunk cost, which makes it easier for people to let go and move on to something else. For a great example of how quickly a new cryptoasset can rise and
fall, recall what happened with The DAO.
However, if a cryptoasset has strong community engagement and achieves
success early on, it can create a solid foothold that can benefit it over time.
Ethereum seems to be a good example. The demise of The DAO significantly
impacted Ethereum (which The DAO was built on), but through leadership
and community involvement, the major issues were addressed, and as of April
2017 Ethereum stands solidly as the second largest cryptoasset in terms of
network value.8

UNDERSTANDING A CRYPTOASSET’S VALUATION
One of the most common questions is: What gives a cryptoasset value? After
all, these assets have no physical manifestation. Since they are born of software,
the value is derived from the community and the marketplace that naturally

Burniske 03.indd 175

9/9/17 2:41 PM

176 CRYPTOASSETS

develops around the asset. Broadly, there are two kinds of value that the community places on any kind of cryptoasset: utility value and speculative value.

Utility Value and Speculative Value
Utility value refers to the use of the cryptoasset to gain access to the digital
resource its architecture provisions and is dictated by supply and demand characteristics. For bitcoin, its utility is that it can safely, quickly, and efficiently
transfer value to anyone, anywhere in the world. All it takes is typing in the
person’s bitcoin address and clicking send, a functionality that all exchanges
and wallets provide (which we cover in Chapter 14). Bitcoin’s utility in sending
value using the Internet is similar to that of Skype, which can safely, quickly,
and efficiently transmit anyone’s voice and image to anyone, anywhere in the
world.
The innovative investor might say: “OK, I understand that bitcoin can have
utility as MoIP, just as Skype has utility as VoIP, but how does that translate to
bitcoin being worth $1,000 a coin?” Bitcoin’s utility value can be determined
by assessing how much bitcoin is necessary for it to serve the Internet economy it supports. To conceptually understand how bitcoin has value, we will
use a couple of simplified examples. From there the innovative investor can
use this scaffolding to dive deeper into valuations.
Let’s start with a hypothetical Brazilian merchant who wants to buy
US$100,000 worth of steel from a Chinese manufacturer. While this particular
merchant is hypothetical, adoption of bitcoin by Latin American merchants
has been well documented.9 The merchant wants to use bitcoin because it will
allow her to transfer that money within an hour as opposed to waiting a week
or more. Therefore, the Brazilian merchant buys US$100,000 worth of bitcoin
and sends it to the Chinese manufacturer. While the manufacturer is waiting
for that transaction to be incorporated into Bitcoin’s blockchain, that bitcoin is
frozen, temporarily drawn out of the available supply of bitcoin.
Now imagine there are 99,999 other merchants wanting to do the same
thing. In total, among all these merchants, there is demand for US$10 billion
worth of bitcoin (100,000 people wanting to send US$100,000 each), simply
because it is more expedient at moving money between Brazil and China than
other available payment methods. US$10 billion worth of demand with bitcoin trading at $1,000 converts to 10 million coins being temporarily frozen or
drawn out of the available supply of bitcoin.
