
P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

CHANNELS

225

entry price of their first short, which is often near the start of the channel. If they do
that, their first entry will be a breakeven trade and they will have a profit on their
higher entries.
If you are scaling into shorts in that bull channel, it is best to do this only in the
first two-thirds of the day. You do not want to find yourself heavily short in a bull
channel with your breakeven entry so far below that you don’t have enough time
left to get out without a loss, never mind with a large profit. In general, if you are
trading a channel in the second half of the day, it is far better to only trade with the
trend, like buying below the low of the prior bar, or above every bull reversal bar
at the moving average.
If the market continues higher than the shorts believe is likely, they will buy
back their entire position at a loss, and this is probably a significant contributor to
the climactic upside breakout that sometimes comes at the end of a channel. They
no longer expect a pullback any time soon that would allow them to buy at a better
price, and instead buy at the market and take losses on all of their short entries.
Since many are momentum traders, many will switch to long. All the momentumtrading bulls will aggressively buy as the market accelerates upward because they
know that the math is on their side. The directional probability of the next tick being
higher and not lower is more than 50 percent, so they have an edge. Even though the
breakout might be brief and the reversal sharp, their buy programs will continue to
buy as long as the logic supports doing so. However, this is like musical chairs; as
soon as the momentum music stops, everyone quickly grabs a chair, which means
that they exit their longs very quickly. As they are selling out of their longs, there
are aggressive bears shorting as well and this can create a strong imbalance in favor
of the bears. If the bears take control, the sell-off will usually last at least 10 bars
and there will usually be a reversal back below the trend channel line and into the
channel, and then a breakout of the downside of the channel.
The television pundits will attribute the sharp upside breakout to some news
item, and there are always many to choose from, because they see the market only
from the perspective of a traditional stock trader who trades on fundamentals. They
don’t understand that many things that happen, especially over the course of an
hour or so, have nothing to do with fundamentals and are instead the result of large
programs doing the same thing at once with no regard for the fundamentals. Once
the market quickly reverses on the climactic blow-off, they move on to the next
story. They never address the fact that they just gave a report that was foolishly
naı̈ve, and they remain completely oblivious to the powerful technical forces that
drive the market in the short run. Every few years there is an exceptionally huge
intraday move, and that is pretty much the only time that they will acknowledge
that technical factors were at work. In fact, they invariably blame it on programs,
as if the programs suddenly briefly appeared. There is nothing to blame. The vast
majority of all intraday price movement is due to programs, yet the reporters don’t
have a clue. All they see are earnings reports, quarterly sales, and profit margins.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

226

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

TREND LINES AND CHANNELS

Since a channel is a sloping trading range, just like with other trading ranges,
most attempts to break out of either the top or the bottom fail. Yes, one side is
stronger, but the principle is the same as for any trading range. For example, in a
bull channel, both bulls and bears are active but the bulls are stronger and that is
why the channel is sloping up. Both the bulls and the bears are comfortable placing
trades in the middle of the channel, but when the market gets near the top of the
channel, the bulls become concerned that the upside breakout will fail; and as soon
as they think that a failure is likely, they will sell out of some of their longs. Also, the
bears were comfortable shorting in the middle of the channel and will short even
more aggressively near the top, at a better value. When the market gets near the
bottom of the range, the bears are less interested in shorting at these lower prices
and the bulls, who were just buying moments ago at higher prices, will buy even
more aggressively here. This leads to a bounce up off of the trend line. The market
usually pokes below the channel one or more times as it is forming, and you have
to redraw the trend line. The result is usually a slightly broader and flatter channel.
Ultimately, the downside breakout will be strong enough to be followed by a lower
high and then a lower low, and when that happens, traders will begin to draw a bear
channel, even if the bull channel still exists, albeit much wider.
It is important to realize that most bull breakouts of bull channels fail. If the
bulls are able to create a bull breakout and they can overwhelm the bears, they
usually will be able to do so for only a few bars. At that point, the bulls will see
the market as too overdone and will take profits; they won’t want to buy until the
market has corrected for a while. The magnetic effect of the middle of the channel
will usually pull the market back into the channel and cause the breakout to fail,
making the breakout a buy climax. Once back in the channel, the market usually
pokes through the bottom of the channel as its minimum objective. The buy climax
usually leads to a two-legged correction that lasts about 10 bars and usually breaks
below the channel. Once the downside breakout happens, if the selling continues
the next objective is a measured move equal to about the height of the channel.
The bears also know that the buy climax will likely be followed by a correction and
they will short aggressively. With the bulls selling out of their longs, there is strong
selling pressure and the market corrects down and can even become a bear trend.
Sometimes an upside breakout of a bull channel is strong and does not fail
within a few bars. When this is the case, the market will usually rally to a measured
move target, and the breakout will become a measuring gap. For example, if the
bull channel has a wedge shape, and breaks to the downside, but the downside
breakout fails within a few bars, and then the market races up and breaks above
the top of the wedge, the rally will usually reach a measured move up that is equal
to about the height of the wedge. The trend bar or bars that break above the wedge
then become a measuring gap. Gaps, measured moves, and breakouts are discussed
in book 2.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

CHANNELS

227

If instead of an upside breakout, there is a downside breakout but without a
failed upside breakout, buy climax, and bear reversal, the market usually goes sideways for a number of bars. It may form a lower high and then a second leg down,
or the trading range might become a bull flag and lead to a resumption of the bull
trend. Less commonly, there is a strong spike down and a strong bear reversal. The
opposite of all of this is true for bear channels.
Since a trend channel is simply a sloping trading range, it usually functions like
a flag. If there is a bull channel, no matter how steep or protracted, it usually will
have a downside breakout at some point and therefore can be thought of as a bear
flag even if there was no bear trend preceding it. At some point, the strong bulls
will take profits and they will be willing to buy again only after a significant pullback. That pullback often has to go all the way to the beginning of the channel,
where they began buying earlier, and this is part of the reason why channels often lead to a correction all the way to the bottom of the channel, where there is
usually a bounce. The strong bears are as smart as the strong bulls, and generally
just when the strong bulls stop buying, the strong bears begin to aggressively short
and will not be shaken out higher. In fact, they will see higher prices as an even
better value and they will short more. Where will they take profits on their shorts?
Near the bottom of the channel, just where the strong bulls might try to reestablish
their longs.
Because a bull channel behaves like a bear flag, it should be traded like a bear
flag. Similarly, any bear channel should be viewed as a bull flag. There may or may
not be a bull trend that precedes it, but that is irrelevant. Sometimes there will be
a higher time frame bull trend that might not be evident on the 5 minute chart,
and when that happens, the bear channel will appear as a bull flag on that chart.
Although a higher time frame trend might increase the chances of a bull breakout
and the chances that the breakout will be strong and go further, you will so often
see huge bull breakouts from bear channels that it is not necessary to look for a
higher time frame bull trend to trade the channel like a bull flag. The opposite is
true of bull channels, which are functionally bear flags.
Since a bull channel is a bear flag, there is usually a bear breakout eventually.
Sometimes, however, there is a bull breakout above the channel. In most cases,
this breakout is climactic and unsustainable. It might last for just a bar or two,
but sometimes it lasts for five or more bars before the market reverses down. Less
often, the bull trend will continue in a very strong trend. If it reverses, it usually
reenters the channel, and with any channel breakout that reenters the channel, it
usually tests the opposite side of the channel. After a failed breakout of the top
of a bull channel, since this is a type of climax, the reversal should have at least
two legs down and last at least 10 bars, and it often becomes a trend reversal. The
opposite is true of a downside breakout of a bear channel. It usually is a sell climax
and reverses back above the channel and has at least two legs up.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

228

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

TREND LINES AND CHANNELS

All channels eventually end in a breakout, which can be violent or have very
little momentum. Trend channels usually last much longer than what most traders
suspect and they often trap traders into prematurely taking reversal trades. Most
channels usually have at least three legs before they end. This is especially clear
in triangles, and in wedges in particular. With triangles, the breakout is usually
imminent but the direction is often not clear.
The steeper the slope and the closer together the lines are, the stronger the
channel is and the stronger the momentum is. When a channel is steep and tight, it
is a special type of channel called a tight channel. When it is horizontal, it is a tight
trading range, which is discussed in book 2. When a channel is strong, it is risky
to trade the first breakout against the trend, and it is likely that the entire channel
will be a spike on a higher time frame chart. So if there is a steep bear channel and
most of the pullbacks within the channel have been only a single bar, it is better not
to buy one of those breakouts above the prior bar, even if it breaks above the bear
trend line. Instead, it is better to wait to see if there is a breakout pullback, which
can be a lower low or a higher low. If there is and the reversal up looks strong
(for example, maybe there were two or three good-sized bull trend bars within the
past several bars), then you can consider buying the breakout pullback. If there is
no pullback and the market races upward, then the odds of even higher prices are
good and you can wait for any pullback, which should come within five bars or
so. The odds of the long being profitable are better if the rally up goes above the
moving average and that first pullback stays above the moving average. This is a
sign of strength. If the first pullback forms below the moving average, the bulls are
weaker and the chance of a second leg up is less. If the market continues to sell off
after the upside breakout, the breakout failed and the bear trend is resuming.
The strength of a channel is especially important when the market might be in
the process of reversing. For example, if there is a strong bull trend and then there
is a strong sell-off that breaks well below the bull trend line, traders will study
the next rally carefully. They want to see whether that rally will simply be a test
of the bull high or will instead break out strongly above the high and be followed
by another strong leg up in the bull trend. One of the most important considerations is the momentum of that test of the bull high. If the rally is in a very tight,
steep channel with no pullbacks and very little overlap between the bars, and the
rally goes far above the bull high before having any pause or pullback, the momentum is strong and the odds are increased that the bull trend will resume, despite
the strong sell-off and breakout below the bull trend line. Usually the first breakout of a tight, prolonged channel will fail. The trend will then resume and often
break out to a new extreme and reach a measured move equal to about the height
of that initial breakout.
By contrast, if the rally has many overlapping bars, several large bear trend
bars, two or three clear pullbacks, maybe a wedge shape, and a slope that is noticeably less than the slope (momentum) of the original bull trend and of the sell-off, the

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

CHANNELS

229

odds are that the test of the bull high will result in either a lower high or a slightly
higher high and then another attempt to sell off. The market might be reversing into
a bear trend, but at a minimum a trading range is likely.
Whenever there is a breakout of any channel and then a reversal back into the
channel, the market will try to test the other side of the channel, and will usually try
to break out of it, at least by a little. If there is a successful breakout of the channel
in either direction, the next minimum objective is a measured move equal to about
the height of the channel. For example, a double top is a horizontal channel and if
there is a successful breakout of the downside, the minimum target is a measured
move equal to the height of the channel. However, the breakout can become a trend
reversal and the move can be much greater. If instead the breakout is to the upside,
the target is again a measured move up equal to the height of the double top. If
AAPL is forming a double top and the top of the pattern is $5.00 above the bottom,
the initial target of any breakout to the upside is $5.00 above the top. If the breakout
instead is to the downside, the initial objective is $5.00 below the low of the pattern.
The same is true for a wedge bottom. The first objective is a test of the top of the
wedge. If the market continues up, the next target is a measured move up. If the
rally continues, the market might then be in a bull trend. Even when a channel is
sloping, the initial objective is a move equal to the height of the channel. In a bull
channel, for example, pick any bar and look at the channel lines directly above and
below. Simply measure how far apart they are to get the measured move projection.
The measured move targets are only approximate, but the market often hits them
exactly and then pauses, pulls back, or reverses. If the market goes much beyond
the target, a new trend is likely underway.
As with all breakouts, three things can then happen: it can be successful and
be followed by more trading in that direction; it can fail and become a small climactic reversal; or the market can just go sideways and the pattern can evolve into
a trading range. Most breakouts have an attempt to reverse within a few bars. If
the reversal bar is strong compared to the breakout bar, the odds of a failed breakout and a successful reversal are good. If the reversal bar is weak compared to
the breakout, the odds are that the reversal attempt will fail and set up a breakout pullback within a bar or two, and the breakout will resume. If the breakout
and the reversal are about equally strong, traders will then look at the bar after
the reversal signal bar. For example, if there is a strong bull trend bar that breaks
out of a bull flag, and the next bar is an equally impressive bear reversal bar, the
bar that follows becomes important. If it trades below the bear reversal bar, the
breakout has failed, at least for the moment. If it then has a strong bear close
and is a strong bear trend bar, the chance that the reversal will continue down
increases. If instead it is a strong bull reversal bar, chances are that the failed
breakout will not succeed, and this bull reversal bar then becomes a signal bar
for a breakout pullback buy at one tick above its high. Breakouts are discussed
in book 2.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

230

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

TREND LINES AND CHANNELS

FIGURE 15.1

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 15.1

Nested Channels

Channels are common on all charts, and some smaller channels are nested inside of larger channels. In Figure 15.1, notice that the lines do not always have
to be drawn to contain all of the highs and lows in the channel. Drawing them
with best fit lines helps to make the channel behavior clearer and often makes it
easier to anticipate signals. Since most trading is institutional and placed by computer programs, it is reasonable to assume that each small, tight channel is due to
program trading. Since there are so many firms running programs all day long, a
channel probably can develop only when several firms are running programs in the
same direction and with enough volume to overwhelm the programs that are trying to make the market move in the opposite direction. For example, in the channel down from bar 4, there were enough sell programs going on to overpower any
buy programs, and the market moved down. When the buy and sell programs are
largely in balance, the market moves sideways in a tight trading range, which is a
horizontal channel.
Bull channels are indistinguishable from bear flags, and bear channels should
be thought of as bull flags. When the channel is tight like from bars 2 to 3, buyers should wait until there is a failed breakout and reversal up before looking for
longs, as occurred at bar 3. They could also wait for a pullback after the breakout,
like the buying above the high of the small bar that formed five bars after bar 3.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

JWBT576-Brooks

Figure 15.1

October 11, 2011

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

CHANNELS

231

Until either of these develop, traders should only be shorting. When a channel has
broader swings like the channel from bars 3 to 8, trades can be taken in both directions, since it more clearly resembles a sloping trading range and trading ranges
are two-sided markets that give both buy and sell signals.
Most of the channels in the chart were tight, and since several had no pullbacks
or small (only one- to three-tick) one-bar pullbacks and lasted about 10 bars or less,
they were also micro channels.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

232

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:45

TREND LINES AND CHANNELS

FIGURE 15.2

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 15.2

Failed Channel Breakouts

When there is a breakout of a channel and then a reversal back into the channel, the
market usually tests the opposite side of the channel and often breaks out of the
other side, at least minimally. If the breakout has follow-through, the first target is
a measured move equal to the height of the channel. In Figure 15.2, bar 3 broke out
of the top of a trading range and reversed back down. After breaking through the
bottom of the channel, the bar 4 low was one tick below a perfect measured move.
Bar 11 broke above the top of a trading range and then the market tested the
bottom of the range with bar 13. Sometimes there are several bars to choose from
when drawing the lines, and it is usually worth being aware of all of the possibilities because you may not know which is best until several bars later. The widest
channel is the most certain.
The bull inside bar that followed the bar 13 breakout set up a failed breakout
buy. Since the market was again reversing into the channel, the first target was a
test of the top of the channel. The breakout of the top was successful and the next
target was a measured move up. Bar 22 went one tick above that target. Sometimes
a trend will begin and carry much further.
Bar 17 broke above a bull micro channel or wedge and reversed back down
on the next bar. Since the channel was so tight, the objective of testing the lower
end of the channel was met on that next bar, but there was not enough room for a
profitable short and no trade should be taken.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 15.2

CHANNELS

233

The measured move up for the breakout of the channel formed by bars 19 and
20 was at the same price as the measured move up from the trading range defined by
bars 6 and 10. When multiple targets are around the same price, any reversal there
has an increased chance of success. Bar 21 was a valid short setup but it failed on
the bar after entry. There was a second entry below bar 22 and the market tested
the bottom of the channel. There, it formed a bull reversal bar and the market then
tested the top of the channel.

Deeper Discussion of This Chart
The market broke below a closing trading range with a large gap down in Figure 15.2,
but the ﬁrst bar was relatively large and had good-sized tails above and below. This is
trading range behavior and not a good signal bar for a trend from the open buy or short.
The second bar was a strong bull reversal bar and signaled a long for a failed breakout
and a trend from the open bull trend. The market entered a tight trading range just
below the moving average, and it became a ﬁnal ﬂag with a failed breakout and reversal
down. Although traders could short as soon as bar 3 went below the low of the prior
bar, it was safer to wait until the bar closed to conﬁrm that it would have a bear body,
and then short below its low.
The rally to bar 1 was in a micro channel, so the bar 2 downside breakout was likely to
not go very far without a pullback. When the market moved above the high of the bar 2
breakout bar, the breakout failed. At that point, the market went sideways as traders
fought for control. The bears were looking for a higher high or lower high pullback from
the bar 2 breakout, and the bulls simply wanted a failed breakout and then another
leg up.
The bears won and the market fell in a micro channel down to bar 4, where the
process reversed. Bar 5 was the signal bar for the failed breakout, but the four-bar bull
spike was strong enough for traders to believe that the market would likely test higher,
which it did in the move up to bar 8.
The move from bar 14 to bar 17 was another bull micro channel, and bar 18 was the
breakout. The market then went sideways before the small trend resumed in the move
up to bar 22.
