Another element on the page is called IBD’s “10 Secrets To Success.” A lot
of parents teach this to their kids by having them read these little short stories. The ten secrets start with “How You Think Is Everything: Always Be
Positive. Think Success, Not Failure. Beware of a Negative Environment.”
The second is “Decide upon Your True Dreams and Goals: Write Down
Your Specific Goals and Develop a Plan to Reach Them.” The third is “Take
Action: Goals Are Nothing without Action. Don’t Be Afraid to Get Started.
Just Do It.” The fourth is “Never Stop Learning: Go Back to School or Read
Books. Get Training and Acquire Skills.” And so on, until you get to the last
one, which is “Be Honest and Dependable; Take Responsibility: Otherwise,
Nos. 1–9 Won’t Matter.”
Below the list, one of the 10 secrets is discussed in detail each day. Parents find this is something their children don’t get in school, and they use it
to help them learn the basic principles of how to succeed in life.
Rounding out the “Leaders & Success” page are two profiles of outstanding people, past and present, and how they succeeded.
Internet and Technology

The next page focuses on “Internet and Technology.” Some investors don’t
spend much time here. But if tech stocks are leading the market, you want
to read this section to be on top of the discussions. We have a bureau in Silicon Valley staffed by experienced reporters who’ve been with us many
years. The page they put together is designed not only for investors, but for
anyone in the tech industry—computer programmers, engineers, systems
people, and others.
We have a subscriber who works at a big outfit the government uses to
research how inventions might be applicable to defense efforts. One of the

353

How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

firm’s top researchers has found that our writers get their facts straighter
and understand the technologies better than those on most of the business
magazines. We also have CEOs of computer software companies that subscribe to IBD.
Your Weekly Review

There is a feature in the first section called “Your Weekly Review.” It
includes a table of 35 stocks showing strong weekly gains and a chart on
each one. It also includes a story on some of the companies. In a recent
story, Paul Whitfield tells how the stocks of Netflix, Edwards Life Sciences,
Matrix Initiative, and McDonald’s are all acting in a superior way accompanied by interesting news.
Inside Real Estate

The next page I turn to is “Inside Real Estate.” I don’t normally read this,
but somebody who is interested in the real estate market certainly should.
The New America

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

Next is ”The New America” page, devoted to young, entrepreneurial companies. One company gets extensive treatment each day. At the top of the
page, we sometimes have short briefs under the heading “AfterMarket.”
The one I’m looking at is headlined “Neutral Tandem Soars on Q4
Results.” It notes that “telecom gear maker Neutral Tandem gapped up
11% in more than seven times average volume” and then quotes what ana-

354 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
lysts are saying. When these tidbits of unusual activity catch my attention,
I’ll check them out on my computer and view a chart to see how the stock
really looks.
You never know how many ideas you’re going to pick up from reading
IBD. But in each issue, there will be several you’ll want to check out. It
takes no time at all to go to your PC, punch in the symbol that appears in the
paper right alongside the first mention of the company’s name, and check
into the history of the stock, its earnings, and a few other key basics. Some
of the best portfolio managers in the country quickly check out stocks this
way to decide which companies they want to focus on or get more information about. It’s a good way to add to your watch list.
Mutual Funds & ETFs

On the first page of the “Mutual Funds & ETFs” section, there are two
information boxes I usually check. They zero in on growth funds with excellent records. The boxes show these funds’ largest holdings in the latest quarter, along with their top new buys and sells. New buys may be of interest.
We also show how the funds have performed relative to the market in each
of the last five years. After you’ve taken the paper for a while, you’ll know
which are the better funds. One way you can judge is by noting their top
positions. If the fund has three or four of the better leaders, I know the
managers really know what they’re doing.
I don’t normally look at our mutual fund tables, but I will frequently
check one or two fund families that I know are outstanding to get a feel of
how they’re doing. We cover far more funds and include more data in our
tables than most daily publications. Many papers have sharply cut the num-

How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

ber of funds they follow. Besides current activity, we include the four-week
percentage change and a 36-month performance ranking for each fund. We
also include the phone number for each fund family.
A couple of tables in the fund section are unique. One shows how big-cap
growth funds are doing compared with small-cap growth funds. The other
compares growth funds to value funds. This is important for you to know in
any market: Are growth stocks leading, or are value stocks? Are big caps
leading, or are small caps? Here you have the answers at a glance. In the
edition I have, growth is leading.
Leading Fund Sectors

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

You also need to know the broad, overall sectors that are in demand. So, on
Fridays we have two tables showing the top industry and sector funds. On
other days, different fund types are displayed. If you’re interested in what
industries are doing well, you can see here that gold has been doing well in

355

356 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
the last 4-week, 8-week, 12-week, and 16-week periods. The medical field
shows well in the longer, 39-week table.
Issues & Insights

At the back of the first section, you’ll find our editorial pages, titled “Issues &
Insights.” We have an outstanding staff of a half-dozen highly experienced
writers turning out up to six editorials a day. I do not write these. Wes Mann,
our distinguished and talented editor, who has been with IBD from the
beginning, is in charge of this key area and is assisted in the important role it
plays for IBD readers and the nation by Terry Jones, who has also been with
IBD since its start-up 25 years ago. Terry came to us from BusinessWeek. I’ll
normally read two or three of the editorials after checking the headlines and
summary paragraphs to see if I’m interested in the subject.
We also have columns from guest writers plus syndicated columnists “On
the Left” and “On the Right,” so you get different points of view. On the
right, I always respect the work of Thomas Sowell and Victor Davis Hanson.
Both are older, experienced observers with great insight. Sowell, from Stanford’s Hoover Institute, is probably the best economist and historian in
America. He has a new book just out entitled Applied Economics: Thinking
beyond Stage One, one of 42 books he has written. From Washington, we
run columns by conservative Charles Krauthammer and liberal David
Ignatius, who is well informed on international issues.
But the first thing I look at each day in “Issues & Insights” is the cartoon.
We have the best editorial cartoonist in the nation, Michael Ramirez. He
won a Pulitzer Prize for Investor’s Business Daily in 2008—the second time
he had received this prestigious award.
IBD also has an extensive public polling operation, conducting monthly
surveys on economic confidence, presidential leadership, and major
national issues year-round and daily tracking polls in election years. In 2008,
for the second presidential election in a row, the IBD/TIPP poll not only
came closest to the final margin between Barack Obama and John McCain,
but was right on the money. These feats, tantamount to hitting a bullet with
a bullet, have earned the IBD/TIPP poll, conducted by TechnoMetrica
Market Intelligence, the honor of being America’s most accurate.
Making Money

In the “Making Money” section, starting on page B1, we try to cover the relevant facts, skills, and rules you need if you are to be a successful investor.
We view Investor’s Business Daily as an educational medium. We don’t tell
people what to buy. We don’t recommend stocks or tout “10 stocks that are
going to go up tomorrow.” We just explain time-tested rules based on mod-

How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

els of successful stocks in all of past history and provide sound techniques
and methods for managing your portfolio wisely.
We also give classes and several levels of paid workshops, from beginning
to very advanced, on investing; in addition, we have a chart school, have several books out, including this fourth edition of the one you’re reading, and
offer a home study course. We view our mission as being to teach anyone
who wants to learn how to become a better investor and protect himself so
he doesn’t get hurt in bear markets.
NYSE + Nasdaq Stocks On The Move

The first thing I read on page B1 is the “NYSE + Nasdaq Stocks On The
Move” tables—a feature that’s in no other publication. We have a massive
computer database that each day screens for those stocks that had the greatest increase in trading volume over and above their average daily volume in
the last three months. This isolates the true demand for securities you
would not otherwise notice. On these lists, you’ll find many new, innovative
companies with names you may not know. But if they appear frequently,
you’d better find out what they’re doing or making. They could be the next
Microsoft or Apple.
In this current issue, Visa is on the NYSE list. It was up 4.6 points on a
volume increase to 239% more than normal for the credit card company.
Visa just reported earnings during a bearish period. There were also a few
medical stocks on the lists.
In addition to price and volume change, the tables show the same company variables IBD shows in its main stock tables. For example, IBD shows
the Earnings per Share rank of Visa as 99, meaning its earnings growth rate
in the last three years and in recent quarters puts it in the top 1% of all companies in our database. This doesn’t mean the stock’s going to go up. But it
certainly means it has characteristics worth checking if you’re hunting for
entrepreneurial stocks that might outperform in a future better market.
We boldface those names on this list that have Earnings per Share and
Relative Strength ratings of 80 or higher, meaning they’re in the top 20% of
all stocks based on those measurements. The stocks with stronger records
are the ones you want to investigate.
Below the list of stocks that advanced for the day is a list of stocks that
were down in price. They too are ranked by percentage increase in volume.
You can judge the market environment and how well our new government
is doing by how many stocks are on the upside versus how many are on the
downside. In the example shown, the table has eight NYSE stocks on the
upside versus 36 on the downside, meaning there were more stocks that day
with greater-than-normal volume that dropped in price than that increased

357

358 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

NYSE + Nasdaq Stocks on the Move

in price. This zeroes in on the daily supply and demand for leading securities. It was a bearish day.
I’ve found this computer screen to be valuable. For it to fail to pick up a
new big leader is almost impossible. But you’ve got to do your own homework to understand some of these names you might not know. IBD also tries
to cover these companies in our various columns.
How’s The Market?

Page B2 is titled “How’s The Market?” It is loaded with absolutely crucial
data. We present the four key general market indexes—the NYSE composite, Nasdaq, S&P 500, and Dow Jones Industrials—in large, easy-to-read
charts. We stack them one on top of the other so you can compare them and
see which indexes are stronger and if one index diverges from the others at
some point. At this time, we note that while all the indexes were in a negative trend in January, the Nasdaq was down only 2%, less than the others,
implying it is the leader at this stage in a difficult market.

359

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

360 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
We also have relative strength lines, moving average lines, and a line just
below the NYSE Composite chart that displays the New York Stock
Exchange advance-decline line, which let’s you quickly see day by day over
the last six months if more stocks on the NYSE were advancing or declining.
There’s even an Accumulation/Distribution measure showing which of the
major indexes has the largest amount of accumulation. At this reading, the
Nasdaq had a “B–,” meaning it has recently enjoyed stronger accumulation
than the others.
B2 is a page I look at every day, and you should too. I want to carefully
check the recent price and critical volume activity of the leading indexes on
a day-by-day basis to see if they’re still in an uptrend and under accumulation or if they’re shifting into a new downtrend and behaving in a highly negative way. Don’t neglect the daily volume; it’s the key that can tell if you
something is going wrong. If you study and learn to interpret the general
market indexes correctly, which can take some time, you will learn how to
avoid most of the serious declines because the increased distribution always
shows up in the early stages, before the more damaging part of a decline
evolves. This can preserve a good bit more of your money and is something
it’s definitely worth striving to perfect, no matter how much time it may take
you. How much time, after all, did you spend earning the money you now
hope to invest? So is it worth your time to learn how to skillfully preserve
and protect it?
If you learn to read the market and apply IBD’s general market rules,
there’s no excuse for finding that you are down 30%, 40%, or 50% or more
in any bear market. I know most public investors and maybe some readers
of the paper were possibly hurt in the market correction of 2008. But IBD
supplied the rules and information. If readers did their homework and read
the “The Big Picture” column, they should have seen that IBD’s method
picked up the adverse activity in the earlier stages of the emerging bear
market decline that developed in late 2000 and 2008.
You Can and Must Learn to Spot the Following

October 3, 2007, was the first distribution day on the Nasdaq, October 11
was the second, October 15 and 16 were the third and fourth, and October
19 was the fifth. If you saw and read this correctly, you would have sold
something. On October 24 you had a sixth distribution day, and you should
have cut back further. By November 1, you had had seven crucial warnings.
This is how all important market corrections and bear markets begin. If you
missed this and were totally unaware of what was happening, go back and
study all the market-top charts in Chapter 9 until they make sense to you
and you understand what you must look for in the future. Many investors

How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

have discovered they need to take charge, get serious, and learn the basics
of sound, successful investing. You can do far better in the future.
IBD Mutual Fund Index

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

There is another unique feature on page B2 you can’t find in other daily
publications—the “IBD Mutual Fund Index,” where we pick two dozen
leading growth funds and show their composite performance in a graphic
display. I use this as a supplementary index because it is in a way a giant
advance-decline line of some of the better funds with a combined 1,000 to
2,000 or more stocks owned among the 24 funds. When I’ve seen a classic,
well-formed cup-with-handle pattern in this index, preceded by a strong
prior uptrend to the pattern, the index and the market have almost always
moved up.

IBD’s 197 Industry Sub-Group Rankings

On this jam-packed page, we also have IBD’s “197 Industry Sub-Group
Rankings.” This list shows a composite rating for each sub-group and
each sub-group’s change from the previous day, plus where the group
ranked three and six weeks and seven months ago. The top 20 and bottom
20 sub-groups are circled because they represent the best- and worstperforming industries.
By now, you should know I am not going to own anything in the bottom
20 because we’ve proven over many years that these industries are going to
be having a lot of trouble. On the other hand, we know that most of the leading areas of a positive market will show up in the top 20.

361

362 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL

The reason we have 197 subgroups is that within every sector, there are
segments that can perform quite differently. Medical genetics is our thirdranking group. Seven months ago it was fifty-seventh.
All told, we have 10 tables that measure industries from different points
of view. Two small boxes on page B2 that I also check each day give you
another perspective on which industries are leading. One shows the “Top 10
Fidelity Industry Funds Since Jan. 1.”
The second small box shows the groups with the highest percentage of
stocks at new highs. With several different ways to look at market sectors,
you can hardly miss the one or two sectors that turn out to be the real leaders in each new bull market.
Next to those boxes, there’s a list displaying indexes of 28 different market sectors and how each performed for the day.
IBD Industry Themes

On page B3, we have another way of keeping track of industries—a daily
column called “IBD Industry Themes.” In every market, there are certain
leading themes. Investors may be buying medical stocks, for example, or
technology stocks. So what are the themes in the current market?
We also have a column on New York and Nasdaq stocks and one for the
long-term investor. Another three columns (on page B5) include “The Base
Reader,” which analyzes various chart patterns, “The Income Investor,” and
“International Leaders,” covering the foreign markets. I don’t read all these

363

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

columns. But I do read the headlines, and if a quick glance tells me a column is talking about some situation I’m interested in, I’ll read it.
2,500 Leading Stocks (NYSE + Nasdaq Research Tables)

A powerhouse element we’ve added recently is the way we organize and display our one-of-a-kind stock tables. We call them “Research Tables”
because we have a boatload of data on each company. IBD follows up to
2,500 stocks, combining New York and Nasdaq stocks in one table, whereas
some of our competitors carry only 1,000 stocks and have nothing close to
the critical ratings and data we provide for each company.
Right off the bat, you’ll see that our “2,500 Leading Stocks” tables
starting on page B3 are organized in order of the strongest of 33 broad
economic sectors. Almost everyone else’s tables are organized alphabetically. For decades, Americans used the stock tables in their local newspaper or in one of our financial competitors just to look up where their
stocks closed yesterday: “Was my General Motors up, or was it down?”
While it’s nice to be able to check how your stock did, these days you can
get quotes anywhere on the Web. What we’re doing is making the tables
an advanced research lab to help you discover the next big leading stock
you’ll want to invest in. Here’s what we’re able to do with how we display
the tables.
This particular issue confirms what we saw in other tables: that the “Medical” sector is number one. Then we show every one of the stocks in the
medical field, listed alphabetically. Each has a composite rating, which goes
from 0 to 99, with 99 being the very best. This is an overall rating that considers key individual ratings. (Of course, this current rating could decline if

364 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
our government succeeds in its attempt to rewrite all the rules and decide
how it wants to run our entire medical system.)
If you spot a stock that looks interesting, we have given you the stock symbol, and you can go to Investors.com and check out the chart or other vital
facts and figures, using a handy checklist to flesh out what you’ve uncovered
in the tables.
As I scan the tables, I look for stocks that are boldfaced. Here, too, we
boldface anything that’s up one point or more or is making a new high in
price. I’m mainly interested in keeping track of price movements so I don’t
miss anything that might turn out to be a huge new leader. The boldfaced
stocks can be scanned very quickly, and if you’re using charts, you may
already be aware of the patterns of some of the ideas you notice in the
tables. For example, if you go through a number of charts every week, looking for sound patterns with strong fundamentals, and you scan the boldfaced stocks in the tables daily, you’ll see a bolded stock whose chart you
were impressed with start to move up.
When I spot unusual activity by high-ranked stocks, I tend to write down
the symbol at the top of the B1 page. When I get through scanning the
tables, I may have eight or ten symbols that I’ll check out because they look
interesting based on their price activity and high ratings. You can go right to
Investors.com or Daily Graphs Online and evaluate the chart to see if the
stock is acting right or acting poorly.
So rather than using the tables just to find out how my stocks did yesterday, I’m using them to screen for potential ideas that might become super
leaders at some point in the future. For any serious investor, this is almost a
necessity if you are going to improve your performance.
“You Can Do It Too”

At the top of page B4, we have something called “You Can Do It Too.”
These are short quotes by investors who have written to tell us they’ve done
well and what their main observations were. I realize there are a number of
people who probably aren’t so successful or who haven’t done their homework, didn’t follow rules, or didn’t have any system. Many of these quotes,
however, are inspiring.
It’s interesting that more than 1,000 people have written to tell us that
they’ve finally figured out how to put it all together to achieve outstanding results. I say “finally” because it takes some time and effort to get
truly superior results. There are no free lunches in the stock market. But
once you understand and apply yourself, you could in time become
financially independent. Would that be a worthy goal for you to strive for
and achieve?
