
c02.indd 30

06/12/12 2:23 PM

How Money Is Made in the Game

31

FIGURE 2.14 EUR/USD Plummets 300 Pips
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company. All rights reserved.

READING THE CHARTS
There are three types of charts which traders use on the broker’s
platform. The three charts include line chart, bar chart, and candlestick
chart.

Line Chart
The line chart is plotted by connecting the closing prices over a speciﬁc
time frame. With a simple line, the price trend of a particular currency can
be seen. The line chart is applicable for all currency pairs, across all time
frames. As a trader, it is important to select the time frame that you are
comfortable with. A short time frame can help you to spot minor trends for
quick proﬁts, while a longer time frame can help you to align yourself with
the dominant trend.
The simplicity of the line chart comes with one glaring drawback:
Because all the line ever records is the closing price, traders are not able
to see any drastic moves prior to the close of the period. Hence, traders
are not able to utilize vital market information to aid their decision-making
process.
Figure 2.15 presents a line chart for USD/CAD using the 5-minute time
frame.
Figure 2.16 presents a line chart for USD/CAD using the hourly time
frame.

c02.indd 31

06/12/12 2:23 PM

32

FOREX IS A GAME

FIGURE 2.15 USD/CAD on a 5-Minute Time Frame
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company.
All rights reserved.

FIGURE 2.16 USD/CAD on an Hourly Time Frame
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company.
All rights reserved.

Bar Chart
A bar chart gives slightly more information than a line chart because it
records the open, high, low, and close of the market price for the currency
pair. Unlike the line chart, which gives data at only one point in time, the

c02.indd 32

06/12/12 2:23 PM

How Money Is Made in the Game

33

bar chart offers more data about the price changes during the selected
time frame. Bar charts are sometimes referred to as OHLC charts, because
they capture the price for open, high, low, and close.
Figure 2.17 shows an example of a price bar.
The OHLC readings on bar charts are:
OPEN: The horizontal line on the left stands for the opening price of
the currency pair in a selected time period.
HIGH: The top point of the vertical line shows the highest price of the
currency pair during that time period.
LOW: The bottom point of the vertical line shows the lowest price of
the currency pair during that time period.
CLOSE: The horizontal line on the right shows the closing price of the
currency pair in the selected time period.
The individual vertical bars in the chart (low and high) indicate the
currency pair’s trading range as a whole. Depending on the time frame
selected, bar charts can summarize price activity over the past minute,
hour, day, or even month.
Figure 2.18 shows the bar chart for USD/JPY in a 15-minute time frame.
Figure 2.19 shows the bar chart for AUD/USD in a 4-hour time frame.
HIGH

CLOSE

OPEN

LOW

FIGURE 2.17 Price Bar

c02.indd 33

06/12/12 2:23 PM

34

FOREX IS A GAME

FIGURE 2.18 USD/JPY in a 15-Minute Time Frame
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company.
All rights reserved.

FIGURE 2.19 AUD/USD in a 4-Hour Time Frame
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company. All rights reserved.

Candlestick Chart
Candlestick charts were invented by the Japanese in the 1700s to study
the movements in the price of rice on Japanese commodity exchanges.
Candlestick charts show the same information as bar charts but in a more
visually appealing way.
Take a look at the two candlesticks in Figure 2.20.

c02.indd 34

06/12/12 2:23 PM

How Money Is Made in the Game

HIGH

35

Wick

HIGH

CLOSE

OPEN

Body

OPEN

CLOSE

Wick
LOW

LOW

FIGURE 2.20 Bull and Bear Candlesticks

The OHLC readings are the same as with bar charts. Please see the
explanatory note before Figure 2.17 for a deﬁnition of each reading.
A candlestick is considered bullish if the closing price is higher than
the opening price. A candlestick is considered bearish if the closing price
is lower than the opening price. In Figure 2.20, the candlestick on the left is
considered bullish and the one on the right is considered bearish.
The “real body” of the candlestick represents the range between the
opening price and the closing price for a particular time frame. Real bodies
can be either long or short.
The “wicks,” or shadows, above and below the candlestick represent
the highest and lowest prices reached during a particular time frame.
Shadows can be long or short.
Figure 2.21 shows a bullish candlestick on the 30-minute (M30) time
frame for the EUR/USD currency pair.
Here’s how we would interpret the candlestick, assuming that the
candle started forming at 11 A.M.: At 11 A.M., the price for EUR/USD was
1.3340. At 11:30 A.M., the price for EUR/USD closed higher at 1.3365. In the
half-hour period, prices ﬂuctuated such that the highest price reached was
1.3378 and the lowest price reached was 1.3322.
Figure 2.22 shows a bearish candlestick on the 4-hour (H4) time frame
for the USD/JPY currency pair.
Here’s how we would interpret the candlestick, assuming that the candle started forming at 2 P.M.: At 2 P.M., the price for USD/JPY was 81.78. At
6 P.M., the price for USD/JPY closed lower at 81.02. In the 4-hour period,
prices ﬂuctuated such that the highest price reached was 81.92 and the lowest price reached was 80.87.
In summary, reading candlesticks can give us an idea of which group—
buyers or sellers—was in control at any point of time.

c02.indd 35

06/12/12 2:23 PM

36

FOREX IS A GAME

1.3378
1.3365

1.3340
1.3322

FIGURE 2.21 Bullish Candlestick

81.92

81.78

81.02
80.87

FIGURE 2.22 Bearish Candlestick

c02.indd 36

06/12/12 2:23 PM

How Money Is Made in the Game

37

MARKET STRUCTURE
Now that we understand how to read the candlesticks, let’s turn to market structure. The forex market has three segments: trend, range, and
breakout.

Trend
A trend can go either up or down. A trend that is moving upwards is called
an uptrend. A trend that is moving downwards is called a downtrend.
Uptrend An uptrend is identiﬁed as prices having a series of higher
highs and higher lows. The highs are the peaks that prices reach intermittently. The lows are the valleys that prices fall to before heading up again.
Hence, an uptrend is formed when there is a series of highs going higher
and a series of lows going higher.
Figure 2.23 shows an example of an uptrend.
Figure 2.24 shows an example of EUR/USD (1-hour time frame) moving in an uptrend.
Figure 2.25 shows an example of USD/JPY (4-hour time frame) moving
in an uptrend.

Higher High

Higher Low

High

Low

FIGURE 2.23 Series of Higher Highs and Higher Lows

c02.indd 37

06/12/12 2:23 PM

38

FOREX IS A GAME

FIGURE 2.24 EUR/USD Moving in an Uptrend
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company.
All rights reserved.

FIGURE 2.25 USD/JPY Moving in an Uptrend
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company.
All rights reserved.

c02.indd 38

06/12/12 2:23 PM

How Money Is Made in the Game

39

Downtrend A downtrend has prices moving in a series of lower highs
and lower lows. (See Figure 2.26.)
Figure 2.27 shows an example of USD/JPY (1-hour time frame) moving
in a downtrend.
Figure 2.28 shows an example of EUR/AUD (4-hour time frame) moving in a downtrend.

High

Low

Lower High

Lower Low

FIGURE 2.26 Series of Lower Lows and Lower Highs

FIGURE 2.27 USD/JPY Moving in a Downtrend
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company.
All rights reserved.

c02.indd 39

06/12/12 2:23 PM

40

FOREX IS A GAME

FIGURE 2.28 EUR/AUD Moving in a Downtrend
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company.
All rights reserved.

Traders use a trending strategy when the market is moving in an
uptrend or a downtrend. When the market is in an uptrend, we would go
long. If the market is moving in a downtrend, we would go short.
Trend Lines Trend lines are lines that are drawn to show the prevailing
direction of price. They are visual representations to give us insight into
where prices could go next. In an uptrend, we draw a trend line by joining
the signiﬁcant higher lows. In a downtrend, we draw the trend line by joining the signiﬁcant lower highs.
The steeper the angle of the trend line, the stronger the momentum.
However, it is important to note that trends with steep angles are very often
short-lived.
Traders use trend lines to show three things:
1. The direction of the trend
2. The angle of the trend
3. The possible chart patterns that may evolve

Figure 2.29 shows an example of an uptrend line drawn on USD/JPY
(4-hour time frame)
Figure 2.30 shows an example of a downtrend line on the AUD/USD
(1-hour time frame)

c02.indd 40

06/12/12 2:23 PM

How Money Is Made in the Game

41

FIGURE 2.29 USD/JPY Moving in an Uptrend
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company.
All rights reserved.

FIGURE 2.30 AUD/USD Moving in a Downtrend
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company.
All rights reserved.

Understanding a Trend In an uptrend, it is easy for us to conclude
that prices rise because there are more buyers than sellers. However, this
is not true. In the forex market, the number of contracts bought always
equals the number of contracts sold. As an example, if you want to buy ﬁve

c02.indd 41

06/12/12 2:23 PM

42

FOREX IS A GAME

lots of EUR/USD, the contract must be available from someone who wants
to sell it. Conversely, if you want to sell three lots of USD/CHF, someone
must be willing to buy it.
Hence, the number of long and short positions in the forex market is
always equal. If the number of contracts bought and sold is always equal,
why do prices move up and down?
The reason lies in the intensity of emotions between the buyers
and the sellers. In an uptrend, the buyers are in control because they
don’t mind paying a high price. They buy high because they expect prices
to rise even higher. Sellers are nervous in an uptrend, and they agree to
sell only at a higher price. The price moves up because the intensity of
the buyers’ greed overpowers the fear and anxiety of the sellers. The
uptrend starts to fail only when buyers refuse to buy at higher prices
anymore.
In a downtrend, the sellers are in control because they don’t mind selling at a low price. They sell low because they expect prices to drop even
further. Buyers are nervous in a downtrend, and they agree to buy only at a
discount. The price moves down because the intensity of the sellers’ greed
overpowers the buyers’ fear and anxiety. The downtrend starts to fail only
when sellers refuse to sell at lower prices anymore.

Range
A range occurs when the price is trading in a channel between two borders.
Using an analogy of a bouncing rubber ball, the price seems to “bounce”
between a ﬂoor and a ceiling. The ceiling is called an area of resistance
while the ﬂoor is called an area of support. (See Figure 2.31.)
Figure 2.32 shows an example of GBP/JPY (30-minute time frame)
moving in a range.
Figure 2.33 shows an example of EUR/JPY (daily time frame) moving
in a range.

Resistance

Support

FIGURE 2.31 Concept of a Range

c02.indd 42

06/12/12 2:23 PM

How Money Is Made in the Game

43

FIGURE 2.32 GBP/JPY Moving in a Range
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company.
All rights reserved.

FIGURE 2.33 EUR/JPY Moving in a Range
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company.
All rights reserved.

In a range, traders go short once prices bounce off levels of resistance
because prices tend to head downwards. Similarly, traders execute long
orders once prices bounce off levels of support because prices tend to head
upwards.

c02.indd 43

06/12/12 2:23 PM

44

FOREX IS A GAME

Figure 2.34 shows an example of where traders place buy and sell
orders in a range.
Figure 2.35 shows an example of where traders place buy and sell
orders on the GBP/JPY (30-minute time frame).
Figure 2.36 shows an example of where traders place buy and sell
orders on the EUR/JPY (daily time frame).

Breakout
A breakout occurs when prices push above the resistance area or below
the support area after bouncing between a trading channel for a period
Resistance
Sell

Buy
Support

FIGURE 2.34 Concept of a Range

FIGURE 2.35 GBP/JPY Moving in a Range
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company.
All rights reserved.

c02.indd 44

06/12/12 2:23 PM

How Money Is Made in the Game

45

FIGURE 2.36 EUR/JPY in a Range
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company.
All rights reserved.

Breakout Area
Go “Long”
Resistance

Support

FIGURE 2.37 Breakout from the Resistance Area

of time. Momentum is greatest on breakout points; hence traders tend to
capitalize on these speciﬁc movements by going long once prices break
upward from a trading range or by going short once prices break downward from a trading range.
Figure 2.37 shows an example of a breakout from the resistance area.
Figure 2.38 shows an example of a breakout on USD/JPY (1-hour time
frame).

c02.indd 45

06/12/12 2:23 PM

46

FOREX IS A GAME

FIGURE 2.38 USD/JPY Breakout
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 2.39 EUR/CHF Breakout
Source: Created with FX Primus Ltd, a PRIME Mantle Corporation PLC company.
All rights reserved.

Figure 2.39 shows an example of a breakout on EUR/CHF (daily time
frame).
Figure 2.40 shows an example of a breakout from the support area.
Figure 2.41 shows an example of a breakout on NZD/USD (1-hour time
frame).
Figure 2.42 shows an example of a breakout on GBP/USD (4-hour time
frame).

c02.indd 46

06/12/12 2:23 PM

How Money Is Made in the Game

47
Resistance

Support
Breakout Area
Go “Short”

FIGURE 2.40 Breakout from the Support Area

FIGURE 2.41 NZD/USD Breakout

FIGURE 2.42 GBP/USD Breakout

c02.indd 47

06/12/12 2:23 PM

48

FOREX IS A GAME

SUMMARY
Traders make money in the forex market by entering long and short
trades. Traders go long on a currency pair when they expect the base
currency to rise against the counter currency. Traders go short on a currency pair when they expect the base currency to fall against the counter
currency.
There are essentially three points in every trade: entry price, stop loss,
and proﬁt target. The entry price is the price at which the trade is triggered.
The stop loss is a level to cut the trade with a loss when it doesn’t go the
intended way. The proﬁt target is a level to exit the trade with a proﬁt when
the market moves the intended way.
For a long position, the proﬁt target is located above the entry price,
and the stop loss is placed below it. For a short position, the proﬁt target is
located below the entry price, and the stop loss is placed above it.
Brokers charge a fee for every long or short trade executed on their
platform. This is termed the spread. In general, spreads are lower for the
most liquid pairs, such as EUR/USD and USD/JPY. For long positions,
traders would execute on the ask price and exit on the bid price. For
short positions, traders would execute on the bid price and exit on the
ask price.
Four main factors cause forex prices to ﬂuctuate: economic factors,
political factors, natural disasters, and speculation. Since currencies are
quoted in pairs, the fraction theory helps traders to get a sense of the market’s general direction.
The main crux of the fraction theory is to pair the strongest currency
against the weakest currency at any point. If we pair the strongest currency in the numerator against the weakest currency in the denominator,
the result will be a strong uptrend. In such cases, it is prudent for traders to
go long. If we pair the weakest currency in the numerator against the strongest currency in the denominator, the result will be a strong downtrend. In
such cases, it is prudent for traders to go short.
The three most popular ways to read a forex chart are: line chart,
bar chart, and candlestick chart. The candlestick chart is the most popular choice of traders worldwide for two reasons. First, the candlestick
shows the four most important price points at any given period: the open,
high, low, and close prices. Second, it shows the intensity of the ﬁght
between the bulls and the bears. This is characterized by the heights
of the shadows (the highs and lows) and the lengths of the candlestick
bodies.

c02.indd 48

06/12/12 2:23 PM

How Money Is Made in the Game

49

The forex market can be broken down into three simple structures:
trend, range, and breakout. An uptrend occurs when prices move in a consistent fashion of higher highs and higher lows. A downtrend occurs when
prices move in a consistent fashion of lower highs and lower lows.
A range occurs when prices tend to bounce between two levels of support and resistance. A breakout occurs when prices move strongly above
the level of resistance or strongly below the level of support.

c02.indd 49

06/12/12 2:23 PM

c02.indd 50

06/12/12 2:23 PM

CHAPTER 3

The Six Major
Players

T

he forex market is exciting because it is made up of millions of participants. The constant buying and selling by these participants adds
to the unprecedented liquidity found only in the forex market. This
chapter focuses on the six biggest players in the forex market. They are:
1. Central banks
2. Commercial and investment banks
3. Multinational companies (MNCs)
4. Institutional traders
5. Retail forex brokers
6. Retail traders

We start with the central banks and the three ways in which they manage inﬂation. We then take a sneak peek into the banking world of proprietary trading and get a grip on the Volcker Rule. We also get to know
the three biggest rogue traders in history. The segment on multinational
companies (MNCs) presents two examples of how importers and exporters conduct hedging activities in the forex market to gain certainty of
price. Finally, a look into the retail crowd shows us why forex brokers
and high-frequency trading are exploding all over the world.

CENTRAL BANKS
The main aim of central banks is to stabilize the country’s economy. They
do this by monitoring one of the most important benchmarks in the economy: inﬂation.
51

c03.indd 51

03/12/12 4:32 PM

52

FOREX IS A GAME

Inﬂation is commonly deﬁned as the rate at which prices of goods and
services are rising. If the central bank does not tackle inﬂation swiftly, it
can lead to an erosion of purchasing power.
In most countries, inﬂation is measured through the consumer price
index (CPI). The CPI is a weighted average of prices of a basket of consumer goods and services. These consumer goods and services normally
include but are not limited to housing, food, transportation, recreation, education, and medical care. A central bank controls inﬂation in three ways:
1. It regulates interest rates.
2. It intervenes by buying or selling currencies.
3. It regulates the reserve requirement ratio.

Let’s explore all three in detail.

Regulate Interest Rates—Up
Central banks normally increase interest rates when inﬂation is high. In
simple terms, inﬂation is deﬁned as “too much money chasing too few
goods, causing the price of goods to increase.” If no measures are taken
to curb inﬂation, the likely effect is a weakening of the currency. When
this happens, central banks step in to raise interest rates in the hope of
curbing inﬂation and strengthening the currency again.
How does raising interest rates help this process? When central banks
increase interest rates, deposit rates and lending rates in commercial
banks go up accordingly. This affects two groups of people: savers and
borrowers. Higher lending rates make the money “more expensive” to borrow, thus discouraging both people and businesses to take up loans. The
opposite effect is also true. Higher deposit rates encourage people and
businesses to save more than they normally would.
This combined effect causes the money supply in the system to
decrease, thereby countering the effects of inﬂation. (See Examples 3.1
and 3.2.)
EXAMPLE 3.1: PEOPLE’S BANK OF CHINA INCREASES
INTEREST RATES
On July 6, 2011, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) announced a 25 basis
point increase in its interest rates—its fifth such move in nine months.
The main reason for the increase was China’s inflation—consumer prices
rose 5.5% in May from a year earlier.

c03.indd 52

03/12/12 4:32 PM

The Six Major Players

53

As shown in this report:
“China’s central bank increased interest rates for the third time this
year, making clear that taming inflation is a top priority even as
the economy slows gently. Benchmark one-year lending rates will
be raised 25 basis points to 6.56 percent, and benchmark one-year
deposit rates will be raised 25 basis points to 3.5 percent.”
Reuters, July 6, 2011

EXAMPLE 3.2: CENTRAL BANK OF SRI LANKA INCREASES
INTEREST RATES
On February 3, 2012, the central bank of Sri Lanka raised interest rates
by 50 basis points, its first increase since 2007. The rate hike was
announced to contain credit growth and inflation after the country’s economy expanded the most since the 1970s.
As shown in this report:
“Sri Lanka unexpectedly raised interest rates to contain credit growth
and inflation after the economy expanded the most since at least the
1970s. The Central Bank of Sri Lanka raised the reverse repurchase
rate to 9 percent from 8.5 percent and the repurchase rate to 7.5
percent from 7 percent.”
Bloomberg Businessweek, February 14, 2012

Regulate Interest Rates—Down
Central banks decrease interest rates to weaken its currency. This normally
happens when inﬂation rates are low. A weak currency encourages lending and ultimately stimulates growth. When central banks decrease interest rates, deposit rates and lending rates in commercial banks go down
accordingly. This affects two groups of people: savers and borrowers.
Lower lending rates make the money “cheaper” to borrow, thus encouraging both people and businesses to take up loans. The opposite effect is
also true. Lower deposit rates discourage people and businesses to save
more than they normally would. Hence, this combined effect will cause the
money supply in the system to increase, thereby stimulating growth. (See
Examples 3.3, 3.4, and 3.5.)
