
xxiv

Fear touches everyone—
even the successful
people, the golden boys,
the people who give the
appearance of passing
through life with their
hands deep in their
pockets, a whistle on
their lips. To take on risk,
you need to conquer fear,
at least temporarily, at
least occasionally. It can
be done, especially if you
look outside yourself for a
strong ledge to stand on.
Denise Shekerjian1

Michael Covel has had
unparalleled face-to-face
access with the great
traders of our time.
Interviewing dozens of
fund managers managing
collectively well over $10
billion USD has given
Covel a unique
understanding.

About the Author

Not afraid of a crowd or controversy, Covel is known for
engaging and provocative speeches presented to audiences from
Tokyo to Paris to Macau (China) to Vienna (Austria) to Hong Kong
to Dallas (US). His writings have appeared in Trader Monthly
Magazine, Stocks, Futures and Options Magazine, Futures
Magazine, Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities
Magazine, TradingMarkets.com, Yahoo Finance, Market
Technicians Association Newsletter, and Futures Japan Magazine.
Covel has been quoted and interviewed by likes of Bloomberg
Radio, Technical Analysis Magazine, Barrons, and dozens of radio
programs.
Covel can be reached directly at www.michaelcovel.com.

xxv

This page intentionally left blank

Part I

1

This page intentionally left blank

Trend Following

1

“Speculation is dealing with the uncertain conditions of the unknown
future. Every human action is a speculation in that it is embedded
in the flux of time.”—Ludwig von Mises1

The Market
A market is simply a place where buyers and sellers gather to
trade and exchange goods, buying and selling for any number of
reasons across all types of instruments (for instance, stocks,
currencies, commodities, and so on). Markets perform the essential
role of exchange. The New York Stock Exchange and the National
Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation System
(NASDAQ) are two exchanges. There are also futures exchanges,
such as the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. All of these exchanges
have many markets where traders can buy and sell whatever they
want. They are the place where organized speculation takes place.
Although this might sound simple and might sound as if I am
focusing on a minor point, I am not. The markets’ capability to
provide a “price” for buyers and sellers to rely on as fact in the
course of speculation is crucial. Ludwig von Mises, the noted
Austrian economist, puts it into perspective:

3

The people that I know
who are the most
successful at trading are
passionate about it. They
fulfill what I think is the
first requirement:
developing intuitions
about something they
care about deeply, in this
case, trading. They are
the people who study
years of charts, or
commodity annuals…
They develop a deep
knowledge of whatever
form of analysis they use.
Out of that passion and
knowledge, their trading
ideas, insights, and
intuitions emerge.
Charles Faulkner2

4

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

“It is the very essence of prices that they are the offshoot of
the actions of individuals and groups of individuals acting
on their own behalf. The catallactic concept of exchange
ratios and prices precludes anything that is the effect of
actions of a central authority, of people resorting to
violence and threats in the name of society or the state or
of an armed pressure group. In declaring that it is not the
business of the government to determine prices, we do not
step beyond the borders of logical thinking. A government
can no more determine prices than a goose can lay hen’s
eggs.”3
Although government can’t determine prices in the long run, in
the short term as we have all seen with the popping of the credit
bubble, the government can greatly affect the market system.
However, at the end of the day, all we have are prices and
speculation. Because that is the case, finding out how to best
“speculate” using market prices is a worthy endeavor.
The joy of winning and
the pain of losing are
right up there with the
pain of winning and the
joy of losing. Also to
consider are the joy and
pain of not participating.
The relative strengths of
these feelings tend to
increase with the
distance of the trader
from his commitment to
being a trader.
Ed Seykota4

Winning Versus Losing
Because of the corporate and market scandals of the last
decade, it is understandable that the general public equates
“winning” with simply abusing the financial market system.
October and November 2008 are the latest to leave the public
feeling abused and on the outside looking in. However, there are
disciplined men and women trading in the markets with the utmost
integrity who achieve spectacular returns year after year. Examine
their beliefs and self-perceptions so you understand what keeps
their earnings honest. However, before you examine others’
perspectives, take a moment to consider your own. How do you
approach investing?
For example, does this describe you? At the end of the 1990s,
just when you were feeling good about yourself because you were
more secure financially, the dot-com bubble burst, and by the time
it was over, you had lost a significant amount of money. The same
thing happened again in October and November 2008. You found
yourself angry with the analysts, experts, brokers, or money
managers whose advice you had taken. You didn’t do anything
wrong except follow their advice. Now you doubt that you will meet

Chapter 1 • Trend Following

5

your investment goals or retire. You’ve held on to your remaining
investments believing that they will eventually turn around, but
deciding how to invest your 401k monies is paralyzing. You still
believe that buying and holding is the way to go. You’ve now begun
to think that winning in the markets is just plain dumb luck.
Or, maybe you view your money world like this: Sure, you lost
some cash in the bear market and sure you lost more in October
and November 2008, but, win or lose, you enjoy the thrill of
investing in stock in the hopes of making a profit. Investing is
entertainment for you. Plus, you like to boast about your
investments for the admiration of others. You know you can be
depressed and angry when you lose, but you also know that when
you win you feel terrific. It’s a great high. Because your main goal is
to invest for quick profits, you’re going to keep on doing what you’ve
always done. After all, there was one time a few years ago when
trading off a “hot tip” made you a nice profit.

If you think education is
expensive, try ignorance.
Derek Bok

There is a much better way to think about making money. How
would you feel about embracing this perspective? Your approach is
objective and rational. You have enough confidence in your own
decision making that you don’t seek out investment recommendations from others. You’re content to wait patiently until the right
opportunity comes along. Yet, you’re never too proud to buy a stock
that is making new highs. For you, buying opportunities are usually
market breakouts. Conversely, when you recognize that you are
wrong, you exit immediately. You view a loss as an opportunity to
learn, move on, and save your money for another day. What good is
obsessing on the past going to do for you? You approach your
trading as a business, making note of what you buy or sell and why
in the same matter-of-fact way that you balance your checkbook.
By not personalizing your trading decisions, you can make them
without emotional indecision.
That is a stark contrast in perspectives. The first is that of a
generally a market loser; the latter is that of a potential market
winner. Don’t be in such a hurry to choose the winning approach
until you’ve found out just what making such a choice entails. On
the other hand, I hope you’ll find in trend following trading the
inspiration to step up to the plate and go for it without fear or
reservation. And don’t be shy about it. You have to want to make
money. You have to want to get ahead and be successful, the critics’
condemnation be damned. Speculation, as von Mises has noted, is

The perfect speculator
must know when to get
in; more important, he
must know when to stay
out; and most important,
he must know when to
get out once he’s in.

6

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

not only honorable, but a lifeblood. Profit-seeking speculation is the
driving force of the market.5

Investor Versus Trader
Do you consider yourself an investor or a trader? Most people
think of themselves as investors. However, if you knew that the
biggest winners in the markets call themselves traders, wouldn’t
you want to know why? Simply put, they don’t invest; they trade.
Nothing has changed
during the 21 years we’ve
been managing money.
Government regulation
and intervention have
been, are, and will
continue to be present for
as long as society needs
rules by which to live.
Today’s governmental
intervention or decree is
tomorrow’s opportunity.
For example, governments often act in the
same way that cartels
act. Easily the most
dominant and effective
cartel has been OPEC,
and even OPEC has been
unable to create an ideal
world from the
standpoint of pricing its
product. Free markets
will always find their
own means of price
discovery.
Keith Campbell6

Investors put their money, or capital, into a market, such as
stocks or real estate, under the assumption that the value will
always increase over time. As the value increases, so does the
person’s “investment.” Investors typically do not have a plan for
when their investment value decreases. They usually hold on to
their investment, hoping that the value will reverse itself and go
back up. Investors typically succeed in bull markets and lose in
bear markets.
This is because investors anticipate bear (down) markets with
fear and trepidation, and therefore, they are unable to plan how to
respond when they start to lose. They choose to “hang tight,” and
they continue to lose. They have an idea that a different approach
to their losing involves more complicated trading techniques such
as “selling short,” of which they know little and don’t care to learn.
If the mainstream press continually positions investing as “good” or
“safe” and trading as “bad” or “risky,” people are reluctant to align
themselves with traders or even seek to understand what trading is
about.
A trader has a defined plan or strategy to put capital into a
market to achieve a single goal: profit. Traders don’t care what they
own or what they sell as long as they end up with more money than
they started with. They are not investing in anything. They are
trading. It is a critical distinction.
Tom Basso, a longtime trader, has said that a person is a trader
whether or not he is actually trading. Some people think they must
be in and out of the markets every day to call themselves traders.
What makes someone a trader has more to do with his perspective
on life more so than making a given trade. For example, a great
trader’s perspective includes extreme patience. Like the African
lion waiting for days for the right moment to strike its unsuspecting

Chapter 1 • Trend Following

prey, a trend follower can wait weeks or months for the right trade
that puts the odds on his side.
Additionally, and ideally, traders go short as often as they go
long, enabling them to make money in both up and down markets.
However, a majority of traders won’t or can’t go short. They struggle
with the concept of making money when a market declines. I hope
that after reading Trend Following, the confusion and hesitation
associated with making money in down markets, markets that are
dropping or crashing, will dissipate.

7

Trend followers are
traders, so I generally use
the word “trader” instead
of “investor” throughout.

Fundamental Versus Technical
There are two basic theories that are used to trade in the
markets. The first theory is fundamental analysis. It is the study of
external factors that affect the supply and demand of a particular
market. Fundamental analysis uses factors such as weather,
government policy, domestic and foreign political and economic
events, price-earnings ratios, and balance sheets to make buy and
sell decisions. By monitoring “fundamentals” for a particular
market, one can supposedly predict a change in market direction
before that change has been reflected in the price of the market
with the belief that you can then make money from that knowledge.
The vast majority of Wall Street uses fundamental analysis
alone. They are the academics, brokers, and analysts who spoke
highly of the new economy during the dot-com craze. These same
Wall Street players brought millions of players into the real estate
and credit bubbles of 2008. Millions bought into their rosy
fundamental projections and rode bubbles straight up with no clue
how to exit when those bubbles finally burst. Consider an exchange
between a questioner and President Bush at a December 17, 2007
press conference:
Q: “I wanted to ask you [Mr. President]—I’m a financial
advisor here in Fredericksburg [Virginia], and I wanted to
ask you what your thoughts are on the market going
forward for ’08, and if any of your policies would make
any difference?”
The President: “No (laughter), I’m not going to answer your
question. If I were an investor, I would be looking at the
basic fundamentals of the economy. Early on in my

Whenever we get a period
of poor performance,
most investors conclude
something must be fixed.
They ask if the markets
have changed. But trend
following presupposes
change.
John W. Henry7

8

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

presidency, somebody asked me about the stock market,
and I thought I was a financial genius, and it was a mistake
(laughter). The fundamentals of this nation are strong. One
of the interesting developments has been the role of exports
in overall GDP growth. When you open up markets for
goods and services, and we’re treated fairly, we can
compete just about with anybody, anywhere. And exports
have been an integral part, at least of the 3rd quarter
growth. But far be it for me—I apologize—for not being in
the position to answer your question. But I don’t think you
want your President opining on whether the Dow Jones is
going to—(laughter)—be going up or down.”
One of our basic
philosophical tendencies
is that change is
constant, change is
random, and trends will
reappear if we go through
a period of non-trending
markets. It’s only a
precursor to future trends
and we feel if there is an
extended period of nontrending markets, this
really does set up a base
for very dynamic trends
in the future.
Former Head of Research
at John W. Henry8

The President’s view is a typical fundamental view shared by
the vast majority of market participants. Consider further an
excerpt found in Yahoo! Finance’s commentary; it outlines a single
market day:
“It started off decent, but ended up the fourth straight down
day for stocks…early on, the indices were in the green,
mostly as a continuation from the bounce Monday
afternoon…but as the day wore on and the markets failed
to show any upward momentum, the breakdown finally
occurred…The impetus this time was attributed to the
weakness in the dollar, even though the dollar was down
early in the day while stocks were up…also, oil prices
popped higher on wishful thinking statements from a
Venezuelan official about OPEC cutting production…
whether or not these factors were simply excuses for
selling, or truly perceived as fundamental factors hardly
matters….”
Millions of readers read this type of drivel every day. Worse,
thousands watch Jim Cramer of Mad Money fame promote similar
nonsensical beliefs every day. Predictions based off of fundamental
analysis don’t work for the vast majority of market participants.
Great example? Not many predicted the October/November 2008
market crash! On top of not being able to predict, fundamental
analysis leaves many with trying to pick bottoms or trust that
conditions will always improve. One of the great traders of the
twentieth century, Ed Seykota, nailed the problem with fundamental
analysis:

Chapter 1 • Trend Following

“One evening, while having dinner with a fundamentalist, I
accidentally knocked a sharp knife off the edge of the table.
He watched the knife twirl through the air, as it came to
rest with the pointed end sticking into his shoe. ‘Why didn’t
you move your foot?’ I exclaimed. ‘I was waiting for it to
come back up,’ he replied.”9
Don’t we all know an investor who is waiting for “his” market to
come back? The financial website marketer Motley Fool has a backstory, a narrative behind how it started, that reflects the folly of
literally banking on fundamental analysis as a solution for making
money:
“It all started with chocolate pudding. When they were
young, brothers David and Tom Gardner learned about
stocks and the business world from their father at the
supermarket. Dad, a lawyer and economist, would tell them,
‘See that pudding? We own the company that makes it!
Every time someone buys that pudding, it’s good for our
company. So go get some more!’ The lesson stuck.”10
The Motley Fools’ David and Tom Gardner’s pudding story
might be cute, but it is Forrest Gump-like simplistic (and wrong).
Their plan gets you in, but it doesn’t tell you when to get out or how
much of the pudding stock you must buy. Unfortunately, many
people believe that simple story is a good strategy for making
money. That is a sad state of affairs.
A second market theory, technical analysis, operates in stark
contrast to fundamental analysis. This approach is based on the
belief that at any given point in time market prices reflect all known
factors affecting supply and demand for that particular market.
Instead of evaluating fundamental factors, technical analysis looks
at the market prices themselves. Technical traders believe that a
careful analysis of daily price action is an effective means of trading
for profit.
Now here is where an understanding of technical analysis
becomes complicated. There are essentially two forms of technical
analysis. One form is based on an ability to “read” charts and use
“indicators” to predict market direction. Here is an example of the
mentality behind a predictive view of technical analysis:

9

But I think our ace in the
hole is that the
governments usually
screw things up and don’t
maintain their sound
money and policy
coordination. And about
the time we’re ready to
give up on what usually
has worked, and
proclaim that the world
has now changed, the
governments help us out
by creating unwise policy
that helps produce
dislocations and trends.
Jerry Parker11

While a fundamental
analyst may be able to
properly evaluate the
economics underlying a
stock, I do not believe
they can predict how the
masses will process this
same information.
Ultimately, it is the
dollar-weighted collective
opinion of all market
participants that
determines whether a
stock goes up or down.
This consensus is
revealed by analyzing
price.
Mark Abraham
Quantitative Capital Management, L.P.

10

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

“I often hear people swear they make money with technical
analysis. Do they really? The answer, of course, is that they
do. People make money using all sorts of strategies,
including some involving tea leaves and sunspots. The real
question is: Do they make more money than they would
investing in a blind index fund that mimics the performance of the market as a whole? Most academic financial
experts believe in some form of the random-walk theory
and consider technical analysis almost indistinguishable
from a pseudoscience whose predictions are either
worthless or, at best, so barely discernibly better than
chance as to be unexploitable because of transaction
costs.”12
Markets aren’t chaotic,
just as the seasons follow
a series of predictable
trends, so does price
action.
Stocks are like everything
else in the world: They
move in trends, and
trends tend to persist.
Jonathan Hoenig
Portfolio Manager,
Capitalistpig Hedge Fund LLC

This is the view of technical analysis held by most people who
know of technical analysis—that it is some form of mysterious chart
reading technique, such as astrology. Equity research from a major
bank furthers my prediction distinction point:

It is not the strongest of
the species that survive,
nor the most intelligent,
but the ones most
responsive to change.
Charles Darwin

However, this type of price analysis never allows trend followers
to enter at the exact bottom of a trend or exit at the exact top of the
trend. Second, with price analysis, they don’t necessarily trade
every day. Instead, trend followers wait patiently for the right
market conditions instead of forcing the market. Third, there
should be no performance goals with price analysis. Some traders
might embrace a strategy that dictates, for example, “I must make
$400 dollars a day.” Trend followers would counter with, “Sure, but
what if the markets don’t move on a given day?”

“The question of whether technical analysis works has
been a topic of contention for over three decades. Can past
prices forecast future performance?”13
However, there is another type of technical analysis that
neither tries to predict or forecast. This type is based on reacting to
price action. Trend followers are the group of technical traders who
use reactive technical analysis. Instead of trying to predict a market
direction, their strategy is to react to the market’s movements
whenever they occur. This enables them to focus on the market’s
actual moves and not get emotionally involved with trying to
predict direction or duration.

Chapter 1 • Trend Following

11

One trend follower summarized the conundrum:
“I could not analyze 20 markets fundamentally and make
money. One of the reasons [trend following] works is
because you don’t try to outthink it. You are a trend
follower, not a trend predictor.”14

Discretionary Versus Mechanical
I have established the concept that you can be an investor or
trader. I have established that trading can be fundamentally or
technically based. Further, technical trading can be predictive or
reactive. And I’ve explained how trend followers are traders who
use a reactive technical approach based on price. However, there is
even more distinction. Traders can also be discretionary or
mechanical.
John W. Henry, one of the best trend followers over the last 25
years, makes a clear distinction between the two strategies: “[I]
believe that an investment strategy can only be as successful as the
discipline of the manager to adhere to the requirements in the face
of market adversity. Unlike discretionary traders, whose decisions
may be subject to behavioral biases, [I] practice a disciplined
investment process.”15
When Henry speaks of decisions that may be subject to
behavioral biases, he is referring to the legions of traders who make
their buy and sell decisions based on the sum of their market
knowledge, their view of the current market environment, or any
number of other factors. In other words, they use their discretion—
hence, the use of discretionary to describe their approach to
trading.
Decisions made at the “discretion” of the trader are subjective
and can be changed or second-guessed. There are no ironclad
assurances that these discretionary trading decisions are not
colored by personal bias. Of course, a trader’s initial choice to
launch a trading system is discretionary. You must make
discretionary decisions such as choosing a system, selecting your
portfolio, and determining a risk percentage. However, after you’ve
decided on the basics, you can choose to systematize these
discretionary decisions and from that point forward, make them
systematic.
