9. There is a lot going on in this chart. Here we have
ﬁve distinct market types: how many did you name?
Clearly, on the left side of the chart we are in rangebound territory. That is easy enough. But then a
sharp drop in the index in July and August tempts
us to say we are in a bearish strong trend. This gets
conﬁrmed when price kisses the 20 MA on a relief
rally and then plunges lower and the 50 MA shows a
downward slope. So that’s the second market type.
But the trend gets negated pretty quickly once price
shoots up above the 50 MA in early September. At
this point we would have to say we are back to a
range-bound market, only the range is now wider.
But then the index keeps going up, and the ﬁrst
pullback in late September bounces cleanly off the
50 MA without going through it. This gives us
our fourth market type: a bullish weak trend. We
hold to this view until mid-October, when some

148

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

consolidation brings the index down to the 20 MA
area. Here it holds before pushing strongly higher.
The fact that it never went all the way to the 50 MA
means that now, on the right side of the chart, we
are in a bullish strong trend. This clearly gets
conﬁrmed as the index continues to climb higher,
and the 20 MA moves further and further away
from a rising 50 MA. Give yourself one point for
each market type you recognized (in the right
order). [5 points]
10. Range-bound. No questions asked. [1 point]
11. Bearish strong trend. No doubt about it. [1 point]
12. This chart is a bit more interesting. It starts with an
obvious bullish weak trend. Note the frequent
pullbacks to the 50 MA, which is in a consistent
uptrend. But then the chart morphs into a rangebound condition as it consolidates all that upward
movement and the 50 ﬂattens out. By mid-July we
might be tempted to call the early part of that
transition a bearish weak trend, since the 50 MA area
came close to holding as resistance and it is starting
to roll over to the downside. But the fact that on its
second relief rally later that month the index was
easily able to pass through the 50 MA leads us to
conﬁrm that we are still within a trading range
rather than starting a new trend. [2 points]
13. We see a range-bound initially, then the chart falls
off quickly into a bearish strong trend as that tight
range breaks to the downside. The trading range

PUT YOUR MARKET-READING SKILLS TO THE TEST

149

seen here is very tight, and as such it is one of the
worst kinds of market environments to trade in.
Range-bound conditions are great for trend
trading, as long as the range is wide enough to
permit both longs and shorts sufﬁcient time to
bring our trailing stop-losses into proﬁt territory.
But the kind of tight range seen here is next to
impossible to proﬁt from unless you are a day
trader. When we are in a tight range-bound
market, we therefore need to ﬁnd charts on our
watch list that are not range-bound but which
are showing sizeable moves either up or down.
[2 points]
14. This chart starts with a bullish weak trend that then
morphs into a bullish strong trend. Either way, it is a
nice market for longs. [2 points]
15. A bullish weak trend is clearly seen here. [1 point]
16. Here we have a bearish strong trend that then
reverses sharply and becomes a bullish strong trend.
The fulcrum on which this strong reversal pivots is,
of course, the terrorist attacks on the United States
that took place on September 11, 2001. You can see
clearly the gap down that took place after the
markets reopened (they were closed for four days
after the attacks) and subsequent selling pressure
that led the index to make a deep cut low. From
there, the index rallied over 50 percent in a few
short weeks. We were able to position ourselves for
this ramp-up, by the way—even before the strong

150

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

trend was conﬁrmed—by looking at bullish
divergence in the indicators. [2 points]
17. A bullish strong trend, which then consolidates in a
range-bound condition. [2 points]
18. A bullish strong trend that then ﬂattens out and
morphs into a bullish weak trend. Note the transition
that takes place between the two markets. In July
we see some price consolidation after the sharp
upward ramp. The 20 MA begins to ﬂatten out, and
the index moves all the way into the 50 MA, even
slightly beyond. But once the 50 MA held as
support and the index rallied, we knew we were still
in an uptrend; only now it would not likely be as
strong as it had been in prior weeks. Again, strong
trends play off the 20 MA, weak trends off the 50
MA. [2 points]
19. A bearish weak trend is clearly seen here. Note that
this trend got a big kick start with a gap down in
January. Also note how the 50 MA acts as resistance
all the way through. [1 point]
20. Easy enough: a range-bound market (due to the fact
that price moves so easily through the 50 MA) that
by mid-August, with the ﬁrst successful hold of the
50 MA as support, becomes a bullish weak trend.
[2 points]
So, how did you do? Give yourself a point for every
market type you correctly recognized. There are 32 market types represented in these 20 charts. Write me if you

PUT YOUR MARKET-READING SKILLS TO THE TEST

151

want to argue otherwise, but for now I am sticking with
the assessments listed here.
Here is how you should score yourself:
30: Excellent!
Write me, I may have a job for you.
25–30: Very good!
With a bit more experience, you should become a
great chart reader.
20–25: Not bad, but . . .
I would suggest rereading this chapter and spending
some time looking at more charts before moving on.
15–20: Having a bad day?
Try drinking a strong cup of coffee and taking the
test again.
⬍15: Don’t quit your day job!
Blame the author of this book for not being clear
enough!

This page intentionally left blank

PA R T
THREE

get started in
trend trading

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

This page intentionally left blank

selecting bullish
stocks to
trend-trade

CHAPTER
9

I this section, I am going to introduce you to my top
N

10 technical setups. These are the setups we at Befriend
thetrend.com have found over the years to be the best possible setups for trend trading. Each of these setups is proprietary. This doesn’t mean that we have a copyright to
them, or that they use any secret “black box” formula that
we will reveal to you only at our really, really expensive
seminars. Rather, it simply means that they have been
uniquely designed by me (“Dr. Stoxx”) and the Befriend
thetrend.com team through long periods of rigorous backtesting and real-money trading. These are the setups we
use daily to ﬁnd the trades we recommend to our various
newsletter subscribers, and that we also trade with real
money in our Befriend the Trend Fund. While they use
common technical elements—so common that any popular charting system can accommodate them—there is nothing common about their performance.
A setup here refers to a combination of price pattern—
the way price paints a certain picture on the chart—and
technical indicators that, together, give us the right condi-

155

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

156

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

tions for predicting with reasonable conﬁdence the future
direction of a stock’s price. Now just because you have a
great-looking setup on a chart does not in any way guarantee that price will move in our predicted direction. But
the following setups have been selected because they have,
in the past, contributed to a healthy percentage of highly
proﬁtable trades. They are thus high-probability setups.
For each of these setups we are going to tell you several things. We will indicate which market type, of the
types we studied in Chapter 8, each setup is best suited for.
This doesn’t mean that there is only one market type you
should play the setup in—it only means that the market
type indicated will give your trade the best possible edge.
We will also give you the rules you need to identify the
setup on your watch list (see Chapter 6 on setting up a
watch list), including the rules needed to conﬁrm your
entry into the trade. We will also show you how to use a
stock-screening tool to search for these setups. You will
have to resort to this tool whenever your watch list fails to
produce any examples of that particular setup. We will tell
you in very speciﬁc terms exactly how and when to enter
the setup as you initiate a new stock position. For each
setup we will give you two or three charts to examine that
illustrate what each of the setups looks like in live trading.
For the sake of convenience we have put our ﬁve bullish setups in this chapter and our ﬁve bearish setups in
Chapter 10. In Chapter 11, we will be treating the allimportant topic of how to properly enter and exit your
positions in order to maximize your proﬁts and minimize
your risks.
Before beginning, if you are not familiar with Japa-

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

157

nese candlestick terms, please go to one of the several free
Web-based tutorials on the subject. Three that I can recommend are supplied by these Web sites:
• www.altavest.com
• www.stockcharts.com
• www.incrediblecharts.com

Candlestick formations factor quite prominently in
several of our systems, so be sure that before you continue
you are familiar with their basic terminology. There are
dozens of candlestick formations that you could study, but
I focus only on the following high-percentage formations:
• Doji
• Hammer
• Piercing
• Morning/evening star
• Engulﬁng

Once you have had your candlestick tutorial, you are
ready to begin looking for our top 10 setups. We have
divided these into two general types: ﬁve bullish setups and
ﬁve bearish setups. If you are looking for trades on the long
side, with the expectation that price will rise for several
days after entry, then you will be looking for one of our
bullish setups. If you are looking for trades on the short
side, with the expectation that price will fall for several days
after entry, then you will be looking for one of our bearish setups.
In certain market conditions you will not ﬁnd many

158

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

setups, and sometimes none at all. In other market conditions, you will ﬁnd dozens of tradable setups. It is best
always to maintain the mindset that you will take whatever
the markets give you. Following are the top ﬁve bullish
setups.

THE PULLBACK
Market Type

This setup is best used in:

• Bullish: strongly trending markets
• Bullish: weakly trending markets

Characteristics This is one of my all-time favorite
setups. Its origins lie in a seminar I took back in 1996
under the tutelage of a now discredited stock market guru.
If we can bracket out the fact that the man was convicted
by the SEC of making fraudulent claims on his Web site,
it is fair to say that he put on a very helpful seminar back
then, at a very reasonable price. The essential tools I
learned there form the basis for this bullish setup. Its focus
is on uptrending stocks that have experienced a period of
minor weakness. This weakness may just be a spate of
proﬁt taking, or it may be in response to news or an earnings announcement. Regardless, our assumption is that the
weakness is temporary and thus a buying opportunity.
Normally after a period of minor weakness—as measured
here by the stochastics indicator reaching an oversold
level—the dominant uptrend will reassert itself as traders
who missed out on the prior move use the dip to get on
board.

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

Key Indicators
indicators:

159

In the pullback setup, there are three key

• First, you should identify an uptrending stock (see

deﬁnition) that has pulled back either into an
upsloping 20 MA, between the 20 MA and the 50
MA, or all the way to the 50 MA. If this pullback
point coincides with, or lies near, an upsloping
trendline drawn under the lows of the uptrend, so
much the better.
Deﬁnition: An uptrending stock is a stock that is
making higher lows (and preferably higher highs,
but, strictly speaking, this is not necessary) over
at least the past three months. A weakly uptrending stock is an uptrending stock whose 20 MA is
mostly rising and mostly above a consistently rising 50 MA. A strongly uptrending stock is an
uptrending stock whose 20 MA is always rising
and always above a consistently rising 50 MA.
The further these two moving averages are from
each other, the stronger the uptrend.
• Second, along with the price pullback there must

be a sharp dip in the stochastics indicator (5,3
period) to or below the oversold 20 line. This
conﬁrms that the stock is in an oversold
condition.
• Third, the current candlestick must register a
bullish reversal candle of some kind (hammer,
engulﬁng, piercing, or doji). If the current

160

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

candlestick shows a bearish candle, or a red or
black candle of any kind (close lower than the
open), then this is a wait-and-see condition. You
should make a note to check that stock again the
next trading day.
• Buy signal: These three factors register a buy
signal, and the stock is ready to be short-listed
as a valid pullback play.
The Screening Tool The pullback setup occurs most
often in bullish weakly trending markets that have suffered
a short period of price consolidation or proﬁt taking. They
can also occur in strongly uptrending markets in volatile
stocks that tend to pull back further than the general market. There are occasions in the natural course of market
cycles when pullback setups do not appear very often. If you
fail to ﬁnd any decent pullbacks on your primary watch list,
you can try using a special screen to search the universe of
stocks for them. To screen for pullback plays, input the following criteria into Stockcharts.com’s screening tool:
• For the last market close:
• All stocks with . . .
• 60-day simple moving average of volume for to-

day is greater than 500,000.
• 60-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 15.
• The chart has a bullish engulﬁng pattern for today (you can also run this with piercing, hammer, or doji selected as well).
• 20-day simple moving average of close for today

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

161

is greater than 50-day simple moving average of
close for today.
• Daily close for today is less than daily close for
ﬁve days ago times 1.15.
This will normally give you a list of between two and
twenty stocks, depending on market conditions. If the list
is large, I will increase the 60-day moving average of volume to 1,000,000 and the daily close ﬁve days ago multiplier to 1.20. If the list is too small, I will decrease the
multiplier to 1.10 or less. It is not wise to go any lower than
500,000 on the moving average of volume.
If that scan fails to produce any viable pullback candidates, you can try this alternate scan:
• For the last market close:
• U.S. stocks with . . .
• 20-day simple moving average of volume for to-

day is greater than 1,000,000.
• 60-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 5.
• 20-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 50-day simple moving average of
close for today.
• 50-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 200-day simple moving average
of close for today.
• 50-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 50-day simple moving average of
close for 10 days ago.
• 200-day simple moving average of close for to-

162

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

day is greater than 200-day simple moving average of close for 20 days ago.
• Daily close for today is less than daily close for
ﬁve days ago.
• Daily close for 7 days ago is greater than daily
close for 20 days ago.
• Daily close for today is less than or equal to 20day simple moving average of close for today.
• Daily close for today is greater than or equal to
50-day simple moving average of close for today.
• Daily open for today is less than or equal to
daily close for today.
• Daily slow stoch %K (5, 3) for today is greater
than daily slow stoch %D (5, 3) for today.

Figure 9.1

BRCM showing pullback setups.

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

163

Figure 9.1 is an example of a strongly uptrending
stock, BRCM, which gave two pullback buy signals. Note
that the stock is easily seen to be uptrending, and indeed is
in a strong uptrend, with the rising 20 MA well above a rising 50 MA. We can see that on two occasions the stock
pulled back to the 20 MA area and then put in a bullish
candle: in the ﬁrst signal there is a bullish engulﬁng candle, and in the second instance a doji. At both signals the
stochastics dropped down to or below 20, signaling an
oversold condition ripe for a reversal.
Figure 9.2 is another example of a strongly uptrending stock, QCOM, which gave one wait-and-see signal
(ﬁrst arrow) and two pullback buy signals. Note that the
ﬁrst of the two buy signals (second arrow) occurred in a

Figure 9.2

QCOM showing pullback setups.

164

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

strong uptrend but nevertheless got us in a bit prematurely,
but a well-placed stop-loss (see Chapter 11) would have
kept us in the trade. With a little patience, the trade eventually turned proﬁtable. The second buy signal occurred
during a weaker moment in the uptrend but still yielded a
solid proﬁt opportunity.

THE COILED SPRING
Market Type

This setup is best used in:

• Bullish: strongly trending markets
• Bullish: weakly trending markets
• Range-bound markets

Characteristics This is sometimes known as a bull ﬂag
or bull pennant setup and sometimes as a symmetrical triangle pattern, depending on the shape of the coiled spring.
For our purposes, we will lump all these together under a
single setup. The premise of the coiled spring is that after
a strong runup, a strong stock likes to take a breather as it
consolidates the ramp-up in price. A weak stock will sell
off, giving back much of its gains. But a strong stock likes
to coil up in a sideways movement. As it does so, price tends
to trend inside an ever tighter range—the spring coils up
tighter and tighter—until shares are ready to climb again.
When the coil ﬁnally springs open, it usually does so with
a delightfully proﬁtable burst of upward momentum.
Key Indicators The pattern relies on a precise deﬁnition
of what we mean by coiled spring. Here are the parameters:

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

165

• In the coiled spring setup, you are looking for a

weakly uptrending to strongly uptrending stock
(see previous setup for deﬁnition) that has
recently put in a new high. By recently we mean
within the past 20 trading days. This new high
must be at least a new three-month high.
• Since setting that new high, the stock has
consolidated inside a coiled spring (see deﬁnition).
The coiled spring can be short and tight or drawn
out and choppy, but the pattern requires the coil
to be tightening up (the trading range is getting
smaller) as it moves further to the right.
Deﬁnition: The coiled spring gets its name from
the narrowing range the stock trades in over the
last seven to twenty trading days as shares consolidate at or near its new high. This range can
trade sideways or it can downtrend slightly, but it
should not be trading at an upward angle. The
key to the pattern is that the trading range, in
general, is getting tighter and tighter.
• Note that in this setup we pay no attention to

indicators. This is a pure pattern play. All we
need are the two moving averages, the 20 MA
and the 50 MA, and some trendlines.
• Use the moving averages to determine that the
stock is weakly or strongly uptrending (see preceding deﬁnition).
• Draw in trendlines over the top and bottom of
the coiled spring. It should form a triangular

166

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

shape of some kind due to the narrowing trading range of the coil but should not be angled
upward.
• It is essential that the coiled spring last at least
seven but no more than 20 trading days. It is also
essential that no part of the coil extend to or
beyond the 50 MA. It can pass over the 20 MA,
but not the 50 MA.
• Buy signal: The coiled spring itself puts the stock
on the shortlist. A break of the trendline drawn
over the tops of this coil marks the buy signal. A
close below the lower trendline negates the coiled
spring, and so we delete it from our watch list.
The Screening Tool The coiled spring setup is not
often seen among high-beta or volatile stocks, so it will not
show up much on your primary watch list. But you can
screen for such stocks by inputting the following parameters into Stockcharts.com’s screener:
• For the last market close:
• All stocks with . . .
• 60-day simple moving average of volume for to-

day is greater than 500,000.
• 60-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 10.
• Daily close for today is greater than or equal to
daily open for today.
• Daily high for today is less than or equal to
daily high for ﬁve days ago.

SELECTING BULLISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

167

• Daily low for today is greater than or equal to

daily low for ﬁve days ago.
• 20-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 50-day simple moving average of
close for today times 1.08.
Here is an alternate screen that also can turn up some
nice coiled spring setups:
• For the last market close:
• All stocks with . . .
• 60-day simple moving average of volume for to-

day is greater than 500,000.
• 60-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 10.
• 50-day simple moving average of close for today
is less than 20-day simple moving average of
close for today.
• Daily Average Directional Index (ADX) line
(14) for today is less than daily ADX line (14)
for 20 days ago times 0.41.
In a market moving mostly sideways, you may return
10 to 15 stocks per day with these screens. But in most
market conditions, your list will be a short one, and not all
the stocks that turn up on this screen are really coiled
springs. Give each chart that turns up on the screen a good
eyeballing, and use the aforelisted rules to eliminate all but
the most coiled of springs.
One thing to watch out for is that the trading range

168

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

within the coil is generally getting smaller (less intraday
movement). The intraday lows should be getting a bit
higher, and/or the highs a bit lower. You can have a wide
range bar or two in this range, but that should be the
exception, not the rule. Generally speaking, the longer the
coiled spring is strung out, the higher it will rise after
the spring has sprung. But coiled springs longer than 20
days in duration tend to indicate indecision on the part of
investors and are best avoided.
Figure 9.3 is an example of a stock, ALVR, showing a
coiled spring setup that triggered a successful buy signal
once price broke above the trendline drawn over the tops
of the coil. Note that the coil is a consolidation of a recent
price high in an uptrend, is getting tighter, does not violate
the 50 MA, and in this case is trending slightly downward.
While this run to over 10.50 yielded a ⫹16 percent return
