
The Bund options in our example form what is probably the most common skew
shape, a smile which is approximately symmetrical. But this is not always the case.
Skews can be symmetrical or asymmetrical, and they can reflect inflated or defiated
implied volatilities across exercise prices, depending on how the marketplace sees the
possibility, and consequences, of various moves in the underlying market. In addition,
in stock index markets, because it is not always possible to take advantage of a mispriced
arbitrage relationship (see Chapter 15), calls and puts with the same exercise prices do
not necessarily trade at the same implied volatility. For this reason, many traders in stock
index markets prefer to evaluate call and put skews separately.

As an example, Figures 18-11a and 18-11b represent the implied volatilities of
March 1993 OEX calls and puts with different amounts of time remaining to expira-


Models and the Real World 415

Figure 18-11a: OEX March 1993 Calls

30
a5 |
5 weeks to expiration
OEX = 406.26
\
3 \ 1 week to expiration
> 207 7 CEX = A1267-
o
>
3
2
‘o 15
—
10-;—+1-weeks td —s
OEX = 3
5 4

Tt ~T
360 370 3B0 390 400 410 420 430
Exercise Price

Figure 18-11b: OEX March 1993 Puts

30>

ppt ~OEKe a0e expiration

GEX = 406.26 (406.79)

:
|
r
i

20+ = Sanaa ee

Implied Volatility (%)

ant a

OEX =|396.64 (397.2

: |
| i
or + +
360 370 360 390 400 410 420 430
Exercise Price



416 Chapter 18

tion.!2 Note the extreme inflation of downside exercise prices, both for calls and puts.
While it may not be possible to determine exactly what is causing the skew to have this
particular shape (it may indicate that the marketplace believes stock markets go down
faster than they go up—as witness October 1987—or it may reflect the fact that stock
index options are often used to hedge long stock portfolios), the marketplace seems to
be giving greater relative value to lower exercise prices. A trader who wanted to use the
marketplace’s relative evaluation might try to integrate the skew into his theoretical
pricing model.

As before, we might try to generalize the skew by expressing each exercise price
in terms of a logarithmic relationship to the underlying index price. Stock index prices,
like stock prices, are assumed to be lognormally distributed around the forward price of
the index, i.e., the current index price plus carrying costs less dividends. It therefore
makes sense to express the exercise price in relation to the forward price rather than to
the index price:

in(exercise price/forward price) / Vtime

This has been done in Figures 18-11¢ and 18-11d. (The forward price of the OEX is in
parenthesis.)

While there are clearly some differences between volatility skews in Figures 18-11¢
and 18-11d, there is considerably more consistency than one would expect from Figures
18-11a and 18-11b. If a trader wanted to find functions, one for calls and one for puts,
by which the skews could be expressed, he could use these functions to analyze a
position under a wide variety of market conditions.

It is only in the last several years that traders have begun to appreciate the
importance of volatility skews, both as an evaluation tool and as a risk management
consideration. This section is intended not as a solution to all the problems that traders
encounter in analyzing and using volatility skews, but as an introduction to how traders
approach the problem. Each trader as he gains more experience must decide how best
to deal with the volatility skew, given the characteristics of the market in which he is
dealing, as well as his ultimate goal in that market.

A FINAL THOUGHT

Because the use of a theoretical pricing model requires a trader to make so many
different decisions, both with respect to the inputs into the model and the degree to
which the assumptions on which the model is based are likely to be accurate, the new
option trader may feel that making the right decisions is simply a matter of luck. While
luck undoubtedly plays a role in the short run, in the long run those traders who are
willing to put in the effort required to understand how models work always seem to
come out ahead. Experienced traders know that using a model, with all its problems, is
still the best way to evaluate options and manage risk.

12. Because of the possibility of early exercise, the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein model was used to calculate OEX
implied volatilities.


Models and the Real World 417

Figure 18-11¢: OEX March 1993 Calls

220
\ 5 weeks t6 expiration i H
\ ' OEX = 406,26 (406.79)
‘ ;
i

\
BOO et

180

i
+
|

160

141 weeks to expiration
OEX= sooo te 728)
i
I
if

| | OEX = 412.67 | (412.89)

140

120 oar _

Implied Volatility (% of at-the-money)

rs
‘

i

!

807 t — +— t

0.3 -0.2 04 0.0 O41 02 03
In(ex. price/forward price)/sqrtitime)

Figure 18-11d: OEX March 1993 Puts

220 7 |

200 |
s
= 180 sare
fe) 11 weeks tolexpiration
& OEX = 396.64 (397.28)

0: -

3) ON
x e
z EN 1 week tolexpiration
= 140 SA OEX = 41P.67 (412.85)
= SoD
is} ~S
>
UD
8 Lo »
ao -

1005 WEEKS to EXDITatION

OEX = 406.26 (406.79) Ih

80 ! 4
-0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.4 0.2 0.3

In(ex. price/forward price)/sqrt(time)



418 Chapter 18

This text, like many others on options, may have left the reader with the impression
that option evaluation and trading can be reduced to a series of arithmetic calculations,
The science of option evaluation is an important part of any trader’s education, but
mathematical models are only a tool to help the trader make decisions. Successful option
trading is at least as much an art as a science, and a trader must know where science
leaves off, and other intangible assets, whether intuition or market feel or experience,
begin. This brings us to one final point, and perhaps the most important principle of
option trading: there is no substitute for common sense. A trader who slavishly uses a
model to make every trading decision is heading for disaster. Only a trader who fully
understands what a model can and cannot do will be able to make the model his servant
rather than his master.


«+ Appendix A +

A Glossary of Option
and Related Terminology

Alt or None (AON)—An order which must be filled in its entirety or not at all.
American Option—An option which can be exercised at any time prior to expiration.

Arbitrage—The purchase and sale of the same product in different markets to take
advantage of a price disparity between the two markets.

Asian Option—Average price option.

Assignment—The process by which the seller of an option is notified of the buyer’s
intention to exercise.

At-the-Money—An option whose exercise price is equal to the current price of the
underlying contract. On listed option exchanges the term is more commonly used to
refer to the option whose exercise price is closest to the current price of the underlying
contract.

Automatic Exercise—The exercise by the clearing house of an in-the-money option
at expiration, unless the holder of the option submits specific instructions to the
contrary.

Average Price Option—An option whose value at expiration is determined by the
average price of the underlying instrument over some period of time.

Backspread—A spread, usually delta neutral, where more options are purchased than
sold, and where all options have the same underlying contract and expire at the same
time.

Backwardation—A futures market where the more distant delivery months trade at a
discount to the nearterm delivery months.

Barrier Option—An option which will either become effective or cease to exist if the
underlying instrument trades at some predetermined price prior to expiration.

419


420 Appendix A

Bear Spread—Any spread which will theoretically increase in value with a decline in
the price of the underlying contract.

Box—A long call and short put at one exercise price, together with a short call and long
put ata different exercise price. All options must have the same underlying contract and
expire at the same time.

Bull Spread—Any spread which will theoretically increase in value with a rise in the
price of the underlying contract.

Butterfly—The sale (purchase) of two options with the same exercise price, together
with the purchase (sale) of one option with a lower exercise price and one option with
a higher exercise price. All options must be of the same type, have the same underlying
contract, and expire at the same time, and there must be an equal increment between
exercise prices.

Buy/Write—The purchase of an underlying contract together with the sale of a cail
option on that contract.

Cabinet Bid—On some exchanges, a bid smaller than the minimum increment,
permissible between traders desiring to close out positions in very far out-of-the money
options.

Calendar Spread—A time spread.

Call Option—A contract between a buyer and a seller whereby the buyer acquires the
right, but not the obligation, to purchase a specified underlying contract ata fixed price
on or before a specified date. The seller of the call option assumes the obligation of
delivering the underlying contract should the buyer wish to exercise his option.

Cap—A contract between a borrower and a lender of floating rate funds, whereby the
borrower is assured of paying no more than some maximum interest rate for borrowed
funds. This is analogous to a call option where the underlying instrument is an interest
rate on borrowed funds.

Chooser Option—A straddie where the owner must decide by some predetermined
date whether to keep either the call or the put.

Christmas Tree—A spread involving three exercise prices. One or more calls (puts)
are purchased at the lowest (highest) exercise price and one or more calls (puts) are sold
at each of the higher (lower) exercise prices. All options must expire at the same time,
be of the same type, and have the same underlying contract.

Class—all options of the same type with the same expiration date and same underlying
instrument.


A Glossary of Option and Related Terminology 421

Clearing House—The organization which guarantees the integrity of all trades made
on an exchange.

Clearing Member—A member firm of an exchange which is authorized by the
clearing house to process trades for its customers, and which guarantees, through the
collection of margin and variation monies, the integrity of its customers’ trades.

Collar—A contract between a borrower and a lender of floating rate funds, whereby
the borrower is assured of paying no more than some maximum interest rate for
porrowed funds, and whereby the lender is assured of receiving no less than some
minimum interest rate on loaned funds. This is analogous to an option fence where the
underlying instrument is an interest rate on borrowed funds.

Combination—A two-sided option spread which does not fall into any well defined
category of spreads. Most commonly it is used to refer to a long call and short put, or
short call and long put, which together make up a synthetic position in the underlying
contract.

Compound Option—An option to purchase an option.

Condor—tThe sale (purchase) of two options with different exercise prices, together
with the purchase (sale) of one option with a lower exercise price and one option with
a higher exercise price. All options must be of the same type, have the same underlying
contract, and expire at the same time, and there must be an equal increment between
exercise prices.

Contango—A futures market where the more distant delivery months trade at a
premium to the nearterm delivery months.

Contingency Order—An order which becomes effective only upon the fulfillment of
some predetermined condition(s) in the marketplace.

Conversion—A long underlying position together with a short call and long put, where
both options have the same exercise price and expire at the same time.

Covered Write—The sale of a call (put) option against an existing long (short) position
in the underlying contract.

Cylinder—A fence or collar.
Deferred Start Option—A forward start option.

Delta (A)—The sensitivity of an option’s theoretical value to a change in the price of
the underlying contract.

Delta Neutral—A position where the sum total of all the positive and negative deltas
adds up to approximately zero.


422 Appendix A

Diagonal Spread—A long call (put) at one exercise price and expiration date, together
with a short call (put) at a different exercise price and expiration date. All options must
have the same underlying stock or commodity. This is simply a time spread using
different exercise prices.

Elasticity-—The percent change in an option’s value for a given percent change in the
value of the underlying instrument. Sometimes referred to as the leverage value.

Exchange Option—An option to exchange one asset for another asset.

Ex-dividend—The day on which a dividend paying stock is trading without the right
to receive the dividend.

Exercise—The process by which the holder of an option notifies the seller of his
intention to take delivery of the underlying contract, in the case of a call, or to make
delivery of the underlying contract, in the case of a put, at the specified exercise price.

Exercise Price—The price at which the underlying contract will be delivered in the
event an option is exercised.

Expiration (Expiry}—The date and time after which an option may no longer be
exercised.

European Option—An option which may only be exercised at expiration.
Extrinsic Value—Time value.
Fair Value—Theoretical value.

Fence—A long (short) underlying position, together with a long (short) out-of-the-
money put and a short (long) out-of-the-money call. All options must expire at the same
time.

Fill or Kill (FOK)—An order which will automatically be cancelled unless it can be
executed immediately and in its entirety.

Flex Option—An exchange-traded option where the buyer and seller are permitted to
negotiate the exact terms of the option contract. Typically, this includes the exercise
price, the expiration date, and the terms of exercise (either European or American).

Floor—aA contract between a borrower and a lender of floating rate funds, whereby the
lender is assured of receiving no less than some minimum interest rate for loaned funds.
This is analogous to a put option where the underlying instrument is an interest rate on
loaned funds.

Forward Contract—A contract between a buyer and a seller whereby the buyer is
obligated to take delivery and the seller is obligated to make delivery of a fixed amount


A Glossary of Option and Related Terminology 423

of a commodity at a predetermined price on a specified future date. Payment in full is
due at the time of delivery.

Forward Price—Taking into consideration all carrying costs on a contract, the price at
which a contract would have to be trading on some future date such that a trade made
at today’s price would just break even.

Forward Start Option—An option whose exercise price will be equal to the price of
the underlying instrument on some predetermined date.

Front Spread—A ratio vertical spread.

Fugit—The expected amount of time remaining to optimum early exercise of an
American option.

Futures Contract—A contract, usually exchange-traded, between a buyer and a seller
whereby the buyer is obligated to take delivery and the seller is obligated to make
delivery ofa fixed amount of a commodity at a predetermined price on some future date.
All profits and losses are realized immediately, and result ina cash credit or debit based
on daily changes in the settlement price of the contract.

Futures-Type Settlement—aA settlement procedure used by commodity exchanges
whereby an initial margin deposit is made, but under which no immediate cash payment
is made by the buyer to the seller. Cash settlement takes place at the end of each trading
day based on the difference between the current day’s settlement price and the previous
day’s settlement price or the original trade price.

Gamma (T}—The sensitivity of an option’s delta to a change in the price of the
underlying contract.

Good ’til Cancelled (GTC)—An order to be held by a broker until it can either be
executed or is cancelled by the customer.

Guts—A strangle where both the call and the put are in-the-money.

Haircut—On equity option exchanges, money deposited by a trader with the clearing
house to ensure the integrity of his trades. This is similar to a margin requirement ona
commodity exchange.

Hedge Ratio—Delta

Hedger—A trader who enters the market with the specific intent of protecting an
existing position in an underlying contract.

Horizontal Spread—A time spread.


424 Appendix A

Immediate or Cancel (IOC)—An order which will automatically be cancelled if it is
not filled immediately. An IOC order need not be filled in its entirety.

Implied Volatility—Assuming ai! other inputs are known, the volatility which would
have to be input into a theoretical pricing model in order to yield a theoretical value
identical to the price of the option in the marketplace.

In-Option—A type of barrier option which becomes effective only if the underlying
instrument trades at some predetermined price prior to expiration.

In-Price—The price at which the underlying instrument must trade before an in-option
becomes effective.

In-the-Money—A cal! (put) option whose exercise price is lower (higher) than the
current price of the underlying contract.

Index Arbitrage—One of several strategies attempting to take advantage of the
relative mispricing of options, futures contracts, or the physical stocks underlying a stock
index.

Intermarket Spread—A spread consisting of opposing market positions in two differ-
ent underlying securities or commodities, or their derivative products.

Intrinsic Value—The amount by which an option is in-the-money. Out-of-the-money
options have no intrinsic value.

Iron Butterfly—A long (short) straddle, together with a short (long) strangle. All
options must expire at the same time and have the same underlying contract.

Jelly Roll (Roll}—A long call and short put with one expiration date, together with a
short call and long put with a different expiration date. All four options must have the
same exercise price and same underlying stock or commodity.

Kappa (K)—Vega.
Knock Out Option—An out-option
Ladder—A Christmas tree.

Long-Term Equity Anticipation Security (LEAPS)}—A long-term (usually more
than one year) exchange traded equity option.

Leg—One side of a spread position.

Limit—The maximum allowable price movement over some time period for an
exchange traded contract.

Limit Order—An order to be executed at a specified price or better.


A Glossary af Option and Related Terminology 425

Local—An independent trader on a commodity exchange. Locals perform functions
similar to market makers on stock and stock option exchanges.

Locked Market—A market where trading has been halted because prices have
reached their limit.

Long—A position resulting from the purchase of a contract. The term is also used to
describe a position which will theoretically increase (decrease) in value should the price
of the underlying contract rise (fall). Note that a long (short) put position is a short (long)
market position.

Long Premium—A position which will theoretically increase in value should the
underlying contract make a large move in either direction. The position will theoreti-
cally decrease in value should the underlying market sit still.

Long Ratio Spread—A backspread.

Look Back Option—An option whose exercise price will be equal to either the lowest
price of the underlying instrument, in the case of a call, or the highest price of the
underlying instrument, in the case of a put, over the life of the option.

Margin-—Money deposited by a trader with the clearing house to ensure the integrity
of his trades.

Market Maker—An independent trader or trading firm which stands ready to buy or
sell contracts in a designated market. Market makers perform duties similar to locals on
commodity exchanges, the primary difference being that a market maker is obligated to
make a two-sided (bid and ask) market in his designated contract.

Market If Touched (MIT)—A contingency order which becomes a market order if
the contract trades at or beyond a specified price.

Market On Close (MOC)—An order to be executed at the current market price as
near as possible to the close of that day’s trading.

Market Order—An order to be executed immediately at the current market price.
Naked—A long (short) market position with no offsetting short (long) market position.

Neutral Spread—A spread which is delta neutral. A spread may also be lot neutral,
where the total number of long contracts and short contracts of the same type are equal.

Not Held—An order submitted to a broker, but over which the broker has discretion
as to when and how the order is executed.

Omega (Q.}—The Greek letter sometimes used to denote an option’s elasticity.


426 Appendix A

One Cancels the Other (OCO)—Two orders submitted simultaneously, either of
which may be executed. If one order is executed, the other is automatically cancelled.

Order Book Official (OBO)—An exchange official responsible for executing market
or limit orders for public customers.

Out-of-the-Money—An option which currently has no intrinsic value. A call (put) is
out-of-the-money if its exercise price is more (less) than the current price of the
underlying contract.

Out-Option—A type of barrier option which is deemed to have expired if the
underlying instrument trades at some predetermined price prior to expiration.

Out-Price—The price at which the underlying instrument must trade before an out
option is deemed to have expired.

Out-trade—A trade which cannot be processed by the clearing house due to conflicting
information reported by the two parties to the trade.

Overwrite—The sale of an option against an existing position in the underlying
contract.

Parity—lIntrinsic value.

Pin Risk—The risk to the seller of an option that at expiration the option will be exactly
at-the-money. The seller will not know whether the option will be exercised.
