
One difficulty in interpreting these formations is that many rectangles
begin as rightangled triangles. Consequently, a great deal of caution should
be used when evaluating these elusive patterns. An example is shown in Fig.
5-29(a), where a potential downward-sloping right-angled triangle develops
into a rectangle in Fig. 5-29(8).

Traditionally, measuring objectives for triangles are obtained by drawing
a line parallel to the base of the triangle through the peak of the first rally.
This line (BB in Fig. 5-80) represents the Price objective that prices may be
expected to reach or exceed.

Figure 5-30(a) and (4) show this concept for a right-angled and symetri-
cal triangle at bottom.

Price Patterns

le)

J

Figure 5-27 Classic symmetrical breakout.

Figure 5-28 Right-angled triangles.

@) (>)

Figure 5-29 Triangle failure.

K nde
—B =
8
(a)

()

ce B
() @

Figure 5-30 Triangle measuring implications.

95

ee



96 Part J; Trend-Determining Techniques

Measuring ————p> —1
objective

Figure 5-31 Alternative triangle measuring implications.

The reverse procedure at market tops is shown in Figs. 5-30(c) and (d).
The same technique is used to project prices when triangles are of the con-
solidation variety. However, in my own experience, I have not found this
method to be particularly useful. I prefer instead to treat the triangle as any
other pattern by calculating its maximum depth and then projecting this
distance at the breakout. An example of this alternative method is shown
in Fig. 5-31.

Summary

* Prices in financial markets move in trends, A reversal is characterized by
a temporary period in which the enthusiasm of buyers and sellers is
roughly in balance. This transitional process can usually be identified by
clearly definable price patterns that, when completed, offer good and reli-
able indications that a reversal in trend has taken place.

* Until a pattern has been formed and completed, the assumption should
be that the prevailing trend is still operative, that is, that the pattern is
one of consolidation or continuation. This principle is more important
when the trend has been in existence for only a relatively short period,

because the more mature it is, the greater the probability of an impor-
tant reversal.

t

Price Patterns 97

Price patterns can be formed over any time period. The longer the time
required to form a pattern and the greater the price fluctuations within
it, the more substantial the ensuing price movement is likely to be.

¢ Measuring formulas can be derived for most types of patterns, but these
are generally minimum objectives. Prices usually extend much further.

* Price objectives are not normally achieved in one move, but are often
reached after a series of rallies and reactions have materialized.

é
Pyaswe 2 OnSMIS
PWS = ~



Smaller Price
Patterns

Most of the price patterns described in Chapter 5 can be observed in both
reversal and continuation formations. The majority of those discussed in this
chapter materialize during the course of a price trend and are therefore of
the continuation variety. Since many of them are reflections of controlled
profit taking during an advance and controlled digestion of losses during
a decline, these patterns, for the most part, take a much smaller time to form

than those described in the previous chapter. They most commonly appear
in the daily charts.

ye Pe
Flags RAR Se
Locke,

A flag, as the name implies, looks like a flag on the chart. It represents a
quiet pause accompanied by a trend of declining volume that interrupts a
sharp, almost vertical rise or decline. As the flag is completed, prices break
out in the same direction that they were moving in prior to its formation.
Flags for both an up and a down market are shown in Figs. 6-1(a) and (0).
Essentially, they take the form of a parallelogram in which the rally peaks
and reaction lows can be connected by two parallel lines. The lines move
ina countercyclical direction. In the case ofa rising market, the flag is usu-
ally formed with a slight downtrend, but in a falling market, it has a slight
upward bias. Flags may also be horizontal.

In a rising market, this type of pattern usually separates two halves of an
almost vertical rise. Volume is normally extremely heavy just before the point
at which the flag formation begins. As it develops, volume gradually dries
to almost nothing, only to explode as the price works its way out of the com-

98

Smaller Price Patterns 99

Figure 6-1 Flags.

pleted formation. Flags can form in a period as short as 5 days or as long
as 3 to 5 weeks. Essentially, they represent a period of controlled profit tak-
ing in a rising market. .

The formation of the flag in a downtrend is also accompanied by declin-
ing volume. This type of flag represents a formation with an upward bias in
price, so the volume implication is bearish in nature, that is, rising price with
declining volume. When the price breaks down from the flag, the sharp slide
continues. Volume tends to pick up as the price breaks below the flag’s lower
boundary, but it need not be explosive. Only upside breakouts in bull mar-
kets require this characteristic. .

It is important to make sure that the price and volume characteristics
agree. For example, the price may consolidate following a sharp rise in what
appears to be a flag formation, but volume may fail to contract appreciably.
In such cases, great care should be taken before coming to a bullish con-
clusion since the price may well react on the downside. A flag that takes
more than 4 weeks to develop should also be treated with caution, because
these formations are, by definition, temporary interrypuions of a sharp
uptrend. A period in excess of 4 weeks represents an tindtily long time for
profit taking and therefore holds a lower probability of being a true flag.

Flag formations are usually reliable patterns from a forecasting point of
view because not only is the direction of ultimate breakout indicated, but
the ensuing move is usually well worthwhile from a trading point of view.
Flags seem to form at the halfway point of a move. Once the breakout has
taken place, a useful method for setting a price objective is to estimate the
Size of the price move in the period immediately before the flag formation
began and then to project this move in the direction of the breakout. In
technical jargon, flags in this sense are said to fly at half-mast, that is, halfway

\



a |
lt
a

100 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

up the move. Since flags take a relatively short period to develop, they do
not show up on weekly or monthly charts.

Pennants

A pennant develops under exactly the same circumstances as a flag and
has similar characteristics. The difference is that this type of consolidation
formation is constructed from two converging trendlines, as shown in Figs.
6-2(a) and (4). In a sense, the flag corresponds to a rectangle, and the pen-
nant to a triangle, because a pennant is in effect a very small triangle. If any-
thing, volume tends to contract even more during the formation of a
pennant than during that of a flag. In every other way, however, pennants
are identical to flags in terms of measuring implication, the time taken to
develop, volume characteristics, and so on.

Chart 6-1 features a pennant for Alcoa in a down market. Note how the

volume shrinks during the formation of the pattern. It then expands on the
breakout.

Wedges

A wedge is very similar to a triangle in that two converging lines can be con-
structed from a series of peaks and troughs, as shown in Figs. 6-3(a) and
(6). However, whereas a triangle consists of one rising and one falling line,
or one horizontal line, the converging lines in a wedge both move in the
same direction. A falling wedge represents a temporary interruption of a ris-
ing trend, and a rising wedge is a temporary interruption of a falling trend.

Figure 6-2 Pennants.

Smaller Price Patterns 101

Chart 6-1 Alcoa pennant. (From Intermarket Review.)

4
; Ha

oP atull Ma oft Pennant
] TT fey A
*] +
“| aoa lt
. my 1
-
*] this
ea |
seo

mn ARTI Li bl apy gta ul el
ares [4 ie 25 | a a 5

February [March [Aprid

tt
- Hy L ,
(ine > HE nf,
f Ba tht
b. . hy
rs -
ie

(a) (b)
Figure 6-3 Wedges.

It is normal for volume to contract during the formation of both wedges.
Since wedges can take anywhere from 2 to 8 weeks to complete, they some-
times occur on weekly charts but are too brief to appear on monthly charts.

Rising wedges are fairly common as bear market rallies. Following their
completion, prices usually break very sharply, especially if volume picks up
noticeably on the downside.



102 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Saucers and Rounding Tops
Figures 6-4(a) and (6) show the formation of a saucer and a rounding top.

A saucer pattern occurs at a market bottom, while a rounding top develops -

at a market peak. A saucer is constructed by drawing a circular line under
the lows, which roughly approximates an elon, or saucer-shaped letter
U. As the price drifts toward the low point of the saucer and investors lose
interest, downward momentum dissipates. This lack of interest is also char-
acterized by the volume level, which almost dries up at the time the price
is reaching its low point. Gradually, both price and volume pick up until
eventually each explodes into an almost exponential pattern.

The price action of the rounded top is exactly opposite to that of the
saucer pattern, but the volume characteristics are the same. As a result, if
volume is plotted below the price, it is almost possible to draw a complete
circle, as shown in Fig. 6-4(4). The tip-off to the bearish implication of the
rounded top is the fact that volume shrinks as prices reach their highest lev-
els and then expands as they fall. Both these characteristics are bearish and
are discussed in greater detail in Chapter 22.

Rounding tops and bottoms are fine examples of a gradual changeover
in the demand/supply balance that slowly picks up momentum in the direc-
tion opposite to that of the previous trend. Quite clearly, it is difficult to
obtain breakout points for these patterns since they develop slowly and do
not offer any clear support or resistance levels on which to establish a poten-
tial benchmark. Even so, it is worth trying to identify them since they are
usually followed by substantial moves. Rounding and saucer formations can
also be observed as consolidation as well as reversal phenomena and can
take as little as 3 weeks to as long as several years to complete.

{
iit
bh irises fin

~-—--

Figure 6-4 A saucer and rounding top.

Smaller Price Patterns 103

Gaps

A gap occurs when the lowest price of a specific trading period is above the
highest level of the previous trading period [see Fig. 6-5(a)] or when the
highest price for a specific trading period is below the lowest price of the
previous trading period [see Fig. 6-5(4)]. On a daily bar chart, the trading
period is regarded as a day, whereas on a weekly chart, it is a week, and so
on.

By definition, gaps can occur only on bar charts on which intraday, weekly,
or monthly prices are plotted. A gap is represented by an empty vertical
space between one trading period and another. Gaps form in overnight trad-
ing as good or bad news is disseminated by the market. Daily gaps are far
more common than weekly ones because a gap on a weekly chart can fall
only between Friday's price range and Monday’s price range; that is, it has
a1 in 5 chance relative to a daily chart. Monthly gaps are even more rare
since such “holes” on the chart can develop only between monthly price
ranges. The most common place to find gaps is on intraday charts at the
open. I will have more to say on that point later.

A gap is closed or “filled” when the price comes back and retraces the
whole range of the gap. For daily charts, this process sometimes takes a few
days, and at other times it takes a few weeks or months. On even more rare
occasions, the process is never completed.

It is certainly true that almost all gaps are eventually filled, but this is
not always the case. Because it can take months or even years to fill a gap,

f
F tt sap vi it 4
t fF FE AE

(a) (b)

Figure 6-5 Gaps.



104 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

trading strategies should not be implemented solely on the assumption that
the gap will be filled in the immediate future. Jn almost all cases, some kind
of attempt is made to fill the gap, but quite often a partial filling on a subse-
quent test is sufficient before the price again reverts to the direction of the
prevailing trend. The reason why most gaps are closed is that they are emo-
tional affairs and reflect traders who have strong psychological motivations.
We could say excess fear or greed, depending on the direction of the trend.
Decisions to buy or sell at any cost are not objective ones, which means the
odds of people having second thoughts when things have cooled down are
pretty high. The second thoughts in this case are represented by the clos-
ing of the gap or at least a good attempt at closing it.

Gaps should be treated with respect, but their importance should not be
overemphasized. Those that occur during the formation of a price pattern,
known as common gaps or area gaps, are usually closed fairly quickly and do
not have much technical significance. Another type of gap, which has little
significance, is the one that results from a stock going ex-dividend. There
are three other types of gaps that are worthy of consideration: breakaway,
runaway, and exhaustion gaps.

upside —vrced Ince) Soy HAE

i . to. ,
Breakaway Gaps _ oweside Soasnot’ weed Weev4 Vol.

A breakaway gap is created when a price breaks out of a price pattern (as
in Figs. 6-5(a) and (6). Generally speaking, the presence of the gap empha-
sizes the bullishness or bearishness of the breakout, depending on which
direction it takes. Even so, it is still important for an upside breakout to be
accompanied by a relatively high level of volume. It should not be concluded
that every gap breakout will be valid because the “sure thing” does not exist
in technical analysis. However, a gap associated with a breakout is more likely
to be valid than one that is not. Gap breakouts that occur on the downside
are not required to be accompanied by heavy volume.

Continuation or Runaway Gaps ( mee Suing O71

Runaway gaps occur during a straight-line advance or decline when price
quotations are moving rapidly and emotions are running high. Either they
are closed very quickly, such as within a day or so, or they tend to remain
open for much longer periods and are not generally closed until the mar-
ket makes a major or intermediate swing in the opposite direction to the
price movement that was responsible for the gap. This type of gap often
occurs halfway between a previous breakout and the ultimate duration of

Smaller Price P: 105

Figure 6-6 Runaway and exhaustion gaps.

the move. For this reason, continuation gaps are sometimes called measur-
ing gaps [see Figs. 6-6(a) and (6)).

Exhaustion Gaps

A price move sometimes contains more than one runaway gap. This indi-
cates that a very powerful trend is in motion, but the presence ofa second
or third gap should also alert the technician to the fact that the move is likely
to run out of steam soon. Hence, there is possibility that a second or third
runaway gap will be the final one. An exhaustion gap is therefore associated
with the terminal phase of a rapid advance or decline and is the last in a
series of runawa' [see Fig. 6-6(d)].

One clue eh ce gap may be forming is a level of volume that
is unusually heavy in relation to the pricechange of that day. In such a case,
volume usually works up to a créscendo well above previous levels.
Sometimes the price will close near the vacuum (or gap) and well away from
its extreme reading. If the next day's trading creates an “island” on which
the gap day is completely isolated by a vacuum from the previous day’s trad-
ing, this is usually an excellent sign thatthe gap day was in fact the turning
point. This indicates only temporary exhaustion, but should be a red flag
that signals to highly leveraged traders that they should liquidate or cover
their positions. a

If the gap is the first one during a move, itis likely to be a runaway rather

than a breakaway type, especially if the price objective called for by a price
pattern has not yet been achieved. An exhaustion gap should not be
regarded as a sign of a major reversal, but merely as a signal that, at the very
least, some form of consolidation should be expected.



106 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

The Importance of Gaps as Emotional Points

As we shall learn later, the places where gaps start or terminate are poten-
tial pivotal points on a chart because they represent high emotion. If you
have an argiiment with a friend and one of you really shouts loudly at one
point, you will both remember that particular moment because it represents
an emotional extreme. The same principle can be applied to technical analy-
sis since charts are really a reflection of psychological attitudes. This means
that gaps have the potential to become important support-resistance levels

that have the power to reverse short-term trends. We will have more to say
on this matter in Chapter 15.

Gaps on Intraday Charts

There are really two types of opening gaps in intraday charts. The first devel-
Ops as prices open beyond the trading parameters of the previous session,
as in Chart 6-2. I'll call these classic aps since these are the ones that also
appear on the daily charts.

The second, more common gap develops only on intraday charts as the
opening price of a new day aps well away from the previous sessions’ clos-
ing bar. I’ll call these Saps intrabar gaps because they only fall between two
bars calculated on an intraday time frame. For example, in Chart 6-3, the
price opened up higher and created a gap. However, if you look back you

Chart 6-2 March 1997 bonds’ 15-minute bar. (From Martin Pring’s Introduction to Daytrading.)

Classic gap [ih rt Mad
W at

ino7 le le i fo i ft2 fs | he fis 20 pt ba pe P6 Be [March [6

Smaller Price Patterns 107

will see that the trading range of the previous day (contained within the box
on the left) was not exceeded at the opening price; thus, on a daily chart,
there would have been no gap.

If you are a trader with a 2- to 3-week time horizon using intraday charts,
you should approach gaps in a different way than if you have a 1- or 2-day
time horizon.

The first category should try to avoid initiating trades at the time the gap
is created. This is because almost all gaps are eventually closed. Sometimes
this happens within a couple of hours, and at others it can take 2 or 3 weeks.
Consequently, if you buy on an opening gap on the upside, as in Chart 6-3,
you run the risk that it will soon be closed. The problem is you do not know
whether it will be in 2 days or 4 weeks.

Intraday traders are also advised to step aside when the market opens
sharply higher or lower. In the case of stocks, this is caused by an order
imbalance. That means that the market makers are forced to go short so
that they can satisfy the unfilled demand. They naturally try to get the price
a little higher at the opening so that it will come down a litde, enabling th em
to cover all or part of the short position. The process will be reversed in the
case of a lower opening. The key then is to watch what happens to the price
after the opening range. Normally, if prices work their way higher after an
upside gap and opening trading range, this sets the tone of the market for
at least the next few hours, often longer.

Chart 6-3 March 1997 bonds’ 15-minute bar. (From Martin Pring’s Introduction to Daytrading.)

v3 oy

1124 i li ;
1124 mu pt i
va ‘ i "log, {

mi ll | ne

| |



108 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

On the other hand, if the price starts to close the gap after a few bars,
then the tone becomes a negative one. In Chart 6-4 featuring Merrill
Lynch, there is an opening gap on Wednesday. After a bit of backing and
filling, the price gradually works its way Jower throughout the day. The sig-
nal that the opening could be an aberration develops after the price slips
below the trendline. Note how the trendline proves to be resistance for
the rest of the session. Thursday again sees an opening gap, but this time

.»_there is very little in the way of a trading range since the price continues

i “to climb. Again, the rally away from the opening bar sets the tone for the
4, Test of the day. On Friday another gap appears, but this time the opening
v trading range is resolved on the downside as the price breaks below the

$86 level flagged by the line. Once again, this proves to be resistance for
the rest of the day.

Island Reversals

An island reversal is a compact trading range created at the end of a sus-
tained move and isolated from previous price behavior by an exhaustion gap

and a breakaway gap. A typical island reversal is shown in Fig. 6-7 and in
Chart 6-5.

Chart 6-4 Merrill Lynch's 7- to 5-minute bar. (Telescan.)

ib eee MERRILL LYNCH CO INC (men Days Log

Chart 6-5 American Airlines (AMR) and an island reversal. (From Intermarket Review.)

“ie 3
Fa
=
=
2
3 __ =
>= —
& —s
~
: pe cas
: =
=——
= whe
——
~— I
ae ee me o
ays god 8
<= _, (
Fy
Ss
fie
Ze

JAN FEB HAR

DEC

JUN guL AUG SEP oct

109



110

Part |: Trend-Determining Techniques
Runoway
gop
*,
Runowoy__ t he '
wi iL eh
Exhoustion == I <+— Breokawoy gop
gop

iti Mana +— Istana
Figure 6-7 Island reversal.

The island itself is not usually a pattern denoting a major reversal.
However, islands often appear at the end of an intermediate or even a major
move and form part of an overall price pattern such as the top (or bottom)

of a head-and-shoulders (H&S) pattern (or an inverse H&S pattern). Islands
occasionally occur as 1-day phenomena.

Summary

© Flags, pennants, and wedges are short-term price patterns that usually
develop halfway along a sharp price movement. Their development is nor-
mally complete within 3 weeks, and they represent periods of quiet price
movement and contracting volume. They are almost always continuation
patterns.

* Saucer formations and rounding tops are usually reversal patterns and are
typically followed by substantial price movements. In both formations, vol-
ume contracts toward the center and is at its highest at either extremity.
