
Who can perform fundamental analysis?
You don’t have to be a high-powered investor to use fundamental analysis. If you
have an interest in finding out more deeply about how companies work, you’re
a candidate for learning about fundamental analysis. In fact, knowing how to
read, analyze, and take action from information you glean about a company
can be helpful for many users, including:
✓ Stock investors: Those looking to take an ownership stake in a company
have a great financial incentive to master fundamental analysis. What
they find out about companies may help them to decide when a good
time to buy or sell may be.
✓ Lenders: When you give someone a loan, you want to make sure they
have the ability to pay you back. If you lend money to a company, perhaps by buying bonds they issue, you’re more concerned about getting
your money back than about making a killing on the investment.
✓ Mutual fund investors: Even if you don’t pick individual stocks or bonds
to invest in, you probably own mutual funds that do. Mutual funds are
investments that invest in a basket of individual securities. Using fundamental analysis, you can investigate some of the stocks your mutual
funds may own. You might take a look at the top holdings of your mutual
fund and question why your mutual fund owns them.
✓ Employees: Workers may be anxious about the health of their company
for several reasons. Using the same techniques an investor would use,
you can study your company’s financial resources and roughly estimate
how likely it might be to pursue aggressive cost-cutting, like layoffs.
Employees who depend on a pension paid by a former employer might
also want to study the health of the company.
✓ Board members: Whether you’re a board member of a large company,
your local museum, or your condominium association, understanding
how to understand the flow of money in and out can make you more
valuable. Understanding fundamental analysis will help you be a solid
watchdog of the organization’s management by looking at the facts, not
the promises.

06 506455-ch02.indd 25

9/24/09 10:06:02 PM

26

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
✓ Donors: Even some nonprofit charities disclose their financial standing.
Fundamental analysis will help you see where donations are being spent
and whether or not money is getting to those in need or being soaked up
by the bureaucracy.
✓ Consumers: As a consumer, you might not think of yourself as investing
in a company. And in most cases, you’re not. Sometimes, even when you
buy a product, you’re forming a long-term relationship with a company.
When you buy a car or an insurance product, you’re probably going to
be connected with the company for many years. It’s a good idea to know
how to analyze a company if you plan on relying on its products for a
long time.
Certainly, a background in accounting can help you dig even deeper into the
financial statements. And in this book, I’ll show you some examples of where
you might not be able to take the financial statements at face value. But
thanks to advances in accounting, even beginners can get pretty comfortable
extracting and massaging the information they need to perform fundamental
analysis. If you want more detail on the nitty-gritty of accounting, check out
Reading Financial Reports For Dummies (Wiley).
Fundamental analysts spend quite a bit of time looking at companies’ financial statements, as you’ll learn in Part II of this book. But skilled fundamental
analysts do more than just pick apart financial statements. After all, if that’s
all it was, fundamental analysis would be synonymous with accounting.
Fundamental analysts use their findings to make investment decisions.

Following the money
One of the basic rules of investigative journalism is following the money.
Tracing the movement of dollars through an organization will quickly show
you the motives of the leaders, availability of resources, and vulnerabilities.
Regulators will often follow the movement of money to pinpoint illegal cartels, Ponzi schemes, and other frauds.
All this might sound very cloak-and-dagger. But there’s something to be
learned from approaching fundamental analysis with the mind of an investigator. Your job is to take available information and attempt to dig up data yourself to get a complete picture of a company and whether or not it’s a suitable
place for you to entrust your money. Following the way money moves through
a company will tell you more about it than just about anything else.
While no two companies are the same, the basics of business are universal.
That’s why fundamental analysis is such a powerful tool you can apply to
high-tech companies, low-tech companies, and everything in between.

06 506455-ch02.indd 26

9/24/09 10:06:02 PM

Chapter 2: Getting up to Speed with Fundamental Analysis

27

Companies are merely in the business of selling things they acquire for more
than what they paid. Sounds simple. But that can be easy to forget after you
get mired in details like profit margins, earnings per share, and P-E ratios.
The trade cycle begins with a business idea, but more specifically when a
company raises money so it can buy the equipment it needs to get started.
Money might be raised by borrowing it, called debt, or by lining up investors willing to bet their money for a piece of future profits, called equity. The
money raised is then used to acquire raw materials, office space, or whatever
the company needs.
Next, the company tries to add value to the raw materials in some way and sell
the product to customers. Typically, companies will also incur indirect costs,
or overhead, to make all this happen. Overhead costs include everything from
advertising, to research and development, to hiring skilled managers.
Now here’s where fundamental analysis comes in. A few questions a fundamental analyst might ask when taking a look at a company:
✓ After factoring in all the costs, did the company make money?
✓ How much money did the company raise to get started?
✓ Is the company able to maintain itself without borrowing more or getting
more investors?
✓ Can the company create new products to keep buyers coming back?
✓ Are competitors catching onto the idea and selling a similar product for
less?

What Fundamental Analysis Isn’t
Fundamental analysis is a well-known way of choosing investments. It’s often
the preferred method taught in business schools, largely due to its roots in
things that can be measured and understood. But it’s not, by any means, the
only method of choosing stocks.
If you’re still a little foggy on what fundamental analysis is, comparing it with
other ways of evaluating investments might clear things up for you.

06 506455-ch02.indd 27

9/24/09 10:06:02 PM

28

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It

How fundamental analysis stacks
up against index investing
If fundamental analysis seems like a lot of work, you can probably identify
with index investors. Index investors think taking the time to pore over companies’ financial statements is a whole lot of trouble for nothing. Index investors figure any information to be gleaned from company reports has already
been extracted by other investors and acted upon.
For instance, if a company’s stock was truly undervalued, other investors will
have already recognized it and bought the stock. If enough investors buy a
stock, they push the price up, and the shares are no longer undervalued. And
thanks to the proliferation of electronic investing, analysts and investment
firms with access to instantaneous information feeds can make such trading
moves very quickly.
For that reason, index investors think trying to buy and sell stocks at just the
right time, or use market timing, is impossible. In addition, index investors
say that if there is an edge to fundamental analysis, it’s wiped out by the cost
and time consumed digging out the information. For that reason, index investors skip the fundamental analysis, and instead:
✓ Diversify: Rather than trying to pick the companies and stocks that
will do best, fundamental analysts buy small stakes in as many stocks
as possible. Generally, index investors will buy mutual funds that own
hundreds, if not thousands, of stocks. That way, if any one company
stumbles badly, the loss is very small as a percentage of the portfolio.
✓ Buy index funds: Since index investors don’t think fundamental analysis gives investors an edge, they don’t see any reason to pay a mutual
fund manager to pick stocks for them. Instead, they buy mutual funds
that own all the stocks in popular stock indexes, such as the Dow Jones
industrial average or Standard & Poor’s 500. The Dow mirrors the ups
and downs of 30 large, well-known companies, and the S&P 500 measures the market’s performance using 500 of the largest companies’
shares.
✓ Focus on costs: Index investors assume the best way to make money
in the stock market is by keeping costs low. Index funds generally have
low expenses. And rather than spend personal time researching stocks,
index investors generally buy a diversified basket of stocks and then
forget about the holdings.

06 506455-ch02.indd 28

9/24/09 10:06:02 PM

Chapter 2: Getting up to Speed with Fundamental Analysis

29

Comparing fundamental analysis
with technical analysis
Like index investors, investors who use technical analysis shake their heads
in disapproval when they see fundamental analysts poring over spreadsheets
and financial statements. They, like index investors, see all the effort that
goes into fundamental analysis as a waste of time and calculator batteries.
That’s because technical analysts assume that any information worth knowing is reflected in a stock price.
But technical analysts agree with fundamental analysts in one important way:
They, too, think it’s possible to beat the stock market. Unlike index investors, who think that timing the market is futile, technical analysts think stock
prices move up and down in observable patterns. Knowing how to recognize
patterns in stock price movements can signal a technical analyst the best
times to get in, and out, of stocks. Technical analysts may not even care what
a company does, since they’re just looking at the price chart. To a technical
analyst, buying and selling at the right time is more important than buying
and selling the right stock. Technical analysts pay close attention to:
✓ Stock price charts: Technical analysts focus on stock price charts,
which are graphs that plot a stock’s movement over a period of time.
These charts will show instantly whether a stock is rising or falling in
addition to how many trades, or volume, are occurring.
✓ Trading patterns: Much as an astronomer sees patterns of stars in the
sky, technical analysts look for stock price movements that follow a
pattern. For instance, if a stock price falls to a low level, rises a bit, and
sinks back down to near that same low level, technical analysts call that
a support level. A support is considered a point where demand for a
stock is strong enough to stop it from sinking much further.
✓ Moving averages: Technical analysts often pay close attention to a
stock’s average price over a period of time, say 200 days. When a stock
falls below its 200-day moving average, or its average price over the
past 200 days, that means the stock is vulnerable to fall further, technicians say. The idea is that when stocks fall below their 200-day-moving
average, many investors who bought in within the past year are losing
money and may be nervous and quick to sell.

Using Fundamental Analysis
If you ever see the library of a fundamental analyst, it can be a pretty intimidating sight. Inevitably, there will be a copy of Security Analysis (McGraw-Hill),
a 766-page tome stuffed with gnarly formulas and arcane wording that makes

06 506455-ch02.indd 29

9/24/09 10:06:02 PM

30

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
your high-school algebra book look like a comic book. There will also be dogeared copies of books with words like “value,” “financial statements,” and
“ratios.” You will see Fundamental Analysis For Dummies on the shelf as well.
Shameless plug, I know.
Fundamental analysis has the rap of being for people who wouldn’t be caught
dead without a pen, mechanical pencil, and calculator in their shirt pocket.
But even if you don’t walk around carrying such instruments, you too, can
benefit from fundamental analysis. With an understanding of a few terms and
basic techniques, fundamental analysis is within reach if you’re interested
and willing to put in a bit of time.
Who knows, maybe after reading this book you’ll want to dig deeper into fundamental analysis? After all, fundamental analysis is a bit like art: As you learn
a little you naturally get curious and want to learn more. And financial analysis
can get very detailed and precise.

How difficult is fundamental analysis?
Contrary to popular belief, you don’t need to be a math wizard to use fundamental analysis. Most of the math you’ll use is pretty basic arithmetic. And
there’s no need to memorize formulas, since I’ll put most of the important
ones all together for you in Chapter 8. You will need to know how to build
some financial models, which try to forecast how much profit a company will
make in the future. But to help you out, I’ll point out some online tools and
calculators to crunch some of the more tricky stuff for you.
Some of the more advanced techniques of fundamental analysis might require
you to fire up a spreadsheet. If you want to get up to speed, Microsoft provides
free help and tutorials for its Excel spreadsheet program at www.office.
microsoft.com/en-us/excel. You might also take a look at Excel 2007 For
Dummies (Wiley).

Is fundamental analysis for you?
If you’re tired of trusting other people to tell you how a company is doing
financially, you’re a prime candidate for fundamental analysis. Most likely,
you might find yourself buying investments on a hunch or whim, only to find
out later the company had some serious problems you didn’t know about.
The whole premise of fundamental analysis is to reduce, if not eliminate,

06 506455-ch02.indd 30

9/24/09 10:06:02 PM

Chapter 2: Getting up to Speed with Fundamental Analysis

31

speculation and wild guesswork from investing. Fundamental analysis is
rooted in the idea that you want to look at cold, hard data to make informed
decisions on why an investment might be worth buying.
Above all, fundamental analysis is ideal for people who want to approach an
investment fully informed of the risks and with their eyes wide open. An indepth fundamental analysis on a stock will not only alert you to potentially
troubling trends at a company, but also give you clues to whether a stock
may be overvalued by investors who aren’t paying attention. An overvalued
company is one that commands a stock price that well exceeds any possible
profit it could generate for investors.
In many ways, fundamental analysis is as much about helping you avoid poor
investments as much as it about helping you find good ones.

The risks of fundamental analysis
Fundamental analysis, while it’s rooted in math and objective information,
isn’t without its flaws. After all, if fundamental analysis was perfect, everyone
would quit their day jobs, analyze stocks, and make bundles of money. That’s
why it’s important to understand the shortcomings of fundamental analysis,
which include:
✓ Vulnerability to wrong data, including your assumptions: Fundamental
analysis is heavily based in fact. But if a company incorrectly reports
data or you misinterpret them, you’re going to have a false conclusion.
Miscalculations are especially likely when making assumptions about
things like a company’s future growth rate, future interest rates, or profits.
✓ Overreliance on past data: Perhaps the biggest knock against fundamental analysis is how much stock it puts in a company’s past performance. There is some truth to that, since numbers companies report
can be a month or more old. However, true fundamental analysis uses
historical numbers to make an educated guess about the future.
✓ Bad timing: Let’s say you do all the homework in researching a stock.
You find a stock that appears to be a screaming buy, so you buy it.
Guess what? A stock can remain a screaming buy for many years or even
decades until investors come to the same conclusion. Fundamental analysts often have to be wrong for a long time before making money.
✓ Betting against the market: If you buy a stock because you think it’s
a steal, you’re in effect betting against thousands of the most sophisticated trading desks around the world with access to the same data.
If you think a stock is too cheap, you’re making the gamble that other
investors are missing something you can see.

06 506455-ch02.indd 31

9/24/09 10:06:02 PM

32

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
✓ Concentrated positions: If you’re going to the trouble to meticulously
study a company, you’re going to want to make sure you’re positioned to
profit if you’re right. Unless you have a team of analysts working for you,
when you find a stock that fits your fundamental criteria, you’re going to
want to own a large chunk of it. As a result, investors who use fundamental analysis may have large exposure to individual companies.
This concept contradicts the idea of diversification, which is owning
hundreds and hundreds of small pieces of many companies. With diversification, you’re spreading your risk over many companies so if one has
a problem, it doesn’t hurt so badly. Fundamental analysts, though, think
that owning just a few investments that you know inside and out is actually safer than owning everything.

Making Money with Fundamental
Analysis
Face it. You’re probably not reading this book because you have a deep yearning
to understand how to read and analyze company information. You’re looking to
dig into company reports for a reason, which is most likely to make money.
Fundamental analysis can be profitable. If you’re able to find hidden value in
a company or its stock and buy in before other investors discover what you
know, you’ll cash in once the rest of Wall Street catches up to you.

Putting a price tag on a stock or bond
If you’ve ever wondered whether a stock is “cheap” or “pricey,” fundamental analysis can be a big help. Fundamental analysis helps you understand
exactly what you’re getting when you buy an investment.
Here’s an example to help you see what I mean. Let’s say you have the opportunity to buy a tree that literally grows dollar bills. How much should you
pay for the tree? You might be tempted to pay millions of dollars, especially if
others have their wallets out and start bidding.
But, fundamental analysis can help you intelligently put a price tag on this
amazing plant. By asking some questions and doing some due diligence, you
can actually arrive at a correct price. The farmer tells you the tree grows 20
one-dollar bills every month. He also says the tree will likely die in a year and
then stop growing money. Lastly, the farmer promises to pay you $20 a month
if, for any reason, the tree stops growing money in less than a year.

06 506455-ch02.indd 32

9/24/09 10:06:02 PM

Chapter 2: Getting up to Speed with Fundamental Analysis

33

Knowing these fundamental details, the tree can be priced. You now know the
tree is expected to generate about $240. So, is the tree worth $240? Not so far.
Remember, the tree won’t grow the $240 right away. You have to wait a year
to get the whole wad of cash. Because you have to wait a year to get the $240,
the tree is worth less than $240. So if there’s a bidding war for the tree that
drives the price over $240, you know to walk away based on your fundamental research.

Being profitable by being a “contrarian”
Being a successful fundamental analyst can be pretty lonely. If you’re trying
to make money from studying a company and determine the company is
worth more than its stock price, you’re betting that other investors bidding
for the stock are wrong.
Fundamental analysis, therefore, is at odds with the efficient market theory.
Efficient market theory says that trying to beat the market by picking winning stocks is futile. The strong form of the efficient market theory says that
all information that’s knowable about a company is reflected in a company’s
stock price. So, let’s say that after reading this book you dig through a company’s financial statements and find that a company has great prospects.
Efficient market theory would suggest that you’re not the first person to discover this, and that other investors have already bid the stock up with the
same information.
But before you throw your hands up and give up on fundamental analysis,
there are some caveats to the efficient market theory worth noting. Most importantly, while stocks may reflect all information over the long term, there can be
short-term periods when prices might excessively rise or fall due to extreme
and fleeting optimism or pessimism. For instance, many high-technology stocks
skyrocketed during the late 1990s, as investors bid up share prices on the
idea that they’d be worth a fortune in the future. Fundamental analysts, looking at the fact many of the companies didn’t make money and never would,
avoided the dot-com bubble. Eventually, the fundamentals caught up to them
and many of the stocks collapsed 90% or more. In some cases, the companies
completely failed.
To profit from fundamental analysis, you have to be comfortable going against
the crowd — or in Wall Street parlance — being a contrarian. When other
investors are overly enthusiastic about a stock, they bid the price so high that
it’s practically impossible for anyone to make money.

06 506455-ch02.indd 33

9/24/09 10:06:02 PM

34

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It

The Fundamental Analysis Toolbox
One of the great things about fundamental analysis is that you don’t really
need much to get started. If you have a computer and calculator, you’re
pretty much set.
Unlike technical analysis, which may require sophisticated and costly stock
chart services, most of the data you need for fundamental analysis is provided free from nearly every company. Plus, many free online services offer
increasingly detailed access to company financial data, making it easy for you
to download and analyze. There are three key financial documents that are
the cornerstone of financial analysis: the income statement, balance sheet,
and statement of cash flows.
