
The young company just starting to develop its production, sales,
and service organization, and in the early stages of establishing cus-
tomer good will is in a very different position. Without patents its
products might be copied by large entrenched enterprises which
could use their established channels of customer relationship to put
the small young competitor out of business. For small companies in
the early years of marketing unique products or services, the investor
should therefore closely scrutinize the patent position. He should get
information from qualified sources as to how broad the protection
actually may be. It is one thing to get a patent on a device. It may be
quite another to get protection that will prevent others from making



What to Buy 73

it in a slightly different way. Even here, however, engineering that is
constantly improving the product can prove considerably more advan-
tageous than mere static patent protection.

For example, a few years ago when it was a much smaller organ-
ization than as of today, a young West Coast electronic manufacturer
had great success with a new product. One of the giants of the indus-
try made what was described to me as a “Chinese copy” and market-
ed it under its well-known trade name. In the opinion of the young
company’s designer, this large competitor managed to engincer all the
small company’s engineering mistakes into the model along with
the good points. The large company’s model came out at just the time
the small manufacturer introduced its own improved model with the
weak points eliminated. With a product that was not selling, the large
company withdrew from the field. As has been true many times
before and since, it is the constant leadership in engineering, not
patents, that is the fundamental source of protection. The investor
must be at least as careful not to place too much importance on
patent protection as to recognize its significance in those occasional
places where it is a major factor in appraising the attractiveness of a
desirable investment.

POINT 12. Does the company have a short-range or
long-range outlook in regard to profits?

Some companies will conduct their affairs so as to gain the greatest
possible profit right now. Others will deliberately curtail maximum
immediate profits to build up good will and thereby gain greater over-
all profits over a period of years. Treatment of customers and vendors
gives frequent examples of this. One company will constantly make
the sharpest possible deals with suppliers. Another will at times pay
above contract price to a vendor who has had unexpected expense in
making delivery, because it wants to be sure of having a dependable
source of needed raw materials or high-quality components available
when the market has turned and supplies may be desperately needed.
The difference in treatment of customers is equally noticeable. The
company that will go to special trouble and expense to take care of the
needs of a regular customer caught in an unexpected jam may show
lower profits on the particular transaction, but far greater profits over
the years.


74 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

The “scuttlebutt” method usually reflects these differences in poli-
cies quite clearly. The investor wanting maximum results should favor
companies with a truly long-range outlook concerning profits.

poINr 13. In the foreseeable future will the growth of the
company require sufficient equity financing so that the
larger number of shares then outstanding will largely
cancel the existing stockholders’ benefit from this
anticipated growth?

The typical book on investment devotes so much space to a discussion
on the corporation’s cash position, corporate structure, percentage of
capitalization in various classes of securities, etc., that it may well be
asked why these purely financial aspects should not be given more than
the amount of space devoted to this one point out of a total of fifteen.
The reason is that it is the basic contention of this book that the intel-
ligent investor should not buy common stocks simply because they are
cheap but only if they give promise of major gain to him.

Only a small percentage of all companies can qualify with a high rat-
ing for all or ncarly all of the other fourteen points listed in this discus-
sion. Any company which can so qualify could easily borrow money, at
prevailing rates for its size company, up to the accepted top percentage
of debt for that kind of business. If such a company needed more cash
once this top debt limit has been reached—always assuming of course
that it qualifies at or near the top in regard to further sales growth, prof-
it margins, management, research, and the various other points we are
now considering—it could still raise equity money at some price, since
investors are always eager to participate in ventures of this sort.

Therefore, if investment is limited to outstanding situations, what real-
ly matters is whether the company’s cash plus further borrowing ability is
sufficient to take care of the capital needed to exploit the prospects of the
next several years. If it is, and if the company is willing to borrow to the
limit of prudence, the common stock investor need have no concern as to
the more distant future. If the investor has properly appraised the situation,
any equity financing that might be done some years ahead will be at prices
so much higher than present levels that he need not be concerned. This 1s
because the near-term financing will have produced enough increase in
earnings, by the time still further financing is needed some years hence, to
have brought the stock to a substantially higher price level.



What to Buy 75

If this borrowing power is not now sufficient, however, equity
financing becomes necessary. In this case, the attractiveness of the invest-
ment depends on careful calculations as to how much the dilution
resulting from the greater number of shares to be outstanding will cut
into the benefits to the present common stockholder that will result
from the increased earnings this financing makes possible. This equity
dilution is just as mathcmatically calculable when the dilution occurs
through the issuance of senior securities with conversion features as
when it occurs through the issuance of straight common stock. This is
because such conversion features are usually exercisable at some moder-
ate level above the market price at the time of issuance—usually from
10 to 20 per cent. Since the investor should never be interested in small
gains of 10 to 20 per cent, but rather in gains which over a period of
years will be closer to ten or a hundred times this amount, the conver-
sion price can usually be ignored and the dilution calculated upon the
basis of complete conversion of the new senior issue. In other words, it
is well to consider that all senior convertible issues have been convert-
ed and that all warrants, options, etc., have been exercised when calcu-
lating the real number of common shares outstanding.

If equity financing will be occurring within several years of the time
of common stock purchase, and if this equity financing will leave com-
mon stockholders with only a small increase in subsequent per-share
earnings, only one conclusion is justifiable. This is that the company has
a management with sufficiently poor financial judgment to make the
common stock undesirable for worthwhile investment. Unless this situ-
ation prevails, the investor need not be deterred by purely financial con-
siderations from going into any situation which, because of its high rat-
ing on the remaining fourteen points covered, gives promise of being
outstanding. Conversely, from the standpoint of making maximum prof-
its over the years, the investor should never go into a situation with a
poor score on any of the other fourteen points, merely because of great
financial strength or cash position.

PoinT 14. Does the management talk freely to investors
about its affairs when things are going well but “clam
up” when troubles and disappointments occur?

It is the nature of business that in even the best-run companies unex-
pected difficulties, profit squeezes, and unfavorable shifts in demand for


Uonesodic 5,100g % Prepues AsopMO. YOM WEG)

oF LS61 | 9S6t e SGél 7Sél Me
O3TWASNI LN3W39VNUW MAN -
o9 t T T t 50 09
$¥901S NONWO?
WIILYW ONICIING °
oe $.u00d 2 GUVONYIS = og
2°66 Gi
fered] X, hd OO}=SS6I ‘le Y3GN3930 oo!
Nem een| aun oa» ©
oeol
oa F cord
ov ~—— yoous HORN? ont
ANVANOD 2 NVWI9W “ONIGGY1D
o91 091
ral SNDOIS IWIYIIVN ONICIING -sA-
og ANVdNOD 9 NVIG2W ONIGGVID | Jog,
N SONIYL JDId LDV
00% 4 I _L i l I I I I 00%



What to Buy 77

their products will at times occur. Furthermore, the companies into
which the investor should be buying if greatest gains are to occur are
companies which over the years will constantly, through the efforts of
technical research, be trying to produce and sell new products and new
processes. By the law of averages, sotne of these are bound to be costly
failures. Others will have unexpected delays and heartbreaking expens-
es during the early period of plant shake-down. For months on end,
such extra and unbudgeted costs will spoil the most carefully laid prof-
it forecasts for the business as a whole. Such disappointments are an
inevitable part of even the most successful business. If met forthrightly
and with good judgment, they are merely one of the costs of eventual
success. They are frequently a sign of strength rather than weakness in a
company.

How a management reacts to such matters can be a valuable clue to
the investor. The management that does not report as freely when things
are going badly as when they are going well usually “clams up” in this
way for one of several rather significant reasons. It may not have a pro-
gram worked out to solve the unanticipated difficulty. It may have
become panicky. It may not have an adequate sense of responsibility to
its stockholders, seeing no reason why it should report more than what
may seem expedient at the moment. In any event, the investor will do

well to exclude from investment any company that withholds or tries to
hide bad news.

POINT 15. Does the company have a management of
unquestionable integrity?

The management of a company is always far closer to its assets than is
the stockholder. Without breaking any laws, the number of ways in
which those in control can benefit themselves and their families at the
expense of the ordinary stockholder is almost infinite. One way is to
put themselves—to say nothing of their relatives or in-laws—on the
payroll at salaries far above the normal worth of the work performed.
Another is to own properties they sell or rent to the corporation at
above-market rates. Among smaller corporations this is sometimes hard
to detect, since controlling families or key officers at times buy and
lease real estate to such companies, not for purposes of unfair gain but
in a sincere desire to free limited working capital for other corporate
purposes.


78 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

Another method for insiders to enrich themselves is to get the cor-
poration’s vendors to sell through certain brokerage firms which perform
little if any service for the brokerage commissions involved but which are
owned by these same insiders and relatives or friends. Probably most
costly of all to the investor is the’ abuse by insiders of their power of issu-
ing common stock options. They can pervert this legitimate method of
compensating able management by issuing to themselves amounts of
stock far beyond what an unbiased outsider might judge to represent a
fair reward for services performed.

There is only one real protection against abuses like these. This is to
confine investments to companies the managements of which have a
highly developed sense of trusteeship and moral responsibility to their
stockholders. This is a point concerning which the “scuttlebutt” method
can be very helpful. Any investment may still be considered interesting
if it falls down in regard to almost any other one of the fifteen points
which have now been covered, but rates an unusually high score in
regard to all the rest. Regardless of how high the rating may be in all
other matters, however, if there is a serious question of the lack of a
strong management sense of trusteeship for stockholders, the investor
should never seriously consider participating in such an enterprisc.



80 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

Like so many other widespread misconceptions, this mental picture
has just enough accuracy to make it highly dangerous for anyone want-
ing to get the greatest long-range benefit from common stocks.

As already pointed out in the discussion of the fifteen points to be
considered if a major investment winner is to be selected by any means
other than pure luck, a few of these matters are largely determined by
cloistered mathematical calculation. Furthermore, as mentioned near
the beginning of this book, there is more than one method by which
an investor, if sufficiently skilled, can over the years make some
money—occasionally even really worthwhile money—through invest-
ment. The purpose of this book is not to point out every way such
money can be made. Rather it is to point out the best way. By the best
way is meant the greatest total profit for the least risk. The type of
accounting-statistical activity which the general public seems to visual-
ize as the heart of successful investing will, if enough effort be given it,
turn up some apparent bargains. Some of these may be real bargains. In
the case of others there may be such acute business troubles lying ahead,
yet not discernible from a purely statistical study, that instead of being
bargains they are actually selling at prices which in a few years will have
proven to be very high.

Meanwhile, in the case of even the genuine bargain, the degree by
which it is undervalued is usually somewhat limited. The time it takes
to get adjusted to its true value is frequently considerable. So far as I
have been able to observe, this means that over a time sufficient to give
a fair comparison—say five years—the most skilled statistical bargain
hunter ends up with a profit which is but a small part of the profit
attained by those using reasonable intelligence in appraising the business
characteristics of superbly managed growth companies. This, of course,
is after charging the growth-stock investor with losses on ventures
which did not turn out as expected, and charging the bargain hunter for
a proportionate amount of bargains that just didn’t turn out.

The reason why the growth stocks do so much better is that they
seem to show gains in value in the hundreds of per cent each decade.
In contrast, it is an unusual bargain that is as much as 50 per cent
undervalued. The cumulative effect of this simple arithmetic should be
obvious.

At this point, the potential investor may have to start revising his
ideas about the amount of time needed to locate the right investments
for his purpose, to say nothing of the characteristics he must have if he



What to Buy 81

is to find them. Perhaps he looked forward to spending a few hours each
week in the comfort of his home, studying scads of written material
which he felt would unlock the door to worthwhile profits. He just
does not have the time to seek out, cultivate, and talk with all the vari-
ous people it might be wise to contact if he wants to handle his com-
mon stock investments to his optimum benefit. Perhaps he does have
the ume. He still may not have the inclination and personality to seek
out and chat with a group of people, most of whom he previously had
not known very well if at all. Furthermore, it is not enough just to chat
with them; it is necessary to arouse their interest and their confidence
to a point where they will tell what they know. The successful investor
is usually an individual who is inherently interested in business prob-
lems. This results in his discussing such matters in a way that will arouse
the interest of those from whom he is seeking data. Naturally he must
have reasonably good judgment or all the data he gets will avail him
nothing.

An investor may have the time, inclination, and judgment but still
be blocked from getting maximum results in the handling of his com-
mon. stocks. The matter of geography is also a factor. An investor, for
example, living in or near Detroit would have opportunities for learn-
ing about automotive accessory and parts companies that would not be
available to one equally diligent or able in Oregon. But so many major
companies and industries are today organized on a nation-wide basis
with distribution, if not manufacturing, centers in most key cities, that
investors living in larger industrial centcrs or their suburbs usually have
ample opportunities to practice the art of finding at least a few out-
standing long-range investments. This unfortunately is not equally true
for those living in rural areas remote from such centers.

However, the rural investor or the overwhelming majority of other
investors who may not have the time, inclination, or ability to uncover
outstanding investments for themselves are by no means barred from
making such investments because of this. Actually, the investor’s work is
so specialized and so intricate that there is no more reason why an indi-
vidual should handle his own investments than that he should be his
own lawyer, doctor, architect, or automobile mechanic. He should per-
form these functions if he has special interest in and skill at the partic-
ular field. Otherwise, he definitely should go to an expert.

What is important is that he know enough of the principles involved
so that he can pick a real expert rather than a hack or a charlatan. In some


82 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

ways it is easier for a careful layman to pick an outstanding investment
advisor than, say, a comparably superior doctor or lawyer. In other ways
it is much harder. It is harder because the investment field has devel~
oped much more recently than most comparable specialties. As a result
mass ideas have not yet crystallized to the point where there is an
accepted line of demarcation between true knowledge and mumbo-
jumbo. There are not as yet the barriers to weed out the ignorant and
the incompetent in the financial field that exist, for example, in the
fields of law or medicine. Even among some of the so-called authori-
ties on investment, there is still enough lack of agreement on the basic
principles involved that it is as yet impossible to have schools for train-
ing investment experts comparable to the recognized schools for teach-
ing law or medicine. This makes even more remote the practicability of
government authorities licensing those having the necessary back-
ground of knowledge to guide others in investments in a manner com-
parable to the way our states license the practicing of law or medicine.
It is true that many of our states do go through the form of licensing
investment advisors. However in such instances only known dishonesty
or financial insolvency, rather than a lack of training or skill, provides
the basis for denying a license.

All this probably results in a higher percentage of incompetence
among financial advisors than may exist in fields such as law and med-
icine. However, there are compensating factors that can enable an
individual with no personal expertness in investments to pick a capa-
ble financial advisor more easily than a comparably outstanding doctor
or lawyer. Finding out which physician had lost the smallest percent-
age of his practice through deaths would not be a good way to pick a
superb doctor. Neither would a corresponding box score of cases won
and lost show the relative skill of attorneys. Fortunately, most medical
treatments are not matters of immediate life or death, and a good
lawyer will frequently avoid going into litigation at all.

In the investment advisor’s case it is quite different, however. There
is a score board that, after enough time has elapsed, should pretty
much reflect that advisor’s investment skill. In occasional cases it may
take as much as five years for investments to demonstrate their real
merit. Usually it does not take that long. It would normally be fool-
hardy for anyone to entrust his savings to the skill of a so-called advi-
sor who, working either for himself or others, had less than five years
experience. Therefore, in the case of investments, there is no reason



What to Buy 83

why those trying to pick a professional advisor should not demand to
see a fair cross-section of results obtained for others. Those results,
compared to a record of security prices for the same period of time,
give a real clue to the advisor’s ability.

Two more steps are then necessary before an investor should make
final determination of the individual or organization to which he will
delegate the important responsibility for his funds. One is the obvious
step of being certain of that advisor’s complete and unquestioned hon-
esty. The other step is more complex. A financial advisor may have
obtained far above average results during a period of falling prices not
because of skill but because he always keeps a large part of the funds he
manages in, let us say, high-grade bonds. At another time, aftcr a long
period of rising prices, another advisor may have obtained above-average
results because of a tendency to go into risky, marginal companies. As
explained in the discussion of profit margins, such companies usually do
well only in such a period and subsequently do rather poorly. Still a
third advisor might do well in both such periods because of a tendency
to try to guess what the security markets are going to do. This can pro-
duce magnificent results for a while, but is almost impossible to contin-
ue indefinitely.

Before selecting an advisor, an investor should learn from that advi-
sor the nature of his basic concept of financial management. He should
then only accept an advisor with concepts fundamentally the same as
the investor’s own. Naturally, I believe that the concepts expressed in
this book are those which fundamentally should govern. Many, reared
in the old-time financial atmosphere of “buy them when they are
cheap and sell them when they are high,“ would strongly disagree with
this conclusion.

Assuming an investor desires the type of huge, long-range gain
which I believe should be the objective of nearly all common stock pur-
chases, there is one matter which he must decide for himself whether
he uses an investment advisor or handles his own affairs. It is a decision
which must be made because the type of stocks which qualify most sat-
isfactorily under the previously discussed fifteen points can vary con-
siderably among themselves in their investment characteristics.
