
357

over, a number of times, and it should be consulted as a reference work.
Furthermore, and most important, you will need the experience of your own
successes and failures so that you will know that what you are doing is the
only logical thing you can do under a given set of circumstances. In such a
frame of mind, you will have your portion of successes; and your failures,
which you can take in stride as part of the business, will not ruin either your
pocketbook or your morale.
In short, the problem stated and analyzed through this whole volume
is not so much a matter of “systems” as it is a matter of philosophy. The end
result of your work in technical analysis is a deep understanding of what is
going on in the competitive free auction, what is the mechanism of this
auction, and what is the meaning of it all. And this philosophy does not
grow on trees. It does not spring full-bodied from the sea foam. It comes
gradually from experience and from sincere, intelligent, hard work.
The second section of this book, which follows, is concerned with tactics.
Up to this point, we have been studying the technical formations and their
consequences. We should have a good general understanding of what is
likely to happen after certain manifestations on the charts. Knowing that,
however, we will still need a more definite set of guides as to when and how
it is best to execute this or that sale.
This section is based on one man’s experience and his analysis of thousands of specific cases. It takes up questions of method, of detail, and of
application, and should provide you with a workable basis for your actual
market operations. As time goes on, you will very likely adopt refinements
of your own, or modify some of the suggested methods according to your
own experience. But the authors feel that the suggestions made here will
enable you to use technical analysis in an intelligent and orderly way that
should help to protect you from losses and increase your profits.
John Magee

AU3772_book.fm Page 358 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 359 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter eighteen

The Tactical Problem
EN: Magee in this chapter addresses the question of tactics for the “speculator” who
follows short- and medium-term trends. Chapter 18.1 addresses the question of
strategy and tactics for the long-term investor. See Chapter 18.1 for a discussion of
the term “speculator.”
It is possible (as many traders have discovered) to lose money in a Bull
Market — and, likewise, to lose money trading short in a Bear Market. You
may be perfectly correct in judging the Major Trend; your long-term strategy,
let us say, may be 100% right. But without tactics, without the ability to shape
the details of the campaign on the field, it is not possible to put your knowledge to work to your best advantage.
There are several reasons why traders, especially inexperienced traders,
so often do so poorly. At the time of buying a stock, if it should go up, they
have no objectives and no idea of what policy to use in deciding when to
sell and take a profit. If it should go down, they have no way of deciding
when to sell and take a loss. Result: they often lose their profits; and their
losses, instead of being nipped off quickly, run heavily against them. Also,
there is this psychological handicap: the moment a stock is bought (or sold
short), commissions and costs are charged against the transaction. The trader
knows that the moment he closes the trade, there will be another set of
charges. Also, since he is not likely to catch the extreme top of a rally or the
extreme bottom of a reaction, he is bound, in most cases, to see the stock
running perhaps several points against him after he has made his commitment. Even on a perfectly sound, wise trade, he may see a 10% or more
paper loss, before the expected favorable move gets under way. Obviously,
if he weakens and runs for cover without sufficient reason before the stock
has made the profitable move he looked for, he is taking an unnecessary loss
and forfeiting entirely his chance to register a gain.
The long-term investor who buys in near the bottom and remains in the
market to a point near the top, and then liquidates and remains in cash or
bonds until (perhaps several years later) there is another opportunity to buy
in at the bottom, does not face the continual problem of when to buy and
when to sell. This assumes that one can tell precisely when such a bottom
has been reached, and that one can also tell when the trend has reached its
ultimate top (and those are very broad assumptions indeed). The long-term
investment problem for large gains over the Major Trends is by no means

359

AU3772_book.fm Page 360 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

360

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

H
76

S

S

1928

72
68
64
CUDAHY PACKING
60
Sales
100’s

S

H

CUX

S

125
100
75
50
25
JULY
7 14

AUGUST

21 28 4 11 18 25 1

SEPTEMBER

OCTOBER

NOVEMBER DECEMBER

8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1

8 15 22 29

FIGURE 200. It is possible to lose money owning stocks in a Bull Market. Notice
that this Major Top Formation did not occur in 1929, but in the summer of 1928. For
more than a year after this, a majority of stocks and the Averages continued the Bull
Market Advance. But Cudahy declined steadily, reaching a price below 50 well before
the 1929 Panic, and continued in its Bearish course for over 4 years, ultimately selling
at 20. Except for the somewhat unusual volume on the head on August 21, this is a
typical Head-and-Shoulders Pattern with a perfect Pullback Rally in mid-November.
It underscores what we have mentioned before; that a Head-and-Shoulders Top in
a stock, even when other stocks look strong, cannot safely be disregarded.
The Head-and-Shoulders Pattern, either in its simple form or with multiple heads
or shoulders, is likely to occur at Major and Intermediate Tops, and in reverse position
at Major and Intermediate Bottoms. It has the same general characteristics as to
volume, duration, and breakout as the Rectangles, and the Ascending and Descending Triangles. In conservative stocks, it tends to resemble the Rounding Turns.

as simple as it sounds when you say, “Buy them when they’re low, and sell
them near the top.” However, such large gains have been made over the
long pull, and they are very impressive. EN: Note the record of the Dow Theory
in Chapters 5 and 5.1.
This section of the book is concerned more particularly with the speculative purchase and sale of securities.
There are some basic differences between the “investment” point of view
and the “speculative.” It is a good thing to know these differences and make
sure that you know exactly where you stand. Either viewpoint is tenable
and workable, but you can create serious problems for yourself, and sustain
heavy losses, if you confuse them.
One difference is that, as a speculator, you are dealing with stocks as
such. A stock, to be sure, represents ownership in a company. But the stock
is not the same thing as the company. The securities of a strong company
are often weak; and sometimes the securities of a very weak concern are

AU3772_book.fm Page 361 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eighteen:

The Tactical Problem

361

60
56
52
48
44
40
38

HUDSON MOTORS

HT

36
34

1930

32
30
28
26
Sales
100’s
50
40
30
20
10
JANUARY FEBRUARY
APRIL
JUNE
MARCH
MAY
4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28

FIGURE 201. What would you have done with Hudson Motors? The great Panic
Move of October–November 1929 carried the Dow–Jones Industrial Average down
from its September all-time high of 386.10 to a November low of 198.69. A rally,
bringing the Average back to 294.07 in April 1930, recovered 95 points or 51% of the
ground lost, a perfectly normal correction.
Suppose you had bought HT after the decline from its 1929 high of 93½, say at 56,
in the belief that the 37 point drop had brought it into a “bargain” range. On your
daily chart, you would have seen the pattern shown above (which you will now
recognize as a Descending Triangle) taking shape in the early months of 1930. Would
you have had a protective stop at 51? Would you have sold at the market the day
after HT broke and closed below 54? Or would you have hoped for a rally, perhaps
even bought more “bargains” at 50, at 48, at 40? Would you still have been holding
onto your “good long-term investment” when HT reached 25½ in June? Would you
still have been holding HT when it reached its ultimate 1932 bottom at less than 3?
(See Figure 65.) EN: See Figure 201.1 for a recaptiulation of the lesson from the 2000s.

exceedingly strong. It is important to realize that the company and the stock
are not precisely identical. The technical method is concerned only with the
value of the stock as perceived by those who buy, sell, or own it.

AU3772_book.fm Page 362 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

362

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

A second difference is in the matter of dividends. The “pure investor,”
who, by the way, is a very rare person, is supposed to consider only the
“income” or potential income from stocks — the return on his investment
in cash dividends. EN: This rara avis is largely extinct now. But there are many
cases of stocks which have maintained a steady dividend while losing as
much as 75% or more of their capital value. There are other cases where
stocks have made huge capital gains while paying only nominal dividends
or none at all. If the dividend rate were as important as some investors
consider it, the only research tool one would need would be a calculator to
determine the percentage yields of the various issues, and hence their
“value.” And, on this basis, stocks paying no dividends would have no value
at all.
From the technical standpoint, “income,” as separate from capital gains
and losses, ceases to have any meaning. The amount realized in the sale of
a stock, less the price paid and plus total dividends received, is the total
gain. Whether the gain is made entirely in capital increase, or entirely in
dividends, or in some combination of these, makes no difference. In the case
of short sales, the short seller must pay the dividends. But, here again, this
is simply one factor to be lumped with the capital gain or loss in determining
the net result of the transaction.
There is a third source of confusion. Very often, the “pure investor” will
insist that he has no loss in the stock he paid $30 for, which is now selling
at $22, because he has not sold it. Usually he will tell you that he has
confidence in the company and that he will hold the stock until it recovers.
Sometimes he will state emphatically that he never takes losses.
How such an investor would justify his position if he had bought Studebaker at over $40 in 1953 and still held Studebaker Packard at around $5 in
1956 (EN: Or Osborne at $25 and $0 in the 1980s or Visacalc at similar prices in
the same decade. EN9: Or Enron and WorldCom in the 2000s.) is hard to say. But
for him, the loss does not exist until it becomes a “realized” loss.
Actually, his faith that the stock will eventually be worth what he paid
for it may be no more than a speculative hope; and a forlorn one at that.
Furthermore, one may question whether his reasoning is always consistent. For example, suppose another stock this investor had bought at $30
was now selling at $45. Would he tell you that he did not consider a profit
or loss until the stock was sold? Or would he be tempted to speak of the
“profit” he had in this purchase?
It is all right to consider gains or losses either on the basis of “realized”
or completed transactions, or on the basis of the market values “accrued” at
a particular time. But it is not being honest with yourself to use one method
to conceal your mistakes and the other method to accentuate your successes.
The confusion of these concepts is responsible for many financial tragedies.
EN: One might almost say, in the modern context, that such confusion amounts to
willful or neurotic behavior. Given the easy availability of portfolio software which
“marks to market” positions, avoidance of this knowledge can only be regarded as
self-defeating.

AU3772_book.fm Page 363 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eighteen:

The Tactical Problem

363

As a trader using technical methods, you will probably find the most
realistic view is to consider your gains and losses “as accrued.” In other
words, your gain or loss at a given time will be measured with reference to
the closing pricing of the stock on that day.
Recapitulating, it is important: (1) to avoid regarding a stock and the
company it represents as identical or equivalent; (2) to avoid the conscious
or unconscious attribution of “value” to a stock on the basis of dividend
yield, without regard to market prices; and (3) to avoid confusing “realized”
and “accrued” gains or losses.*
The technical trader is not committed to a “buy and hold” policy. There
are times when it is clearly advantageous to retain a position for many
months or for years. But there are also times when it will pay to get out of
a stock, either with a profit or with a loss. The successful technician will
never, for emotional causes, remain in a situation which, on the evidence at
hand, is no longer tenable.
An experienced trader using technical methods can take advantage of
the shorter Intermediate Trends, and it can be shown that the possible net
gains are larger than the entire net gains on the Major Trend, even after
allowing for the greater costs in commissions and allowing for the greater
income tax liability on short-term operations.
But it should be understood that any such additional profits are not
easily won. They can be obtained only by continual alertness and adherence
to systematic tactical methods. For the market, regarded as a gambling
machine, compares very poorly with stud poker or roulette, and it is not
possible to “beat the market” by the application of any simple mathematical
system. If you doubt this, it would be best to stop at this point and make a
careful study of any such “system” that may appeal to you, checking it
against a long record of actual market moves. Or ask yourself whether you
have ever known anyone who followed such a system alone, as a guide to
market operations, and was successful. EN: After Magee wrote this, many
successful traders, aided by computer technology and advances in finance theory,
have created objective systems which have been successful in the financial markets.
However, the markets usually become aware of the success of these systems and
develop counterstrategies to defeat them. So there is a tendency for the performance
of mechanical systems to degenerate or totally fail over time. In fine it is the happy
combination of the system with markets hospitable to it which makes mechanical
systems successful over defined periods of time.
The practice of technical analysis, on the other hand, is not a mathematical process, although it does, of course, involve mathematics. It is intended
to search out the significance of market moves in the light of past experience
in similar cases, by means of charts, with a full recognition of the fact that
* Some of the most serious and dangerous “traps and pitfalls” of the market are tied up with
difficulties of perception on the part of the investor, and consequent misevaluations and faulty
identifications. For a particular study of these psychological problems, see The General Semantics
of Wall Street by John Magee. EN: Now in its second edition as Winning the Mental Game on Wall
Street, a title chosen by a computer, as edited by the present Editor.

AU3772_book.fm Page 364 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

364

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

the market is a sensitive mechanism by which all of the opinions of all
interested persons are reduced by a competitive democratic auction to a
single figure, representing the price of the security at any particular moment.
The various formations and patterns we have studied are not meaningless
or arbitrary. They signify changes in real values, the expectations, hopes,
fears, developments in the industry, and all other factors that are known to
anyone. It is not necessary that we know, in each case, what particular hopes,
fears, or developments are represented by a certain pattern. It is important
that we recognize the pattern and understand what results may be expected
to emerge from it.
The shorter-term profits are, you might say, payment for service in the
“smoothing out” of inequalities of trends, and for providing liquidity in the
market. As compared to the long-term investor, you will be quicker to make
commitments, and quicker to take either profits or (if necessary) losses. You
will not concern yourself with maintaining “position” in a market on any
particular stocks (although, as you will see, we will try to maintain a certain
“total Composite Leverage” [or risk and profit exposure] according to the
state of the market, which accomplishes the same result). You will have
smaller gains on each transaction than the longer-term investor, but you will
have the advantage of being able to frequently step aside and review the
entire situation before making a new commitment.
Most particularly, you will be protected against Panic Markets. There
are times (and 1929 was by no means the only time) (EN: 1987 and 1989 also
come to mind. EN9: Add 2001-2, if you please: 5/21/01, Dow 11350; 9/17/01, 8062;
and 3/18/02, 10673; 7/22/02, 7532), when the long-term investor stands to see
a large part of his slowly accumulated gains wiped out in a few days. The
short-term trader, in such catastrophes, will be taken out by his stop–loss
orders, or his market orders, with only moderate losses, and will still have
his capital largely intact to use in the new trend as it develops. EN: The best
technical analysts’ opinion in “modern times” is that even long-term investors
should not grin and bear a Bear Market. This is a necessity only for bank trust
departments and large Wall Street firms which cannot afford to offend their investment banking clients by suggesting that their retail clients should sell their holdings.
Finally, before we get on with the subject of tactics, the operations we
are speaking of are those of the small- and medium-sized trader. The methods suggested here, either for getting into a market or getting out of it, will
apply to the purchase or sale of odd lots, 100 shares, 200 shares, and sometimes up to lots of thousands of shares or more of a stock, depending on the
activity and the market for the particular issue. The same methods would
not work for the trader who was dealing in 10,000-share blocks (except in
the largest issues), since in such cases, his own purchases or sales would
seriously affect the price of the stock. Such large-scale operations are in a
special field which is governed by the same basic trends and strategy, but
which requires a different type of market tactics. EN: Or, put another way, as
Magee said to me one time, a mouse can go where an elephant can’t.

AU3772_book.fm Page 365 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter eighteen:

90

The Tactical Problem

365

ENE LAST-Weekly 01/11/2002

70
50
40
30
20
10

1998

1999

2000

2001

Created with TradeStation 2000i by Omega Research 1999

FIGURE 201.0. If an investor only learned one thing from this book, and it were
this one thing, that one thing might be the salvation of his portfolio, or his retirement
plan (if all his assets in the investment plan were shares of Enron). Instead, the
employees of Enron made a major mistake in not having a diversified retirement
portfolio – they had all their eggs in one basket, their income and savings came from
one source. But diversification is not even the crucial lesson here. The lesson is get
out of the stock when it reverses. The corollary of that lesson is, never buy a stock
in a downtrend. And there is even a more important lesson: Never buy a stock when
it is in a swan dive. So obvious you say. Not so obvious at the time for portfolio
managers for the University of Miami who continued to accumulate Enron stock
even as it neared earth at 100 miles an hour. Of course they had sophisticated (?)
company. The Motley Fools had a death grip on the stock all the way to the bottom.

AU3772_book.fm Page 366 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 367 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter 18.1

Strategy and Tactics
for the Long-Term Investor
What’s a Speculator, What’s an Investor?
In the years since Magee wrote Chapter 18, some different connotations have
attached themselves to the terms “speculator” and “investor.” A great cultural shift has also occurred. The days when the New Haven (New York,
New Haven and Hartford Railroad) was a beacon of respectability (and lent
luster to its investor) and paid good dividends are gone forever. And so is
the New Haven. In fact, after the turn of the century, corporations saw a
change in investor sentiment about dividends. Investors wanted capital
appreciation and cared less for dividends. In fact it has lately been considered
the mark of a “growth stock” not to pay dividends. Evidently, the days of
the New Haven are gone forever, when an “investor” was one who bought,
held, and collected dividends, and “speculators” were slightly suspect men
like Magee who played the medium-term trends and bought “unchic,”
“speculative” stocks. It all has a sepia tone to it.
Yesterday’s speculator might be called a medium-term investor today.
While the term “speculator” could still be applied to anyone who
“trades” the market, today that old-time speculator and his kind would more
likely be called traders than speculators. Commodity traders who have no
business interest in the contracts they exchange are always referred to as
speculators, as opposed to commercials, who are hedgers and users of the
commodities they trade. Now “day traders” might be considered the equivalent of the old-time speculators. And only the passive, in the opinion of
this editor, never trade at all and sit on their holdings during Bear Markets.
On the spectrum of investors, from investor to gambler, the old “New
Haven Investor” who “wants his dividends” is pretty rare these days, and,
again, may be one of those trust departments which doesn’t want to get sued
and so stays out of stocks which go up. After all, prudent men don’t “trade
in volatile stocks” but “invest in safe issues, like bonds,” which only lose
about 1.5–2.0% of their purchasing value per year, but preserve the illusion
of having “preserved principal.”
