
8467_Smitten_09_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 190

• 190 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

The next day, while locked in solitary, Monaghan set fire to his
mattress. The sheriff then placed a guard outside his cell.
The day his trial was to begin, July 29, Monaghan pleaded guilty
to the charges of burglary. The charge of killing Scarsdale Patrol
Sergeant Harrison was dropped. Monaghan received a 50-year sentence. As he entered the courtroom for sentencing he was heard saying, “Well, here I am. I’ll get life, I suppose, but I’ll be out soon.”
His escape threat was taken seriously. He was taken to Sing Sing
prison under heavy guard, right up until the prison ferry picked
him up at College Point. On the way there, Monaghan again
vowed to Sheriff Stronson that he would escape from prison.
On January 6, 1929, Nassau County detectives brought in
Eddie Kane, the former chauffeur involved in the Livermore robbery, from Kenosha, Wisconsin, after a two-year search. On January 7, Kane pleaded guilty. On May 22, Kane was sentenced to
three and a half to five years in a state penitentiary.
Both Dorothy and Jesse Livermore were shocked to find out
that Kane had aided the robbers. They refused to believe he was
involved until he finally confessed to the crime.
The report of the possible plot to kidnap his children in Palm
Beach in March 1925 and the 1927 robbery by the Boston Billy
gang, as well as the gang’s subsequent threats and the long pursuit
of the robbers, left Livermore badly depressed and very protective
of his family.
But it did not stop the irrepressible Dorothy from throwing
grand parties whenever the spirit moved her.

8467_Smitten_10_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 191

*

chapter ten

*

The Crash of 1929

There is nothing unique about the crash of ’29. It is something
that happens about every 20 to 30 years, because that is the
length of the financial memory. It is about the length of time
needed for a new set of suckers to come in and imagine that they
have a new and wonderful fix on the future.”
John Kenneth Galbraith, The Great Crash of 1929

8467_Smitten_10_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 192

• 192 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

LIVERMORE’S CONCENTRATION ON THE TURBULENT,

boiling bull market of early 1929 was briefly distracted by a surprise lawsuit.
On April 4, 1929, 93 investors sued the Mizner Development
Corporation, which included Livermore and T. Coleman Du Pont
as directors, for $1.45 million. These investors claimed that they
had suffered in the crash of the Boca Raton land boom. Maximilian Morgenthau, the son of former ambassador to Turkey Henry
Morgenthau, led this group of disgruntled investors.
Morgenthau filed an 870-page complaint. It was the longest
complaint ever filed up to that time. The complaint stated that the
Mizner Development Corporation had committed fraud. It stated
that the Boca Raton, Florida, lots had been misrepresented and
that the Mizner Development Corporation, the promoter of the
development, had operated without any prior knowledge of real
estate sales and management.
The complaint further stated that the criminal operation was
initiated on April 12, 1925, when the promoters had appointed as
president Addison Mizner, an architect with no experience in real
estate development. Mizner had then appointed his brother, Wilson Mizner, a playwright with no qualifications in real estate, as
secretary of the company.
The press had a field day with the suit. The corporation’s directors quickly and privately settled it. The details of the settlement
were never disclosed. The entire matter quietly drifted off the
newspaper pages.
The problem had begun in 1925, when Addison Mizner, a
famous Palm Beach architect, had the brilliant idea to develop
Boca Raton, an undeveloped area just south of Palm Beach.
Mizner wanted to build the world’s most architecturally beautiful
playground. He wanted to construct a magnificent 1,000-room
hotel, a polo field, and a casino in the first year and expand from

8467_Smitten_10_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 193

THE CRASH OF 1929

• 193 •

there into a massive land development scheme that would include
three more major hotels.
A syndicate, the Mizner Development Corporation, was
formed to oversee and finance the ambitious development. The
group was made up of leading financial, entertainment, and social
luminaries, including Harold Vanderbilt, Paris Singer, Jesse Livermore, Irving Berlin, W. K. Vanderbilt II, Addison and Wilson
Mizner, Elizabeth Arden, T. Coleman Du Pont, and Rodman
Wanamaker, to name a few.
The syndicate purchased two miles of beachfront around the
Boca Raton inlet and 1,600 acres of land. An offering of $500,000
of the new syndicate’s original $5 million capital investment was
offered for sale to the public. It was sold out in less than a week.
Land prices in the area surrounding the proposed development
skyrocketed.
This ad appeared in the Palm Beach Post on May 15, 1925:
The owners and controllers of the Mizner Development
Corporation are a group of very rich men and women of
unlimited means who propose to build from the creative
genius of Addison Mizner what will most likely be the most
wonderful resort city in the world. The combined wealth of
the stockholders probably represents over one-third of the
entire wealth of the United States. It is reasonable to suppose
that every lot buyer should make quick and large profits.
The prominent backers’ names were used in all the ads and
marketing efforts to promote the corporation. On August 6, the
directors were elected. Du Pont, recently elected senator from
Delaware, was made chairman of the board, and Livermore was
made head of the finance committee. It did not take Livermore
and the finance committee long to find out what was going on and

8467_Smitten_10_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 194

• 194 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

to object to the use of their names in promoting the development
project. They strenuously denounced this bandying about of their
names as if they were personally guaranteeing the financial success
of the project.
They also objected to promising the new purchasers of land that
three more hotels would be built, including a Ritz-Carlton, as well
as three golf courses, polo fields, and miles of excellent paved
streets throughout the development.
Finally, before the year was out, on November 24, Du Pont
resigned, saying to the press that proper business methods were not
being used, although the project had great possibilities. Livermore
and several other directors resigned, as well.
These resignations and problems in the press brought about the
immediate demise of the Boca Raton land boom. In its first six
months of operation, the marketing company had achieved sales of
over $25 million. But with the board of directors breaking up and
Du Pont’s negative comments appearing in the New York Times,
sales ended abruptly, and the project shut down.
This left Livermore with another good lesson: Stick to what you
know, which in his case was the stock market. He set back to work
to recoup the money he had lost in the Florida land deal, a deal his
prominent Palm Beach friends had told him just could not fail.
From the winter of 1928 until the early spring of 1929, Livermore
was a full-fledged bull in a runaway bull market, but he was looking for the market to signal the turn, the inevitable turn, and he
was waiting to sell out his long positions. Experience had taught
him that it was always best to sell early into a strong market, especially when he had substantial line of stocks to sell off.
In the early summer of 1929, still in the heat of a bull market,
Livermore finally sold out all his long positions. He made a list of
the leading stocks that he believed were overextended.

8467_Smitten_10_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 195

THE CRASH OF 1929

• 195 •

The line of least resistance had changed from bullish to sideways
movement. He asked himself whether this sideways movement was
merely a correction from the upward spike of the bull market, or
the beginning of a major change in the direction of the overall
market. Had the market trend changed? Was it changing in front
of everyone’s eyes, and was the greed factor too strong for people
to see the top?
All of Livermore’s experience and instincts screamed at him,
telling him this was a top. But he knew timing was everything. It
was not whether the top was coming; it was when the top was coming. He had been wrong before by going in early only to find out
that he had been correct but had made his move too soon. He
decided to follow his developed method of sending out probes to
establish small positions on the short side of the market.
Operating out of his war room, his suite of offices in the
Heckscher Building at 730 Fifth Avenue, he began his operation
secretly. Constantly changing brokers, using as many as 100 brokers to disguise his moves over the next six months, telling no one
of his strategy, using his secret symbols on the chalkboard, and
keeping away from the press until all his positions were established,
he tested the market.
He sent out his probes by selling several stocks short, small positions. The market continued upward, and he had to cover them,
losing well over $250,000, a small part of his capital. He had his
full crew of six chalkboard markers working everyday on the long
catwalk. He was active on his direct phone lines to the London and
Paris markets. The direct line to the grain pits in Chicago showed
him that the prices of all major commodities were dropping to alltime lows, across the board. Because of his constant and neverending queries into economics, both in the United States and
abroad, he felt that the world was looking at a serious deflation.
He set out a second line of probes, testing his strong feelings

8467_Smitten_10_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 196

• 196 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

again, but they did not hold, and he had to cover them when the
market moved against him. But then in the late summer, for the
third time, he set out his probes. They held.
They were suddenly profitable—not big profits, but at least they
were profitable. Now he fully believed he was right.
His patience had paid off. It was one of the reasons he liked fishing, if you did the right thing, were persistent and patient, eventually you would catch fish. Now that he had a fish on the hook, he
had to reel it in. This time he knew he was right. And he was prepared to back his play with sizable positions.
He was famous as the Boy Plunger, the Great Bear of Wall
Street, and the Lone Wolf of Wall Street. He was ready to truly live
up to his reputation.
In the summer of 1929, Livermore set out his short line while
the market was still strong enough to accept his trades. It was also
easy for him to borrow the necessary stock against his short positions, because practically everyone was bullish and thought it madness to be selling short. Things could not be better: The economy
was great, liquidity was great, there was plenty of money around
for businesses to borrow, and there was no sign of inflation—in
fact, consumer prices were falling. His friends asked him why he
would want to sell.
Livermore watched all this, and his famous instinct took over—
his gut instinct, which he believed was not instinct at all. Rather,
it was the sum total of all his experience and all his knowledge that
was keeping his dreams fitful at night, stealing sleep—subconscious
rumblings.
There were plenty of signals as the market finally topped. It did
not just shoot up in a spike in one grand climax and fall to earth.
No, like all markets before, it moved inexorably, slowly, like a giant
ship at sea, but the market gave signals, signals that Livermore had
seen before: The leaders were struggling, unable to make new

8467_Smitten_10_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 197

THE CRASH OF 1929

• 197 •

highs; the smart money was selling into the strong, driving greed
of the public.
The public had arrived in the market in full force. The mechanics, the barbers, the shoe clerks, the paper carriers, the housewives,
and the farmers were all trading on 10 percent margin. It was
apparent to them that winning in the stock market was an easy
game; invest your money and prosper. It was a new time in history,
a time like never before, a time of endless prosperity, with a simple
formula: Buy stocks and get rich. Stocks went one way—up, up,
and up. This was a new era of perpetual prosperity—and, most
important, the little guy could participate.
Livermore watched stocks rise with wild capitalization, good
stocks selling at 30, 40, 50, 60 times their annual earnings. These
were stocks that had normally traded at 8 to 12 times earnings.
Plus, the wild speculative stocks, like the new high-technology
radio companies, took off. They were the trendy, favored stocks.
He also observed the leaders, the stocks that had led the market
upward. He watched as they stalled and corrected, failing to make
new highs, drifting back when they met a wave of distribution as
the smart money hit the road.
In the fall of 1929, Livermore sat in his office and watched
through the big glass window as his crew of six markers, wearing
headphones, marked the movement of stocks on the green chalkboard. The symbols made music for him, but it was now a wild
crescendo, the climax to the end of a great symphony, years and
years of sweet music. Now the end was near; the tempo was up,
out of control, on the verge of wildness; the chords were often discordant to his ears. He moved out of his office and sat for hours at
his long, shiny, mahogany conference table. He sat in silence,
watching the markers moving on the catwalk. As he watched, his
resolve grew. This was the end. Every once in a while he would go
into his private office and make a trade. He would then tell Harry

8467_Smitten_10_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 198

• 198 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Edgar Dache, his trusted assistant, who would enter it into the
book.
Often, at the end of the day, as a game, he would race Dache for
a tally of where he stood, his exact equity balance, to the penny.
Livermore would do the calculations in his head and, just as Dache
was about to shout the answer given by the machine, he would
hold up his hand and utter a number quietly, the number he had
calculated mentally. Dache would just nod. Livermore was always
correct.
Then it struck—the storm broke.
The cataclysm struck in full fury as soon as trading began. In
the first 30 minutes of business, immense blocks of stocks—
50,000 shares at a time of Chrysler, General Electric, International Telephone and Telegraph, and Standard Oil—were
dumped on the market by wealthy individuals and institutions
at prices that stunned onlookers. AT&T, which had reached a
peak of $310 per share in the heady summer days of the bull
market, smashed all the way down to $204 in a sickening slide.
U.S. Steel skated past 190, 180, 170, and kept going down.
RCA, a former favorite at 110, went begging at 26. Some
brokers lost their nerve and sold out their customers needlessly, lending further momentum to the downward spiral.
Others lost their minds. Spectators watched in mute horror as
one trader ran screaming like a lunatic from the floor of the
exchange. Those who remained among the shouting, frantic
mob took on the furtive, frightened look of hunted things.
By noon, more than 8 million shares of stock had been
sold, a furious pace enveloped the trading floor as all previous
trading records were shattered. Shortly thereafter, the members of the governing committee of the exchange held a

8467_Smitten_10_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 199

THE CRASH OF 1929

• 199 •

secret meeting in a cramped, smoke-filled room beneath the
floor of the market and anxiously debated whether to suspend trading completely until the panic subsided.
Across the news tickers that morning came a sequence of
terse urgent messages: “Federal Reserve Board is in session
in Washington with Secretary Mellon. Cabinet is meeting.
President Hoover conferring with Secretary of Commerce
Lamont. Leading bankers gathering at the office of J. P. Morgan Jr., to discuss the deteriorating situation.” As the extent
of the financial debacle became clear—15 billion worth of
stock values had vanished into thin air, wiping out the life
savings of investors across the nation—the human toll began
to mount.
Businessmen whose companies went bankrupt suffered
heart attacks. Ruined speculators leaped from hotel windows,
or shut all windows and turned on the gas, or swallowed poison, or simply shot themselves. Behind them, in the wreckage of lifetimes of hard work, dreams and fatal illusions, they
left notes that read: “Everything lost. Tell the boys I can’t pay
what I owe them.”
The great crash, when securities on the nation’s stock
exchanges lost more than a third of their value in a heartbreaking avalanche that haunted the memories of an entire
generation. When the dreams of hundreds of thousands of
American investors—mostly members of the middle-class
including secretaries, clerks, elderly spinsters, and smallbusiness men—vanished in the smash-up along with hard
earned savings. The great crash that battered the country,
inflicting severe psychological trauma whose effects were still
plainly visible more than a decade later.
William Klingaman, 1929:The Year of the Great Crash

8467_Smitten_10_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 200

• 200 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

The next day, Black Tuesday, was worse: The market fell 11.7
percent in one day.
Livermore was personally blamed for the crash. Even the New
York Times ran an article attributing the crash to his strong and constant short-selling attack on the market. Once again he was the
center of a major drama, and his life was threatened.
The calls seemed never-ending. He personally answered the
phone. He told Dache to put the angry calls through to him. The
threats came in letters and telegrams, as well. After a while he
stopped answering the phone. But the calls worried him for his
safety and the safety of his family.
For Livermore, there was no joy in the misery of others. He
wondered how his life had come to this sad point. It was his greatest single day in the market, his greatest victory. Why did he feel
so hollow and empty?
In the early part of the twentieth century, depression was considered a mental condition caused by emotional instability or
weakness of character. Clinical depression had not yet been discovered. Chemical imbalance as the cause of aberrant behavior was
a theory not yet born. For serious cases of depression through
most of the century, patients were often subjected to electroshock
treatment. Electrodes were attached to the skull, and a terrific blast
of electricity was applied to the cranium, searing into the brain.
There is no proof that this therapy did anything but cause brain
damage to the patient.
In 1930, besides his depression, Livermore had other personal
problems. His wife Dorothy, his beloved Mousie, was drinking
heavily, and her mother had become her complete alter ego. They
shopped together and traveled together. Her mother’s residence
occupied one entire wing of the mansion at Evermore, and
Dorothy sought her advice on every household and personal mat-

8467_Smitten_10_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 201

THE CRASH OF 1929

• 201 •

ter. Their main preoccupation was spending Livermore’s money,
primarily in decorating the various Livermore homes.
Dorothy’s mother also loved to gamble. She was well off and
used her own money. She was a good gambler. She won more than
she lost.
On a European trip in 1930, they traveled to Spain to visit the
American ambassador, Jesse’s good friend Alexander P. Moore.
Livermore had covered for Moore in his torrid affair with Lillian
Russell. While they were in Spain, Moore introduced Dorothy’s
mother to the king of Spain, whom she promptly engaged in a
torrid affair. The affair lasted for several months. She stayed on in
Spain, gambling at the casino almost every night and having her
fling with the king.
Dorothy thought it was charming, since her mother had been a
widow for years. Livermore and Moore were bewildered by the
whole affair and just shook their heads in silence.
Livermore often resented his mother-in-law. He felt isolated
from his wife, and he believed that her mother’s presence was a
barrier between them. He was never an outgoing, gregarious type
of person, and he kept his feelings to himself, so he never mentioned these feelings to Dorothy. He was, in fact, like his straitlaced
New England parents, emotionally constipated. Reticence to display his feelings was ingrained in his personality. He considered it
necessary to act like a poker player in his business, to never tip his
hand or to react emotionally. Because of this inability and unwillingness to express his emotions, the stress on him was permanent.
The only relief came when he sold out his market positions and
took a vacation, or went out on his yacht, something he did more
and more as he grew older.
He had another recreation, a secret recreation. Livermore had a
weakness for beautiful women. And some women had a weakness

8467_Smitten_10_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 202

• 202 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

for a powerful man with unlimited money and the seductive aura
of a secretive life spent stalking the dark corridors of Wall Street
and the dimly lit halls of high finance.
He cut a mysterious, elegant figure, always dressed perfectly in
his Saville Row suits and perfectly groomed. He was shaved every
morning by his personal barber and had his hair perfectly trimmed
daily. Livermore always had access to beautiful women through Flo
Ziegfield and others like him. He also met many women at the
endless parties thrown by Mousie and his neighbors on Long Island.
Livermore started spending more and more nights in secret
liaisons in New York during the week. Rumors were born and
started to subtly circulate in the high societies of Long Island’s
Great Neck community and the caverns of Wall Street. These
rumors eventually found their way to Dorothy’s ears. She confronted her beloved J.L.
“J.L., I’m hearing terrible things about you.”
“Like what?”
“Other women, beautiful women, showgirls like I used to be,
who are associated with you.”
“Look Mousie . . .”
“No. I won’t have it, and I refuse to discuss it.”
“But you brought this up for discussion.”
“Don’t try to get off the subject and distract me. I simply don’t
want to discuss it. Tell me it’s not true, J.L.”
“It’s not true.”
“That’s the last of it then, and if it were true, I want it to be
untrue, and stop.”
“Don’t worry, Mousie.”
She smiled and took his hand. She did not believe him, but she
hoped he would stop. She drank more, and threw more parties at
Evermore, on the yacht, at the Breakers in Palm Beach, and at
their home in Lake Placid.
