>6 - JAPANESE
’

A OLE TICK
CHARTING
TECHNIQUES
SECOND EDITION

rl '7JV

' <

fI 7J

A CONTEMPORARY
GUIDE TO THE ANCIENT
INVESTMENT TECHNIQUES
OF THE FAR EAST

STEVE NISON

JAPANESE
CANDLESTICK
CHARTING
TECHNIQUES
A CONTEMPORARY GUIDE TO THE
ANCIENT INVESTMENT
TECHNIQUES OF THE FAR EAST
SECOND EDITION

STEVE NISON

IK
HEW YORK INSTITUTE OF FINANCE
MEW YORK •TORONTO •SYDNEY •TOKYO •SINGAPORE

NEW YORK INSTITUTE OF FINANCE
NYIF and NEW YORK INSTITUTE OF FINANCE are trademarks of Executive
Tax Reports, Inc., used under license by Penguin Putnam Inc.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to
the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged
in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional service. If legal advice or other expert
assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought.
—From the Declaration of Principles jointly adopted by a Committee of the American Bar Association
and a Committee of Publishers and Associations

Copyright © 2001 by Steve Nison
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means,
without permission in writing from the publisher.

--

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Nison, Steve.

Japanese candlestick charting techniques : a contemporary guide to the ancient
investment techniques of the Far East / Steve Nison. 2nd ed.

—

p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-7352-0181-1 (cloth)
1. Stocks Charts, diagrams, etc. 2. Investment analysis. I. Title.

—

HG4638 .N57 2001
332.63'222'0952 dc21

—

2001026704

Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4

Most NYIF books are available at special quantity discounts for bulk purchases for sales
promotions, premiums, fund-raising, or educational use. Special books, or book excerpts,
can also be created to fit specific needs.

For details, write: Special Markets, Penguin Putnam Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York,
New York 10014.

PREF ACE
h»

LJljf
J
JT

-

„
"

rj

3 If!i JTt £ E§ t
A clever hawk hides it claws.

t's hard to believe that Japanese candlestick charts, the
I "claws" of Japanese technical analysis, were completely
unknown to the Western world before I revealed them to the
Western hemisphere in 1989. Candlestick charts are now so
prevalent that it is hard to imagine that before the first edition
of this book, no one in the West knew about these wonderful
techniques and not one charting service had candlestick charts.
This is amazing to me, considering that candlestick charts are
now available on almost every charting service.
I am proud to say that Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques
quickly became the foundation of all candlestick charting work
in the West. The first edition of this book is why you now have
candlestick charts on the Internet and anywhere else they are
available. Illustrating the universal popularity and effectiveness of candle charts, the book has been translated into six languages and has gone through thirteen printings.

v

vi

Preface

The tools, techniques, and topics offered in the first edition of
this book are ageless and useable in all markets and time
frames. But through cogent logic (and holding my dog
hostage!) the editor of this edition convinced me it was time for
a new edition.
Some of the fresh aspects of this book include updated
charts, more equity markets, a focus on active trading via intraday charts, new refinements and strategies, and fresh combinations of Western technical analysis with candlestick charting
tools.
In a public seminar, I asked the audience to write what they
hoped to get from the seminar. Someone wrote, "To make big
$$$." While I can't guarantee "big $$$" I expect that the tools,
strategies, and techniques in this book will go a long way to
improve your trading and decrease risk exposure.
Thank you for making the first edition of this book so popular. I know you will find this one as valuable, practical, and
entertaining.
I would enjoy hearing your comments, experiences, and
ideas with candle charts. I welcome your e-mail at info@candlecharts.com and invite you to visit our site at www.candlecharts.com. While I can't guarantee a reply, all your e-mails
and letters will be read.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
- f /h £

t> tt&i J:„

Do not forget little kindnesses and do not remember small faults .

want to thank all of you who have helped ignite the flames
I of interest in candle charts. The overwhelmingly positive
feedback keeps the lights of the candles growing ever brighter.
To my institutional and public seminar attendees, advisory
clients, and online clients, I want to thank you for your continued support and kind words.
A Japanese proverb says that, "One evening's conversation
with a superior man is better than ten years of study." It is my
pleasure to acknowledge the superior men and women who
have so generously helped me.
Many of those who deserve recognition for their help are
mentioned in Chapter 1. There are others whom I would like to
thank for their help in lighting my path. There were so many
who contributed to this project that if I have forgotten to mention anyone I apologize for this oversight.

Vll

vm

Acknowledgments

The underpinnings for all my research on candles are the
translations provided by Richard Solberg. His acquisitions of
the Japanese candle charting books, his ideas, and his work
provided the scaffolding for the rest of my candle endeavors.
The Market Technicians Association (MTA) deserves special
mention. It was at the MTA's library that I first discovered candle material written in English. This material, albeit scant, was
extremely difficult to obtain, but the marvelously complete
MTA library had it.
Yoji Inata spent many hours answering my more advanced
questions. He was also kind enough to contact his peers in
Japan to get more detailed answers if necessary.
The Nippon Technical Analysts Association ( NTAA )
deserves utmost praise for their assistance. Mr. Kojiiro
Watanabe helped me to contact NTAA members who have
been especially helpful. They are: Mr. Minoru Eda and Mr.
Yasushi Hayashi Nori Hayashi.
There are many candle charting software programs available.
For this book I used two of what I consider the best: Aspen
Graphics (www.Aspenres.com ) and CQG (www.cqg.com ).
Their products and support are top-notch.
Just as I did in the first edition, I again want to thank "idea a
day" Bruce Kamich. Bruce is a friend and a fellow technician
with over 25 years' experience. He continues to provide many
valuable ideas and suggestions.
Mark Tunkel, a friend and a colleague for many years, has
powerful insights into candle charts. His help on this book is
much appreciated.
Susan Barry, the editor for the first edition of this book, had
the foresight to convince her boss that candles would be popular enough to take a chance on a book. The increasing sales
since its initial publication in 1991 have confirmed her thinking.
For this edition, Ellen Schneid Coleman and Sybil Grace at
Prentice Hall have taken the coal of this book and made it into
a diamond.
Of course, there is my family. It's hard to believe that my son
was just born when I wrote the first edition. (He's now 11.) I
told him that I came close to calling him Candlesticks Nison.
That name would be appropriate. Evan's a very quick learner
especially when it comes to finances—and can't absorb candle
charting fast enough. I think we will put our family finances in
his hands.

—

Acknowledgments

Rebecca, four years old when the first edition was published,
is a very bright young lady now. She makes me proud to be her
father. If we put our finances in her hands, we would be homeless, but would have lots of clothing and make-up.
My wife Bonnie continues to be our cornerstone. Without
her, everything would fall apart and there would be no way
this book could have been done.

IX

ABOUTTHE
AUTHOR
:$v

•

fcifS
If you wish to know the road , inquire of those who have traveled it .

s

teve Nison, CMT, was the very first to reveal the startling
power of candlestick charts to the Western Hemisphere. He
is acknowledged as the leading authority on the subject.
His two books, Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques and
Beyond Candlesticks , are international best-sellers and are the
foundation of all candlestick research and analysis.
Steve has trained professionals in almost every major investment firm in eighteen different countries on how to apply these
methods. He has also taught at the Federal Reserve, The World
Bank, and numerous universities. He is an instructor at the
New York Institute of Finance.
Steve was among the first to receive the Chartered Market
Technician (CMT) designation from the Market Technicians
Association (MTA ). He was previously a senior technical analyst at Merrill Lynch and senior vice president at Daiwa securities. He holds an M.B.A. in Finance and Investments.

xi

Xll

About the Author

Steve is president of Candlecharts.com, which offers institutional on-site and public seminars, educational products, and
advisory services. To learn all that Candlecharts.com has to
offer, see page 287 or visit their Web site at www.candle
charts.com.

CONTENTS
r. .

PREFACE v
••
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS vn
ABOUT THE AUTHOR xi

Chapter X

INTRODUCTION
What's New in This Book 2
Why Have Candle Charting Techniques
Captured the Attention of Traders and
Investors Around the World? 2
Who Is This Book For? 4
Some Background 5
What Is in This Book? 7
Some Cautions 8
The Importance of Technical Analysis 11

1

Chapter 2

A HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

15

xiv

Contents

PART 1: THE BASICS
Chapter 3

21

CONSTRUCTING THE CANDLESTICK
LINES
Drawing the Candle Lines 25

23

Chapter 4

REVERSAL PATTERNS
Umbrella Lines 32
Hammer 34
Hanging Man 38
The Engulfing Pattern 42
Dark-Cloud Cover 49
Piercing Pattern 55

31

Chapter 5

STARS
The Morning Star 62
The Evening Star 66
The Morning and Evening Doji Stars
The Shooting Star and the Inverted
Hammer 74
The Shooting Star 75
The Inverted Hammer 77

61

70

Chapter 6

81
MORE REVERSAL PATTERS
The Harami Pattern 82
Harami Cross 83
Tweezers Tops and Bottoms 87
Belt-Hold Lines 93
Upside-Gap Two Crows 95
Three Black Crows 97
Three Advancing White Soldiers 99
Three Mountains and Three Rivers 103
Counterattack Lines 109
Dumpling Tops and Frypan Bottoms 114
Tower Tops and Bottoms 119

Chapter 7

125
CONTINUATION PATTERNS
Windows 126
Tasuki 134
High-Price and Low-Price Gapping
Plays 136
Gapping Side-by-Side White Lines 139

Contents

Rising and Falling Three Methods
Separating Lines 150

142

Chapter 8

THE MAGIC DOJI
155
The Northern Doji (Doji during Rallies) 158
The Long-Legged Doji (Rickshaw Man),
the Gravestone Doji, and the Dragonfly
Doji 161
The Tri-Star 170

Chapter 9

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

PART 2 : CONVERGENCE

xv

173

181

Chapter 10 A CLUSTER OF CANDLES

187

Chapter 11 CANDLES WITH TREND LINES
Springs and Upthrusts 199
The Change of Polarity Principle 205

193

Chapter 12 CANDLES WITH RETRACEMENT
LEVELS

213

Chapter 13 CANDLES WITH MOVING AVERAGES 217
The Simple Moving Average 217
The Weighted Moving Average 219
The Exponential Moving Average 219
Using Moving Averages 219
225
Chapter 14 CANDLES WITH OSCILLATORS
The Relative Strength Index 226
Computing the RSI 226
Using the RSI 227
Moving Average Oscillator 229
Computing the Moving Average
Oscillator 229
Using the Moving Average Oscillator 229
Stochastics 233
Computing Stochastics 234
Using Stochastics 234
Moving Average Convergence-Divergence 237

xv

xvi

Contents

Constructing the MACD
Using the MACD 237

237

Chapter 15 CANDLES WITH VOLUME

241

Chapter 16 MEASURED MOVES
Breakouts from Boxes 250
Swing Targets, Flags, and Pennants

249

255

Chapter 17 THE BEST OF THE EAST AND WEST:
THE POWER OF CONVERGENCE

263

CONCLUSION

267

Glossary A CANDLESTICK TERMS
AND VISUAL DICTIONARY

269

Glossary B WESTERN TECHNICAL TERMS

279

BIBLIOGRAPHY

285

INDEX

289

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

The beginning is most important .

apanese candlestick chart analysis, so called because the
lines resemble candlesticks, has been refined by generations
of use in the Far East. Until the publication of Japanese Candle
Charting Techniques , the "claws" of Japanese charting analysis—
that is, candle charts were a hidden secret from the Western
world for over a century. That book revealed in detail, for the
first time to the Western hemisphere, these "secrets of the
Orient."
Since the term "candlesticks" is often shortened to "candles,"
I will use both terms interchangeably throughout this book.
I am flattered that my work has been credited with revolutionizing technical analysis and that all subsequent books, articles, etc. by other authors have used the first edition of this
book as their underpinning. This is what I had hoped. The

)

—

1

2

Chapter 1 • Introduction

premise of that book was to lay the foundation for future candle charting material. It is thus very gratifying to have this book
often called the "bible of candle charting."
Before the publication of this book in 1991 B.C. (Before
Candlesticks), who ever heard of a candlestick chart? Now, who
hasn't?
Online traders, day traders, institutional propriety traders,
and market makers are just some of the candle charting enthusiasts. Web sites, real-time trading systems, and technical analysis software packages include candle charts. This attests to the
popularity and universal appeal candles have to trading
today's volatile markets. Candles are hotter than ever.
My 11-year-old son Evan (who was almost called
Candlesticks Nison when he was born) saw an online charting
service that had candle charts. He said, "Daddy, so if it wasn't
for you, there would be no candle charts on the Web or anywhere in America. Is that right?" I said that was true. He hesitated and then said, "Cool, I want a raise in my allowance."

WHAT'S NEW IN THIS BOOK
While the format and underlying concepts are the same as the
first edition (if it ain't broke don't fix it), the trading environment and players in the market have changed since that edition.
Consequently, besides having all new charts, this edition has:

• more intraday markets

• more focus on active trading for swing, online, and day
traders

• new tactics for getting maximum use from intraday charts
• new Western techniques in combination with candles

• a greater focus on capital preservation
WHY HAVE CANDLE CHARTING
TECHNIQUES CAPTURED THE ATTENTION
OF TRADERS AND INVESTORS AROUND THE
WORLD?
Year after year the flames of interest grow ever brighter for
these charting tools. This is because candle charts:

Chapter 1 • Introduction

• Are easy to understand: Anyone, from the first-time chartist to
the seasoned professional, can easily harness the power of
candle charts. Don't let the simplicity of these tools fool you.
Their power to analyze the health of the market is
unmatched by any other charting methodology.
• Provide earlier indications of market turns: Candle charts often
send out reversal signals well before those of traditional indicators on bar or point and figure charts. This should help you
to enter and exit the market with better timing.
• Furnish unique market insights: Candle charts not only show
the trend of the move, as does a bar chart, but, unlike bar
charts, candle charts also show the force underpinning the
move.

• Are enjoyable to learn: The picturesque terms such as dark-

cloud covers , hammers , and windows make candle charts fun to
use. But don't let the "picturesque" names fool you. These
techniques will be potent weapons in your battle with the
markets.

• Enhance Western charting analysis: Candle charts are so versatile, they can be fused with any Western technical tool. For
our clients, we merge the insights given by the candle charts
with the most potent Western technical analysis tools. If you
are a seasoned technician, you will discover how joining
Japanese candles with your favorite technical tools can create
a powerful synergy of techniques. This merging of Eastern
and Western analysis will give you a jump on those who use
only traditional Western charting techniques.

• Will increase efficiency of your analysis: Because of the immediate visual information sent out by the candle charts, they will
make your market analysis faster and more efficient.
As the Oriental proverb states, "The journey of a thousand
miles begins with the first step." This chapter is that first step,
albeit an important one, on the road to candle chart analysis.
Yet, even after this introductory chapter, you will discover how
the candles will help make your market analysis more efficient,
improve entry and exit timing, and open new, effective, and
unique avenues of analysis.
I made a bold forecast in the first edition of this book. I said,
"In the near future, candle charts may become as standard as

3

4

Chapter 1 • Introduction

the bar chart. As more technical analysts become comfortable
with candle charts, they will no longer use bar charts." This,
indeed, is what is unfolding.
At the conclusion of my institutional and public seminars, I
often ask the audience, "How many of you will now use bar
charts?" Of the thousands of traders who have taken my seminars, no one has ever raised a hand. If you are new to candles,
you will understand why after reading this book (or even the
first few chapters).
Using candle charts instead of bar charts is a win-win situation. As we will see in the chapter on drawing candle lines,
the same data is required to draw the candle charts as for the
bar charts (open, high, low, and close). This is very significant.
It means that any of the technical analyses used with bar
charts (such as moving averages, trendlines, retracements,
etc.) can be employed with candle charts. But, and this is the
key point, candle charts can send signals not available with
bar charts. This aspect will give you a jump on those who use
only traditional Western charting techniques. By employing
candle charts instead of bar charts, you have the ability to use
all the same analyses as you could use with bar charts. But
candle charts send out insights into the health of the market
that are unavailable anywhere else.

WHO IS THIS BOOK FOR?
This book is for you if :

• Your charting service has candle charts and you want to
unlock their full potential.

• You want to get a jump on the competition.
• You would like to enter and exit the market with better timing.
• You want added value techniques to complement trading
tools you now use.

• You want to have fun while you learn.
• You are new to candle charts or are a seasoned pro.

Chapter 1 • Introduction

SOME BACKGROUND
"Why," I have often asked myself , "has a system that has been

around so long been almost completely unknown in the West?"
Were the Japanese trying to keep it secret? I don't know the
answer to this, but it took years of research to fit all the pieces
together. I was fortunate in several ways. Perhaps my perseverance and serendipity were the unique combination needed
that others did not have.
I became acquainted with a Japanese broker in 1987. One day,
while I was with her in her office, she was looking at one of her
Japanese stock chart books (Japanese chart books are in candle
form ). She exclaimed, "Look, a window." I asked what she was
talking about. She told me a window was the same as a gap in
Western technicals. She went on to explain that while Western
technicians use the expression "filling in the gap," the Japanese
would say "closing the window." She then used other expressions like "doji" and "dark-cloud cover." I was hooked. I spent
the next three years exploring, researching, and analyzing anything I could about candle charts.
It was not easy. My initial education was with the help of a
Japanese broker and through drawing and analyzing candle
charts on my own. Then, thanks to the Market Technicians
Association (MTA)1 library in New York City, I came across a
booklet published by the Nippon Technical Analysts
Association called Analysis of Stock Price in Japan. It was a
Japanese booklet that had been translated into English.
Unfortunately, there were just ten pages on interpreting candle
charts. Nonetheless, I finally had some English candle material.
A few months later, I borrowed a book that provided some
more basic candle charting information. Once again I had found
it at the MTA library. The MTA office manager, Shelley Lebeck,
brought a book back from Japan entitled The Japanese Chart of
Charts by Seiki Shimizu and translated by Greg Nicholson (published by the Tokyo Futures Trading Publishing Co.) back from
Japan. It was an important find since it contained about seventy
pages on candle charts and is written in English.

5

6

Chapter 1 • Introduction

As I discovered, while the book yielded a harvest of information, it took some effort and time to get comfortable with its
concepts. They were all so new. I also had to become comfortable with the Japanese terminology. The writing style was
sometimes obscure. Part of this might have to do with the dif ficulty of translation. The book was originally written in
Japanese about twenty-five years ago for a Japanese audience.
I also found out, when I had my own material translated, that
it is dreadfully difficult to translate such a specialized subject
from Japanese to English.
Nonetheless, I had some written reference material. I carried
the book with me for months, reading and rereading, taking
copious notes, applying the candle methods to the scores of my
hand-drawn candle charts (since there wasn't any candle charting software, all my charts had to be constructed by hand ). I
chewed and grinded away at the new ideas and terminology. I
was fortunate in another way I had the help of the author,
Seiki Shimizu, to answer my many questions. Although Mr.
Shimizu does not speak English, the translator of the book,
Greg Nicholson, graciously acted as our intermediary via fax
messages. The Japanese Chart of Charts provided a base for the
rest of my investigation into candles.
In order to expand my nascent abilities in candle charting
techniques, I sought out Japanese candle practitioners who
would have the time and inclination to speak with me about
the subject. I met a Japanese trader, Morihiko Goto, who had
been using candle charts and who was willing to share his
valuable time and insights. This was exciting enough! Then he
told me that his family had been using candle charts for generations! We spent many hours discussing the history and the
uses of candle charts. He was an invaluable storehouse of
knowledge.
My real treasure trove of information is the Japanese candle
charting literature that I had translated. For this I had the
extreme good fortune to find a translator, Richard Solberg. His
ability to track down all the candle charting books in Japan (to
my knowledge, I have the largest collection outside Japan) and
his translating skills were invaluable.
In December 1989, I authored a two-page article on candle
charts. This was the first information on the subject ever writ-
