
Price

:- R~tio-n~1 :
, Price ,- - 1

1

Bullish News Event

FIGURE 7.3 Efficient market response to bullish news.

Time

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

339

poseful movement, as if the price were being magnetically drawn to the
rational level. Such a movement would be, to some degree, predictable.
Because EMH denies predictability, it must also deny the possibility of
overreactions to news. A hypothetical overreaction to bullish news and a
subsequent systematic movement back to rational levels is illustrated in
Figure 7.4.
By the same logic, EMH must also deny the possibility of underreaction to news, where prices move less than the news justifies. In this case, a
systematic price movement would also develop as prices continued to
trend (drift) toward the new rational level implied by the news. Underreaction to bullish and bearish news events and the resultant nonrandom
movement toward rational value are illustrated in Figure 7.5.
Evidence supporting EMH's prediction that overreactions and underreactions do not occur is presented in the event studies of Eugene Fama. 18
He examined all types of corporate news events such as earnings and dividend announcements, takeovers, mergers, and so forth and found that after an initial, almost instantaneous, nonexploitable price movement
triggered by the news, there was no additional movement. These observations are consistent with EMH's prediction that the markets quickly and
accurately discount news events. 19
A second prediction of EMH is that prices should change only when
news arrives. It follows then, that prices should not change dramatically
in the absence of news or in response to noninformative events. 20 These

Nonrandom Price Movement Back to Rational Price Level

: R;tio-n~i:
I
Price ,1
1

Time

FIGURE 7.4 Overreaction to bullish news (implies nonrandom price movements).

340 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Price
Negative News

-------.

: Rational I
I
Price r1
1
Trend: A Gradual Adjustment to New
Rational Price Level
Time
FIGURE 7.5

Underreaction to news can explain nonrandom trends.

two predictions suggest yet a third that is most crucial to TA. EMH implies that stale information, information already in the public domain,
should have no predictive power and be of no value in making investment profits. Clearly, all information used by TA qualifies as stale. Thus,
EMH predicts that all TA methods should fail. If this were to be confirmed, it's lights out for TA.
The prediction that all stale information strategies should have no
predictive power seems cut and dried until one tries to test it. Recall,
EMH says an investment strategy based on stale information should not
be able to generate excess profits after risk adjustment. So the mere fact
that a strategy based on stale information makes gains is not sufficient to
rebut EMH. To contradict EMH, it must be demonstrated that the gains
are excessive after adjusting for the strategy's risk.
The notion of judging investment strategies on the basis of riskadjusted returns is entirely reasonable. For example, if a strategy makes
20 percent per year and the benchmark makes 10 percent, but the strategy
exposes the investor to three times the risk, the strategy has not beaten
the index after risk adjustment. The question is: How does one define and
quantify risk?
Quantifying risk requires a risk model. The most well known is the
capital asset pricing modeFl (CAPM), which explains systematic differences in the returns of securities in terms of a single risk factor, the security's relative volatility. This is to say, the risk of a stock is quantified by its

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

341

volatility relative to the volatility of the market as a whole. Thus, if a stock
is twice as volatile as the market index, its returns should be twice that of
the market. Such a stock is said to earn excess returns when it earns more
than twice the market return. This approach works well when measuring
the risk of a single stock or a portfolio of long stock positions. However,
CAPM cannot quantify the risk exposures of more complex strategies. In
response to this limitation, capital market theorists have proposed other
risk models. One of the best known is APT (arbitrage pricing theory),
which attributes risk to several independent risk factors. 22
However, EMH advocates have tacitly given themselves the liberty of
cooking up new risk factors whenever they wish. This makes it nearly impossible to refute their claim that stale information strategies cannot
beat the market. For, it is always possible to propose a new risk model
that explains away a strategy's excess returns as compensation for risk.
As explained in Chapter 3, this is not a scientific sin if the risk factor(s)
were identified before the stale information strategy earning excess returns was discovered. However, proposing a new risk factor(s) after a
market-beating strategy has been discovered is nothing more than an ad
hoc hypothesis. This is an eXP.lanation cooked up after the fact for the
specific purpose of immunizing a theory, in this case EMH, from falsification. This practice is frowned upon in science for good reason. Also, as
discussed in Chapter 3, the information content of a scientific theory is
roughly equivalent to the opportunities it presents for falsification. The
unbridled ability to explain away any and all dissonant evidence effectively drains the theory of its information content. Thus, the freedom to
concoct new risk factors to explain each and every investment strategy
that beats the market with stale information effectively reduces EMH to a
meaningless theory.
The evidence confirming the weak form of EMH, which states that
stale prices and indicators derived from them-such as price momentum-are without value, is based on auto-correlation studies. They measure the degree to which price changes are linearly correlated with prior
changes, at various lag intervals. 23 These studies have confirmed that price
changes (Le., returns) are indeed linearly independent. This means that a
linear function of current and past returns cannot be used to predict future returns. 24 Based on these findings, it was concluded by EMH advocates, that security returns are an unpredictable random walk.
However, autocorrelation studies are relatively weak tests in the
sense that they can only detect linear dependencies. Searching for linear structure is merely one way to determine if a time series is behaving
in a nonrandom fashion. Edgar Peters25 and Andrew Lo and A. Craig
MacKinlay 26 have shown that alternative data analysis methods indicate
that financial market time series do not behave like random walks. For

342 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
example, the test statistic used by Lo and McKinlay, called the variance
ratio, can detect more complex (nonlinear) nonrandom behaviors that
would be invisible autocorrelation studies.

CII!\LLENGING EMU
A good theory is consistent in two ways. Its logic is internally consistent
and it is consistent with observed evidence. Thus a theory can be challenged either by showing that it contradicts itself or that it is contradicted
by evidence.
A theory is self-contradicting if it implies or predicts something that
would contradict the theory. An example was given earlier in this chapter:
I showed that a cornerstone premise of popular TA, which asserts that
price perfectly reflects all information, contradicts another of its central
premises, that price contains predictive information.

The Smart versus Dumb Paradox
One implication of market efficiency is that knowledgeable investors
should not be able to earn higher returns than investors who are less
knowledgeable. This follows from the premise that market efficiency
means that whatever information is known or knowable has already been
reflected in security prices. In an efficient market, there is no competitive
advantage to being smart or disadvantage to being dumb.
However, this implication conflicts with another of EMH's assumptions-that the arbitrage activities of rational investors are able to drive
prices toward rational levels. (See the heading titled "The Assumptions of
EMH" later in this chapter.) Arbitrage can only act as an enforcer of rational prices if arbitrageurs have more trading capital and, thus, greater
price-moving power than irrational, dumb investors. Having more trading
capital implies that smart arbitrageurs must have earned higher returns in
the past than less well informed (dumb) investors. Either market prices
are set by the smartest, richest participants or they are not. EMH implies
both. Paradoxical, isn't it!

The Cost of Information Paradox
Another logical inconsistency of EMH has to do with the cost of information. It is reasonable to assume that it costs time, money, and intelligence
to gather information and process it into useful investing strategies. At the
same time EMH contends that such information cannot earn incremental

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

343

returns for investors who incur these costs. Remember, EMH contends
that information is instantly reflected in prices. This implies that no matter how wide or deep the research effort, whatever is discovered will be of
no value.
However, if EMH is correct that there is no payoff for information
gathering and processing, then investors would lack the motivation to
incur the costs of doing so. With no one to dig out the information and
act on it, it would not get reflected in price. In other words, if it is costly
to make markets informationally efficient, investors would be motivated to do it only if they were compensated with excess risk-adjusted
returns. Thus the contradiction-EMH requires that information seekers be compensated for their efforts and simultaneously denies that
they will be.
This paradox is argued persuasively by Grossman and Stiglitz in
their article "On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient Markets."27
They contend that inefficiencies are necessary to motivate rational investors to engage in information gathering and processing. The returns
they earn from the market's pricing errors are compensation for their efforts, which, in turn, have the effect of moving prices toward rational levels. The gains of these rational investors are financed by the losses of
noise traders and liquidity traders. Noise traders are investors who buy
and sell based on signals that they think are infornlative but that are not.
Rational investors also earn profits from the losses of investors who trade
to increase their cash reserves (liquidity traders). One way for the rational
investor to gain would be if there were a delay between the time information is discovered and the time it is reflected in prices, but EMH denies the
possibility of gradual price adjustments. This is yet another logical inconsistency of EMH.
A similar logic applies to the costs of acting on information (e.g., commissions, slippage, bid-asked spreads). Unless investors were compensated for incurring trading costs there would be no point to their trading
activities, which are required by EMH to move the price to its rational
level. The bottom line is that any factor that limits trading-costs to trade,
costs to generate information, the rule that impairs short-selling, and so
forth-limits the ability of the market to attain efficiency. It simply does
not hold logically that there would be no compensation to those engaged
in trading.
The Assumptions of EMU

To appreciate the arguments made by EMH's critics, it is necessary to
understand that EMH rests on three progressively weaker assumptions:
(1) investors are rational, (2) investors' pricing errors are random, and

344 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
(3) there are always rational arbitrage investors to catch any pricing errors. Let's examine each of these in a bit more detail.
First is EMH's contention that investors are, by and large, rational. To
recap, rational investors, in aggregate, are purported to value securities
correctly. This means prices will reflect, as accurately as possible, the present discounted value of a security's future cash flows and risk characteristics. As rational investors learn new inforn1ation, they respond quickly,
bidding up prices when news is good and letting the price fall when news
is bad. As a consequence, security prices adjust, almost instantly, to new
information. 28
Even if this assumption were incorrect, EMH advocates still insist
that prices adjust quickly to rational levels anyway because of their second assumption: The valuation mistakes of individual investors are uncorrelated. This means that if one investor erroneously values a security too
high, that error will be offset by another investor's error of valuing it too
low. Taken in aggregate, these valuation errors are self-canceling and have
an average value of zero. That is to say pricing errors are unbiased. This is
presumed to be true because the error-prone investors are likely to be using different, though useless, investment strategies. Therefore, their actions should be uncorrelated. To put it bluntly, as one foolish investor gets
an uninformative signal to buy, another investment fool is equally likely to
get an uninformative signal to sell. In effect they wind up trading with
each other, leaving prices very close to rational levels.
Moreover, even if this second assumption fails to keep prices at rational levels, EMH invokes yet a third assumption. That is, if the valuation
mistakes of irrational investors turn out to be biased (i.e., have an average value that is greater than or less than zero), arbitrage investors will
come to the rescue. They will notice that prices have systematically diverged from rational values. The arbitrageurs will buy when prices are
too low or sell when they are too high, thus forcing prices back to where
they should be.
In the EMH world, arbitrage is as close as it gets to a free lunch. An arbitrage transaction incurs no risk, requires no capital, and earns a guaranteed return. As envisioned by efficient market advocates, an arbitrage
trade goes something like this: Consider two financial assets, stocks X and
Y, which sell at equal prices and which are equally risky. However, they
have different expected future returns. Obviously, one of the two assets is
improperly priced. If asset X has a higher future return, then to take advantage ofthe mispricing, arbitrageurs would buy asset X while short-selling Y.
With the activities of like-minded arbitrageurs, the price of each stock will
converge to its proper fundamental value. 29 Market efficiency attained in
this manner assumes there are always arbitrageurs ready, willing, and able
to jump on these opportunities. The better ones become very wealthy,

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

345

thereby enhancing their ability to drive prices to proper levels, while the
irrational investors eventually go broke losing their ability to push prices
away from equilibrium levels. The uninformed, irrational investors are driven out of the market the way a weak species is driven from an ecosystem, while the rational, well-informed arbitrageurs thrive.

Flaws in EM" Assumptions
This section considers each of the assumptions of EMH and how they
miss the mark.
Investors Arc Rational. Investors do not appear to be as rational as
EMH assumes. Many investors react to irrelevant information, what noted
economist Fischer Black calls "noise signals."3o Though they think they
are acting intelligently, these investors can expect to earn the same return
as an investor who buys and sells based on a coin flip. Investors who follow the advice of financial gurus who base their advice on noise signals
are noise traders by proxy.
In fact, investors are guilty of numerous departures from rationality.
For exanlple, they fail to diversify, they trade too actively, they increase
their tax liabilities by selling appreciated stocks but hold onto losing positions, and they trade mutual funds with high fees. Moreover, their failures
are recurring. "Investors' deviations from the maxims of economic rationality turn out to be highly pervasive and systematic. "31 These departures
from rationality can be classified into three areas: inaccurate risk assessments, poor probability judgments, and irrational decision framing. I discuss each of these in turn.
Investors typically do not assess risks in confornlity with the normative ideal put forward by Neumann and Morgenstern, known as "expected
utility theory." In a perfectly rational world, an individual faced with
choosing among several options selects the one with the highest expected
value. The expected value of a particular choice is equal to a sum of products, where each product is the probability of each possible outcome multiplied by the value or utility of that outcome to the decision maker. The
problem is people do not actually behave this way. Research has shown
that investors make numerous systematic errors when assessing risks and
making choices.
These mistakes have been incorporated into a framework called
Prospect Theory, which was proposed by Kahneman and Tversky (1979).32
It explains how people actually make decisions under conditions of uncertainty. For example, it explains that investors hold onto losing stocks but
sell profitable positions to avoid the psychic pain of realizing a loss. It also
explains why investors overvalue low-probability long-shot speculations.

346 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
The second way investors depart from the rational ideal of EMH is in
their judgments of probability. EMH assumes that, as investors receive
new information, they update their probability assessments in accordance
with Bayes' theorem, a formula for combining probabilities in a theoretically correct way. However, to their detriment, investors do not behave
this way. One common error, discussed in Chapter 2, is the crime of small
numbers-drawing grand conclusions from small samples of data. This
explains why investors will rashly conclude that a corporation with a
short string of successful quarterly earnings reports is likely to continue
to grow rapidly. Their overreaction to this small sample of positive earnings changes causes the stock to become overpriced.
Lastly, investors' decisions can be strongly impacted by how choices
are described (framed). By incorrectly framing a decision situation, investors tend to misperceive the true expected value of a choice. For example, when choices are framed in terms of potential gains, investors tend
to choose the option most likely to earn a gain, even if it is insignificant in
size. However, when the same choices are framed in tenns of potential
losses, investors will assume the risk of a very significant loss just to avoid
the certainty of a small loss. This error, called the "disposition effect," is
thought to explain why investors sell winners quickly, so as to be sure to
earn a gain, even if it's small, but hold on to losers even if it means there is
a chance the loss will turn into a much larger one.
InvcstOl' Errors Arc Unconclatcd. The assumption that investors'
errors are uncorrelated is contradicted by psychological research which
shows people do not deviate from rationality randomly in situations characterized by uncertainty. In reality, most people tend to make similar mistakes in such situations and hence their deviations from rationality are
correlated. Many investors will be tempted to buy the same stock because
the stock appeals to a common heuristic rule of judgment that makes it
look like a candidate for further appreciation. For example, a company
that has three positive earning quarters can be perceived by many investors to be a growth stock that warrants a high price-to-earnings ratio or
PIE. This problem is made worse by social interactions, or herding, between investors. "They follow each other's mistakes listening to rumors
and imitating the actions of their fellow traders. "33
Money managers, who should know better, make these mistakes as
well. They are guilty of creating portfolios that are excessively close to
the benchmarks against which they are measured, all in an effort to reduce the chance they will underperform. Professional money managers
also engage in imitative behavior and move herd-like into the same
stocks, for fear of falling behind the pack. They dress up their portfolios

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

347

by adding stocks that have done well and eliminate those that have not,
so year-end portfolio reports show the fund invested in the highest performing stocks.
Arbitrage Forces Prices to Rational Levels. This assumption
fails because the power of arbitrage activities to push prices toward rationallevels is limited. First, no one rings a bell when securities become mispriced. The rational price is the discounted value of a stream of future
cash flows, which is, by definition, uncertain. Investors try to estimate future earnings, but their forecasts are prone to significant error.
Second, arbitrageurs do not have unlimited tolerance for adverse
price movement-for example, when an underpriced stock that has
been purchased continues to go lower, or an overpriced security that
has been sold short continues to soar. The actions of noise traders can
easily push prices further away from rational levels before they return
to them. Therefore, even if an arbitrageur spots a truly mispriced security, the pricing error may grow larger before it is finally eradicated.
Should this adverse price movement become too large, the arbitrageur
may have to close the position with a loss. If this happens often enough,
the noise traders can drive rational investors out of business. This is referred to as noise trader risk 34 and it limits the motivation and commitments of arbitrage traders. Behavioral finance expert Andre Shleifer
says even an arbitrage trade that looks nearly perfect from the outside
is in reality quite risky so the number of investors who go after it will be
limited. The bottom line is arbitrage activities cannot always enforce
rational pricing.
Noise trader risk was a factor in the blow-up of the Long Term Capital
Management (LTCM) hedge fund in the fall of 1998. The fund's crash
nearly took the entire financial market with it. Ultimately, the mispricings
that LTCM had identified were corrected, but because they had overleveraged their positions, the fund lacked the staying power to hold its positions through a short-term period of even greater mispricing.
Improper use of leverage is yet another factor that can impair the
role arbitrage plays in driving markets to efficiency. Thus, even if arbitrageurs can accurately identify over- and under-priced securities, if
they use too much leverage they can get wiped out. There is an optimal
leverage for favorable bets (i.e., speculations with a positive expectancy).35 If this level is exceeded, the probability of ruin rises despite the positive expectation.
I show this to my students during a class I call Casino Night. We playa
game in which everyone starts off with an imaginary $100. I have a friend
come in to act as coin flipper. Before each flip, the students determine what
