dividends, yet another market for the 2008 aggregate S&P dividends, and in
fact markets for all subsequent aggregate dividends up to the horizon, say
twenty years, and then a market for the terminal index value (say, in 2025).
Brennan argued that such markets would “provide an incentive for analysts
to concentrate on forecasting those fundamentals [future dividends] . . . rather
than to concentrate on simply forecasting the level of the market itself. In

SPEC U L AT I V E V O L ATIL ITY IN A F RE E S O CIE TY

233

addition, since the level of the market index must be consistent with the prices
of the future dividend flows, the relation between these will serve to reveal the
implicit assumptions the market is making in arriving at its valuation. These
assumptions will then be the focus of attention and debate.”7 In recent years,
a number of dividend futures have appeared on European markets, though
they are not yet influential enough to satisfy Brennan’s objectives.
Progress in financial technology may seem at times to be slow, but in fact
history shows that major new economic institutions do eventually develop
from seemingly slow beginnings. A process of experimentation with new
institutional forms encounters many obstacles and setbacks, but we should
not interpret these as problems for the long run. Eventually, we learn how to
deal with them. The rate of experimentation with, and research on, financial
institutions has been increasing over the decades, and advanced information technology that exploits broader databases and reduces the cost of new
financial services is being used more extensively.

The Public Should Be Helped to Hedge Risks
To encourage proper risk management, the advice given by public authorities should stress more effective hedging of risks. I have argued in this book
that people are ultimately highly influenced by the perceived wisdom of
experts—the “they say that . . .” authorities—and they will not carry out risk
management well unless experts encourage them to do so.
While financial experts today are typically extolling diversification, they
do not stress what genuine risk management really means. Many people still
think that they have done all they can if they hold stock in a good number
of companies in their own country’s stock market. They must invest more
broadly than that, and, in fact, to achieve true diversification, they must also
pay attention to other existing risks.
In addition, new institutions should be created that would make it easier
for individuals to get out of their exposure to the stock market or the housing
market. The institutions we have—such as short sales, stock index futures,
put options, as well as home price futures—are not particularly user friendly,
and most investors do not avail themselves of these. Many investors today
feel themselves locked into their holdings because of the capital‑gains‑tax
consequences of selling and their inability to find other ways of reducing
their exposure.
People have to be encouraged by experts to understand that true diversification largely means offsetting the risks that they are already locked into.8
This means investing in assets that help insure their labor incomes, in assets
that tend to rise in value when their labor income declines, or at least that do
not tend to move in the same direction. This objective can be fulfilled today

234

A C ALL T O AC TION

by taking positions in existing assets that are found to correlate negatively
(or at least less positively) with specific labor incomes.9 It also means investing in assets that help insure the equity in their homes, in assets that tend to
rise in value when their home value declines. Since labor income and home
equity account for the great bulk of most people’s wealth, offsetting the risks
to these is the critical function of risk management.
For example, in my 2008 book Subprime Solution, I proposed that there
should be an alternative mortgage type, that I called a Continuous Workout
Mortgage, offering homeowners a preplanned workout (reduction in the
principal they owe if home prices fall) that is not one-time-only, but that
adapts continuously to changing housing market conditions.10 Further work
with my colleagues Rafał M. Wojakowski, M. Shahid Ebrahim, and Mark B.
Shackleton is ironing out some of the details of these possible new mortgages.
Issuers of such mortgages can hedge the risks they incur writing them in the
home price futures market.11
Although hedging is a time‑honored practice in business risk management,
it is still today foreign to most people’s thinking. Few nonprofessionals could
even define the term today. Discussion of how investment returns correlate
with incomes or with home prices is almost totally absent from public discourse on investments.
It is difficult to change this mindset, since the public has so much invested
in the conventional wisdom today and in the notion that one can amass
great wealth through stock market or real estate investments. The personal
investment media typically feature the opinions of celebrity sources who
are apparently already rich and who subtly suggest that their advice might
make one rich too. It would be inconsistent with this fantasy to start talking
about the mundane task of defending the value of the assets one already
has. Those in the media and the investment community often do not want
to risk disturbing the get‑rich fantasy, which they have learned to exploit to
their own advantage. But attitudes can be changed if public opinion leaders
take it upon themselves to stress the changes in thinking that must be made.
Once it becomes a “they say that . . .” item, people will routinely take proper
steps to hedge their existing wealth, much as they routinely buy homeowners
insurance today.

Policy Addressing Saving and Retirement Planning
Should Be Realistic about Bubbles
There has been an unfortunate tendency for financial advisers to assume that
expected returns in major asset classes are constant through time, in accord­
ance with simple efficient markets models, and hence to issue no warnings to
those who make saving and retirement plans at times of overvalued markets.

SPEC U L AT I V E V O L ATIL ITY IN A F RE E S O CIE TY

235

Over much of the course of the Millennium Boom of 1982–2000 and the
Ownership-Society Boom from 2003 to 2007, the personal saving rate in the
United States declined as the stock market rose, and as, after 1997, the housing
market rose, giving people the spurious impression that they did not need to
save. The personal saving rate was 12.0% of income at the bottom of the U.S.
stock market in July 1982. By November 1996, when the housing boom first
showed signs of picking up, it had fallen to 5.8% of income. At the top of the
stock market before the financial crisis (near the top of the housing market
as well), October 2007, it had fallen to 2.9% of income. Of course, when both
stock and housing prices fell sharply, people increased their saving rate
sharply, even though, with lower incomes and higher unemployment, it was
harder to save. The personal saving rate rose back up to 8.1% by the worst of
the financial crisis, May 2009.12
Moreover, those in charge of defined benefit pension plans underfunded
their plans, thinking that fabulous stock market returns on their investments
would provide generously for the retirees they would be responsible for in
the future. During the complacency of a boom, it is easy to get away with
underfunding pension plans.
We saw the painful consequences of this play out in the years after the
bursting of the Millennium Bubble in 2000 and after the bursting of the
Ownership-Society Bubble in 2007. Defined benefit pension funds had been
grossly underfunded with the blithe assumption that financial markets would
do as well as expected despite a very high price-earnings ratio (especially as
measured by the CAPE). At a time of complacency during the booms, state
and local politicians did not want to address the need to raise taxes to better
fund their pension plans. With this complacency, labor unions as well did
not bargain aggressively for better funding. The assumption was that further
stock market price increases would provide generously for the retiring Baby
Boomers, so provisions to fund them well were not needed. The result was
disastrous, as state and local governments, facing the need to bolster their
retirement funds, cut back on teachers and police officers, and contributed to
the depth of the recession by increasing their saving at the worst possible time.
The U.S. Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC), which had been
created by an act of Congress in 1974 to accumulate a trust fund to insure
workers with private pension plans against losing their pension income when
their plan sponsors run out of money, was looking at imminent failure after
the Ownership-Society Boom ended, until it was at least temporarily saved
by the New-Normal Boom of 2009–2014. But their problems remain unsolved
unless the stock market continues to boom. The PBGC, as of its fiscal 2013
Projections Report issued in 2014, was using a Pension Insurance Modeling
System (PIMS) with an assumed geometric average rate of return for pension
plans of 6.1%, which appears unrealistically high, given the high pricing in the

236

A C ALL T O AC TION

stock market and low bond yields. Even with this optimistic PIMS assumption,
in their own 2013 report, the PGBC warned of a likely bankruptcy of their
support for multi-employer plans at current premium levels by 2019, and with
a 90% probability by 2025.13
At the time of this writing, in 2014, with very high stock market valuations
and rising real estate valuations, we run the risk of repeating these mistakes
again. The U.S. personal saving rate, benefiting from stimulus that is trying
to boost it to stimulate the economy, is, at 4.8% with the latest data, still low. It
will have to be increased once the economy recovers more fully. Even today,
the U.S. government can contribute indirectly to saving by launching public
infrastructure investment stimulus programs, which would be very timely,
as it can borrow at virtually zero real interest rates to fund them.
Currently (2014), most people are not saving enough for their future, and
pension funds are likely not building up enough new funds. The lesson for
individual investors at this point of time from very high valuation of the stock
market is not to pull investments massively out of the market in favor of bonds,
for bond yields are also very low. Rather, the lesson for individuals is to not
be lulled into more complacency by past investment successes, to remember
that the level of returns we have seen in the past few years is unlikely to
continue. The lesson for governments is to promote economic stimulus and
infrastructure investments in public goods, taking advantage of their ability
to borrow at low rates to invest in the future.

Promoting Good Policy toward Speculative Volatility
The problems posed for policy makers by the tendency for speculative markets
to show occasional bubbles are deep ones. They will have to take full account
of our evolving understanding of the nature of these bubbles when formulating measures to deal with the problems these bubbles cause. Unfortunately,
the nature of the bubbles is sufficiently complex and changeable that experts
can never expect to prove the particular role of any given policy in bringing
about our objective of long‑term economic welfare.
Policies that interfere with markets by shutting them down or limiting
them, although under some very specific circumstances apparently useful,
probably should not be high on our list of solutions to the problems caused by
speculative bubbles. Speculative markets perform critical resource‑allocation
functions (a point I have taken for granted and have not focused on in this
book), and any interference with markets to tame bubbles interferes with
these functions as well.
Ultimately, in a free society, the government cannot protect people from all
the consequences of their own errors. The government cannot protect people
completely without denying them the possibility of achieving their own

SPEC U L AT I V E V O L ATIL ITY IN A F RE E S O CIE TY

237

fulfillment. And, the government cannot completely protect society from the
effects of waves of irrational exuberance or irrational pessimism—emotional
reactions that are themselves part of the human condition.
Policies to deal with speculative volatility are a little like policies to deal
with political instability. We worry that a political party appealing to baser
instincts or rash judgments will gain control. But we do not deal with this risk
by shutting down certain political parties in times of unrest or by taxing their
activities. Instead, we rely on the complete freedom of all political parties to
express themselves, and we expect that common sense will ultimately prevail
among voters. This good outcome is achieved by designing, and continually
improving, rules for campaigns and elections.
By analogy, most of the thrust of our national policies to deal with speculative bubbles should take the form of facilitating more free trade, as well as
greater opportunities for people to take positions in more and freer markets.
A good outcome can be achieved by designing better forms of social insurance
and creating better financial institutions to allow the real risks to be managed
more effectively. The most important thing to keep in mind whenever we
experience tumult in the markets is that we should not let it distract us from
such important tasks.14

Appendix

Nobel Prize Lecture: Speculative Asset Prices

I

will start this lecture with some general
thoughts on the determinants of long-term
asset prices, such as stock prices or home prices: what, ultimately, drives these
prices to change as they do from time to time, and how can we interpret
these changes? I will consider the discourse in the profession about the role
of rationality in the formation of these prices and the growing trend toward
behavioral finance and, more broadly, behavioral economics, the increasing acceptance of the importance of alternative psychological, sociological,
and epidemiological factors as affecting prices. I will focus on the statistical
methods that allow us to learn about the sources of price volatility in the stock
market and the housing market, and evidence that has led to the behavioral
finance revolution in financial thought in recent decades.
The broader purpose here is to appreciate the promise of financial technology.
There is a great deal of popular skepticism about financial institutions afoot
these days, after the financial and economic crisis that has dragged on ever since
the severest days in 2008. I want to consider the possibilities for the future of
finance in general terms, rather than focusing on current stopgap measures to
deal opportunistically with symptoms of our current economic crisis. The talk
about the rationality of markets is a precursor to this talk of financial technology, for it underpins our notions of the possibilities that new technology offers.

This is a substantial revision (February 19, 2014) of the lecture I gave for the Sveriges Riksbank
Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, on December 8, 2013, www.nobelprize
.org/mediaplayer/index.php?id=1996.
239

240

APPENDIX

I will conclude that the markets have already been “human-factorsengineered” to function remarkably well, and that as we improve our understanding of the kind of psychology that leads to bubbles and related problems,
we can further innovate to improve the functioning of these markets.

Price Volatility, Rational Expectations, and Bubbles
The history of thought in financial markets has shown a surprising lack of
consensus about a very fundamental question: what ultimately causes all
those fluctuations in the price of speculative assets like corporate stocks,
commodities, or real estate? One might think that so basic a question would
long ago have been confidently answered. But the answer to this question is
not so easily found.1
At the same time, there has been an equally widespread acceptance in
other quarters of the idea that markets are substantially driven by psychology.
Indeed, since 1991 Richard Thaler and I have been directors of the National
Bureau of Economic Research program in behavioral economics, which has
featured hundreds of papers that seem mostly at odds with a general sense
of rationality in the markets.2
The term “speculative bubble” is often used and applied carelessly. The
word “bubble” first became popular at the time of the Mississippi Bubble in
European stock markets that came to an end in 1720, a time often mentioned
as one of craziness, but whether that period is best described as one of wild
irrationality still remains controversial; see Garber (2000) and Goetzmann et
al. (2013). I would say that a speculative bubble is a peculiar kind of fad or
social epidemic that is regularly seen in speculative markets: not a wild orgy
of delusions but a natural consequence of the principles of social psychology
coupled with imperfect news media and information channels. In the second
edition of my book Irrational Exuberance I offered a definition of “bubble” that
I thought represents the term’s best use:
A situation in which news of price increases spurs investor enthusiasm, which
spreads by psychological contagion from person to person, in the process
amplifying stories that might justify the price increases and bringing in a larger
and larger class of investors, who, despite doubts about the real value of an
investment, are drawn to it partly through envy of others’ successes and partly
through a gambler’s excitement.

1 There is a similarly disconcerting lack of consensus in the economics profession over what
drives fluctuations from quarter to quarter in aggregate economic activity, as measured by
gross domestic product; see Shiller (1987), Akerlof and Shiller (2009).
2 http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/behfin/index.htm.

NO B E L P R I Z E L E C T URE : S P E CUL ATIVE AS S E T P RIC ES

241

At the center of my definition are the epidemic spread, the emotions of investors, and the nature of the news and information media. Bubbles are not, to my
mind, about the craziness of investors. They are rather about how investors
are buffeted en masse from one superficially plausible theory about conventional valuation to another. One thinks of how a good debater can take either
side of many disputes and, if the debater on the other side has weak skills,
can substantially convince the audience of either side. College debate teams
demonstrate this phenomenon regularly, and they do it by suppressing certain facts and amplifying and embellishing others. In the case of bubbles, the
sides are changed from time to time by the feedback of price changes, with
the proliferation, caused by price increases, of reminders of basic facts that a
debater might use to defend the bubble. The news media are even better at
presenting cases than are typical college debaters.
Investing ideas can spread like epidemics. Economists traditionally have
not shown much interest in epidemiology, sociology, social psychology, or
communications and journalism, and it takes some effort for them to consider
such alien academic traditions.
There is a troublesome split between efficient markets enthusiasts (who
believe that market prices accurately incorporate all public information, and
so doubt that bubbles even exist) and those who believe in behavioral finance
(who tend to believe that bubbles and other such contradictions to efficient
markets can be understood only with reference to other social sciences, such as
psychology). I suspect that some of the apparent split is illusory, deriving from
the problem that there is no widely accepted definition of the term “bubble.”
The metaphor might suggest that speculative bubbles always burst suddenly
and irrevocably, as soap bubbles seem to do, without exception. That would
be silly, for history does not generally support the catastrophic burst notion.
Though the abrupt ends of stock market booms in 1929, 2000, and 2007 might
seem consonant with such a metaphor, these booms were reflated again before
long (1933–37, 2003–7, and 2009–present, respectively).
I think that the eventuality of a sudden irrevocable burst is not essential
to the general term “speculative bubble” as the phrase is appropriately used.
The metaphor may be misleading: it suggests more drama than there in fact is,
imparting a sense of uniqueness to current events, which might help explain
the popularity of the term with news reporters vying for the attention of
readers. Just as reporters like to stir people up by reporting that an index has
hit another record high (disregarding the fact that record highs occur quite
often, especially since reporters hardly ever correct for inflation), so too they
like to suggest the possibility of a collapse in the offing that will be remembered many years later.
I sometimes wish we had a different metaphor. One might consider substituting the term “wind trade” (Dutch Windhandel), a term that was used during

242

APPENDIX

the tulip mania, the famous boom and bust in tulip prices in the early 1600s.
The reference to trading in mere air seems more apt than the evocation of a
fragile bubble.
Curiously, in his Nobel Lecture in Medicine during the 2013 Nobel Week
in Stockholm, James E. Rothman (2013) invoked soap bubbles too, for their
analogy to the cell vesicles that were the focus of his Nobel Prize research. He
showed a movie of two soap bubbles being pressed together, and, surprisingly
to most of us, they did not burst but merged into a single larger bubble. That’s
analogous to what cell vesicles can do, he said. It led me to wonder whether
we could say that the stock market bubble and the housing bubble of the early
2000s somehow merged into a larger bubble that burst around 2008, touching
off widespread financial crisis. Imaginative thinking is fun, and maybe even
inspirational, but we cannot let the bubble metaphor, or any simple analogy,
guide our models beyond the very beginnings, for any metaphor will break
down if we carry it to its absurd conclusions.

Efficient Markets Theory
From the very beginning, in his 1964 PhD dissertation, written under the
supervision of Merton Miller and Harry Roberts, Eugene Fama found that
stock prices are not very forecastable. He found then that the average correlation coefficient between successive days’ log price changes over the thirty Dow
Jones Industrial Average stocks between 1957 and 1962 was only 0.03, which he
described as “probably unimportant for both the statistician and the investor.”3
The same year saw the appearance of Paul Cootner’s The Random Character of
Stock Market Prices, which reached similar conclusions about market efficiency.
The “efficient markets theory,” widely attributed to Fama (1970) and the
academic work that he stimulated, maintains that prices have a rational basis in
terms of fundamentals like the optimal forecast of earnings, or assessments of
the standard deviation of risk factors facing corporations. As the theory went,
because they are rationally determined, they are changed from day to day
primarily by genuine news, which is by its very nature essentially unforecastable. Fama’s work propelled an efficient markets revolution in finance. I was
part of the movement then, less than a decade later, with my PhD dissertation
(1972) about the efficiency of the long-term bond market.
