
book_c16.qxd

12/20/06

2:34 PM

Page 157

Back to Where It All Began

FIGURE 16.4

157

Harry’s reminder.

ON A ROLL
My wife was satisfied that I had returned to work to make right what I had
done wrong. She had never felt great about me leaving a stable job in the
first place. Now that I was going to earn back the money I had lost and
would have instruction not only from Harvey, but maybe from Anderson
and the people at Ernest Wellington, we both knew that that I would learn
how to trade better—I was on the right track.
The next day I arrived a full hour early for work, filed my way straight
through the morning without a break and then skipped lunch to submit a
classified ad (to start the search for my replacement). I was working without the help of Scott or interns, but I found that I liked getting things done
by myself. I realized that as a manager of the filing system, I had become
very lazy.
By 5:00 P.M. I was on a roll. I researched a new computer-based filing
management system and took notes on the cost, called the company that
sold the program, and left a message, and organized a huge stack of case
files that lawyers had probably thought were lost forever. I refiled the depositions, letters, transcripts, and who knows what else from the past four
weeks of the Anderson case and found that Scott had made a lot of mistakes, or had clumsily returned things where he shouldn’t have, as he was

book_c16.qxd

12/20/06

158

2:34 PM

Page 158

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

selling off information to the news or to the opposing counsel. I didn’t stop
to wonder at all where Scott was. He was old news and I was happy that
we had left on reasonably good terms.
By 7:00 P.M., I had to pull myself away from work and nearly forgot to
visit the 31st floor. As promised, the night security guard had a badge for
me when I showed up and it worked perfectly. The floor was just as empty
as it had been the day before, with probably 15 people that I could see, sitting at their desks. A few of them were playing cards and the others were
surfing the web. None of them were trading.
Near the back corner of the room, only about 20 feet from Craig’s desk,
a computer was set up where there hadn’t been one the day before. The
desks to either side were empty, without computers or monitors or
phones. A note from Anderson told me that the desk was mine to use, that
I should call the tech support guys if I needed to load software onto the
machine, and that I should make myself at home.
Next to the note from Anderson was a note from someone named Alistair Martin. It said:
“Harry: sweet trade on the Euro! Thanks for the idea!”
Who was Alistair Martin? I looked up, toward the desk where I’d sat
the night before. Then I realized that I’d left my Post-it note on the desk of
a currency trader named Ellen Hansell, and that she had taken the trade,
probably with Anderson’s approval. I immediately punched some keys on
the computer (realizing that I had become very comfortable with a computer, without having even noticed it before) and pulled a chart to see
where the Euro had traded that day (Figure 16.5).
To say that I amazed myself is an understatement. I shocked myself.
For five minutes, I just looked at the chart from several different angles.
Was I looking at it correctly? Did I really plan that trade? Had I actually analyzed the charts, picked an entry, a stop, and a profit target? Without
blowing up an account? I wondered how much money Alistair Martin had
made using my idea. If Alistair was trading one-million-dollar positions,
then the 120 pips had made him twelve thousand dollars. If he had traded a
five-million-dollar position, then he had made sixty thousand. The numbers amazed me.
I decided that the long-term charts worked better for me, after all. Harvey was right from the beginning, and I never should have looked at the
shorter time frames, which only tempted me to jump into quick positions.
The short-term charts appealed to my greed. The long-term charts required
patience, rewarded analysis, and produced in one trade more profit than
any of the short-term trades I’d seen.

book_c16.qxd

12/20/06

2:34 PM

Page 159

Back to Where It All Began

FIGURE 16.5

159

Harry looks at Euro trades.

I thought of Mindy at George Sisler’s hedge fund. It occurred to me that
she could benefit from switching to a long-term view, if in fact George was
going to require more of her, as Harvey suggested. It made sense to me anyway. Why trade over one hundred times in one day, just to achieve the
same profits in one trade by careful study on the long-term charts?
Next I determined that if the system of support and resistance that I’d
traded worked before, then it would work again. And if I was tempted to
look at a different time frame, I’d select an even longer time frame than the
four-hour charts. But first I had some questions.
The first trader I found sitting about twenty feet in front of me was actively engaged in a game of rolling dice against another trader who was obviously working very hard, and not at his desk. Both of them were dressed
casually. Neither one was a day over 30 years old. I supposed, from what I
learned about traders so far, that their youngish looks and apparent lack of
concern for the market had nothing to do with their skills as trader. I
started to think that the better the trader, the less the person would actually look like a trader. Or what I expected a trader to look like. Or, more
yet, what I expected a trader would be doing. In fact, what did these guys
do all day? Why were they even here? I wondered.
“Hi Harry,” the first trader said. “Watcha doin?” He spoke with a Canadian accent.
“Hi. I have some questions. If you don’t mind. I hope I’m not interrupting anything important.”

book_c16.qxd

12/20/06

160

2:34 PM

Page 160

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

“Not at all, Mr. Banes,” the other answered. “We’re just here manning
some open positions.” This one spoke forcefully with a British accent. His
voice had a tone of confidence, and this impressed me. I wanted to speak
like that. I wanted to be sure of myself like that, especially when trading.
Confidence seemed to play a big role in trading success. After making a
mental note to ask Craig or Anderson or Harvey about it, I asked: “Is there
any reason that switching from a four-hour chart to a daily chart would
make a big difference? As long as I am following the same system?”
The Brit didn’t even look up. He shook his head. I think he took me for
an amateur (which I could not dispute) and didn’t seem to care one way or
the other if I got my answer. The Canadian seemed completely willing to
help and replied happily: “Not really. What works on the four-hour ought to
work on the daily. But you should go back in time and test it to make sure.”
That seemed reasonable to me, although I had no idea how I might go
about doing such testing. I was going to ask another question, but the
Canadian beat me to it: “If you’re going to trade from the daily, you’re really
going for the bigger moves. That’s where you can get a big piece of the action, if you can ride along for the swings. A lot of traders here are taking a
harder look at the long-term charts for that reason. More profit, less work.
And you trade from home, right? Well, it’s obviously much easier since you
are only going to have to look at the chart once a day. Or at least, you’re
going to center your planning time around 5:00 P.M. Eastern Time, when the
New York session is completely over and the daily candle closes.”
Once a day? That made sense. If I planned my support and resistance
trades on a daily chart—then I would only really be looking at the charts
when the daily candle closed. And now I knew that it closed at 5:00 P.M. I
would later learn that in the 24-hour world of currency trading, 5:00 P.M.
Eastern Time represented the end of one day and the beginning of the next.
At that time, a new day was starting in Asia and a workday was ending in
New York. So it made sense if I looked at it from a worldwide standpoint.
I couldn’t remember any more questions, so I stood and watched them
roll the dice a few times. The Brit chimed in: “Want a piece of the action,
Harryboy?”
“Not really. What’s at stake here?”
The Canadian laughed. “This game is called ‘paycheck,’ Harry. He’s got
me for two paychecks right now. It’s a simple game: I roll three times and
add up the total. Then Roddy here makes a bet. He bets either that he can
beat the total in one roll, in two rolls, or in three rolls. One roll is called a
‘one bet,’ two rolls a ‘two bet,’ and three rolls, a ‘three bet,’ or the ‘wussbet,’
and you can figure out why we call it that. If he makes a three bet, and he
wins, then he owes me nothing and I owe him nothing and I get to roll
again. If he loses the three bet, as we call it here at EW, then he pays me
half a paycheck. If he makes a 2 bet and wins, he wins half of my next pay-

book_c16.qxd

12/20/06

2:34 PM

Page 161

Back to Where It All Began

161

check and gets to roll next. Now he would only make a one bet or a two bet
if the numbers say he can win with those, of course. Follow me?”
“Sure. I get it.” This was madness. It was 8:00 P.M. on a Thursday night
and they were rolling dice to win more money from each other than I
would make in two months.
“Now about the one bet,” he continued, in his Canadian accent, “That’s
where it gets interesting. If Roddy wins a one bet, he gets my next paycheck and he gets to roll for the next two turns, no matter if I win or lose.
If he loses, he owes me his next paycheck and loses a turn.”
I thought: Yes, they’re insane. How much money could they possibly
have?
I started to leave when the Brit spoke up: “Hey, Banes! How about that
trade today? How far you think it can go? You think it can get down to
1.2000? The round numeral, as I like to call it?”
“I don’t know,” I replied. “My target was 1.2080. Where’s it trading
now?”
He leaned over to his keyboard and punched it in. “It’s still hanging
out in the high 2000s. But I think it can make a second drop lower. I’m
stayin’ in.”
“You took the trade?” I asked.
“Yeah, sure I did. I heard all about you. You’re working with Harvey, the
Winklemeister. Everyone here took the trade. Just about every desk you
see here, they all wanted to take the trade—small or large, didn’t matter.
Some of these guys only trade the crosses, you know, the EUR/JPY, the
GBP/CHF, and so on. So they didn’t take it. But I did. So did Winnipeg
George.”
“Does Anderson know you all took it?” I asked.
“Heck yeah,” he shot back, obviously thinking I was a moron for not
knowing that already. “Anderson knew about it. He signed off on every one
of us taking it. It was a fine trade, Harry. You made me some excellent coin
today. Cheers!”
“Cheers!” I replied, and then I forgot all my other questions.
What? I thought.
Whump! It hit me on the head as hard as those bad trades had hit. But
this time it was a much better whump! It was the whumping that you get in
your heart when you are first kissed. Only I had been kissed by sweet, redemptive pippage. Who knows how much money I’d made for these people
here? One-million-dollar positions times 10, 20 traders? Or more? Multiplied by a hundred pips or more?
I recollected my brains and then walked back to my temporary trading
desk. I didn’t try to act nonchalant about it. If I could have skipped back to
the desk, I would have done it. My duty now was to find more of these
trades. Had it been a one-time-only thing? Had I just been lucky because

book_c16.qxd

12/20/06

2:34 PM

Page 162

162

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Craig had tipped me off to the idea in the first place, and Harvey had confirmed it? Could I repeat this?
I opened up the daily chart for the Euro and went to work.

COULD I DO IT AGAIN?
What surprised me more wasn’t that my idea had been used by real Wall
Street traders (okay, it was not fully my idea, but it sure felt like it at the
time and I needed a boost in confidence), but rather that something as simple as a support/resistance line was powerful enough to create pips. It was
a drug to me: I wanted more of it. Did other currency pairs act like this?
Could I do the same thing on others? What about those cross currency
pairs that Roddy had mentioned, like the EUR/JPY?
The good news was that I didn’t need to worry about all that right
away. For now, I could focus on the four-hour, and even the daily charts. I
could start to understand what Harvey was talking about when he said
testing: He was asking me to focus and study one thing. I didn’t quite know
how to start doing that, but I was determined to try. If I didn’t get it right,
then I wouldn’t see him again.
The moves on the daily chart were much bigger—just like Winnipeg
George said—so I would have to plan for wider stop losses and could gain
greater profits from those moves as well. That must have been why Harvey
was so intent on having me concentrate on the long-term stuff. Greater potential for more reward, for the same effort. Sounded good to me. The fourhour and the daily and the EUR/USD would do just fine for now.
Then I asked myself a series of questions, inspired by Roddy: How far
might the Euro fall downward? Where was it likely to stall? Could I find an
area, just like 1.2200, only lower? Some area where the currency pair had
experienced trouble moving higher or lower?
The four-hour chart was no help at all. I could see some areas that
might stall the pair above 1.2200, but not below it. And I needed to find a
good stopping point on the downside. So I moved to the daily chart and
found something that I really liked (see Figure 16.6).
It definitely appeared that 1.1850 was a meaningful number. On the
left-hand part of the chart, back in May and June 2003, the currency pair
had struggled to rise above that level. Then in October of the same year, it
couldn’t break above it at all. Then in November, as it was finally gaining
enough strength to pierce the level, it still stalled there for several days,
and still surely produced some nice moves back and forth. In all, I found
five solid examples of the pair bouncing off that level between May and October 2003.

book_c16.qxd

12/20/06

2:34 PM

Page 163

Back to Where It All Began

FIGURE 16.6

163

The daily chart.

I wanted to choose this level for a profit target. But was this enough research? I looked back at the current chart. How could I know that is where
it would stop? The night before, my planning had started with a number
that Craig and Harvey had given me, and then I backed into a reason for
justifying a trade at that number. But this was entirely different. Would I be
willing to write this number down on a Post-it? And leave it on my desk?
More confirmation. I wanted more confirmation. I needed another
chart to back me up.
So I looked at the weekly chart, but it was no help at all. It showed that
in October 1998, the pair had some trouble with the 1.1850 mark. But had
the Euro even existed back then? How could they do charts for a currency
pair that didn’t exist?
I deleted the weekly chart and wondered what Harvey would do in a
situation like this. I decided that first of all, he most certainly would not
risk losing money on this trade. So I definitely wasn’t going to suggest a
buy trade with a stop and a profit target. No way. But would it be appropriate to express my view that I thought the EUR/USD would stop moving
down once it hit the 1.1850 mark? Roddy had asked me, after all, where I
thought it would fall to. Why not write that down? It was just paper trading,
after all. No one was going to get hurt.
So I wrote down: “EUR/USD Stops: 1.1850” on a Post-it, stuck it to my
desk, gathered my things together, and left. As I shut the door of the trading floor behind me, I heard Roddy scream out.
Somebody had lost a paycheck.

book_c17.qxd

12/20/06

2:38 PM

Page 164

CHAPTER 17

Testing

he next day I learned that I needed to be far more clear about my currency analysis, for when I arrived at Wakeman, Butterman, and Bailey
at 7:00 A.M. (over two hours early, because I was intent on starting to
pay back stolen time, even if I could never catch up), my voice mail
chirped that I had received, and I am not making this up, 37 messages.
I peeked around the corner. Herbie’s light was on. He was always in
this early, but it couldn’t be him. He would leave a note, telling me never to
come back. It wasn’t like Herbie to leave 37 voice messages, either. This
was something entirely different.
The first message said it all. It was Roddy from down on the 31st
floor, and it had come in two hours earlier: “Harry, you left a bloody note
down here and the traders have all gone mad. They’re running around
wonderin’ if you’re buyin’ or you’re sellin’ the Euro at 1.1850. Call down
to 31, don’t be callin’ me. I’m at home and I’m sick of the phone ringin’
here just because I saw yer note first. Bugger! Don’t leave any more
bloody notes!”
The next messages were from all sorts of traders I’d never met and I
had no idea how they got my number or why they would care. I was in
early, anyway, so I had a couple of hours to sort all this out and then I could
return to Wakeman in time to start the day. Although I didn’t like the idea
of falling behind on the filing, I most certainly didn’t like the idea of having
our receptionist flooded with phone calls as soon as she got in.
Before I could pick up the phone, my extension rang again. It was
Craig. There were loud voices in the background. He must have been sur-

T

164

book_c17.qxd

12/20/06

Testing

2:38 PM

Page 165

165

rounded by other traders. He said: “Harry, you had better get down here. I
don’t know what’s gotten into these guys. But they want to talk to you.”
“All right,” I agreed. How had I become so popular, just from one trade?
What in the world was happening? Craig’s tone let me know that he wasn’t
particularly amused that he was the representative secretary who had to
track me down. I also rightly assumed that he didn’t much like an inexperienced trader like me getting so much attention. When I arrived on the 31st
floor, I waved my badge in front of the door, and walked out onto the trading floor. It was loud. It was chaotic. It almost seemed like something had
gone terribly wrong. Craig seemed out of place in the midst of it all.
When I found him, I first asked him what in the world had happened.
“It’s just a bit crazy here right now,” he admitted. “There’s word that one of
our London traders took a huge hit. Massive. Like more than a hundred
million dollars.”
“A currency trader?”
“Right. So it’s sent all the fixed income guys—everyone down here—
into a frenzy.”
“Why would that affect them?”
It was so loud in the room that we nearly had to shout to hear each
other. The upside was that no one recognized me and they weren’t paying
attention. Business television was covering the story on all the screens
above us, and between the comments from the reporters, I heard every
sort of vulgarity imaginable.
“This isn’t the most stable of trading desks in the world,” he told me.
“These guys aren’t noted for their adherence to Zen spirituality or peaceful
living. They are like a bunch of sharks. They smell blood in the water. They
sense change. Some of them are already calling headhunters and trying to
see if they can move into other jobs on the Street. Some are wondering if
there will be cutbacks, and if they will make the cut.”
I wondered if Roddy or George were part of the panicking crowd. “I
met a guy named Roddy last night. And a guy from Canada named George.
Are they in trouble? Are you?”
He shook his head. “Roddy, no way. He’s an Asian session expert and
has contacts all over the world. He makes prices for some really large companies. Some of them are in London but he doesn’t want go back there.
Having too much fun here winning everyone’s paychecks. He’s got
nowhere to go but up in all this. He might have a chance for a promotion in
all this, as long as he’s willing to go back to London. George, he’s fine, too.
We call him Winnipeg George, because he’s from the province of Winnipeg.
And George is a great trader. He’s been working closely with Roddy for a
long time.”
“And you?”
“Me? I’m fine. I’m having a great month.”

book_c17.qxd

12/20/06

166

2:38 PM

Page 166

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

“That’s excellent. It almost seems like you don’t fit in here with this
crowd.”
He shrugged in a way that told me he agreed but that this wasn’t the
time or place to admit it.
“By the way, Harry,” he said, “I sold Euros at 1.2200, and I’m still in the
trade, too. Why did you tell these guys to make that trade? Anderson told
me he gave you a desk but you’re not working here. What’s going on?”
Now it was my turn to shrug. “I can’t explain it. I am sort of shocked
that a bunch of bank traders would care at all what I said.”
“Ordinarily, they wouldn’t. But Anderson really put you on a pedestal.”
“Really?”
“Yes, really.” There was a hint of jealousy in Craig’s voice. “What did
you tell him? I thought your trading was going terribly. I told some guys
that Harvey was teaching you and they flew threw the roof—that news,
combined with Anderson’s endorsement, it was too much for them. March
wasn’t easy on the short-term traders here and some of them got bit, making prices for some clients last month. They wanted to get back on track
and they’re looking to you now.”
“Well,” I replied, “first you need to know that I told Anderson that I was
a terrible trader and that I’d lost all of my trading capital. That, apparently,
was not a big deal to him.”
Craig gave me a quizzical look. “It just doesn’t make sense.”
That stung a bit. Maybe I had drained my trading account. Maybe I had
not been a disciplined individual. Those things were true. But I wasn’t a
complete moron. I was facing my challenges and I had been able to plan a
good trade with Harvey’s help.
Craig realized what he’d said and tried to backpedal. “Sorry, Harry. I
didn’t mean it like that. I meant to say that it doesn’t make sense that, well,”
and then he paused. He looked at me square in the eye: “Okay, I probably
did mean it like that. And I should not have said it. Your trade was actually
really good. We got the entry from Harvey, but you planned the stop loss
and the profit target.”
“But why would these guys follow someone they’ve never met?”
“They do it all the time. Every day they’re talking to each other, swapping ideas, talking about rumors. That part isn’t a surprise. And I know that
Anderson can be a great judge of talent. So I’m not completely shocked
that he sees potential in you. But to give you space down here? Give you a
pass to get in the door? That’s a lot of trust for someone he hardly knows.
Something seems odd.”
“I can’t disagree. I’m not sure what to say.”
“Coming here today and yesterday, and hearing all these guys talk
about your trades, made me remember when I first started here and that I
felt like I was on top of the world after one good trade.”
