
friends." On being again asked whether all was fair, the dying man faintly murmured
"Yes:" but in a minute after, he said, "You're a bad man!" Campbell was now in great
agitation, and wringing his hands convulsively, he exclaimed, "Oh, Boyd! you are the
happiest man of the two! Do you forgive me?" Boyd replied, "I forgive you -- I feel for
you, as I know you do for me." He shortly afterwards expired, and Major Campbell made
his escape from Ireland, and lived for some months with his family under an assumed
name, in the neighbourhood of Chelsea. He was, however, apprehended, and brought to
trial at Armagh, in August 1808. He said while in prison, that, if found guilty of murder,
he should suffer as an example to duellists in Ireland; but he endeavoured to buoy himself
up, with the hope that the jury would only convict him of manslaughter. It was proved in
evidence upon the trial, that the duel was not fought immediately after the offence was
given, but that Major Campbell went home and drank tea with his family, before he
sought Boyd for the fatal encounter. The jury returned a verdict of wilful murder against
him, but recommended him to mercy on the ground that the duel had been a fair one. He
was condemned to die on the Monday following, but was afterwards respited for a few
days longer. In the mean time the greatest exertions were made in his behalf. His
unfortunate wife went upon her knees before the Prince of Wales, to move him to use his
influence with the King, in favour of her unhappy husband. Everything a fond wife and a
courageous woman could do, she tried, to gain the royal clemency; but George III was
inflexible, in consequence of the representations of the Irish Viceroy that an example was
necessary. The law was therefore allowed to take its course, and the victim of a false
spirit of honour died the death of a felon.
The most inveterate duellists of the present day are the students in the Universities of
Germany. They fight on the most frivolous pretences, and settle with swords and pistols
the schoolboy disputes which in other countries are arranged by the more harmless
medium of the fisticuffs. It was at one time the custom among these savage youths to
prefer the sword combat, for the facility it gave them of cutting off the noses of their
opponents. To disfigure them in this manner was an object of ambition, and the German
duellists reckoned the number of these disgusting trophies which they had borne away,
with as much satisfaction as a successful general the provinces he had reduced or the
cities he had taken.
But it would be wearisome to enter into the minute detail of all the duels of modern
times. If an examination were made into the general causes which produced them, it
would be found that in every case they had been either of the most trivial or the most
unworthy nature. Parliamentary duels were at one time very common, and amongst the
names of those who have soiled a great reputation by conforming to the practice, may be
mentioned those of Warren Hastings, Sir Philip Francis, Wilkes, Pitt, Fox, Grattan,
Curran, Tierney, and Canning. So difficult is it even for the superior mind to free itself
from the trammels with which foolish opinion has enswathed it -- not one of these
celebrated persons who did not in his secret soul condemn the folly to which he lent
himself. The bonds of reason, though iron-strong, are easily burst through; but those of
folly, though lithe and frail as the rushes by a stream, defy the stoutest heart to snap them
asunder. Colonel Thomas, an officer of the Guards, who was killed in a duel, added the
following clause to his will the night before he died: -- "In the first place, I commit my

soul to Almighty God, in hope of his mercy and pardon for the irreligious step I now (in
compliance with the unwarrantable customs of this wicked world) put myself under the
necessity of taking." How many have been in the same state of mind as this wise, foolish
man! He knew his error, and abhorred it, but could not resist it, for fear of the opinion of
the prejudiced and unthinking. No other could have blamed him for refusing to fight a
duel.
The list of duels that have sprung from the most degrading causes might be stretched out
to an almost indefinite extent. Sterne's father fought a duel about a goose; and the great
Raleigh about a tavern bill. [Raleigh, at one period of his life, appeared to be an
inveterate duellist, and it was said of him that he had been engaged in more encounters of
the kind than any man of note among his contemporaries. More than one fellow-creature
he had deprived of life; but he lived long enough to be convinced of the sinfulness of his
conduct, and made a solemn vow never to fight another duel. The following anecdote of
his forbearance is well known, but it will bear repetition :-- A dispute arose in a coffeehouse between him and a young man on some trivial point, and the latter, losing his
temper, impertinently spat in the face of the veteran. Sir Walter, instead of running him
through the body, as many would have done, or challenging him to mortal combat, coolly
took out his handkerchief, wiped his face, and said, "Young man, if I could as easily wipe
from my conscience the stain of killing you, as I can this spittle from my face, you should
not live another minute." The young man immediately begged his pardon.] Scores of
duels (many of them fatal) have been fought from disputes at cards, or a place at a
theatre, while hundreds of challenges, given and accepted over-night, in a fit of
drunkenness, have been fought out the next morning to the death of one or both of the
antagonists.
Two of the most notorious duels of modern times had their origin in causes no more
worthy than the quarrel of a dog and the favour of a prostitute: that between Macnamara
and Montgomery arising from the former; and that between Best and Lord Camelford,
from the latter. The dog of Montgomery attacked a dog belonging to Macnamara, and
each master interfering in behalf of his own animal, high words ensued. The result was
the giving and accepting a challenge to mortal combat. The parties met on the following
day, when Montgomery was shot dead, and his antagonist severely wounded. This affair
created a great sensation at the time, and Heaviside, the surgeon who attended at the fatal
field to render his assistance, if necessary, was arrested as an accessory to the murder,
and committed to Newgate.
In the duel between Best and Lord Camelford, two pistols were used which were
considered to be the best in England. One of them was thought slightly superior to the
other, and it was agreed that the belligerents should toss up a piece of money to decide
the choice of weapons. Best gained it, and, at the first discharge, Lord Camelford fell,
mortally wounded. But little sympathy was expressed for his fate; he was a confirmed
duellist, had been engaged in many meetings of the kind, and the blood of more than one
fellow-creature lay at his door. As he had sowed, so did he reap; and the violent man met
an appropriate death.

It now only remains to notice the means that have been taken to stay the prevalence of
this madness of false honour in the various countries of the civilized world. The efforts of
the governments of France and England have already been mentioned, and their want of
success is but too well known. The same efforts have been attended with the same results
elsewhere. In despotic countries, where the will of the monarch has been strongly
expressed and vigorously supported, a diminution of the evil has for a while resulted, but
only to be increased again, when death relaxed the iron grasp, and a successor appeared
of less decided opinions upon the subject. This was the case in Prussia under the great
Frederick, of whose aversion to duelling a popular anecdote is recorded. It is stated of
him that he permitted duelling in his army, but only upon the condition that the
combatants should fight in presence of a whole battalion of infantry, drawn up on
purpose, to see fair play. The latter received strict orders, when one of the belligerents
fell, to shoot the other immediately. It is added, that the known determination of the King
effectually put a stop to the practice.
The Emperor Joseph II of Austria was as firm as Frederick, although the measures he
adopted were not so singular. The following letter explains his views on the subject:-"To GENERAL * * * * *
"MY GENERAL,
"You will immediately arrest the Count of K. and Captain W. The Count is young,
passionate, and influenced by wrong notions of birth and a false spirit of honour. Captain
W. is an old soldier, who will adjust every dispute with the sword and pistol, and who has
received the challenge of the young Count with unbecoming warmth.
"I will suffer no duelling in my army. I despise the principles of those who attempt to
justify the practice, and who would run each other through the body in cold blood.
"When I have officers who bravely expose themselves to every danger in facing the
enemy -- who at all times exhibit courage, valour, and resolution in attack and defence, I
esteem them highly. The coolness with which they meet death on such occasions is
serviceable to their country, and at the same time redounds to their own honour; but
should there be men amongst them who are ready to sacrifice everything to their
vengeance and hatred, I despise them. I consider such a man as no better than a Roman
gladiator.
"Order a court-martial to try the two officers. Investigate the subject of their dispute with
that impartiality which I demand from every judge; and he that is guilty, let him be a
sacrifice to his fate and the laws.
"Such a barbarous custom, which suits the age of the Tamerlanes and Bajazets, and
which has often had such melancholy effects on single families, I will have suppressed
and punished, even if it should deprive me of one half of my officers. There are still men

who know how to unite the character of a hero with that of a good subject; and he only
can be so who respects the laws. " JOSEPH." "August 1771."
[Vide the Letters of Joseph II to distinguished Princes and Statesmen, published for the
first time in England in "The Pamphleteer" for 1821. They were originally published in
Germany a few years previously, and throw a great light upon the character of that
monarch and the events of his reign.]
In the United States of America the code varies considerably. In one or two of the still
wild and simple States of the Far West, where no duel has yet been fought, there is no
specific law upon the subject beyond that in the Decalogue, which says, "Thou shalt do
no murder." But duelling everywhere follows the steps of modern civilization, and by the
time the backwoodsman is transformed into the citizen, he has imbibed the false notions
of honour which are prevalent in Europe, and around him, and is ready, like his
progenitors, to settle his differences with the pistol. In the majority of the States the
punishment for challenging, fighting, or acting as second, is solitary imprisonment and
hard labour for any period less than a year, and disqualification for serving any public
office for twenty years. In Vermont the punishment is total disqualification for office,
deprivation of the rights of citizenship, and a fine; in fatal cases, the same punishment as
that of murderers. In Rhode Island, the combatant, though death does not ensue, is liable
to be carted to the gallows, with a rope about his neck, and to sit in this trim for an hour,
exposed to the peltings of the mob. He may be further imprisoned for a year, at the option
of the magistrate. In Connecticut the punishment is total disqualification for office or
employ, and a fine, varying from one hundred to a thousand dollars. The laws of Illinois
require certain officers of the state to make oath, previous to their instalment, that they
have never been, nor ever will be, concerned in a duel. ["Encyclopedia Americana," art.
Duelling.]
Amongst the edicts against duelling promulgated at various times in Europe, may be
mentioned that of Augustus King of Poland, in 1712, which decreed the punishment of
death against principals and seconds, and minor punishments against the bearers of a
challenge. An edict was also published at Munich, in 1773, according to which both
principals and seconds, even in duels where no one was either killed or wounded, should
be hanged, and their bodies buried at the foot of the gallows. The King of Naples issued
an ordinance against duelling in 1838, in which the punishment of death is decreed
against all concerned in a fatal duel. The bodies of those killed, and of those who may be
executed in consequence, are to be buried in unconsecrated ground, and without any
religious ceremony; nor is any monument to be erected on the spot. The punishment for
duels in which either, or both, are wounded, and for those in which no damage whatever
is done, varies according to the case, and consists of fine, imprisonment, loss of rank and
honours, and incapacity for filling any public situation. Bearers of challenges may also be
punished with fine and imprisonment.
It might be imagined that enactments so severe all over the civilized world would finally
eradicate a custom, the prevalence of which every wise and good man must deplore. But
the frowns of the law never yet have taught, and never will teach, men to desist from this

practice, as long as it is felt that the lawgiver sympathises with it in his heart. The stern
judge upon the bench may say to the unfortunate wight who has been called a liar by
some unmannerly opponent, "If you challenge him, you meditate murder, and are guilty
of murder !" but the same judge, divested of his robes of state, and mixing in the world
with other men, would say, "If you do not challenge him, if you do not run the risk of
making yourself a murderer, you will be looked upon as a mean-spirited wretch, unfit to
associate with your fellows, and deserving nothing but their scorn and their contempt!" It
is society, and not the duellist, who is to blame. Female influence, too, which is so
powerful in leading men either to good or to evil, takes, in this case, the evil part. Mere
animal bravery has, unfortunately, such charms in the female eye, that a successful
duellist is but too often regarded as a sort of hero; and the man who refuses to fight,
though of truer courage, is thought a poltroon, who may be trampled on. Mr. Graves, a
member of the American Legislature, who, early in 1838, killed a Mr. Cilley in a duel,
truly and eloquently said, on the floor of the House of Representatives, when lamenting
the unfortunate issue of that encounter, that society was more to blame than he was.
"Public opinion," said the repentant orator, "is practically the paramount law of the land.
Every other law, both human and divine, ceases to be observed; yea, withers and perishes
in contact with it. It was this paramount law of this nation, and of this House, that forced
me, under the penalty of dishonour, to subject myself to the code, which impelled me
unwillingly into this tragical affair. Upon the heads of this nation, and at the doors of this
House, rests the blood with which my unfortunate hands have been stained!"
As long as society is in this mood; as long as it thinks that the man who refuses to resent
an insult, deserved that insult, and should be scouted accordingly, so long, it is to be
feared, will duelling exist, however severe the laws may be. Men must have redress for
injuries inflicted, and when those injuries are of such a nature that no tribunal will take
cognizance of them, the injured will take the law into their own hands, and right
themselves in the opinion of their fellows, at the hazard of their lives. Much as the sage
may affect to despise the opinion of the world, there are few who would not rather expose
their lives a hundred times than be condemned to live on, in society, but not of it -- a byword of reproach to all who know their history, and a mark for scorn to point his finger
at.
The only practicable means for diminishing the force of a custom which is the disgrace of
civilization, seems to be the establishment of a court of honour, which should take
cognizance of all those delicate and almost intangible offences which yet wound so
deeply. The court established by Louis XIV might be taken as a model. No man now
fights a duel when a fit apology has been offered, and it should be the duty of this court to
weigh dispassionately the complaint of every man injured in his honour, either by word
or deed, and to force the offender to make a public apology. If he refused the apology, he
would be the breaker of a second law; an offender against a high court, as well as against
the man he had injured, and might be punished with fine and imprisonment, the latter to
last until he saw the error of his conduct, and made the concession which the court
demanded.

If, after the establishment of this tribunal, men should be found of a nature so
bloodthirsty as not to be satisfied with its peaceful decisions, and should resort to the old
and barbarous mode of an appeal to the pistol, some means might be found of dealing
with them. To hang them as murderers would be of no avail; for to such men death would
have few terrors. Shame alone would bring them to reason. The following code, it is
humbly suggested to all future legislators upon the subject, would, in conjunction with
the establishment of a court of honour, do much towards eradicating this blot from
society. Every man who fought a duel, even though he did not wound his opponent,
should be tried, and, upon proof of the fact, be sentenced to have his right hand cut off.
The world would then know his true character as long as he lived. If his habits of duelling
were so inveterate, and he should learn to fire a pistol with his left hand, he should, upon
conviction of a second offence, lose that hand also. This law, which should allow no
commutation of the punishment, under any circumstances, would lend strength and
authority to the court of honour. In the course of a few years duelling would be ranked
amongst exploded follies, and men would begin to wonder that a custom so barbarous
and so impious had ever existed amongst them.

THE LOVE OF THE MARVELLOUS AND THE DISBELIEF OF THE TRUE.
"Well, son John," said the old woman, "and what wonderful things did you meet with all
the time you were at sea?" - " Oh! mother," replied John, "I saw many strange things." -" Tell us all about them," replied his mother, "for I long to hear your adventures." -- "
Well, then," said John, "as we were sailing over the Line, what do you think we saw?" "I can't imagine," replied his mother. -- " Well, we saw a fish rise out of the sea, and fly
over our ship!" "Oh! John! John! what a liar you are!" said his mother, shaking her head,
and smiling incredulously. "True as death? said John; "and we saw still more wonderful
things than that." -- " Let us hear them," said his mother, shaking her head again; "and tell
the truth, John, if you can." -- " Believe it, or believe it not, as you please," replied her
son; "but as we were sailing up the Red Sea, our captain thought he should like some fish
for dinner; so he told us to throw our nets, and catch some." -- " Well," inquired his
mother, seeing that he paused in his story. "Well," rejoined her son, "we did throw them,
and, at the very first haul, we brought up a chariot-wheel, made all of gold, and inlaid
with diamonds!" "Lord bless us!" said his mother, "and what did the captain say ?" -- "
Why, he said it was one of the wheels of Pharaoh's chariot, that had lain in the Red Sea
ever since that wicked King was drowned, with all his host, while pursuing the
Israelites." -- " Well, well," said his mother, lifting up her hands in admiration; "now,
that's very possible, and I think the captain was a very sensible man. Tell me such stories
as that, and I'll believe you; but never talk to me of such things as flying fish! No, no,
John, such stories won't go down with me, I can assure you!"
Such old women as the sailor's mother, in the above well-known anecdote, are by no
means rare in the world. Every age and country has produced them. They have been
found in high places, and have sat down among the learned of the earth. Instances must
be familiar to every reader in which the same person was willing, with greedy credulity,
to swallow the most extravagant fiction, and yet refuse credence to a philosophical fact.
The same Greeks who believed readily that Jupiter wooed Leda in the form of a swan,
denied stoutly that there were any physical causes for storms and thunder, and treated as
impious those who attempted to account for them on true philosophical principles.
The reasons that thus lead mankind to believe the marvellously false, and to disbelieve
the marvellously true, may be easily gathered. Of all the offspring of Time, Error is the
most ancient, and is so old and familiar an acquaintance, that Truth, when discovered,
comes upon most of us like an intruder, and meets the intruder's welcome. We all pay an
involuntary homage to antiquity -- a "blind homage," as Bacon calls it in his "Novum
Organum," which tends greatly to the obstruction of truth. To the great majority of mortal
eyes, Time sanctifies everything that he does not destroy. The mere fact of anything
being spared by the great foe makes it a favourite with us, who are sure to fall his victims.
To call a prejudice "time-hallowed," is to open a way for it into hearts where it never
before penetrated. Some peculiar custom may disgrace the people amongst whom it
flourishes; yet men of a little wisdom refuse to aid in its extirpation, merely because it is
old. Thus it is with human belief, and thus it is we bring shame upon our own intellect.
To this cause may be added another, also mentioned by Lord Bacon -- a misdirected zeal
in matters of religion, which induces so many to decry a newly-discovered truth, because

the Divine records contain no allusion to it, or because, at first sight, it appears to
militate, not against religion, but against some obscure passage which has never been
fairly interpreted. The old woman in the story could not believe that there was such a
creature as a flying-fish, because her Bible did not tell her so, but she believed that her
son had drawn up the golden and bejewelled wheel from the Red Sea, because her Bible
informed her that Pharaoh was drowned there.
Upon a similar principle the monks of the inquisition believed that the devil appeared
visibly among men, that St. Anthony pulled his nose with a pair of red-hot pincers, and
that the relics of the saints worked miracles; yet they would not believe Galileo, when he
proved that the earth turned round the sun.
Keppler, when he asserted the same fact, could gain no bread, and little credence; but
when he pretended to tell fortunes and cast nativities, the whole town flocked to him, and
paid him enormous fees for his falsehood.
When Roger Bacon invented the telescope and the magic-lantern, no one believed that
the unaided ingenuity of man could have done it; but when some wiseacres asserted that
the devil had appeared to him, and given him the knowledge which he turned to such
account, no one was bold enough to assert that it was improbable. His hint that saltpetre,
sulphur, and charcoal, mixed in certain proportions, would produce effects similar to
thunder and lightning, was disregarded or disbelieved; but the legend of the brazen head
which delivered oracles, was credited for many ages.
[Godwin, in his "Lives of the Necromancers," gives the following version of this legend.
Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay entertained the project of enclosing England with a wall,
so as to render it inaccessible to any invader. They accordingly raised the devil, as the
person best able to inform them how this was to be done. The devil advised them to make
a brazen head, with all the internal structure and organs of a human head. The
construction would cost them much time, and they must wait with patience till the faculty
of speech descended upon it. Finally, however, it would become an oracle, and, if the
question were propounded to it, would teach them the solution of their problem. The
friars spent seven years in bringing the subject to perfection, and waited day after day in
expectation that it would utter articulate sounds. At length nature became exhausted in
them, and they lay down to sleep, having first given it strictly in charge to a servant of
theirs, clownish in nature, but of strict fidelity, that he should awaken them the moment
the image began to speak. That period arrived. The head uttered sounds, but such as the
clown judged unworthy of notice. "Time is!" it said. No notice was taken, and a long
pause ensued. "Time was!" -- a similar pause, and no notice. "Time is passed!" The
moment these words were uttered, a tremendous storm ensued, with thunder and
lightning, and the head was shivered into a thousand pieces. Thus the experiment of Friar
Bacon and Friar Bungay came to nothing.]
Solomon De Cans, who, in the time of Cardinal Richelieu, conceived the idea of a steamengine, was shut up in the Bastille as a madman, because the idea of such an
