
immensely powerful, and combines two of the most dynamic analytical techniques into a unified single
approach. It is an approach that can be applied to any combination of time frames from fast tick charts to higher
time frame charts. It does not differentiate as to whether you are a speculator or an investor.
The approach is simple and straightforward, and is like the ripples in a pond when a stone is thrown. As the
stone lands in the centre of the pond the ripples move outwards. This is like the ripples of market sentiment
which move across time frames outwards from the fastest to the slowest. Once the ripples appear in the slowest
time frame, then this is likely to have the greatest longer term impact as the move has taken the longest time to
build, giving additional momentum to the move. To return to our clockwork car, when fully wound the car will
travel further and a perfect expression of cause and effect.
In the following chapters, I would now like to build on these first principles and extend them out into actual
examples, using real charts from a variety of markets.

Chapter Five
Volume Price Analysis: Building The Picture
Mistakes are the best teachers. One does not learn from success.
Mohnish Pabrai ( 1964 -)
In the previous chapter we looked at some of the basic building blocks of VPA, and how to apply our analysis
first to single candles, and then to use this knowledge in relation to small groups of candles. This really took us
through the first two steps of VPA in our three step process. The three step process which begins with a close
up look at one candle, then gradually zooms out, to step 2 which is the candles in close proximity to the latest
candle. Finally, we zoom out to bring the complete chart into focus, which is what we are going to focus on in
this chapter, and in doing so, I hope will also help to reinforce the basic skills we learnt in the previous chapter.
In addition in this chapter, I'm also going to introduce some new concepts which I hope will help to put
everything into context, and pull the various strands of VPA together. I think this is probably the best place to
start, and then we can begin to look at a variety of examples, and I can walk you through each chart as the price
action unfolds.
So let me start with five concepts which lie at the heart of VPA, and these are as follows:
1. Accumulation
2. Distribution
3. Testing
4. Selling Climax
5. Buying Climax
The simplest way to understand these terms, and for me to explain them to you, is to go back to our analogy of
the warehouse, which was also used by Richard Ney in his books to explain this concept. This is what he said:
“To understand the specialists' practices, the investor must learn to think of specialists as merchants who want
to sell an inventory of stock at retail price levels. When they clear their shelves of their inventory they will
seek to employ their profits to buy more merchandise at wholesale price levels.”
I used the same analogy in my article for Working Money magazine many years later, which was the Parable of
Uncle Joe.
The easiest way to think of volume in terms of the market price action, and this applies to all markets, is to use
the wholesaling analogy. However, in order to keep things simple, let's just refer to the specialists, the market
makers, the large operators, the professional money, as the insiders from now on. So, the insiders are the
merchants who own the warehouses of stock and their primary goal is to make money buy buying at wholesale
prices and then selling at retail prices.
Remember also, in the following explanations, that in my VPA Principle No 2, the market always takes time to
turn in a dramatic way, and this is also borne out in Wyckoff's second law of cause and effect. We are always
going to see small changes up and down, as the market pulls back or reverses in a longer term trend. But, for
the major changes in trend to occur, (and remember, a 'major change' can appear on a 5 minute chart or a 1 day
chart) this takes time. The longer the time taken, (the cause), the greater the change (the effect). However, this
does vary from market to market. Some markets may take days, weeks or even months, before they are ready to
turn dramatically, whilst other markets may take just a few days. I will be covering this later in the book, once we
start to look at the various nuances which apply to specific markets, as they all behave slightly differently.
The key principles described here still apply. It's just the time frames and speed at which events occur that
changes dramatically, and is due to the different structure of each market, the role of the insiders in that market,
and the role that each capital market plays as an investment or speculative vehicle.

The first term we need to understand is accumulation.

The Accumulation Phase
Before the insiders can begin to do anything, they need to make sure they have enough stock, or inventory, to
meet demand. Think of this as a wholesaler, about to launch a major advertising campaign for a particular
product. The last thing any wholesaler would want to do is to spend time, effort and money launching a
campaign, only to discover that after a few days there was no more stock. This would be a disaster. Well, funnily
enough, it's the same for the insiders. They don't want to go to a great deal of trouble, only to find that they have
run out of stock. It's all about supply and demand. If they can create the demand, then they need the supply to
meet this demand.
But, how do they fill their warehouses before starting any campaign? This is where accumulation comes in, and
just like a real warehouse, takes time to fill. Naturally it’s not possible to stock a large warehouse with one lorry
load of goods. It may take several hundred loads to completely fill, and remember, at the same time, there are
goods simultaneously leaving the warehouse. Just as filling a warehouse takes time in the real world, so it
takes time in our financial world.
Accumulation then, is the term used to define an 'accumulation phase' which is the period that the insiders go
through to fill up their warehouse, prior to launching a major marketing campaign on selling their stock. So
accumulation is buying by the insiders, and depending on which market we are considering, can go on for
weeks or months, depending on the instrument being acquired.
Now the next question, is how do the insiders 'encourage' everyone to sell. It's actually very simple, and it's
called the media. The news media, in all its various forms, is manna from heaven as far as the insiders are
concerned. Over the centuries they have learnt every trick in the book to manipulate each news release, every
statement, natural disaster, political statement, war, famine and pestilence, and everything in between. The
media is an avaricious monster, and demands ‘new’ and fresh news items daily. The insiders simply take
advantage of the constant fear and greed which is generated by this stream of news stories, to manipulate the
markets, for many different reasons, but not least to shake market participants out of the market.
These are the words of Richard Wyckoff on the subject written in the 1930s
"The large operator does not, as a rule, go into a campaign unless he sees in prospect a movement of from 10
to 50 points. Livermore once told me he never touched anything unless there were at least 10 points in it
according to his calculations. The preparation of an important move in the market takes a considerable time. A
large operator or investor acting singly cannot often, in a single day's session, buy 25,000 to 100,000 shares of
stock without putting the price up too much. Instead, he takes days, weeks or months in which to accumulate his
line in one or many stocks."
The word campaign is an appropriate one. Just like a marketing campaign or a military campaign, the insiders
plan each phase with military precision, with nothing left to chance. Each phase is planned and executed using
the media to trigger the selling. But how does an accumulation phase play out? In practice, it goes something
like this:
An item of news is released which is perceived as bad for the instrument or market. The insiders grab the
opportunity to move the market lower fast, triggering a waterfall of selling, as they start their accumulation
phase, buying inventory at the lowest prices possible, the wholesale price if you like.
The markets then calm as the bad news is absorbed, before starting to move higher, which is largely as a result
of the buying by the insiders.
Two points here. First, the insiders cannot frighten everyone too much, or no one would ever buy. If there is too
much volatility, with dramatic swings, this would frighten away many investors and traders, which would defeat
the object of the exercise. Each move is carefully planned with just enough volatility to frighten holders of stock
into selling. Second, the buying by the insiders may push prices back up higher again too quickly, so they take
great care in ensuring that inventory is purchased in 'manageable' volumes.
Too much buying, would force prices higher quickly, so great care is taken, and is a further reason why the
accumulation phase takes time to complete. It would simply not be possible to fill the warehouse with just one

move lower. It simply would not work because the numbers are too large. Our simple examples in the previous
chapter, were just to introduce the basic principles.
What happens next is that anyone who survived the first wave of selling is relieved, believing the market will
recover and they continue to hold. After a period of calm, more bad news arrives, and the insiders take prices
lower once again, shaking more holders out of the market. As they buy again there is a consequent recovery in
the price.
This price action is then repeated several times, each time the insiders accumulating more and more stock for
their warehouse, until finally the last stock holders give up, and admit defeat. What does this look like on the
price chart?

Fig 5.10 The Accumulation Phase
Whilst Fig 5.10 is a graphical representation of the price action, nevertheless I hope it gives a sense of what this
looks like on a real chart. The repeated buying by the insiders is highlighted in blue.
I have deliberately avoided using a scale on the chart, either in terms of price or time, as I believe it is the
'shape' of the price and associated volume bars which is important. This is the price action which creates the
classic price congestion which we see in all time frames, and which is why this ‘shape’ is so powerful, when
associated with volume. This is what gives price action, the three dimensional perspective using VPA.
Once the campaign has begun, the price action then follows this typical pattern, where the market is repeatedly
moved higher and lower. This type of price action is essential to 'shake' sellers out of the market. We can think
of this as shaking fruit from a tree, or as we do in Italy, harvesting the olives! The tree has to be shaken
repeatedly in order for all the crop to fall. Some of the crop is more firmly attached and takes effort to release.
This is the same in the financial markets. Some holders will refuse to sell, despite this constant whipsaw action,
but eventually they give up after several 'false dawns', generally on the point when the campaign is almost over,

with the insiders preparing to take the market higher with fully stocked warehouses. So the campaign comes to
an end. It is all over, until the next time!
This is repeated over and over again, in all time frames and in all markets. If we take the cause and effect rule of
Wyckoff, the above price action could be a 'secondary' phase in a much longer term cycle, which is something I
cover in more detail once we start to look at multiple time frames.
Everything, as Einstein said, is relative.
If we took a 50 year chart of an instrument, there would be hundreds of accumulation phases within the 50 year
trend. By contrast an accumulation phase in a currency pair, might last a few hours, or perhaps only a few days.
And the reason for this difference is to do with the nature and structure of market. The equity market is a very
different market to bonds and commodities. In equities for example, this phase might last days, weeks or
months, and I cover this in detail when we look at the characteristics of each market and its internal and external
influences, which create the nuances for us as VPA traders.
The key point is this. Just recognise the price action and associated volume for what it is. This is the insiders
manipulating the market in preparation for an extended price move higher. It may be a small move (cause and
effect) based on a short time period, or a more significant move based on a longer phase. And if you think that
perhaps this is a fantasy, let me just quote from Richard Ney again, and this time from his second book, The
Wall Street Gang.
“On November 22, 1963, the day President Kennedy was assassinated, specialists used the alibi provided by
the tragedy to clean out their books down to wholesale price levels. After they had accumulated large
inventories of stock, they closed shop for the day and walked off the floor. This prevented public buy orders from
being executed at the day's lows. The specialist in Telephone, for example, dropped his stock on November 22
from $138 to $130. He opened it on the 25th at $140! Sacrificing accuracy for expediency, he admitted to
making $25,000 for his trading account.”
Any news, provides the perfect excuse to manipulate the market, and nothing is exempt. In US equities it is the
quarterly earnings season reports which provide the perfect opportunity. Economic data is also a rich source,
whilst natural disasters can be used for longer term triggers. On an intra day basis, accumulation is made very
easy with the constant round of comments from politicians, central banks, coupled with the daily stream of
economic data. Life is very easy for the insiders, and to be honest, if we had the opportunity, we would probably
do the same thing as well!

The Distribution Phase
The distribution phase is the exact opposite of the accumulation phase. In the accumulation phase, the insiders
were filling their warehouses, in preparation for the next phase of the operation, and as I said earlier, the word
campaign is perfect. This is a military campaign with nothing left to chance, as we will see shortly when I
explain about testing.
With a full warehouse, the insiders now need to start moving the price higher, to encourage the somewhat
nervous and jaundiced buyers back into the market. This is one reason why the insiders dare not frighten
everyone too much, as they simply cannot afford to kill the goose that lays the golden egg!
Whilst the key emotional driver in 'shaking the trees' in the accumulation phase was fear, the fear of a loss, the
key driver that is used in the distribution phase is also fear, but this time the fear of missing out on a good trade.
The timing here is critical, as the insiders know that most investors and speculators are nervous, and like to wait
for as many confirming signals as possible, before jumping into a market, fearing they will miss out on a big
move higher. This is the reason most traders and investors buy at a top and sell at a bottom.
At the top of a bullish trend, traders and investors have seen the market move higher slowly, then gather
momentum, before rising fast, and it is at this point that they buy, fearful of missing out on any 'quick profits'. This
is precisely the point at which the insiders are preparing to pause and reverse. The same happens at the bottom
of the accumulation phase. The investors and speculators can take no more pain and uncertainty, they have
seen the market move lower slowly, then gather pace before dropping fast, which triggers waves of panic sales.
Calm is then restored and the market starts to move into the accumulation phase. Here hope of a recovery is

restored, before being dashed, then restored, then dashed again. This is the way that the insiders manipulate
trader fear, and in many ways we could argue that it is not the markets they manipulate at all, but trader
emotions, which are much easier.
So what is the typical pattern for our distribution phase, and how is it managed?
First, the market breaks out from the end of the accumulation phase, moving higher steadily, with average
volume. There is no rush as the insiders have bought at wholesale prices and now want to maximise profits by
building bullish momentum slowly, as the bulk of the distribution phase will be done at the top of the trend, and
at the highest prices possible. Again, given the chance we would do the same.
The move away from the accumulation phase is now accompanied by 'good news' stories, changing sentiment
from the 'bad news' stories which accompanied the falling market.
The market continues to rise, slowly at first, with small pull backs, but nothing too scary. Gradually the market
picks up speed, as the bullish momentum gathers pace, until the target price area is reached. It is at this point
that the distribution phase starts in earnest, with the insiders starting to clear their warehouses, as eager traders
and investors jump in, fearful of missing out. The good news stream is now constant and all encompassing as
the market continues to climb.
The insiders now have a willing supply of victims to whom they happily sell to in ever increasing numbers, but
careful never to sell the market too hard. Prices therefore trade in a narrow range, sucking in more buyers on
each dip. Finally, the warehouse is empty, and the campaign comes to an end. Fig 5.11 illustrates the typical
price action and volume schematic of the distribution phase.

Fig 5.11 The Distribution Phase

The example in Fig 5.11 gives us a picture of what is happening here, and once we begin to think of this
behaviour in terms of a full or empty warehouse, then it will start to make sense. It is very logical, and if we had
our own warehouse of goods we wanted to sell at the highest price, we would go about this in much the same
way.
First we would ensure we had enough stock and then start a marketing campaign to create interest. Next we
would increase the marketing and hype the sales message – perhaps using celebrities, testimonials, PR,
media, in fact anything to get the message across. A recent and classic example of marketing hype has been
Acai berries (instant and massive weight loss with no effort – just eat the berries and wait for the results).
This is all the insiders are doing, they are simply playing on the emotions of the markets which are driven by
just two. Fear and greed. That's it. Create enough fear and people will sell. Create enough greed and people
will buy. It's all very simple and logical, and to help them, the insiders have the ultimate weapon at their
disposal – the media.
This cycle of accumulation and distribution is then repeated endlessly, and across all the time frames. Some
may be major moves, and others minor, but they happen every day and in every market.

Testing Supply
One of the biggest problems the insiders face when mounting any campaign is they can never be sure that all
the selling has been absorbed, following an accumulation phase. The worst thing that could happen is they
begin to move the market higher, only to be hit by waves of selling, which would drive the market lower,
undoing all the hard work of shaking the sellers out of the market. How do the insiders overcome this problem?
And the answer is that just as in any other market, they test!
Again, this is no different to launching a marketing campaign to sell a warehouse full of goods. Not only do the
items have to be correctly priced, but also that the market is receptive, primed and ready if you like. Therefore a
small test marketing campaign is used to confirm if we have the right product at the right price, and with the right
marketing message to sell in volume.
The insiders also want to test, and once they have completed the accumulation phase, they prepare to move
the market higher to begin the selling process. At this stage, they are generally moving back into price regions
which have only recently seen heavy selling, so they execute a test to gauge market reaction and check that all
the selling has been absorbed in the accumulation phase. The test is as shown in the schematic below:
Fig 5.12 is a schematic to explain this principle which is common sense when we think about it logically.

Fig 5.12 Low Volume Test – Good News!!
The phase of price action we are looking at here follows the accumulation phase, and prior to this, the insiders
will have frightened everyone into selling by moving prices down fast. Panic selling follows with high volumes
in this area. The insiders then begin to shake the trees for the more obstinate 'fruit' before they slowly begin to
push the market out from this region and to start the gentle upwards trend, which will ultimately develop into the
distribution phase at the top of the bull trend.
At this point the insiders are moving the market back through an area of recent heavy selling, and the worst
thing that could happen, is for this selling pressure to return, bringing the campaign to a shuddering halt. The
answer is to execute a test in the rising market which is shown in the schematic in Fig 5.12.
The market is marked lower, possibly on the back of a minor item of bad news, to test to see if this is likely to
flush out any remaining sellers. If the volume remains low, this instantly tells the insiders that there are few
sellers left, and that virtually all the selling has been absorbed in the accumulation phase of the campaign. After
all, if the sellers were still in the market in any number, then the candle would have closed lower on above
average volume. The volume is low, as the insiders move the candle back near the opening price with a 'good
news' story, before continuing higher, happy with this positive result.
These so called 'low volume' tests occur in all time frames and in all markets, and is a simple way for the
insiders to gauge the balance of supply in the market. They are, after all, trying to create demand here, but if
there is an over supply in the market then this will bring the bull campaign to a halt.
In this case the test was successful and confirms that any selling pressure has been removed. The precise
formation of the candle is not critical, but the body must be a narrow spread, with a deep lower wick. The colour
of the body can be either bullish or bearish.
With the test now confirmed the insiders can move the market higher to the target distribution level, confident
that all the old selling has now been absorbed.
