
The Turtles

49

he had an edge, he would go all into a position with mammoth trading size.”
Dennis may have been able to pull the trigger, but that disastrous
ﬁrst year came close to wiping him out. He lost $2 million that ﬁrst day
of November. It was touch-and-go for a while. The experience forced
Dennis and Eckhardt to reevaluate everything they had learned about
trading. They began to test by computer “every idea or piece of conventional wisdom that had ever passed their way. The successful trader
is the one who codiﬁes, the one who turns things into rules. Every idea
that’s market-worthy must then be tested.” 17
Don’t discount this story by saying, “It was $2 million; this is a game
for rich people, not me!” That is the dead wrong view. There will always be someone with more or less money than someone else. If you
have $100 million and you lose $2 million, that is not a big deal. If you
have $50,000 and you lose $1,000, that is not a big deal. Both losses are
2 percent.
That is not to say losses are easy to accept, but Dennis and Eckhardt
taught the Turtles not to consider their trading in terms of amounts of
money. They wanted them to think of money as a variable, because in
that way, regardless of account size, they could make the correct trading decisions at all times.
However, ﬁrst and foremost Dennis and Eckhardt wanted the Turtles to understand that their kind of speculation had virtually no external limits. It took place in a limitless environment. They could bet any
amount on any potential market movement at any time, but if the Turtles entered this no-limit environment and didn’t protect their scarce
capital, then sooner or later the probabilities would catch up with
them.18
The lessons they put forward in the classroom solved the dilemma of
“speculation.” Since the markets are a zero-sum game, the Turtles
learned that even a marginally proﬁtable trader must win money from
other market players. By deﬁnition, they must use different methods
than everyone else in the game.19
What this means is that only when “good” trades, not necessarily
proﬁtable trades, are consistently made over the long run, the chances
of proﬁtable results increase dramatically. A bad month, a bad quarter,
or even a bad year does not mean much in the grand scheme. The

50

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

Turtles learned that the most important thing was to have a sound trading approach tested in the real world.20
Dennis and Eckhardt had that real world of making money ﬁgured
out. Their philosophy and rules taught in the Turtle classroom were
the equivalent of a two-week seminar on how to ﬂy a plane without ever
getting in the plane.21

4
The Philosophy
“. . . when you have eliminated the impossible, whatever remains,
however improbable, must be the truth.”
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle (Sherlock Holmes)

Dennis and Eckhardt’s two weeks of training was heavy with the scientiﬁc method—the structural foundation of their trading style and the
foundation on which they had based their arguments in high school. It
was the same foundation relied upon by Hume and Locke.
Simply put, the scientiﬁc method is a set of techniques for investigating phenomena and acquiring new knowledge, as well as for correcting and integrating previous knowledge. It is based on observable,
empirical, measurable evidence, and subject to laws of reasoning.1 It
involves seven steps:
1. Deﬁne the question.
2. Gather information and resources.
3. Form hypothesis.
4. Perform experiment and collect data.
5. Analyze data.
6. Interpret data and draw conclusions that serve as a starting
point for new hypotheses.
7. Publish results.2
This is not the type of discussion you will hear on CNBC or have
with your local broker when he calls with the daily hot tip. Such
pragmatic thinking lacks the sizzle and punch of get-rich-quick advice.

52
Dennis and Eckhardt were adamant that their students consider themselves scientists ﬁrst and traders second—a testament to their belief in
doing the “right thing.”
The empiricist Dennis knew that plugging along without a solid
philosophical foundation was perilous. He never wanted his research
to be just numbers bouncing around in a computer. There had to be
a theory, and then the numbers could be used to conﬁrm it. He said, “I
think you need the conceptual apparatus to be the ﬁrst thing you start
with and the last thing you look at.” 3
This thinking put Dennis was way ahead of his time. Years later,
the academic Daniel Kahneman would win a Nobel prize for “prospect theory” (behavioral ﬁnance), a fancy name for what Dennis was
actually doing for a living and teaching his Turtles. Avoiding the psychological voltage that routinely sank so many other traders was mandatory for the Turtles.
The techniques that Dennis and Eckhardt taught the Turtles were
different from Dennis’s seasonal spread techniques from his early ﬂoor
days. The Turtles were trained to be trend-following traders. In a nutshell, that meant that they needed a “trend” to make money. Trend
followers always wait for a market to move; then they follow it. Capturing the majority of a trend, up or down, for proﬁt is the goal.4
The Turtles were trained this way because by 1983, Dennis knew
the things that worked best were “rules”: “The majority of the other
things that didn’t work were judgments. It seemed that the better part
of the whole thing was rules. You can’t wake up in the morning and
say, ‘I want to have an intuition about a market.’ You’re going to have
way too many judgments.” 5
While Dennis knew exactly where the sweet spot was for making
big money, he often fumbled his own trading with too many discretionary judgments. Looking back, he blamed his pit experience, saying, “People trading in the pit are very bad systems traders generally.
They learn different things. They react to the [price] ‘tick’ in your
face.” 6
Dennis and Eckhardt did not invent trend following. From the 1950s
into the 1970s, there was one preeminent trend trader with years
of positive performance: Richard Donchian. Donchian was the undis-

TurtleTraderThePhilosophy

53
puted father of trend following. He spoke and wrote profusely on the
subject. He inﬂuenced Dennis and Eckhardt, and just about every
other technically minded trader with a pulse.
One of Donchian’s students, Barbara Dixon, described trend followers as making no attempt to forecast the extent of a price move. The
trend follower “disciplines his thoughts into a strict set of conditions
for entering and exiting the market and acts on those rules or his
system to the exclusion of all other market factors. This removes,
hopefully, emotional judgmental inﬂuences from individual market
decisions.” 7
Trend traders don’t expect to be right every time. In fact, on individual trades they admit when they are wrong, take their losses,
and move on. However, they do expect to make money over the long
run.8 In 1960, Donchian reduced this philosophy to what he called
his “weekly trading rule.” The rule was brutally utilitarian: “When
the prices moves above the high of two previous calendar weeks
(the optimum number of weeks varies by commodity), cover your
short positions and buy. When the price breaks below the low of the
two previous calendar weeks, liquidate your long position and sell
short.” 9
Richard Dennis’s protégé Tom Willis had learned long ago from
Dennis why price, the philosophical underpinning of Donchian’s rule,
was the only true metric to trust. He said, “Everything known is reﬂected in the price. I could never hope to compete with Cargill [today
the world’s second-largest private corporation, with $70 billion in revenues for 2005], who has soybean agents scouring the globe knowing
everything there is to know about soybeans and funneling the information up to their trading headquarters.” Willis has had friends
who made millions trading fundamentally, but they could never know
as much as the big corporations with thousands of employees. And
they always limited themselves to trading only one market. Willis
added, “They don’t know anything about bonds. They don’t know
anything about the currencies. I don’t either, but I’ve made a lot of
money trading them. They’re just numbers. Corn is a little different
than bonds, but not different enough that I’d have to trade them differently. Some of these guys I read about have a different system for

TurtleTraderThePhilosophy

54
each [market]. That’s absurd. We’re trading mob psychology. We’re
not trading corn, soybeans, or S&P’s. We’re trading numbers.” 10
“Trading numbers” was just another Dennis convention to reinforce
abstracting the world in order not to get emotionally distracted. Dennis made the Turtles understand price analysis. He did this because at
ﬁrst he “thought that intelligence was reality and price the appearance, but after a while I saw that price is the reality and intelligence is
the appearance.” 11
He was not being purposefully oblique. Dennis’s working assumption was that soybean prices reﬂected soybean news faster than people could get and digest the news. Since his early twenties, he had
known that looking at the news for decision-making cues was the
wrong thing to do.
If acting on news, stock tips, and economic reports were the real
key to trading success, then everyone would be rich. Dennis was blunt:
“Abstractions like crop size, unemployment, and inﬂation are mere
metaphysics to the trader. They don’t help you predict prices, and they
may not even explain past market action.” 12
The greatest trader in Chicago had been trading ﬁve years before
he ever saw a soybean. He poked fun at the notion that if “something”
was happening in the weather, his trading would somehow change: “If
it’s raining on those soybeans, all that means to me is I should bring an
umbrella.” 13
Turtles may have initially heard Dennis’s explanations and assumed
he was just being cute or coy, but in reality he was telling them exactly how to think. He wanted the Turtles to know in their heart of
hearts the downsides of fundamental analysis: “You don’t get any
proﬁt from fundamental analysis. You get proﬁt from buying and selling. So why stick with the appearance when you can go right to the
reality of price?” 14
How could the Turtles possibly know the balance sheets and assorted other ﬁnancial metrics of all ﬁve hundred companies in the
S&P 500 index? Or how could they know all the fundamentals about
soybeans? They couldn’t. Even if they did, that knowledge would
not have told them when to buy or sell along with how much to buy
or sell.
Dennis knew he had problems if watching TV allowed people to

TurtleTraderThePhilosophy

55
predict what would happen tomorrow—or predict anything for that
matter. He said, “If the universe is structured like that, I’m in trouble.” 15
Fundamental reporting from CNBC’s Maria Bartiromo would have
been called “ﬂuff” by the C&D Commodities teaching team.
Michael Gibbons, a trend-following trader, put using “news” for
trading decisions in perspective: “I stopped looking at news as something important in 1978. A good friend of mine was employed as a reporter by the largest commodity news service at the time. One day his
major ‘story’ was about sugar and what it was going to do. After I read
his piece, I asked, ‘how do you know all of this?’ I will never forget his
answer; he said, ‘I made it up.’ ”
However, trading à la Dennis was not all highs. Regular small losses
were going to happen as the Turtles traded Dennis’s money. Dennis
knew the role conﬁdence would play. He said, “I suppose I didn’t like
the idea that everyone thought I was all wrong, crazy, or going to fail,
but it didn’t make any substantial difference because I had an idea
what I wanted to do and how I wanted to do it.” 16
The Turtles’ core axioms were the same ones practiced by the great
speculators from one hundred years earlier:
“Do not let emotions ﬂuctuate with the up and down of your
capital.”
“Be consistent and even-tempered.”
“Judge yourself not by the outcome, but by your process.”
“Know what you are going to do when the market does what it is
going to do.”
“Every now and then the impossible can and will happen.”
“Know each day what your plan and your contingencies are for the
next day.”
“What can I win and what can I lose? What are probabilities of
either happening?”
However, there was precision behind the familiar-sounding euphemisms. From the ﬁrst day of training, William Eckhardt outlined ﬁve

TurtleTraderThePhilosophy

56
questions that were relevant to what he called an optimal trade. The
Turtles had to be able to answer these questions at all times:
1. What is it the state of the market?
2. What is the volatility of the market?
3. What is the equity being traded?
4. What is the system or the trading orientation?
5. What is the risk aversion of the trader or client?
There was no messing around in Eckhardt’s tone, as he suggested
that these were the only things that had any importance.17
What is it the state of the market? The state of the market simply
means. “What is the price that the market is trading at?” If Microsoft is
trading at 40 a share today, then that is the state of that market.
What is the volatility of the market? Eckhardt taught the Turtles
that they had to know on a daily basis how much any market goes up
and down. If Microsoft on an average trades at 50, but typically
bounces up and down on any given day between 48 and 52, then
Turtles were taught that the volatility of that market was four. They had
their own jargon to describe daily volatilities. They would say that Microsoft had an “N” of four. More volatile markets generally carried
more risk.
What is the equity being traded? The Turtles had to know how
much money they had at all times, because every rule they would
learn adapted to their given account size at that moment.
What is the system or the trading orientation? Eckhardt instructed the Turtles that in advance of the market opening, they had
to have their battle plan set for buying and selling. They couldn’t say,
“Okay, I’ve got $100,000; I’m going to randomly decide to trade
$5,000 of it.” Eckhardt did not want them to wake up and say, “Do I
buy if Google hits 500 or do I sell if Google hits 500?” They were
taught precise rules that would tell them when to buy or sell any
market at any time based on the movement of the price. The Turtles
had two systems: System One (S1) and System Two (S2). These sys-

TurtleTraderThePhilosophy

57
tems governed their entries and exits. S1 essentially said you would
buy or sell short a market if it made a new twenty-day high or low.
What is the risk aversion of the trader or client? Risk management was not a concept that the Turtles grasped immediately. For example, if they had $10,000 in their account, should they bet all
$10,000 on Google stock? No. If Google all of a sudden dropped,
they could lose all $10,000 fast. They had to bet a small amount of the
$10,000, because they didn’t know whether or not a trade was going
to go in their favor. Small betting (for example, 2 percent of $10,000
on initial bets) kept them in the game to play another day, all the while
waiting for a big trend.

Class Discussion
Day after day, Eckhardt would emphasize comparisons. Once he told
the Turtles to consider two traders who have the same equity, the
same system (or trading orientation), and the same risk aversion and
were both facing the same situation in the market. For both traders,
the optimal course of action must be the same. “Whatever is optimal
for one should be optimal for the other,” he would say.18
Now this may sound simple, but human nature causes most people,
when faced with a similar situation, to react differently. They tend to
outthink the situation, ﬁguring there must be some unique value that
they alone can add to make it even better. Dennis and Eckhardt demanded that the Turtles respond the same or they were out of the
program (and they did end up cutting people).
In essence Eckhardt was saying, “You are not special. You are not
smarter than the market. So follow the rules. Whoever you are and
however much brains you have, it doesn’t make a hill of beans’ difference. Because if you’re facing the same issues and if you’ve got the
same constraints, you must follow the rules.” Eckhardt said this in a far
nicer, more professorial and academic way, but that was what he
meant. He did not want his students to wake up and say, “I’m feeling
smart today,” “I’m feeling lucky today,” or “I’m feeling dumb today.”
He taught them to wake up and say, “I’ll do what my rules say to do
today.”

TurtleTraderThePhilosophy

58
Dennis was clear that it would take stick-to-itiveness to follow the
rules day to day and do it right: “To follow the good principles and not
let fear, greed and hope interfere with your trading is tough. You’re
swimming upstream against human nature.” 19 The Turtles had to have
the conﬁdence to follow through on all rules and pull the trigger when
they were supposed to. Hesitate and they would be toast in the zerosum market game.
This motley crew of novices quickly learned that of the ﬁve questions deemed to be most important by Eckhardt, the ﬁrst two, about
the market’s state and the market’s volatility, were the objective
pieces of the puzzle. Those were simply facts that everyone could see
plain as day.
Eckhardt was most interested in the last three questions, which addressed the equity level, the systems, and the risk aversion. They were
subjective questions all grounded in the present. It did not make a difference what the answers to these three questions were a month ago
or last week. Only “right now” was important.20
Put another way, the Turtles could control only how much money
they had now, how they decided to enter and exit a trade now, and
how much to risk on each trade right now. For example, if Google is
trading at 500 today, Google is trading at 500. That’s a statement of
fact. If Google has a precise volatility (“N”) today of four, that’s not a
judgment call.
To reinforce the need for objectivity on issues such as “N” Eckhardt
wanted the Turtles to think in terms of “memory-less trading.” He told
them, “You shouldn’t care about how you got to the current state but
rather about what you should do now. A trader who trades differentially because of swings in conﬁdence is focusing on his or her own
past rather than on current realities.” 21
If ﬁve years ago you had $100,000 and today you have only
$50,000, you can’t sit around and make decisions based on the hypothetical $100,000 you used to have. You have to base your decisions
on the reality of the $50,000 you have now.
How to handle proﬁts properly is a separation point between
winners and losers. Great traders adjust their trading to the
money they have at any one time.

TurtleTraderThePhilosophy

59
If crude oil had just traded above $40 for the ﬁrst time, the Turtles
were not to sit around and kibitz about it. They were to take action if it
hit their S1 or S2 entry or exit signals. Why or how it got to $40 was irrelevant. Eckhardt threw out the examples fast and furious.
He started with a commonplace idea that most people are willing
to accept. If you make some proﬁts with your original money, you can
take more risks, because now you’re playing with their money. He said,
“It’s certainly a comforting thought. It certainly can’t be as bad to lose
their money as yours. Can’t it? Why should it matter whom the money
used to belong to? What matters is whom it belongs to now (you) and
what to do about it now.” 22
For instance, assume you start with a $100,000 account, quickly
making another $100,000. You now have $200,000. Although you
made a proﬁt, you can’t say, “I can now take crazier risks with that
$100,000.”
Why would you view your money as funny money or lucky money?
The Turtles were taught to treat that additional $100,000 as they did
their original $100,000. They had to use the same concern, care, and
discipline. The ﬁve questions didn’t change, even if their account balances did.
Traders who face the same opportunity must trade the same.
Personal feelings can’t interfere.
Pretend there are two traders, John and Mary. John and Mary are
exactly alike in all respects. They have the same risk aversion and the
same system. There is one small difference between the two: John has
50 percent more money. John then decides to go on vacation and
while he’s away having fun at South Beach, Mary makes 50 percent.
Now they have exactly the same amount of money. How or why they
got to the point of having the same amount of money is not relevant.
The correct course for John is the correct course for Mary.23
Eckhardt did not want the Turtles to say. “I had a period where I
made some money, so now I can do something different.” They had to
take the same steps regardless.
Logically, upon ﬁrst hearing that Mary had just made 50 percent
more, most people might want to debate Eckhardt’s contention that

TurtleTraderThePhilosophy

60
they should trade the same way. The rule was designed to keep traders with a big proﬁt run-up in their trading account from acting irrationally or breaking a rule. Many people with a big proﬁt run-up don’t
want to lose those paper gains. They are anxious to take their proﬁts
off the table so they can feel secure.
Eckhardt slammed home the point that the security craved by humans was bad for proper trading: “The distinction between open
trade equity and closed-out trading proﬁts is completely vacuous.
How much do you have in open trade equity? How much do you have
in closed-out equity? This is a bookkeeper’s artifact. It has absolutely
no relevance to correct trading.”
While it might have zero relevance, people go the wrong way all
the time. Instead of trading as they should today, based on their
money now and their rules, they trade based on the money they once
had. They are clearly trying to recoup. “How much money you use to
have has no signiﬁcance. It’s how much money you have now,” implored Eckhardt.24
If the Turtles started with $100,000 but now had $90,000, they still
had to make trading decisions based on what they had now. If the
Turtles were supposed to risk 2 percent of their trading capital, then
they had to risk 2 percent of their current $90,000, not 2 percent of
their original $100,000.
If the Turtles lost money in a market, they had to move on.
Accepting and managing losses are part of their game.
The whole notion of holding on to the past was a big issue for the
team at C&D Commodities. Eckhardt was stern about the mistake losing traders make when they look backward in time. The losing trader is
trying to make money back in the same market and on the same position. Eckhardt described it as a “market vendetta.”
Suppose John lost money in Cisco. That market “hurt” him. Instead
of focusing on what the best opportunity might be now, he only wants
his money back in Cisco. All John can think about is his Cisco position,
and in turn his loss just keeps growing. According to Eckhardt, this is
the kind of personal memory mistake that always leads to disaster.25
The Turtles were taught not to ﬁxate on what particular market
