
For example, suppose a trader has made a volatility forecast of 20% based on
historical data, and that the implied volatility is currently 24%. If the trader decides to
give the implied volatility 75% of the weight, his final forecast will be:

(75% x 24%) +. (25% x 20%) = 23%

On the other hand, if the trader decides to give the implied volatility 25% of the weight,
his final forecast will be:

2. For further information an ARCH and GARCH models see:

Engle, R.F., “Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedaticity with Estimates of the Variance of United
Kingdom Inflation,” Econometrica, Vol. 50, Na. 4, 1982, pages 987-1000.

Bollerslev, T., “Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteraskedasticity,” Journal of Economics,
No. 31, April 1986, pages 307-327.

Bollerslev, T., “A Conditional Heteroskedastic Time Series Model for Speculative Prices and Rates of
Return,” Review of Economics and Statistics, No. 69, August 1987, pages 542-547,

Nelson, David B., “Conditional Heteraskedasticity in Asset Returns: A New Approach,” Econometrica,
No. 59, 1991, pages 347-370

Kuberek, Robert C., “Predicting Interest Rate Volatility: A Conditional Heteroskedastic Model of
Interest Rate Movements,” Journal of Fixed Income, Vol. 1, No. 4, March 1992, pages 21-27.


282 Chapter 14

(25% x 24%) + (75% x 20%) = 21%

Finally, if the trader decides to give the implied volatility half the weight, his final
forecast Will be:

(50% x 24) + (50% x 20) = 22%

A PRACTICAL APPROACH

No matter how painstaking a trader’s method, he is likely to find that his volatility
forecasts are often incorrect, and sometimes to a large degree. Given this difficulty,
many traders find it easier to take a more general approach. Rather than asking what
the correct volatility is, a trader might instead ask, given the current volatility climate,
what’s the right strategy? Rather than trying to forecast an exact volatility, a trader will
try to pick a strategy that best fits the volatility conditions in the marketplace. To do this,
a trader will want to consider several factors:

1, Whatis the long-term mean volatility of the underlying contract?

What has been the recent historical volatility in relation to the mean volatility?
What is the trend in the recent historical volatility?

Where is implied volatility and what is its trend?

Are we dealing with options of shorter or longer duration?

SNF oD

How stable does the volatility tend to be?

For example, suppose there are ten weeks (approximately 50 trading days) to
expiration and we are trying to decide on an appropriate volatility strategy. To make a
decision, we might look at the 50-day historical volatility (the historical volatility which
corresponds to the amount of time remaining to expiration), its relationship to the
long-term mean volatility, and of course the implied volatility. Having done this, suppose
we find the conditions shown in Figure 14-5A. What are our conclusions?

Clearly we are coming off a period of high volatility and seem to be moving
downward. The recent 50-day historical volatility (approx. 20.6%} is still above the
long-term historical mean (approx. 18.7%), so there is reason to believe that the
volatility will continue to decline. The implied volatility is also declining, but still
appears to be about 1% percentage points higher (22.1%} than the 50-day historical
volatility. Al! volatility conditions seem to be pointing in the same direction. The
historical volatility is above the mean but declining, and the implied volatility is above
the historical volatility and also declining. A short volatility position (negative
gamma/negative vega] is strongly indicated.

There are of course a variety of short volatility strategies available, and the best
strategy will still depend on a trader’s experience in the market and the amount of risk
he is willing to take. Suppose we have additional volatility data (perhaps a volatility cone
of the type in Figure 14-3) showing that the 50-day volatility can easily vary by as much
as 10 percentage points. We still want to sell volatility, but given this instability and the


283

Volatility Revisited

09

<- ainyn4 jsed x >
os Or oE OL ) ol O02 Of Om oS 098 Of O08 06
it 1 5 i 1 L I it a 1 t gL
Ayiyejoa ues Wa} Buoy | et
uolyesidxa
+02

Ayyyejoa
paijdust

Ayye|OA jeouoysiy Lhe
kep og
Loo
mo
Pe
L Se

es-p) aunbi4

(9%) ANINE|OA



284 Chapter 14

fact that implied volatility at 22.2% is only slightly above the 50-day historical volatility,
perhaps the wisest choice is a less risky strategy such as the purchase of butterflies. If a
riskier strategy is chosen, perhaps it should be done only in small size. On the other
hand, if implied volatility is currently 25% and we find that the volatility tends to be
quite stable, varying only five or six percentage points for any 50-day period, a trader
may be willing to take ona much riskier position, perhaps selling a straddles or strangles.

In real life the situation is rarely as simple as in Figure 14-5A. For example, consider
Figure 14-5B. Now the historical volatility is above the historical mean and declining,
but the implied volatility has already moved ahead of the historical volatility. A trader
may still choose a short volatility position, but he is unlikely to have the same degree of
confidence. Indeed, the situation may be even more confused. Suppose the historical
volatility is above the long-term mean but seems to be increasing (Figure 14-5C}. Or
suppose implied volatility is moving in the opposite direction of the historical volatility
(Figure 14-5D}. In each of these situations some factors dictate one type of position,
while other factors dictate a different position.

Consider the situation in Figure 14-6A where we are thinking of taking a position
in six-week options (approximately 30 trading days}. The 30-day historical! volatility,
currently at 15.8%, is well above the long-term mean of 11.2%. However, the trend in
volatility seems to be up, and there is no telling how long it will take for the volatility
to revert to its mean of 11.2%. The current implied volatility of 14.6% is also well above
the long term mean volatility, but is lower than the 30-day historical volatility.
Corresponding to the upward trend in historical volatility, there also seems to be an
upward trend in the implied volatility. With so many contradictory signals, a trader is
unlikely to have a strong opinion about whether he should buy or sell volatility. He may
choose to take no position at all, preferring to wait for clearer indications.

Suppose, in addition to six-week options, we also have available 19-week options
(approximately 95 trading days). Volatility data for this contract is shown in Figure
14-6B. While a trader may be hesitant to take a position in six-week options alone, when
combined with {9-week options, he may be able to construct a strategy with much more
acceptable risk characteristics. Here the 95-day historical volatility of 12.6% is above the
11.2% mean volatility. Moreover the current implied volatility of 19-week options, at
14.5%, is well above both the 95-day historical volatility and the long-term mean
volatility. There is a much better chance that the volatility will revert to its mean over
a 19-week period than over a six-week period, so there are much stronger reasons for
taking a short volatility position in 19-week options than in six-week options. Still, the
upward trend in both the historical and implied volatilities will cause some worry if we
do take a short volatility position. However, if we were to simultaneously take a long
volatility position in six-week options, we would at least be protected against a
continuing increase in the volatility of the underlying contract over the next six weeks.
By creating a short time spread (buy six-week options/sell 19-week options) we can take
a position which should be profitable based on our knowledge of volatility charac-
teristics, but which also has acceptable risk characteristics if we are wrong.

A short time spread will not eliminate every risk. The market might suddenly
become very quiet, with historical volatility quickly dropping to, or even below, its


285

Volatility Revisited

09

os 0

ld

0

Ee

02
nl

enn
ol

yseq
fe] 0 ia 02 og- Ov

Os 09° oz"

ab

uolyeaidxe

Ayyiqejoa jeouvoysiy
Aep og

Ayejon ueaw Wwe} Buoy

Aquge|on
perdu

6h

Hz &

Ey

eS

Lzz 38
Lez
bz
Gz

qS-pL aunbig



~_ aunin4 ised _

os Or o€ 0g 0 k Q Ob 02- og: Or- os- og" OL os- 06-

1 1 i

; St

Ay|We|OA UPB W893} Buo|

uonesdxe

Liz &
B
5
Lez 3
Ayiyejon yeou0ysi4
Aep 0S had
Ayye|on be
paydu
4

286

9S-PL einBi4



287

Volatility Revisited

og

~~! auning ised a
os Ov oe 0¢ OL 0 OlL- Qe- Oe- ov Qs- Qg- OZ- os- 06-
1 1 LL. = _j 1 L jt 1 1 al Le
Ayigejon uUeSU LUI} Buo|
uoyendxa

<
fe)
B
5
<S
Ayejoa ee
perdu!
Lez
Ay|ve{OA fedL10}814
Aep os
wid
Se
ps-p} ean6iy



Chapter 14

288

02

~<g— oinjng
OL

0 Sed | a

Ol- Oz- Oe- OF os 09" O2- o8-

L 1

06-

FEE

Aywejon ueaw

(suondo yaem 9) Auize|on pal|duuy

T
N
-_

UJ
o
_

Qt

(%) AUIE|OA

e9-p1 einBi4



289

Volatility Revisited

0c

~<q— enn
ob

(e)

yseq

OL-
L

Oe OE- or og oo" o2- og-

06-

~AuyejOA ue

Ayqejoa jeouoysly Aep sg

(suondo yaem 64) Ayejoa par dut

ma

FEL

SL

(9%) AyaeIOA,

q9-h}. aunBi4



290 Chapter 14

long-term mean. At the same time, implied volatility may remain relatively high. Such
conditions will do the most damage to a short time spread. Still, if we believe that the
implied volatility tends to follow the historical volatility, we may conclude that it is
unlikely that the implied volatility will stay high if the historical volatility drops.

A trader will always attempt to pick the strategy which best fits his opinion of
market conditions, whether a directional opinion or a volatility opinion. Given the fact
that there is such a wide variety of market conditions, a trader who is familiar with the
greatest number of strategies will have the best chance of surviving and prospering. He
will be in a position to pick strategies with the best risk/reward characteristics, strategies
which will be profitable when things go right, but which won’t give back all the profits
when things go wrong. This skill comes not only from a technical knowledge of option
evaluation and theory, but also from a practical knowledge of what really happens in
the marketplace.

SOME THOUGHTS ON IMPLIED VOLATILITY

Since many option strategies are sensitive to changes in implied volatility, and since
implied volatility will often play a role in forecasting the volatility of the underlying
contract, it may be worthwhile to consider some of the characteristics of implied
volatility.

Implied versus Historical Volatility

Implied volatility can be thought of as a consensus volatility among all market partici-
pants with respect to the expected amount of underlying price fluctuation over the
remaining life of an option. In the same way that an individual trader is likely to change
his volatility forecast in response to changing historical volatility, it is logical to assume
that the marketplace as a whole will also change its consensus volatility in response to
changing historical volatility. As the market becomes more volatile, implied volatility
can be expected to rise; as the market becomes less volatile, implied volatility can be
expected to fall. Market participants are making the logical assumption that what has
happened in the past is a good indicator of what will happen in the future.

The influence of historical volatility on implied volatility can be seen in Figure 14-7,
the historical and implied volatility of U.S. Treasury Bond futures traded on the Chicago
Board of Trade from 1989 to 1991. In late 1989, and again in mid-1991, there were
declines in the volatility of Treasury Bond futures, and these were accompanied by
corresponding declines in implied volatility. From August 1990 through January 1991
(the period of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait), there were several sharp increases in the
volatility of the futures, and these were accompanied by similar increases in implied
volatility. Clearly, the marketplace, in the form of changing implied volatility, was
responding to the changing historical volatility of the underlying contract.

Notice, however, that the fluctuations in implied volatility were usually less than
the fluctuations in historical volatility. When the historical volatility declined, the
implied volatility rarely declined by an equal amount. And when historical volatility
increased, the implied volatility rarely increased by an equal amount. Because volatility


291

Volatility Revisited

zeuer 16degs leunr 16-494 06100 osinr = O64eW 68-AON 6e-Bny 6e-dy sever
L L

Ayejoa eoUOIsIU Kep 02 Ls

-9

Le

. _. Le

a Mw

i Ny iy, sa i \ 6 o
a \ mm ; \ - ray
vA SOOM GP | \a Z
, \y pg

\ Eth

\ pos
v Lat
Ayyeoa paydut

Let

Leh

" St

AWNEIOA Saunyng puog Ainseadl :Z-ph einbig



292 Chapter 14

tends to be mean reverting, when historical volatility is above its mean there is a greater
likelihood that it will decline, and when historical volatility is below its mean there is a
greater likelihood that it will increase.

Moreover, the further out in time we go, the greater the likelihood that the
volatility of the underlying contract will return to its mean. (Look again at Figure 14-3.)
Consequently, the implied volatility of long-term options tends to remain closer to the
mean volatility of an underlying contract than the implied volatility of short-term
options. As historical volatility rises, the implied volatility of all options is likely to rise.
But given the stronger mean reverting characteristics of volatility over long periods of
time, the implied volatility of long-term options will tend to rise less than the implied
volatility of short-term options. As historical volatility falls, the implied volatility of all
options is likely to fall. But the implied volatility of long-term options will tend to fall
less than the implied volatility of short-term options. This is born out by Figure 14-8,
the implied volatility of Treasury Bond options for various expiration months from
September 1990 to May 1991. Note the increase in implied volatilities during January
1991. But the increase in the implied volatility of the short-term contract (March) was
much greater than the increase in the implied volatility of the mid-term (June) contract,
which was in turn greater than the increase in the implied volatility of the long-term
(September) contract. When implied volatility began to decline in late January 1991 the
roles were reversed. The March contract declined the most rapidly, followed by the June
contract, and the September contract. This is typical of the way in which implied
volatility tends to change in response to changing volatility environments.

Over long periods of time the historical volatility of the underlying contract will be
the dominant factor affecting implied volatility. Over short periods of time, however,
other factors can also play a significant, perhaps even a dominant, role. If the market-
place foresees events which could cause the underlying contract to become more
volatile, anticipation of these events might cause implied volatility to change in ways
that are not necessarily consistent with historical volatility. For example, government
reports on economic conditions are issued periodically, and these reports have been
known to contain surprises for the interest rate and foreign exchange market. This
potential for surprise can cause uncertainty in the marketplace, and this uncertainty is
often reflected in an increase in implied volatility. Going into government reports, there
is a strong tendency for implied volatility to rise, even in the face of low historical
volatility in the underlying instrument.

Government reports are not the only factors which add uncertainty to the market.
Any future events which could have unexpected consequences can have an effect on
implied volatility. In the currency markets, upcoming meetings of finance ministers—or
in the energy markets upcoming OPEC meetings—often cause implied volatility to rise.
In the stock option market, earnings news, the potential success or failure of new
products, or (most dramatically) the possibility of a takeover, can all cause increases in
implied volatility, regardless of the historical volatility of the stock.

In a similar way, if the marketplace believes that no significant events are likely to
occur in the foreseeable future, uncertainty is removed from the market. In such a case
the implied volatility may start to fall, even if the actual historical volatility has been


293

Volatility Revisited

Lee

be-qe4 be-uer

06-080

06-AON 0690 de-des o6-Bny o6-inr
L
9

166 | Jequiaides

1661 Ye

1661 eunr

(%) Ane|on payduyy

066} Joquiscsq

0664 Jequiajdag
rOb

Zt >
AypyeloA peljduy seanjng puog Ainseas, :g-p1 eunbig



294 Chapter 14

relatively high. This is why implied volatility sometimes drops right after large moves in
the underlying contract. Once the big event has occurred, there may be a perception
that all the uncertainty has been removed from the market.

Regardless of short-term changes in implied volatility, it is still important fora trader
to remember that the volatility of the underlying contract will eventually overwhelm
any considerations of implied volatility. As an example, consider the following situation:

futures price = 97.73

time to expiration = 60 days
interest rate = 6%

implied volatility = 20%

Given these conditions, the 100 call would be trading for 2.17, with an implied delta
of 40. Suppose we create a delta neutral position by purchasing ten 100 calls for 2.17
each, and selling four futures contracts at 97.73. What will happen to our position if
implied volatility rises to 22%?

If implied volatility immediately goes to 22%, the new price of the 100 call wilt be
2.47, and we will show a profit of

10 x (2.47 -— 2.17) = +3.00

Suppose, however, that the increase in implied volatility occurs very slowly, over a
period of 20 days, and during this period the price of the underlying futures contract
remains at 97.73. Under these conditions, even if implied volatility rises from 20% to
22%, the 100 call will now be worth only 1.87. Our position will then show a loss of

10 x (1.87 ~ 2.17) = -3.00

Even though the implied volatility increased, the fact that the underlying futures
contract failed to make any significant move resulted in the option’s price declining.
Now suppose we have the same position (long ten 100 calls, short four futures
contracts) but this time instead of rising to 22%, the implied volatility drops to 18%.
What will be the effect on our position?
If implied volatility immediately drops to 18%, the new price of the 100 call will
be 1.86, and we will show a loss of

10x (1.86 - 2.17) =-3.10

Suppose, however, that the decline in implied volatility is accompanied by a swift move
in the underlying contract. If the underlying futures contract falls to 93.00, and implied
volatility falls to 18%, the price of the 100 call will be .59, and we will show a profit of

4 x (97.73 — 93.00) — 10 x (2.17 — 59) = +3.12

On the other hand, if the underlying futures contract rises to 102.50 while implied
volatility falls to 18%, the price of the 100 call will be 4.32, and we will again show a
profit

4 x (97.73 - 102.50) + 10 x (4.32 - 2.17) = +2.42


Volatility Revistted 295

In both cases the movement in the underlying contract has more than offset any decline
in the option’s price due to a decline in implied volatility.

The foregoing examples are of course simplified. As market conditions change-an
active trader may very well make adjustments to his position in order to remain delta
neutral. If so, the actual profit or loss will be affected by the cash flow from this
adjustment process. The important point is that the volatility of the underlying contract,
whether the contract moves or sits still over time, will eventually overwhelm any
changes in implied volatility. This is not to say that implied volatility is unimportant.
The price of a contract is always an important consideration in making trading decisions.
But in order to trade intelligently, we need to know value as well as price. The value of
an option is determined by the volatility of the underlying contract over the life of the
option.

Implied versus Future Volatility

If, as many traders believe, prices in the marketplace reflect all available information
affecting the value of a contract, the best predictor of the future volatility ought to be
the implied volatility. Just how good a predictor of future volatility is implied volatility?
While it would be impossible to answer this question definitively, since that would
require a detailed study of many markets over long periods of time, we might still gain
some insight by looking at a limited number of examples.

Clearly, no one knows the future volatility. We can, however, record the implied
volatility at any moment in time and then, when expiration arrives, look back and
calculate the actual volatility of the underlying contract between the time we recorded
the implied volatility and expiration. We can do this every day during an option’s life,
recording the implied volatility and then at expiration calculating the actual volatility
that occurred over this period. This has been done in Figures 1 4-9A, 9B, and 9C for the
June 1992, March 1993, and December 1993 options on Treasury Bond futures. It is
admittedly dangerous to generalize from such limited data, but are there any conclu-
sions we might draw from these graphs?

We can see that with a great deal of time remaining to expiration, the future
volatility of the underlying contract (the solid line) is relatively stable. But as we get
Closer to expiration the future volatility can become much less stable. This is logical if
We again recall that the mean reverting characteristics of volatility are much less certain
over short periods of time than over long periods. One large move in the underlying
contract with only several days remaining to expiration will result in a sharp increase in
the volatility to expiration (see Figure 14-9C). On the other hand, if the underlying
contract is relatively quiet over the last several days in an option’s life, the volatility to
expiration will collapse (see Figure 14-9B).
