
Answer 74
Yes. Give yourself three points for choosing the right answer.
Since a gold futures contract has 100 ounces, a trader wins or loses
$100 whenever gold rises or falls $1 per ounce. Gary plans to risk $300,
plus commission and slippage. The 2% Rule allows him to risk a maximum of $400. The 2% Rule allows him to take that trade. Gary is aiming for a $900 profit, risking $300. Those are good odds, but his plan
illustrates how hard it is to trade a small account. A mere $3 move
against him puts him near the limit of his risk tolerance. He may want
to look into trading smaller minicontracts.

130

ANSWERS AND RATING SCALES

Answer 75
No. Give yourself three points for choosing the right answer.
The 2% Rule limits Susan’s maximum allowed risk to $1,000. Risking
$2.50 per share on 500 shares would expose $1,250 to risk, plus commissions and slippage. This trade would violate the 2% Rule. Susan has
to reduce the number of shares she’ll buy. If a proven system gives her
this trade, she should take it, but on a smaller scale—300 shares rather
than 500.

Answer 76
Choice 3 is correct. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
All of the choices given are helpful, but none compares in importance with having a boss whose main tasks are money management and
discipline. People who trade well for institutions can rarely match their
performance level once they leave to trade for themselves, because they
leave the manager behind. A private trader has to be his own manager,
which is why it is essential to write down your trading plans and rate
yourself on your adherence to them.

Answer 77
Choice 2 is correct. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
Record your account size at the beginning of the month. To observe the
6% Rule, you must stop trading as soon as your equity dips 6% below that
level. Stay out for the balance of the month. Your risk is at its highest when
you put on a trade; the total account risk will never exceed 6% because
then you simply may not put on another trade. Following the 2% Rule, you
may have more than three open positions, if each risks less than 2%.

Answer 78
Yes. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.

MONEY MANAGEMENT

131

Six precent of a $90,000 account comes to $5,400—this is Ann’s permitted risk of loss for the month. She already lost a total of $2,400 on trades
A and B, but trades C and D are moving in her favor, stops are at breakeven,
and she has no money at risk in them. This leaves her with $3,000 of permitted risk capital. Trade E would expose $1,500 to risk—this is less than
2% of her account, while her total risk for the month remains below 6%.

Answer 79
No. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
Six percent of a $150,000 account comes to $9,000—this is Peter’s
permitted risk of loss for the month. No matter how profitable early in
the month, he has already lost $5,000 of his starting equity and has two
open trades, risking $1,900 and $1,700, for a total of $8,600 either lost
or at risk. There is simply no room for one more trade, unless he wants
to close out one of the trades in which he has money at risk and free up
enough risk capital for a new trade.

Answer 80
Yes. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
Six percent of a $30,000 account comes to $1,800—this is Jim’s permitted risk of loss for the month. So far he lost $500, besides having two
profitable trades. If he trades the same size in D and E and uses similar
stops as in his previous trades, his total risk exposure will be $1,500—
below his monthly limit.

Answer 81
True 1, 3, 5
False 2, 4
Give yourself a point for each correct answer.
The less money you risk on any given trade, the more objective you
are likely to be, and the more likely that trade is to be a winner. It is
important to trade a fairly consistent size and reduce it when losing.

132

ANSWERS AND RATING SCALES

Putting on bigger trades in an attempt to recoup losses is typical amateur behavior. Professionals plan their trades for safety and survival first,
for big profits second. The best trades tend to have very tight stops,
allowing you to trade a large size with a fairly small amount at risk.

Answer 82
Choice 2 is correct. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
Overtrading means risking too much for your account. Making three
trades a day can be a legitimate level of activity for a day-trader, and an
active swing trader may make 10 trades a week when the market is running. The maximum risk per trade in a $100,000 account is $2,000, and
someone who buys right above support with a very tight stop may be
able to afford to trade a big size. The maximum risk for a $100,000
account is $6,000 per month, allowing five open trades risking $1,000
each. Having 10 open positions, whose risk amounts to $7,500, busts
through the 6% Rule and indicates overtrading.
Rating Yourself
Below 54 Poor. Failing this test gives you plenty of company. Most people do not know enough about money management. You must bring
yourself up to speed—this aspect of trading cannot be skipped!
Please return to the recommended materials, study them, and retake
this test a few days later.
54–60 Excellent. You show a level of understanding of trading that few
people possess. If you implement your knowledge in practice, you
should get ahead of the game. Now please move on to the next
essential topics—record keeping and accountability.
Required Reading
Elder, Alexander. Come into My Trading Room (New York: John Wiley & Sons,
2002). See Chapter 7 ”Money Management Formulas.”
Additional Reading
Vince, Ralph. Portfolio Management Formulas (New York: John Wiley & Sons,
1990).

N I N E

THE ORGANIZED TRADER

Answer 83
Factor 3 is correct. Give yourself three points for choosing the right
answer.
All factors listed here are important, but none more so than discipline. Markets are full of intelligent people with experience and imagination who have been trained and still fail to make money. Discipline
is the key factor; without it all others are useless.

Answer 84
Choice 2. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
Good records are the key factor in disciplined trading. Keeping them
leads to a reduction in trading mistakes. No matter how good your
records, no matter how proficient you become in trading, nothing permits you to relax your money management discipline; if anything, as
traders get better, they tend to tighten their money management.

Answer 85
E. All of the above. Give yourself four points for choosing the right
answer.
Entry and exit dates and price levels are the basic starting points for
this spreadsheet. It also helps to keep an eye on expenses. A more
133

134

ANSWERS AND RATING SCALES

sophisticated trader uses his spreadsheet to calculate his performance
grade for every trade, that is, the percentage of a trading channel caught
in that trade. He can also rate the quality of entries and exits—whether
he bought or sold closer to the top or the bottom of the daily bar.

Answer 86
C. 1, 2, and 3. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
If you intend to treat trading as a business, you must know its cash
position at any given time. Equity in a trading account consists of the
current value of all open positions, marking open profits and losses to
market, as well as cash and cash equivalents, such as T-bills. Funds outside of your trading account, such as savings or credit lines, are immaterial to your equity.

Answer 87
Trader 5 has the best equity curve. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
Trader 4 earned the biggest profit, but his drawdown is outright scary.
A $28,000 drawdown represents more than a quarter of this trader’s
starting equity. What if such a deep drawdown comes at the very
beginning of a money management period? No matter how brilliant a
comeback, this kind of trading is an invitation to disaster. Most fund
managers look for steady gains with small drawdowns. If your drawdown never goes into double digits, your performance is brilliant.

Answer 88
Choice 4 is correct. Give yourself three points for choosing the right
answer.
One chart per entry or exit may not be enough, because entries and
exits tend to be complex affairs with several parameters. You may want
to print out a weekly, a daily and an intraday chart for an entry and a

THE ORGANIZED TRADER

135

daily, and an intraday for an exit. Five charts per entry or exit is too
much; trading decisions are best reduced to a small number of key
parameters.

Answer 89
C. 1, 2, and 3. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer
(two points if you chose D).
Gloating after taking a profit or cringing after taking a loss does nothing to improve future performance. What did I do right? Have I made a
mistake? What should I do differently next time? A focused, disciplined
trader keeps asking himself these and other questions, and a trading
diary helps him answer them. People who have the discipline to keep
good records have the discipline to win consistently. Still, it may be
impractical for a very active trader to keep a diary of every single trade.
In that case, it is important to keep a diary for every second, third, or
fifth trade, in strict order, rather than deciding to keep it for “interesting”
trades and omitting it for “ordinary” trades. Knowing which is which
tends to come well after a trade has been closed out.

Answer 90
Entry—4. 75%.
Exit— 2. 25%.
Give yourself two points for each correct answer.
The entry grade rates the quality of your entry by expressing it as a
percentage of that day’s range. If the high of the day was 48, the low 44,
and you bought at 47, then your entry grade is 75, meaning you missed
75% of the day’s range. The lower the percentage while buying, the better. The exit grade rates the quality of your exit. If the high of the day
was 54, the low 50, and you sold at 51, your exit grade is 25. It means
you captured 25% of that day’s range. The higher the percentage, the
better for the seller. The idea is to get your buying grade below 50% and

136

ANSWERS AND RATING SCALES

your selling grade above 50%. This is much harder to accomplish than
it looks.

Answer 91
C. 1, 2, and 3. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer
(two points if you chose B).
Rapidly changing prices affect people like the noise and flashing of
slot machines, tempting them to put in another quarter. Making decisions to buy, sell, or stand aside when the markets are closed offers
traders the luxury of time. Comparing your stock or future to others adds
an extra dimension to your decision-making process. It is a bad idea to
ask for advice on specific trades before taking them—those trades are
yours and the decision is yours alone.

Answer 92
1. A
2. B
3. C
4. E
5. D
Give yourself a point for each correct answer.
Having to describe a chart forces you to focus on specific signals that
led to a trading decision. Live charts often seduce traders into joining
emotional crowds; reading your orders from a printed sheet reinforces
discipline. If you planned to buy a stock if it trades flat, but it gaps up
the next morning and you have not planned for it, there is no reason to
trade. When a stock does something you have not anticipated, that is a
clear signal that your decision making was not in gear with the market,
and putting on a trade is not a good idea.

THE ORGANIZED TRADER

137

Answer 93
D. 1, 2, 3, and 4. Give yourself four points for choosing the right
answer.
The trader’s spreadsheet provides a basic record of every trade,
including its performance grade. The equity curve tracks the health of
your account as a whole. The trading diary allows you to learn from
visual records of past trades. The action plan helps you face the next
trading day in a calm and disciplined manner. All of these records are
essential for success; only the ABC rating system is optional. You need it
if you track a large number of stocks and futures, but can do without it if
you watch just a handful.

Answer 94
B. 1 and 2. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
Second-guessing a system, or making trading decisions on the basis
of factors which are not included in the system, dramatically increases
the range of options but reduces the likelihood of success. Secondguessing raises the level of psychological stress, subverts discipline, and
leads to impulsive trading.

Answer 95
C. 1, 2, and 3. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
Telling people about your open positions is like inviting them to
watch you get intimate with your significant other. It will make you
more popular and invite friendly advice on positions you haven’t considered, none of which is likely to lead to a successful outcome. You
need to be strong enough to shoulder all the responsibility for a trade;
you may discuss it with others only after closing it.

138

ANSWERS AND RATING SCALES

Answer 96
E. All of the above. Give yourself four points for choosing the right
answer.
Trading requires time just as much as it requires capital. You need to
review all markets in which you are interested at least once a week,
usually on weekends. All open positions have to be reviewed daily. You
need to keep a timetable of all important news that may impact your
market in order to decide whether to hold your position, reduce its size,
or get out. Breakouts from opening ranges can help with entries; weak
prices near the close can give the signal to get out of a trade. The more
time you put into the markets, the more profit they are likely to return
to you.

Answer 97
1. A
2. E
3. C
4. D
5. B
Give yourself a point for each correct answer.
The ABC rating system helps traders use their time more efficiently.
It calls for a weekly review of all markets you track and sorting them
into three groups. A is the most promising, and usually the smallest,
group, where you anticipate a trade the next day. Stocks or futures in
group A must be reviewed in depth daily. B is the group where you
expect a trade within a few days, and its stocks or futures should be
reviewed a few days later. C is the group where you do not anticipate
a trade for a week, and its stocks or futures can be set aside for the rest
of the week.

THE ORGANIZED TRADER

139

Answer 98
Combination 4 is correct. Give yourself four points for choosing the
right answer.
Strict money management rules are the keystone of any trading plan;
they allow you to survive and succeed in the long run. A systems trader
must be absolutely strict about his analytic rules, but a discretionary
trader has some degree of flexibility. As long as he analyzes multiple
timeframes and does not trade against his rules, he has some latitude in
choosing his indicators and methods.

Answer 99
Choice 2 is correct. Give yourself four points for choosing the right
answer.
Beginners are attracted by tales of huge profits, but professionals focus
on survival first. This is why any good trading plan is built on the basis
of money management rules. The next goal is to grind out steady profits.
Once that goal is being consistently achieved, we can spend more time
looking for extraordinary opportunities. Then, if our analysis is right and
the market cooperates, we sometimes achieve extraordinary returns.

Answer 100
Sequence 5 is correct. Give yourself four points for choosing the right
answer.
Serious trading begins with good records. They come first because
they allow you to learn from mistakes as well successes, while you
experiment with different techniques. Setting money management rules
and recording your compliance with them is the next most important
step. The third stage is the development of a decision-making tree.

140

ANSWERS AND RATING SCALES

Rating Yourself
Below 60 Poor. If you failed this test, please go back to the main book,
reread the appropriate chapters, and retake this test. The topic is so
new and so neglected in trading literature that most people are completely unfamiliar with it. If you master it, you will get far ahead of
the crowd. Return to the recommended chapters, study them, and
retake this test a few days later.
60–72 Excellent. Your understanding of trading records is uncommon!
All that is left now is to set up your own records—and to trade successfully!
Required Reading
Elder, Alexander. Come into My Trading Room (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 2002). See Chapter 8 “The Organized Trader” and Chapter 9
“Trading for a Living.”

S E C T I O N
T H R E E

LET’S TRADE:
CASE STUDIES
AND QUESTIONS

LET’S TRADE

The longer you trade, the more you learn—practice will make you a
better trader. Be sure to put on many small trades and carefully document every entry and exit. Good records allow you to learn from experience. Trading small will help you keep emotions in check. You will
have plenty of time to increase your trading size once you become a
competent trader.
Remember this paragraph from Come Into My Trading Room:
Keeping good records is the single most important contribution to
your success. If you scrupulously maintain records, review them, and
learn from them, your performance will improve. If, at the same time,
your money management is in place to ensure survival during the
learning process, you’re sure to become a success.

This chapter of the Study Guide offers you an opportunity to practice making trading decisions and keeping records. Look at the charts
in this chapter as if you saw them in your trader’s diary. Mark up chart
patterns and indicator signals, and write down your comments on the
most important points. Make your trading decision and then turn to
the Answers chapter to compare your notes with mine and grade your
performance.
There are many ways to reach a trading decision. Some serious
traders use fundamental analysis, others technical, some combine both,
while gamblers trade “from the gut.” I like to be aware of the key fundamentals, but my favorite method is technical analysis. Price, time,
and volume reflect actions of all market participants—smart and dumb,
143

144

CASE STUDIES

disciplined and gamblers, rich and poor, long-term and short-term
oriented. Prices and indicators are the footprints of bulls and bears. Let
us practice reading those footprints in order to find our way.
The charts in this section were printed in December 2001, not long
after the disaster of September 11th in New York. In stressful times like
these, when fundamentals shift rapidly, technical analysis really shines.

How to Work with These Case Studies
You will see three charts for each trade—two for the entry and one for
the exit. For the entry, you will have a weekly and a daily chart. The
weekly chart will show about a year and a half of history, a 26-week
EMA (solid), a 13-week EMA (dotted), and MACD-Histogram. The daily
chart, ending on the same day, will show several months of history,
the 22-day and the 13-day EMAs (solid and dotted), a 2-day Force Index,
and MACD-Histogram. For exit and reentry decisions, you will see an
updated daily chart that will, in addition to the above, show a trading
channel centered around the long EMA.
These charts feature some of my favorite indicators, although many
others could be used. It would impossible to show all important indicators in a study guide, especially since serious traders always change
their sets of technical tools. My main goal here is to demonstrate the
need for using multiple timeframes—making a strategic decision on
the weekly chart and tactical choices on the daily chart. I also want to
illustrate the need for combining several indicators—trend-following
and oscillators—to evaluate different aspects of market behavior and
make rational trading decisions.
It is your job to find, mark, and document at least two important trading signals on each chart. You will receive a point for each correctly
marked signal and bonus points for identifying additional trading signals. Be sure to document each step that you take.
There are eight sets of charts, covering eight trades. Begin by working through an entry in one market, and then grade your performance
on that entry. Afterward, work through an exit and grade your performance again, using rating scales in the Answers section. If you are satisfied with your performance, move on to the next trade and repeat this
process. If you find that you have done poorly in a trade, return to Come

QUESTIONS

145

Into My Trading Room and reread the relevant chapters before going
any further. This process will put you miles ahead of amateurs and gamblers who jump into the market with both feet, chasing a quick buck—
and get taken out feet first. Education, record keeping, and caution are
essential for your long-term success, which is the only success worth
having in the financial markets.
Please do not try to complete all eight exercises in a single day. Give
yourself enough time to think, reflect, reread relevant chapters, and
review other charts on your screen. You can take more than a week to
work through these exercises.
Here is the recommended sequence of steps as you move through
eight trades:
1. Look at the Entry Question page, which shows two unmarked
charts—weekly and a daily.
2. Mark two or more trading messages on each chart; make an entry
decision and document it.
3. Go to the Entry Answer page for that trade and grade your entry performance. If the grade is satisfactory (above the pass point), proceed
as directed below; otherwise, return to Come Into My Trading Room
and study the relevant chapters.
4. Go to the Exit Question page, which shows an updated unmarked
daily chart. Quickly cover it with a sheet of paper.
5. Gently move the sheet from left to right, until you uncover the vertical arrow marking the entry into the trade; from that day onward,
move the sheet to the right very slowly, one day at a time, stopping
after you uncover each day.
6. Whenever you see an exit point, based on chart or indicator signals,
mark it; whenever you see a likely reentry point, mark it also. Most
charts have more than one exit and reentry point.
7. Once you reach the right edge of the chart, go to the Exit Answer
page and rate your performance. If the grade is satisfactory (above
the pass point), proceed as directed below; otherwise, return to
Come Into My Trading Room and study the relevant chapters.
8. Proceed to the next trade and repeat the process.

146

CASE STUDIES

Technical analysis is partly a science and partly an art—partly objective and partly subjective. There are two main approaches to using it in
trading—systematic and discretionary. Systematic traders test and automate every step. Discretionary traders change their tools as markets
evolve. If you are a systematic trader, you will test all the tools and
apply them in an absolutely uniform manner. As a discretionary trader,
I adjust my tools and every once in a while try to anticipate indicator
signals. The trick is to anticipate them ever so slightly, without going too
far out on a limb, and use the protection of money management.
Intelligent traders may disagree about trading signals. This is why a
professional trader is unlikely to get a perfect score on these tests. He
will bring his personality into the picture and interpret markets slightly
differently. Show me an experienced trader with independent judgment, good records, and solid money management, and I will show
you a winner. What if you see some charts in a different light than I do?
I fear an avalanche of e-mails with questions, and not enough hours
in the day to answer all. The only place where we can butt heads and
argue about trades late into the night is in Traders’ Camps. Bring in your
differences, and we will resolve them. Just be sure to keep good records
of your decisions. Now, let’s go look for trades!
