
P1: OTA
JWBT439-cintro

JWBT439-Michalowski

Introduction

January 18, 2011

19:2

Printer: Yet to come

17

might be surprised how trading can be a microcosm of life. People learn
from comparing other aspects of life to trading.
I will utilize my belief that there is a right and wrong fork in the road
for a lot of things, including trading. The wrong road is often the easiest to
take, but is often the sucker play. That is one reason why trading is not so
easy. I hope that my observations will help paint the picture more clearly
and make the book a little more than your run-of-the-mill book on trading.
I will incorporate unique terms like “the If . . . Should rule,” “Three’s
a Crowd,” “Trading between the Goal Posts,” the “Bullish or Bearish Highway,” and others. These may not mean a thing now, but my goal is for them
to be part of your trading vocabulary in the future.
Through it all, I will focus on attacking currency trends. Are you ready?

P1: OTA
JWBT439-cintro

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

18

19:2

Printer: Yet to come

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

PART I

The Foundation
for Success

house needs to be built on a strong foundation. Otherwise, there is
a risk that the house will fall down in a storm. A successful trader
has a strong trading foundation. Otherwise, the risk is the trader’s
account will blow up in a volatile market.
The currency market is characterized—rightly or wrongly—by volatility. I think what people might mean when they say this is that currencies
can go up and they can go down. The evening news will say, “The dollar is
strong” or “The dollar is weak.” That may sound volatile to a stock investor
who is used to buying and holding because over time stocks go higher.
However, is that theory still necessarily true, especially in a country like
the United States, which has seen stock prices move up and down over the
last 10 or so years? If you listen now, the stock market is characterized as
being “more volatile” as well.
To me, volatility means that the price can trend one way and then
trend the other way. Those trend changes can wreak havoc if a trader does
not have a firm foundation for the risk. It is not good enough to buy and
hold, because the reversals in trends can be storms that cause total failure. Many traders blame the failures from large losses on volatility. They
may blame them on the institutional traders or “big boys” whom they believe cause that volatility, that change in trend. I like to think the blame lies

A

19

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

20

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

with a faulty trading foundation. A foundation that is not strong enough to
weather the trend storms.
Part I of this book builds that foundation for your currency trading
so you have a chance during the storms. In fact, if the foundation is truly
solid, the storms should not have an effect at all. You should be able to
stand strong, just like the big boys.
Chapter 1 is an introduction to the characteristics of the retail currency
trader and will address why trend trading is so difficult for most traders.
Just because it is difficult does not mean you cannot do it. It means you
may have to change, though. So be prepared for some soul searching in
that chapter. In Chapter 2, I discuss those attributes that are needed to be
a successful currency trader. There are six of them, and they build on each
other. If you skip one, you will most likely fail; your foundation will crumble. From there, I progress to the trader’s mission statement in Chapter 3.
When I ask retail traders whether they have a mission statement, 99 percent of them say no. Do you have one? You need one. Without one, that
storm will knock you out. I will give you a mission statement in Chapter 3.
Chapter 4 outlines the game plan for satisfying our mission statement. What
do you have to focus on to win the game—to satisfy the mission? If there is
a game plan, that implies a game of some sorts. All games have rules that
provide control. Successful traders need to follow rules so they too can
have better control over their trading. Those rules are outlined in Chapter
5. Finally, Part I ends with a look at the tools needed in the trader’s toolbox.
Not just any tool is allowed; some tools can be counterproductive. They do
more harm than good. I will warn you of what tools are not welcomed, but
more importantly tell you which ones will help you with your mission and
game plan.
I have the opportunity to talk to many retail traders. Many times the
story starts with “I blew up and . . .” What they really often mean to say is
that their foundation wasn’t in place, a storm came along, and the account
blew up. Don’t ignore the storm warnings. A storm is indeed approaching.
So firm up that foundation before it is too late.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

CHAPTER 1

Stereotyping the
Retail Currency
Trader

tereotyping people is something I do not feel comfortable doing. It
mainly comes from being wrong in the past about people whom I
bucketed as being one way, only to find out they were not at all what
I thought.
My biggest blunder occurred when I was offered a job at Citibank in
London in 1991. I remember my wife and I being warned that the British
were hard to get to know. They liked to keep to themselves. We would be
better off living in an expatriate community and for our young sons to go
to the American school.
When my wife and I went over to look for a place to live, we were sure
we should live where the American school was located and settle in what
we thought was our comfort zone—in a place where we would be happiest.
We arrived in London in early February 1991 and faced something we
were very accustomed to—snow. It was the blizzard of 1991, and although
the eight or so inches did not approach the snowfalls we experienced in
the northeast United States, it crippled the city. Despite the distractions
from shoveling out the family car, going sledding with their children, and
stocking up on supplies, my new work colleagues made a special effort to
immediately welcome me.
My wife and I both realized our preconceived thoughts about the people we would meet in our new home—our new country—bore no resemblance to the people we met. It was then we realized we did not want to
live overseas in an American enclave. We wanted to do the total opposite
and embrace living with the British people, sending our young children
to British schools and respecting and learning about their customs and

S

21

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

22

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

traditions. We wanted to call cookies biscuits and french fries chips, do
without American football and learn about British football, and figure out
what a cricket score really meant.
We spent four years in the U.K. and met many wonderful British people. I wonder what it would have been like if we had kept our misguided
stereotypical thoughts and moved into the American community. I am sure
the experience would have been less memorable and rewarding.
Since that experience, my family and I have always welcomed a new
adventure where the idea of change takes you forward—not backward.
We may now be back to calling chips fries and biscuits cookies, but I still
say “Cheers.” I realized that introspection and change can often be a good
thing.
So with my confession out of the way, it is with some apprehension
that I have to stereotype retail currency traders. However, it is also done
with more than 10 years of knowledge from monitoring retail currency
traders, and from my share of trading blunders, that I try to right some
of the wrongs before they send you down trading paths that will cost you
money.
For some of you, the characteristics may strike a chord after your own
self-analysis. I hope it helps force a change. For others, you may have already come to the realization and changed. For still others, you may look
to stay the same. For those who may be reluctant, I only ask that you take
a serious look at yourself and consider a change. You might like what you
eventually see.

THEY THINK TRADING CURRENCIES
IS EASY
I often have retail traders come to me at trade shows or other events, put a
chart in front of me, and say, “All I have to do is flip a coin. If the flip says
‘buy,’ either I will be right, and the price will go up, or I will be wrong, and
the price will go down. I am willing to take that bet.”
I have to stop them and tell them if it were so easy, this room would
be empty, and everyone would be trading rather than looking for the next
answer to the age-old question of how to trade successfully.
Nevertheless, on the surface it does seem easy. There is a price for
the euro versus the U.S. dollar (conventionally displayed as EURUSD),
say 1.3512, and that price is either going up or going down. If the event
of the next price movement were isolated, and not dependent on any outside forces like fundamental analysis or technical analysis, a trader could
flip a coin to determine whether he or she should be bullish and buy, or be
bearish and sell.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

Stereotyping the Retail Currency Trader

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

23

Currency pairs like the EURUSD, GBPUSD, USDJPY, USDCHF, USDCAD,
AUDUSD, and NZDUSD are quoted in the market in terms of how much of
the base currency it would take to buy one unit of the counter currency. The
base currency is the ﬁrst currency in the currency pair, and is represented by
a universally derived three character “name.” EUR is short for the euro, USD
is short for the U.S. dollar, GBP is short for the British pound, JPY is short
for the Japanese yen, CHF is short for the Swiss franc, CAD is short for the
Canadian dollar, AUD is short for the Australian dollar, and NZD is short
for the New Zealand dollar. These currencies make up the major currencies. The combinations of any one of the major currencies to the U.S. dollar
make up the major currency pairs.
The major currency pairs are quoted for trading in a consistent, universally accepted convention. For example, the EURUSD currency pair has
the euro as the base currency and the U.S. dollar as the counter currency.
The convention is that the value of the base currency remains constant at
1.0000. The value of the counter currency is ﬂoating. As a result, a price
of 1.3512 would imply that 1.3512 U.S. dollars are equivalent to 1.0000
euro. If a trader thought the euro was going to appreciate versus the U.S.
dollar, he would buy the EURUSD. If the price of the EURUSD went higher,
say to 1.3525, he could sell the 1.0000 euro for that higher value of 1.3525
U.S. dollars. When this happens, the euro is said to be strengthening and
the dollar is said to be weakening. Note that one currency in a currency
pair is always getting stronger while the other currency is getting weaker.
If another trader thought the euro was going to depreciate versus the U.S.
dollar, she would sell the EURUSD. If the EURUSD did fall to 1.3500, the
trader could buy back the euros she sold at the cheaper price of 1.3500
U.S. dollars for the same 1.0000 euro.
The pricing convention versus the U.S. dollar is the same for the EUR,
GBP, AUD, and NZD. That is, it is in terms of how many dollars it would take
to equal 1.0000 units of the foreign currency.
The JPY, CHF, and CAD pricing conventions are reversed versus the
U.S. dollar. For these currency pairs, the USD is the base currency (i.e.,
USDJPY, USDCAD, and USDCHF) and the foreign currency is the counter
currency. As a result, the price of the currency pair is in terms of how
many foreign currency units it would take to buy or sell 1.0000 U.S.
dollar.
If, for example, the USDCHF was at 1.0112, it would take 1.0112 Swiss
francs to buy (or sell) 1.0000 U.S. dollars. If the USDCHF went up, the dollar
would have said to strengthen. If the price went down, the dollar would have
weakened.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

24

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

TABLE 1.1 Bid-to-Ask Spread Matters
Buy Price −

Sell Price =

Loss on Trade

1.31512 –

1.3510 =

– 2 pips

However, what is important to realize is that the 50-50 probability of
the price moving higher or lower is for the next price change only, which
is typically a one-pip move (a pip is the minimum a currency pair can fluctuate). That is, if the price is at 1.3512, there is a 50-50 chance the next price
move will tick up to 1.3513 or down to 1.3511.
If there were no bid-to-ask spread, the 50-50 probability of making a
pip or losing a pip from a standing start would be correct (all things being
equal). However, in currency trading (and all trading for that matter), there
is a bid-to-ask spread that skews the odds for success slightly against the
trader. This spread is the property of the market makers or brokers who
quote the market prices 24 hours a day, 5 days a week.
For example, the EURUSD, which is the most liquid currency pair,
tends to trade at around a two-pip bid-to-ask spread. Assume the current
price in the market is 1.3510 Bid/1.3512 Ask (see Table 1.1). If a trader flips
a coin that has “buy” written on one side and “sell” on the other, and the
random flip says to “buy,” the trader would need to buy at the ask price of
1.3512.
If the deal were immediately liquidated, the best the trader could do
would be to sell at the bid price of 1.3510. If this were done, the trader
would incur a two-pip loss on his long position.
Taking a two-pip loss is not the definition of successful trading. A
trader needs to make a profit to be successful. So where would his long
position be profitable?
To make a profit of one pip, the trader would need the bid price to
move up to 1.3513. This would be the minimum price that would guarantee the trader a profit. If the market bid-to-ask price is 1.3510/1.3512 when
the trade is initiated, three successive price moves up would be needed to
make a profit (see Table 1.2). That is not as easy as a 50-50 proposition
from a standing start. Table 1.2 outlines those moves.

What about the Trading Losses?
Let’s take this example a step further. Assume the trader flips the coin and
has a rule that as soon as he makes a one-pip profit, he closes the position.
We have seen the trader has to have the price move three pips to make that
one-pip profit.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

25

Stereotyping the Retail Currency Trader

TABLE 1.2 EURUSD P/L Proﬁle for a Three-Pip Move in the Trade’s
Favor
Bid

1.3510
1.3511
1.3512
1.3513

Ask

Proﬁt/Loss

1.3512
1.3513
1.3514
1.3515

–2-pip loss
–1-pip loss
0-pip loss
+1-pip gain

What about the stop loss? The same trader cannot just flip the coin,
go long or buy, and if the price goes down, not have a stop loss price that
limits the loss by squaring the position.
So let’s assume that if the profit requires a three-pip move in the direction of the trade to take a profit, the trader will tolerate a similar three-pip
move in the opposite direction of the trade before stopping the position
out. Since there is a bid-to-ask spread in currency pair prices, and traders
need to buy at the ask price and sell at the bid, the three-pip move in the opposite direction would create the loss profile shown in Table 1.3, assuming
a purchase at 1.3512.
Initially, as soon as the trade is executed, the trader can sell at 1.3510
and incur a two-pip loss. Should the price move down one pip, it would
bring the price down to 1.3509. A two-pip decline moves the price to 1.3508,
and a three-pip move results in being stopped out by selling at 1.3507. For
the same three-pip move in the opposite direction, the trader stands to lose
five pips on his trade. The trader buys at 1.3512 and sells at 1.3507. Yikes.
A three-pip move in the trader’s direction equals a one-pip gain, while a
three-pip move against the trader leads to a five-pip loss.

How Would the Best Scalper in the World Do?
Let’s say a trader was right an amazing 84 percent of the time with his
coin-flip strategy whereby he either let the market move three pips in his
favor and booked a one-pip profit or let it move three pips against him
TABLE 1.3 EURUSD P/L Proﬁle for a Three-Pip Move against the Trade
Bid

1.3510
1.3509
1.3508
1.3507

Ask

Proﬁt/Loss

1.3512
1.3511
1.3510
1.3509

–2-pip loss
–3-pip loss
–4-pip loss
–5-pip loss

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

26

January 20, 2011

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

and booked a five-pip loss. That success rate is obviously well above the
average for traders. On the 84 trading wins, the cumulative wins would
result in 84 pips of profit (84 trades × 1 pip gain = 84 pips).
The losses for the remaining 16 trades would cumulate to minus 80
pips (16 trades × −5 pips = −80 pips).
A win/loss rate of 84 percent would be needed to eke out a four-pip
gain. You are not exactly lighting the world on fire with those results.
Ironically, a lot of retail currency traders look to trade, or incorporate
trading systems, whereby they rely on this pip-type strategy. After a while,
they wonder why it all ends in tears with losses in their accounts. Sure
they get a rush from the win/loss percentage—who wouldn’t want to boast
about being profitable 84 percent of the time at their next neighborhood
cocktail party—but in this game called currency trading, it is not necessarily the win/loss percentage that wins the championships. It is the quality of
the wins that really matters.
To prove it, take a win/loss percentage of just .400 with 40 wins and
60 losses over our fictitious 100-trade season. On the 40 wins, assume we
require an eight-pip gain. Given our two-pip bid-to-ask spread, this would
require a ten-pip move. That is, if you buy at 1.3412 ask price, you need for
the ask price to go to 1.3422 to sell at the 1.3420 bid price for our eight-pip
gain.
On the 60 losses assume we maintain our five-pip loss. So,
40 wins × 8 pip gain = +320-pip gain
60 losses × −5 pip loss = (300)-pip loss
Net Gain = +20 pips
By my math, the trader who comes in last in most sports leagues with a
.400 win/loss percentage wins the trading league when compared to the
.840 win/loss percentage trader. In fact, his net gain is five times more with
a 20-pip gain versus 4 pips. It isn’t just about wins and losses in currency
trading.

You Have to Work at It
The message from the example is this: The profitable trader has to make
eight pips, not just one. How do you do that? By working at it. By trading
smart. By having a mission statement and goals for achieving that mission
statement. By following rules. By looking for and anticipating trends that
make the eight-pip hurdle easier.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

Stereotyping the Retail Currency Trader

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

27

But the first thing you need to understand is trading is not easy. It takes
effort. It is more than an auto-execute program that wins 84 percent of the
time. It’s not only about the wins in currency trading, but about the quality
of the wins and about limiting those darn losses. Eighty-four wins and 16
losses would win any league in any sport. In currency trading it does not
come close.
This simplified example illustrates the hurdle that traders have to overcome to make money. Traders who simply take the approach that trading
is a 50-50 proposition and assume that trading is easy will soon find out
that the bid-to-ask hurdle skews the odds against them. As a result, to be
successful, traders need to do more. They need to look at the market with
a more intelligent and logical focus and in the process skew the odds of
success back in their favor by trading trends.
Look at yourself in the mirror. What do you see? A trader who thinks
trading is as easy as making a pip or two, or a trader who realizes that to
be successful it will require some work. It requires catching the trends.
What is your bias? How do you trade? Maybe you should rethink your
strategy.

THEY HAVE TOO MUCH FEAR
Another characteristic I often find among retail currency traders is they
assume they will have little or no fear of trading. It may be a “macho” thing
to think this way, but I can tell you it is simply not true.
Most retail traders have fear, whether they realize it or not, and ironically, fear does not simply manifest itself in terms of losing money. It
also is prevalent when most traders are winning. In fact, it is the fear of
success—as I like to call it—or fear from profits that leads to retail traders
not being able to remain on a trend for an extended period of time. This
idea will be further explored in Chapter 2 and throughout the book as we
build toward the theme of attacking the currency trends.
I can say that traders all have some fear. The fear is partly a result of the
thought that the market price will move opposite to the trader’s position.
What most retail traders don’t realize is the inherent fear they will have
simply from the volatile price action.
As even the most novice of currency traders realize, prices do not always move in a consistent direction in the currency market. That is, prices
move sporadically at times. In a normal market the price may go from
1.3512 to 1.3511, to 1.3510, back to 1.3511, up to 1.3512, back down to
1.3511, and 1.3510, and 1.3509, and back up to 1.3511, and 1.3512, and 1.3513
all in the time span of less than a minute.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

28

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

With this sporadic volatile movement, it is no wonder the trader immediately hits the bid at 1.3513 and books a one-pip profit when given the
first opportunity for a positive gain. Most new retail traders’ minds are not
ready for so many events in such a short time period.

Trading Is Like Roulette on Steroids
I like to parallel trading ideas with analogies that most people can relate
to. The best way to teach a new concept or to change a thought pattern is
to relate the concept to something more universally known and accepted.
With the volatility of the currency market moving actively with many
price changes over the course of a minute, hour, day, or longer, I liken the
market movements in this fast-paced world to what it would be like playing
a fictional game of “roulette on steroids.” The analogy to roulette is not
meant to compare trading to gambling. Gambling is a game of chance and
luck. Trading successfully is much more calculated. It takes much more
knowledge. We learned that two pages ago.
Let’s assume bets of red for bearish or black for bullish are the only
options on our fictional roulette wheel. You analyze the market and choose
black because you think the market price will go higher. The croupier spins
the wheel and the ball lands in a black or bullish slot immediately (our
wheel does not need the time to settle in a slot). In currency terms, the
price moves up a pip because black is a bullish move.
Now instead of the waiting for the pit crew to pay off the winners and
for you to place your next bet, the croupier spins the wheel again, and you
are forced to keep the same black or bullish bet on the table. The next spin
is made automatically within seconds of the last. This time, within a second
or so, it comes up red or bearish. The price moves back down a pip.
The pit crew takes your chip and automatically your bet is reestablished on black again. The wheel keeps on spinning and spinning as if it
were hyped up on some sort of performance-enhancing steroid drug. On
each spin either you win one unit or you lose one unit.
In the real world, a start-to-finish roulette bet might take a few minutes
from the time a bet can be placed to when the ball settles in a black or
red slot on the wheel. In between you are having a drink, chatting with
the other people, having a good time. In currency trading there may be 30
“spins” or market price changes in that few-minute time period. There are
usually no people with you, and I certainly would not recommend drinking
anything other than a nonalcoholic beverage while trading.
I am not a big gambler, but if I go to Las Vegas and have a choice to sit
at a blackjack table that has five players or one where it would be just me
and the dealer, I choose the one with the five other players. Why? Fewer
