
The tendency for prices of physicals and futures to approach one another, usually
during the delivery month. Also called a “narrowing of the basis.”

convergence

corner (1) Securing such relative control of a commodity that its price can be manipulated, that
is, can be controlled by the creator of the corner; or (2) in the extreme situation, obtaining contracts requiring the delivery of more commodities than are available for delivery. See squeeze and
congestion.
correction

A temporary retracement in the primary trend.

correlation A statistical measure of the degree of coordination in movement between two series

of numbers. The correlation coefficient (r) ranges from +1 (perfectly unified movement between
two variables) to –1 (perfectly unified inverse movement). Zero (0) indicates a completely random
relationship. Correlation does not establish a cause-effect relationship. In finance, an r of 0.6 or
greater (–0.6 or less) is considered significant. See coefficient of determination.
COT See Commitments of Traders Report.
COT index Based on stochastics, a formula that compares the current net position to its historical

range and ranks it on a scale of 0 percent (most bearish) to 100 percent (most bullish).
counter-trend trading In technical analysis, the method by which a trader takes a position con-

trary to the current market direction in anticipation of a change in that direction. See scale-down
(or -up) trading.
crop year The time period from one harvest to the next, varying according to the commodity
(e.g., July 1 to June 30 for wheat; September 1 to August 31 for soybeans).
cross-hedge Hedging a cash market position in a futures or option contract for a different but
price-related commodity.
cross rate In foreign exchange, the price of one currency in terms of another currency in the

market of a third country. For example, the exchange rate between Japanese yen and euros would
be considered a cross rate in the U.S. market.
CTA See Commodity Trading Advisor.
day trader A trader, often a person with exchange trading privileges, who takes positions and

then offsets them during the same trading session prior to the close of trading.
deliverable supply The total supply of a commodity that meets the delivery specifications of a
futures contract. See economically deliverable supply.

gloss

JWBK143-Briese

February 26, 2008

21:11

Char Count=

261

Glossary

delivery The tender and receipt of the actual commodity, the cash value of the commod-

ity, or of a delivery instrument covering the commodity (e.g., warehouse receipts or shipping
certificates), used to settle a futures contract. Also called notice of delivery and delivery
notice.
Deliveries being made during a present month. Sometimes “current delivery” is
used as a synonym for “nearby delivery.”

delivery current

The specified month within which a futures contract matures and can be settled
by delivery or the specified month in which the delivery period begins.

delivery month

delivery nearby

The nearest traded month, the front month. In plural form, one of the nearer

trading months.
derivative A financial instrument, traded on or off an exchange, the price of which is directly
dependent upon (i.e., “derived from”) the value of one or more underlying securities, equity indices, debt instruments, commodities, other derivative instruments, or any agreed-upon pricing
index or arrangement (e.g., the movement over time of the Consumer Price Index or freight rates).
Derivatives involve the trading of rights or obligations based on the underlying product, but do
not directly transfer property. They are used to hedge risk or to exchange a floating rate of return for fixed rate of return. Derivatives include futures, options, and swaps. For example, futures
contracts are derivatives of the physical contract and options on futures are derivatives of futures
contracts.
distribution See liquidation.
dominant future

That future having the largest amount of open interest.

double hedging As used by the CFTC, it implies a situation where a trader holds a long position in
the futures market in excess of the speculative position limit as an offset to a fixed price sale, even
though the trader has an ample supply of the commodity on hand to fill all sales commitments.
ease off

A minor and/or slow decline in the price of a market.

That portion of the deliverable supply of a commodity that is
in position for delivery against a futures contract, and is not otherwise unavailable for delivery.
For example, Treasury bonds held by long-term investment funds are not considered part of the
economically deliverable supply of a Treasury bond futures contract.

economically deliverable supply

eligible commercial entity An eligible contract participant or other entity approved by the CFTC
that has a demonstrable ability to make or take delivery of an underlying commodity of a contract;
incurs risks related to the commodity; or is a dealer that regularly provides risk management, hedging services, or market-making activities to entities trading commodities or derivative agreements,
contracts, or transactions in commodities.
E-Mini A mini contract that is traded exclusively on an electronic trading facility. E-Mini is a

trademark of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
euro

The official currency of most members of the European Union.

Eurodollars U.S. dollar deposits placed with banks outside the United States. Holders may in-

clude individuals, companies, banks, and central banks.
A central marketplace with established rules and regulations where buyers and sellers
meet to trade futures and options contracts or securities. Exchanges include designated contract
markets and derivatives transaction execution facilities.

exchange

gloss

JWBK143-Briese

February 26, 2008

21:11

Char Count=

262

GLOSSARY

The price at which one currency is exchanged for another, usually stated in the
terms of the second currency listed in a FOREX symbol. For example the USD/JPY (“Dollar-Yen”)
rate is the number of Japanese yen it takes to buy one dollar.

exchange rate

FOREX (FOReign EXchange)

Refers to the OTC market for foreign exchange transactions. See

exchange rate.
forwardation See contango.
forward months

Futures contracts, currently trading, calling for later or distant delivery. See

back months.
front month

The spot or nearby delivery month, the nearest traded contract month.

full carrying charge, full carry See carrying charges.
fundamental analysis Study of basic, underlying factors that will affect the supply and demand of
the commodity being traded in futures.
gold/silver ratio

The number of ounces of silver required to buy one ounce of gold at current spot

prices.
In technical analysis, a chart formation that resembles a human head and
shoulders and is generally considered to be predictive of a price reversal. A head and shoulders top (which is considered predictive of a price decline) consists of a high price, a decline
to a support level, a rally to a higher price than the previous high price, a second decline to the
support level, and a weaker rally to about the level of the first high price. The reverse (upsidedown) formation is called a head and shoulders bottom (which is considered predictive of a price
rally).

head and shoulders

hedge exemption An exemption from speculative position limits for bona fide hedgers and certain
other persons who meet the requirements of exchange and CFTC rules.

A private investment fund or pool that trades and invests in various assets such as
securities, commodities, currency, and derivatives on behalf of its clients—typically wealthy individuals. Some commodity pool operators operate hedge funds.

hedge fund

hedging Taking a position in a futures market opposite to a position held in the cash market to
minimize the risk of financial loss from an adverse price change; or a purchase or sale of futures
as a temporary substitute for a cash transaction that will occur later. One can hedge either a long
cash market position (e.g., one owns the cash commodity) or a short cash market position (e.g.,
one plans on buying the cash commodity in the future).
hedging pressure Directional impact on prices caused by commercials placing buy or sell orders
for hedging purposes.
indicators Technical studies based on price or net positions used to compare current readings to

history. See COT Index.
Futures contracts traded on fixed income securities such as U.S. Treasury
issues, or based on the levels of specified interest rates such as LIBOR (London Interbank Offered
Rate). Currency is excluded from this category, even though interest rates are a factor in currency
values.

interest rate futures

inverted market A futures market in which the nearer months are selling at prices higher than
the more distant months; a market displaying “inverse carrying charges,” characteristic of markets
with supply shortages. See backwardation.

gloss

JWBK143-Briese

February 26, 2008

21:11

Char Count=

263

Glossary

Uncounted stocks of a commodity in the hands of wholesalers, manufacturers,
and producers that cannot be identified accurately; stocks outside commercial channels but theoretically available to the market.

invisible supply

lag A period of time between events. If stock index movements are said to lag bond prices by
eight weeks, you would expect to see a change in bond prices reflected in the stock index eight
weeks hence.
large traders A large trader is one who holds or controls a position in any one future or in any one

option expiration series of a commodity on any one exchange equaling or exceeding the exchange
or CFTC-specified reporting level.
liquidation The closing of market positions. As a market phase, liquidation is considered the top

of the market, where long positions are closed. See accumulation.
long (1) One who has bought a futures contract to establish a market position; (2) a market
position that obligates the holder to take delivery; (3) one who owns an inventory of commodities.
See short.
look-back

The historical period used in the calculation of an indicator. See indicator.

margin The amount of money or collateral deposited by a customer with his broker, by a broker

with a clearing member, or by a clearing member with a clearing organization. The margin is not
partial payment on a purchase. Also called Performance Bond. (1) Initial margin is the amount
of margin required by the broker when a futures position is opened; (2) Maintenance margin is
an amount that must be maintained on deposit at all times. If the equity in a customer’s account
drops to or below the level of maintenance margin because of adverse price movement, the broker
must issue a margin call to restore the customer’s equity to the initial level. See variation margin.
Exchanges specify levels of initial margin and maintenance margin for each futures contract, but
Futures Commission Merchants may require their customers to post margin at higher levels than
those specified by the exchange. Futures margin is determined by the SPAN margining system,
which takes into account all positions in a customer’s portfolio.
mini Refers to a futures contract that has a smaller contract size than an otherwise identical
futures contract.
momentum In technical analysis, the relative change in price over a specific time interval. Often

equated with speed or velocity and considered in terms of relative strength.
movement index The rate of change in movement of the COT Index over a specified number of
weeks (usually six). Movement can range from −100 to +100 percentage points.

The average or mean of prices for a given number of periods. The mean is recalculated for each period with the most recent price substituted for the oldest price, thus moving the
calculation period forward. See look-back.

moving average

nearby delivery month The month of the futures contract closest to maturity; the front month or

lead month.
nearbys The nearest delivery months of a commodity futures market.
negative carry The cost of financing a financial instrument (the short-term rate of interest), when

the cost is above the current return of the financial instrument. See carrying charges and positive
carry.
negative feedback trading See counter-trend trading and scale-down (or -up) trading.

gloss

JWBK143-Briese

February 26, 2008

21:11

Char Count=

264

GLOSSARY

net position The difference between the open long contracts and the open short contracts held
by a trader in any one commodity. Also the difference between open long contracts and open short
contracts for a trader group.
new crop See old and other futures.

The long and short open interest shown as “Nonreportable Positions”
are derived by subtracting total long and short “Reportable Positions” from the total open
interest. Accordingly, for “Nonreportable Positions,” the number of traders involved and the
commercial/non-commercial classification of each trader are unknown.

nonreportable positions

notional principal In an interest rate swap, forward rate agreement, or other derivative instrument, the amount to which interest rates are applied in order to calculate periodic payment obligations. Also called the notional amount, the contract amount, the reference amount, and the currency amount.
notional value

The contract value (price × contract quantity).

number of traders To determine the total number of reportable traders in a market, a trader

is counted only once regardless whether the trader appears in more than one category (noncommercial traders may be long or short only and may be spreading; commercial traders may
be long and short). To determine the number of traders in each category, however, a trader is
counted in each category in which the trader holds a position. Therefore, the sum of the numbers
of traders in each category will often exceed the “Total” number of traders in that market.
For selected commodities where there is a well-defined
marketing season or crop year, the COT data are broken down by “old” and “other” crop years.

old and other futures (long form only)

The total number of futures contracts long or short in a delivery month or market
that has been entered into and not yet liquidated by an offsetting transaction or fulfilled by delivery.
Also called open contracts or open commitments.

open interest

A technical opinion that the market price has risen too steeply and too fast in relation
to underlying fundamental factors.

overbought

oversold A technical opinion that the market price has declined too steeply and too fast in relation
to underlying fundamental factors.

The trading of commodities, contracts, or other instruments not listed on
any exchange. OTC transactions can occur electronically or over the telephone. Also referred to
as off-exchange.

over-the-counter (OTC)

percent of open interest Percents are calculated against the total open interest for the futuresonly report and against the total futures-equivalent open interest for the options-and-futurescombined report. Percents less than 0.05 are shown as 0.0, and the percents may not add to exactly
100.0 due to rounding.
position An interest in the market, either long or short, in the form of one or more open contracts.
position limit See speculative position limit.
positive carry The cost of financing a financial instrument (the short-term rate of interest), where
the cost is less than the current return of the financial instrument. See carrying charge and negative carry.

A trader that adds positions as the market moves favorably to existing positions
(momentum or trend-following).

positive feedback

gloss

JWBK143-Briese

February 26, 2008

21:11

Char Count=

265

Glossary

The general overall direction of price movement shown on a bar chart.

primary trend

producer A commercial such as a miner or a farmer who hedges using short futures to secure a
price for future delivery of the raw commodity. See user.

An option contract that gives the holder the right but not the obligation to sell a specified
quantity of a particular commodity or other interest at a given price (the “strike price”) prior to or
on a future date.

put

pyramid Adding to an existing profitable market position. See positive feedback.
rally An upward movement of prices. See bull and bear markets.
range The difference between the high and low price of a commodity, futures, or option contract

during a given period.
reaction

A downward price movement after a price advance.

regression A statistical measure of the dependence of one variable on another, implicitly assum-

ing a one-way causal relationship.
reportable positions Clearing members, futures commission merchants, and foreign brokers
(collectively called “reporting firms”) file daily reports with the Commission. Those reports show
the futures and option positions of traders that hold positions above specific reporting levels set
by CFTC regulations.
reporting level Sizes of positions set by the exchanges and/or the CFTC at or above which com-

modity traders or brokers who carry these accounts must make daily reports about the size of the
position by commodity, by delivery month, and whether the position is controlled by a commercial
or noncommercial trader.
resistance In technical analysis, a price area where new selling will emerge to dampen a continued rise. See support.
retracement

A reversal within a major price trend.

reversal A change of direction in prices. See reverse conversion.
reverse conversion With regard to options, a position created by buying a call option, selling a
put option, and selling the underlying instrument (for example, a futures contract).
rollover Lifting a near futures position and reestablishing it in a more deferred delivery month.
scale down (or -up) trading To purchase or sell on a scale down means to buy at regular price

intervals in a declining market. To sell on scale up means to sell at regular price intervals as the
market advances. See counter-trend trading and negative feedback trading.
A condition of the market in which there is a scarcity of goods available and
hence sellers can obtain better conditions of sale or higher prices. See buyer’s market.

seller’s market

selling hedge (or short hedge) Selling futures contracts to protect against possible decreased
prices of commodities. See hedging.

Attitude of a portion of traders toward a particular futures price as measured by an
indicator or survey. See bull and bear.

sentiment

settlement Closing or last price posted during a trading session (usually referring to the daily
closing price).

(1) The selling side of an open futures contract; (2) a trader whose net position in the
futures market shows an excess of open sales over open purchases. See long.

short

gloss

JWBK143-Briese

February 26, 2008

21:11

Char Count=

266

short hedge

GLOSSARY

See selling hedge.

short selling Selling a futures contract or other instrument with the idea of delivering it on or
offsetting it at a later date.
short squeeze

See squeeze.

sideways trend Prices moving in a generally horizontal direction with neither an up nor a down

bias. See trading range.
slippage Difference between actual price received versus the hypothetical price calculated for
entering or exiting a market position.
small traders Traders who hold or control positions in futures or options that are below the

reporting level specified by the exchange or the CFTC.
soft (1) A description of a price that is gradually weakening; or (2) this term also refers to certain
“soft” commodities such as sugar, cocoa, and coffee.
speculative bubble A rapid run-up in prices caused by excessive buying that is unrelated to
any of the basic, underlying factors affecting the supply or demand for a commodity or other
asset. Speculative bubbles are usually associated with a bandwagon effect in which speculators rush to buy the commodity (in the case of futures, “to take positions”) before the price
trend ends, and an even greater rush to sell the commodity (“unwind positions”) when prices
reverse.
speculative position limit The maximum position, either net long or net short, in one commodity
future (or option) or in all futures (or options) of one commodity combined that may be held or
controlled by one person (other than a person eligible for a hedge exemption) as prescribed by an
exchange and/or by the CFTC. See hedging, and aggregation.

In commodity futures, an individual who does not hedge, but who trades with the
objective of achieving profits through the successful anticipation of price movements.

speculator

spot commodity (1) The actual commodity as distinguished from a futures contract; (2) some-

times used to refer to Cash Commodities available for immediate delivery.
The futures contract that matures and becomes deliverable during the present month.
Also called current delivery month.

spot month

spot price The price at which a physical commodity for immediate delivery is selling at a given
time and place. See cash price.
spread (or straddle) The purchase of one futures delivery month against the sale of another
futures delivery month of the same commodity; the purchase of one delivery month of one commodity against the sale of that same delivery month of a different commodity; or the purchase of
one commodity in one market against the sale of the commodity in another market, to take advantage of a profit from a change in price relationships. The term “spread” is also used to refer to
the difference between the price of a futures month and the price of another month of the same
commodity. A spread can also apply to options. See arbitrage.

A market situation in which the lack of supplies tends to force shorts to cover their
positions by offset at higher prices. Also see congestion and corner.

squeeze

standard deviation A statistical formula to determine how tightly individual data points (such as
daily closing prices) cluster around the mean of the data. A high standard deviation means that the
data is quite variable.

gloss

JWBK143-Briese

February 26, 2008

21:11

Char Count=

267

Glossary

stop loss An order placed with a broker on an electronic trading platform to close out a market
position at a preset price level on an adverse move.
strong hands When used in connection with delivery of commodities on futures contracts, the
term usually means that the party receiving the delivery notice probably will take delivery and
retain ownership of the commodity; when used in connection with futures positions, the term
usually means positions held by trade interests or well-financed speculators.
