
“They gave us this book of speeches—keynote speech, election speech, lieutenant governor’s speech—and
we were supposed to deliver these things every week. The way it works is that you learn to get out of
yourself. I mean, why should you be able to talk alone with somebody five minutes before and then freeze in
front of a group? So they teach you the psychological tricks to overcome this. Some of it is just
practice—just doing it and practicing. We really helped each other through. And it worked. That’s the most
important degree that I have.”
Yet Warren could not try out his new skills on Susie, who made herself scarce. Mindful of Doc Thompson’s
influence over his daughter, Warren showed up every night, ukulele in tow, to romance her father in her
stead. “She would go out with other guys,” says Buffett, “and I didn’t have anything to do when I would go
over there. So I would flirt with him instead, and he and I would talk about things.” Doc Thompson, who
loved the summer heat, sat outside on the screened porch on the boiling July nights, dressed in his three-piece
pastel wool suit, while Susie was secretly out with Milt. Doc Thompson played the mandolin while Warren
sweated and sang, accompanying him on the ukulele.
Warren felt comfortable with Doc Thompson, whose style reminded him of his father’s way of holding forth
on how the world was going to hell because of the Democrats. Whittaker Chambers’s autobiography,
Witness, describing his conversion from Communist spy to ardent Cold War anti-Communist, had just been
released. Warren had read this book with great interest, in part because of its description of the Alger Hiss
case. Chambers had accused Hiss of being a Communist spy, an accusation that had been pooh-poohed by
people the Buffetts considered political enemies, the Truman crowd. Only Richard Nixon, a young senator on
the House Un-American Activities Committee, had pursued Hiss, leading to Hiss’s conviction for perjury in
January 1950. This was the kind of fodder that Doc Thompson could chew on endlessly. Unlike Howard,
however, he also talked about sports. He had no sons, and he thought Warren was the best thing since bubble
gum.32 Warren was smart, Warren was Protestant, Warren was Republican, and, above all, Warren was not
Milt Brown.
The support of Bill Thompson was not as much of a plus as it might have seemed. Warren was up against stiff
odds in winning Susie’s heart. She could overlook his baggy socks and cheap suits; it was the rest that worked
against him. He came across to her as a Congressman’s son, somebody considered “special,” a boy who had
every advantage—a graduate degree and a good bit of money—and who was obviously headed for success.
He talked about stocks all the time, a subject she cared nothing about. His way of entertaining a date was
telling rehearsed jokes, riddles, and brainteasers. That her father liked Warren so much made her think of
Warren as an extension of her father’s control. Doc Thompson “practically threw Susie at Warren.”33 “It
was two against one,” says Buffett.
Milt, who needed her, suffered the injustice of being a Jew from literally the wrong side of the tracks. He was
all the more attractive because he was the guy her father couldn’t stand.
That summer, Brown was working in Council Bluffs. When he got a letter from Northwestern notifying him
of a tuition increase, he realized he couldn’t afford to go back to Evanston, so he went over to the Buffett
house and handed Bertie, his class vice president, a letter saying that he was transferring to the University of
Iowa.34 Susie was enrolling that fall at the University of Omaha, and by then, she and Milt had to
acknowledge that, because of her father, they were “off and on.” She spent the summer in tears.
Meanwhile, despite her initial lack of interest in Warren, Susie could never spend time with anyone without
wanting to learn all about him. She soon started to realize that her first impression had been wrong. He was
not the privileged, cocky, self-confident guy she thought. “I was a wreck,” he recalls; he was jittering on the
brink of a nervous breakdown. “I felt odd, I was socially inept, but beyond that, I hadn’t found a cruising
speed in life.” Even her friends noticed the vulnerability that lay beneath his veneer of self-assurance. Susie
gradually recognized how worthless he felt inside.35 All that confident chatter about stocks, the aura of a
prodigy, the tinny twang of the ukulele, were wrapped around a fragile, needy core: a boy who was stumbling
through his days in a shroud of desolation. “I was a mess,” he says. “It was incredible the way Susie saw
through to some of that.” Indeed, somebody who felt like a wreck and a mess was catnip to Susie. Warren

would later say of her need to turn him into a cause that he “was Jewish enough for Susie, but not too
Jewish” for her dad. And so she started coming around.
Warren, who was nearly blind to the way others dressed—even women—was so in love with Susie by now
that he actually noticed her clothes. He would never forget the blue dress she wore on their dates or the
black-and-white print outfit he called the “newspaper dress.”36 Amid the summer fireflies at the Peony Park
pavilion, they stumbled around the dance floor to the sounds of a Glenn Miller tune. Warren had still never
learned to dance and tried as hard as he could. He was about as cozy on the dance floor as a sixth grader at a
sorority social. But “I would have done anything she asked,” he says. “I would have let her put worms down
the back of my shirt.”
By Labor Day, when Warren took her to the state fair, they were a couple. Susie registered at the university
as a sophomore majoring in journalism, signed up for the debate team,37 and enrolled in the Association for
the Study of Group Dynamics, a psychology group.38
Warren wrote his aunt Dorothy Stahl in October 1951 in his best smart-alecky style: “Things in the girl
department are at an all-time peak…the hooks have been sunk pretty deep into me by one of the local gals.
As soon as I get the go-ahead from [my uncle] Fred and you, I may proceed further. This girl has only one
drawback; she knows nothing about stocks. Otherwise she is unbeatable and I guess I can overlook her
Achilles’ heel.”39
Cautiously “proceeding further” was putting it right. Warren worked up his nerve. Instead of proposing
marriage, he “just sort of assumed it, and kept talking.” Susie, for her part, “realized she had been chosen,”
although “she wasn’t sure how.”40
Triumphant, Warren went to his Dale Carnegie class on schedule. “That’s the week I won the pencil. They
gave a pencil award for doing something difficult and doing the most with the training. The week I won the
pencil was the week that I proposed.”
Afterward, Susie wrote a long, sad letter to Milton Brown, telling him the news. He was shocked. He knew
she had been out on some dates with Warren but had no idea it was anything serious.41
Warren went to talk to Susie’s father to get his blessing. This, he already knew, would be easily had. But Doc
Thompson took a while—quite a while—to get to the point. He started by explaining that Harry Truman and
the Democrats were sending the country straight to hell. Pouring money into Europe after the war through
the Marshall Plan and the Berlin airlift42 was just proof that the policies of that devil Roosevelt were still in
place, and that Truman was sending the country straight into bankruptcy. Look at how the Soviets got hold of
the atomic bomb right after Truman had dismantled part of the military. Senator Joe McCarthy’s House
Un-American Activities Committee was proving what Doc Thompson had known all along, that the
government was riddled with Communists. HUAC was finding Commies everywhere. The government was
downright ineffectual—or worse—when it came to dealing with Communism. Truman had lost China for
democracy. He would never be forgiven for firing the heroic General Douglas MacArthur for insubordination
after he made repeated efforts to go around Truman and get approval to attack the Chinese Commies in
Manchuria. But it was probably too late for even MacArthur to save the country now. The Communists were
taking over the world, and stocks were going to be nothing but valueless bits of paper. So Warren’s plan to
work in the stock market was going to fail. But Doc Thompson would never blame Warren when his daughter
starved. He was a smart young man. If not for the Democrats ruining the country, he would probably do all
right. The miserable future that awaited Susie wouldn’t be Warren’s fault.
Long used to this kind of talk, from both his own father and Susie’s, Warren waited patiently for the crucial
word “yes.” Three hours later, Doc Thompson wound his way to a conclusion and gave his consent.43
By Thanksgiving, Susie and Warren were planning their April wedding.

19
Stage Fright
Omaha • Summer 1951–Spring 1952

Warren understood Doc Thompson’s concern about how he would support a family, even though he had no
such doubts himself. Since he couldn’t work for Graham-Newman, he had decided to become a stockbroker,
and to do it in Omaha, far from the canyons of Wall Street. If you wanted to make money in the stock
market, went the common wisdom, the place to do it was New York, so his decision was an unusual one. But
he felt free from the conventions of Wall Street; he wanted to work with his father; Susie was in Omaha; and
he was never happy far from home.
At almost twenty-one, Warren was supremely confident in his own investing abilities. By the end of 1951, he
had already boosted his capital from $9,804 to $19,738. He had earned seventy-five percent in a single year.1
As a matter of course, however, he consulted his father and Ben Graham. To his surprise, both said, “Maybe
you should wait a few years.” Graham—as always—thought the market was too high. Howard, pessimistic,
favored mining stocks and gold stocks and other investments designed to protect against inflation. He didn’t
think any other kind of business would be a good investment, and he worried about his son’s future.
That didn’t make sense to Warren. Since 1929, the value of businesses had grown substantially.
“It was absolutely the reverse effect of what you saw in other times, when the market was staggeringly
overvalued. I had looked at companies. I just couldn’t see why you wouldn’t want to own them. It was on a
micro level, not an assessment of the growth of the economy or anything like that, and I was working with
micro money. But it just seemed to me that it was crazy not to own them. On the other hand, here’s Ben,
with his two hundred IQ and all experienced, telling me to wait. And my dad, who, if he told me to walk out
a window, I would have done it.” Still, to make this decision to defy the advice of his two great
authorities—his father and Ben Graham—was an enormous step for him. It required him to consider the
possibility that his judgment might be superior to theirs, and that the two men whom he most deeply
respected were not thinking rationally. Yet he was certain he was right. He might have walked out a window
if his father told him to—but not if it meant leaving a Moody’s Manual full of cheap stocks behind.
In fact, the opportunities he saw were so plentiful that they justified borrowing money for the first time. He
was willing to take on debt equal to a quarter of his net worth. “I was already running short of money to
invest. If I was enthused about a stock I would have to sell something else to buy it. I had an aversion to
borrowing money, but I got a loan for five thousand dollars or so from the Omaha National Bank. I was
under twenty-one and my dad had to cosign the loan. Mr. Davis, the banker, conducted it as a rite of
passage. He said something like, ‘You’re going into manhood now,’ and referred to this five thousand
dollars, saying, ‘It’s a solemn obligation, and we know you’ve got the kind of character to pay it back.’ This
went on for half an hour while I was sitting there next to this big desk.”
Howard probably felt both proud and a little silly cosigning a loan for his son, who had been a full-fledged
businessman for at least a dozen years. Since Warren had made up his mind, Howard was also willing to take
him on at his own firm, Buffett-Falk—though only after suggesting that he interview at a prominent local
firm, Kirkpatrick Pettis Co., to see what the best of Omaha stockbroking had to offer.
“I went to see Stewart Kirkpatrick and said during the interview that I wanted intelligent customers. I was
going to try to look for people who could understand things. And Kirkpatrick said, in effect, don’t worry
about whether they’re intelligent, worry about whether they’re rich. Which is okay, you can’t knock him for
that. But I wouldn’t have wanted to work anyplace but at my dad’s firm.”

At Buffett-Falk, Warren was installed in one of its four private unair-conditioned offices, next to the “cage,”
a glassed-in area where a clerk handled the money and securities. He started out selling his favorite stock to
the safest people he knew, his aunt and his college friends, including his first roommate at Wharton, Chuck
Peterson, who was now in the real estate business in Omaha and with whom he’d reconnected.
“My aunt Alice was the first call I made, and I sold her a hundred shares of GEICO. She made me feel good
about myself. She was interested in me. And after that Fred Stanback, Chuck Peterson, and anybody I could
get to buy it. But mostly I got myself to buy it, because when other people didn’t buy it, I’d just figure out a
way to buy five more shares myself. I had this big ambition. I was going to own one-tenth of one percent of
the company. It had 175,000 shares outstanding, and I figured if the company would become worth one
billion dollars someday and I owned that much, I would be worth a million dollars. So I needed 175
shares.”2
Yet in the meantime, his job was to sell on commission, and beyond this narrow circle, Warren found that
almost insurmountably difficult. He got a taste of the obstacles his father had faced to build his brokerage
business back when the grand old families of Omaha—the owners of the banks, stockyards, breweries, the
big department stores—peered down their noses at the grandson of a grocer. Alone in Omaha now, with his
parents back in Washington, Warren felt that he got no respect.
These were the days when all stocks were sold by full-service stockbrokers, and most people bought
individual stocks rather than mutual funds. Everybody paid fixed commissions of six cents a share.
Transactions took place in person or over the telephone, as part of a relationship. Every trade was preceded
by a few minutes of chat with “your broker,” part salesman, part adviser, part friend. Your broker might live
in your neighborhood, and you saw him at parties, you golfed with him at your country club, and he came to
your daughter’s wedding. General Motors brought out new models of its cars every year, and a businessman
might trade his car more often than his stocks. That is, if he owned any stocks.
Important accounts didn’t take Warren seriously. Nebraska Consolidated Mills, a client of his father’s, once
scheduled him to come out at five-thirty a.m.3 “I was twenty-one. And I’d go around to all these people to
sell them stocks, and when I’d get all through they’d say, ‘What does your dad think?’ I got that all the
time.” Warren, who looked like a “dork,” struggled to make sales.4 He didn’t know how to read people,
couldn’t make small talk, and certainly wasn’t a good listener. His mode of conversation was to broadcast
rather than receive. When nervous, he sprayed forth information about his favorite stocks like a fire hose.
Some potential clients listened to his pitch, checked with other sources, and used his ideas, but bought the
stocks through other brokers, so he didn’t get the commission. He was shocked at this perfidy from people
he’d spoken to face-to-face and would be seeing again around town. He felt cheated. Other times he was
simply baffled. Once he walked in on a guy who was in his seventies sitting with a pile of dollar bills on his
desk and a secretary in his lap. Every time she kissed him, the man gave her a dollar bill.
“My dad hadn’t taught me what to do in that sort of circumstance. Generally speaking, I was not getting
reinforcement. When I first started selling GEICO to people, Buffett-Falk had this little office downtown,
and the stock certificates would come in and Jerome Newman’s name would be on those certificates. He
was the seller I was buying from. And the guys at Buffett-Falk said, ‘What the hell. If you think you’re
smarter than Jerry Newman…’”
In fact, Graham-Newman was forming a new partnership, and some of the investors had given the firm
GEICO shares to fund money into the partnership. So in effect, it was they who were selling, not GrahamNewman. Warren didn’t know that.5 But when it came to GEICO, he didn’t care who was selling. It did not
occur to him to ask anyone at the firm why they were selling. He was unshakeably certain of his own opinion.
Nor did he hide that fact.
“I was sort of a wise guy, with this graduate degree, among people who hadn’t gone to college. One time an
insurance agent, Ralph Campbell, came in to see Mr. Falk and said, ‘What’s this kid doing going around
promoting this company?’ GEICO was a company that didn’t use insurance agents. And I said, like a wise

guy, ‘Mr. Campbell, you better buy this stock for unemployment insurance.’”
The full import of Dale Carnegie’s first rule, don’t criticize, hadn’t sunk in. Warren used what would later
become the trademark Buffett wit to show that he knew more than everybody else, but why would anyone
have been willing to believe that of a twenty-one-year-old? And yet he did. It must have stunned people at
Buffett-Falk to watch him, morning through night, ripping through the manuals, adding to his file cabinets of
knowledge.
“I went through the Moody’s Manuals page by page. Ten thousand pages in the Moody’s Industrial,
Transportation, Banks and Finance Manuals—twice. I actually looked at every business—although I didn’t
look very hard at some.”
Even though endlessly fascinated by the game of finding stocks, Warren wanted to be more than an investor,
more than a salesman. He wanted to be a teacher, to emulate Ben Graham. He signed up to teach a night
course at the University of Omaha.
At first he partnered with his stockbroker friend Bob Soener, who taught the first four weeks of “Profitable
Investing in Stocks.” While Soener explained to the class basics such as how to read the Wall Street Journal,
Warren stood in the hallway listening for any good investment ideas. Then he took over for the next six
weeks.6 Eventually he taught the whole course and gave it the more cautious name of “Sound Investing in
Stocks.” In front of his classroom, he lit up, pacing the floor as if he couldn’t get the words out fast enough,
even though the students had to struggle not to drown in the flood of information he threw at them. But
despite his deep vein of knowledge, he never promised the class they would get rich or that taking his class
would give them any particular result. Nor did he brag about his own success at investing.
His students ranged from stock-market professionals to people who had no head for business—housewives,
doctors, retirees. They symbolized a subtle shift: Long-absent investors were starting to come back for the
first time since the 1920s—part of why Graham thought the market was overvalued. Warren adapted his
teaching to the range of their knowledge and skills. He modeled his teaching style after Graham’s, using the
“Company A, Company B” method and some of his mentor’s other little teaching tricks. He handed out
grades with the strictest fairness. His aunt Alice took the course and sat in the classroom gazing at him with
adoring eyes.7 He gave her a C.
People were always throwing out the names of stocks, asking him whether to buy or sell. He could speak
from memory for five or even ten minutes about any stock they named: its financial data, price/earnings ratio,
the volume of shares that traded—and from all appearances, he could do this for hundreds of stocks, as if he
were quoting baseball statistics.8 Sometimes a woman in the front row would say, “My late mother gave me
ABC stock, and now it’s up a little bit. What should I do?” Then he would say, “Well, I think I would sell
that, and maybe buy…,” giving three or four options such as GEICO or one of a few stocks about which he
was entirely confident (and already owned).9 The students remarked on his unusual conservatism when
responding to their questions about how to invest.
Meanwhile, Warren was working like a woodpecker in April to make money for himself. He was going to be
taking care of a family soon, which would divide his income into two streams. Part of what he made—his
stream—would go back into the mill and continue to grow. And part he would spend for him and Susie to
live, a significant change in his circumstances. Until now, he had been able to pare his expenses by living in
the maid’s room at Columbia, eating cheese sandwiches, and taking his dates to lectures or playing the
ukulele for them instead of escorting them to the posh “21” Club. Now that he was back in Nebraska, he was
able to cut his costs even further by living in his parents’ house, even though it meant occasional contact with
Leila when they came back from Washington.
He had never needed motivation to try to work his capital as hard as possible, and now he sat in the office at
Buffett-Falk with his feet on his desk, searching systematically through the Graham and Dodd book for more
ideas.10 He found a stock, Philadelphia and Reading Coal & Iron Company, a company that mined anthracite
coal. It looked cheap because it was selling for $19 and a fraction, but had about $8 a share worth of culm

banks.*14 Warren would happily spend hours figuring out how much coal mines and culm banks were worth
in order to make a rational decision about a stock. He bought Philadelphia and Reading Coal & Iron shares
himself and sold them to his aunt Alice and Chuck Peterson. When the stock immediately dropped to $9 a
share, he saw that as a reason to buy even more.
He bought a textile company called Cleveland Worsted Mills. It had current assets†15 of $146 per share, and
the stock was selling for less than that. He felt the price did not reflect the value of “several well-equipped
mills.”
Warren wrote a short report on the stock. He liked the fact that the company was paying out a lot of what it
earned to shareholders—giving them a bird in the hand. “The $8 dividend provides a well-protected 7% yield
on the current price of approximately $115,” the report noted.11 He wrote “well-protected” because he
thought Cleveland Worsted Mills had enough earnings to cover its dividend. That proved less than prescient.
“I called it Cleveland’s Worst Mill after they cut off paying the dividend.” Warren was so mad that he
decided to spend some money to find out what was wrong. “I went to an annual meeting of Cleveland’s
Worst Mill, and I flew all the way to Cleveland. I got there about five minutes late, and the meeting had
been adjourned. And here I was, this kid from Omaha, twenty-two years old, with my own money in the
stock. The chairman said, ‘Sorry, too late.’ But then their sales agent, who was on the board of directors,
actually took pity on me, and so he got me off on the side and talked to me and answered some questions.”
The answers, however, changed nothing. Warren felt awful; he had gotten other people to buy Cleveland’s
Worst Mill too.
There was nothing he hated more than selling people investments that lost them money. He couldn’t stand
disappointing people. This was what it had been like back in the sixth grade when the Cities Service Preferred
stock he’d gotten Doris to invest in was clobbered. She hadn’t hesitated to “remind” him about it, and he’d
felt responsible. Now, he would do anything to avoid the feeling of letting someone down.
Warren began looking for any way to make himself less dependent on the job he was starting to hate. He had
always enjoyed owning businesses, and decided to buy a gas station with a friend from the National Guard,
Jim Schaeffer. They bought a Sinclair station that was next to a Texaco station “that consistently out-sold us,
which drove us crazy.” Warren and his brother-in-law Truman Wood, who had married Doris, even worked
at the station themselves on weekends. They washed windshields “with a smile”—despite Warren’s aversion
to manual labor—and did everything they could to attract new customers, but instead drivers continued to
pull in to the Texaco station across the street. Its owner “was very well established and very well liked. He
beat us every month. That’s when I learned the power of customer loyalty. The guy had been in business
forever and had a clientele. Nothing we could do was going to change that.
“My service station was the dumbest thing—I lost two thousand dollars, and that was a lot of money for me
at the time. I’d never had real damage in a loss. It was painful.”
It seemed to Warren that nearly everything he did in Omaha reinforced his sense of youth and inexperience.
He was no longer a precocious boy who was acting like a man, but a young man—about to get married—who
looked and sometimes acted like a boy. Kaiser-Frazer, the stock he had shorted two years before in Bob
Soener’s office, still hung stubbornly around five dollars a share instead of going to zero as he had expected.
Carl Falk was always giving him funny looks and questioning his judgment. And Warren felt more and more
queasy about the very nature of his job. He started to think of himself as being like “a prescriptionist.” “I had
to explain to people who didn’t know enough about whether they should take aspirin or Anacin,” and people
would do anything the “guy in the white coat”—the stockbroker—told them to do. The stockbroker got paid
based on turnover instead of advice. In other words, “he’s getting paid based on how many pills he sells. He
gets paid more for some pills than others. You wouldn’t go to a doctor whose pay was totally contingent on
how many pills you took.” But that’s how the business of being a stockbroker worked at the time.
Warren felt there was a conflict of interest inherent in the business. He’d recommend a stock like GEICO to
his friends and family, and tell them that the best thing to do was to hold it for twenty years. That meant he
