
Using long legged dojis as sell signals
Just as a long legged doji that appears during a downtrend can be considered
a buy signal or the end of the downtrend, a long legged doji that appears in
an uptrend may be considered an uptrend reversal or sell signal that can be
extremely helpful if you’re looking to short a security.
Sometimes in the market no trend is obvious or exists. If you see a long legged
doji during one of these times, do nothing. The long legged doji is only useful
as a signal when it appears during a trend.

Seeing a good short signal on the long legged doji
Have a look at Figure 6-7 for an example of a long legged doji that provides a
useful signal for shorting. This daily stock chart is for Gap, Inc. (GPS). The
long legged doji appears in the middle of an uptrend. Notice that there wasn’t
much of a chance to get out of a long position, and although the opportunity
to put on a short was definitely there, you would’ve had to have been on your
toes to pull it off. The stock opened up slightly the next day, and then the
bears took over and dominated most of the day. Even the bears that were late
to the party toward the end of the day were rewarded with a substantial gap
down the next day.

The long legged doji sells signal failing
As always, an example that didn’t work too well is in order. Figure 6-8 is a
chart of the futures contract that trades on the Canadian dollar. In the center
of the chart is a nice long legged doji that appears in an uptrend that may
seem to be rolling over. Rolling over means that the price action on a chart
has been strong but is starting to top out. I’ve highlighted the uptrend and
then where the price begins to roll over or top out. Toward the right side of
this rolling price action, a long legged doji appears. Things look good for a
little while, and then the high of the doji is overtaken, and the price is off to
the races once again.

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 103

Chapter 6: Single-Stick Patterns That Depend on Market Context

Figure 6-7:
A long
legged doji
sell signal
on GPS that
works out
quite well.

Figure 6-8:
A long
legged doji
sell signal
on Canadian
dollar
futures that
fails.

103

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 104

104 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
Other dojis
The long legged doji, bullish dragonfly doji, and gravestone dojis are powerful but rare. You’re more likely to see a doji with an open and close that
appear somewhere other than the center or one of the ends of a wick. These
dojis are still useful as reversal indicators, and because they appear more
often than the named dojis, they offer more trading opportunities. Figure 6-9
highlights a variety of dojis.
When evaluating a doji, I look for the candle to appear on the top half of the
wick if I’m using the doji as a buy signal or on the bottom half of the wick if
I’m using it as a sell signal. With the open and close near the high, I feel that
the bulls are winning the day, and if the open and close are near the low, I feel
that the bears are coming out on top.

Figure 6-9:
A variety
of dojis.

Figure 6-9 looks like a chart that my three-year-old created while she was
learning how to write the letter t. Basically dojis just look like t’s or upside
down t’s.

Using regular dojis to trade long
Figure 6-10 is a chart of the stock Capital One Financial Corp. (COF). Notice
the long doji on the left. After that doji, the stock takes off on a very nice
uptrend. The doji is a great example because the candle that marks the open
and close is clearly in the top half of the price action for the day. I really have
more comfort buying a doji signal when the price closes near the high; I just
feel that more bulls are on my side.

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 105

Chapter 6: Single-Stick Patterns That Depend on Market Context

Figure 6-10:
A regular
long doji
appearing
on a chart
of COF.

For an example of a failing doji signal, see Figure 6-11. It’s a chart of the futures
contracts that trade on the Japanese Yen. In the center of the chart is a doji
appearing during a definite downtrend. The signal is negated the following day
with a violation of the low of the day in which the doji appeared. Once again, if
you traded this signal and you didn’t call it quits after the violation and signal
failure, you’d be in for a painful ride down.

Using regular dojis to short
Regular dojis work well in short or selling situations, too. Figure 6-12 shows a
short doji formation in an uptrend that quickly reversed for a nice short selling opportunity in the U.S. Treasury bond futures. The short doji is highlighted, along with another doji. The day after the short doji, the rarest of all
dojis appears on the chart: the four-price doji, which occurs when the open,
high, low, and close are the same on a chart. This occurrence is very rare and
usually happens on a very low volume day. The incidence may also represent
a data error. In this case, having a source to double-check the data behind the
chart would be very helpful. (See the “Data Integrity” sidebar in this chapter
for more details.)

105

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 106

106 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

Figure 6-11:
A regular
long doji
appearing
(and failing)
on a chart
of the Yen
futures.

Figure 6-12:
A short
doji on U.S.
Treasury
bond
futures.

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 107

Chapter 6: Single-Stick Patterns That Depend on Market Context
The signal doji in Figure 6-12 meets the criteria of appearing in an uptrend
and then also appears to have the open and close in the bottom half of the
day’s price action. No violation negates the signal, and the signal is quickly
followed by a downtrend lasting several days. I wish all my trades were so
easy to identify and profit from.
Like all other signals, short dojis aren’t perfect. Have a look at Figure 6-13, a
chart of IBM. This figure shows two failures of a short doji signal within the
span of just a couple of weeks. Both are highlighted on the chart, and both
fail pretty quickly.
This leads me to another fact I’ve picked up over the years. Each market or
stock may have its own individual trading characteristics. Although shorting
a doji formation in an uptrend may be a highly successful trading method for
the majority of financial instruments, there may be some out there who continuously shrug off this sell signal. Unfortunately, knowing what works well in
various markets is just a matter of putting in time and gaining experience.

Figure 6-13:
Short dojis
failing on
IBM.

107

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 108

108 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
Data integrity
With so many financial products trading in the
world today and so much data floating around,
data errors are bound to occur. In the case of a
four-price doji, having a second source to check
the price action of the day is extremely valuable.
As a professional trader, I use multiple charting
software packages and data sources to assure
that the data I’m using accurately reflects the
price action that occurred in the past. With
fewer resources, you may want to consult an
exchange’s Web site for data accuracy or free

data sources such as Yahoo! (www.yahoo.
com) or MarketWatch.com (www.market
watch.com). (Flip back to Chapter 4 for more
information about online and electronic sources
of charting information.)
MarketWatch.com has a terrific function that
allows you to enter a stock symbol and a specific date to check for accuracy. Either way,
when you see some price action that looks out
of place on a chart, doing a double check can
save you frustration and money in the long run.

Looking At Other Patterns: Spinning Tops
Like the doji, the spinning top is another single-stick pattern that depends on
market context and reveals a tight battle between bulls and bears. Whenever
the bulls-versus-bears battle is close, eventually one side has to give, and
when this happens, an explosive move in one direction is possible. My favorite
analogy for that scenario is a coiled spring being pushed hard on both sides.
Eventually one side gives in, and that’s the direction the spring flies.
The key is picking the right direction, and considering the market environment
where you find your pattern helps you make the right pick. For spinning tops
or any other patterns that indicate a tight battle between bulls and bears,
if the bulls have been in charge for some time leading up to the pattern, it
usually indicates that the bears are starting to gain some strength. And the
reverse is also true: If the pattern appears during a bearish trend, it generally
indicates that the bulls are going to make a run (and you don’t have to be in
Pamplona to run with them).

Identifying spinning tops
To qualify as a spinning top, a candlestick should have a small body and wicks
that stick out on both ends. The body should appear close to the center of the
range of the day’s price action. Also, the wicks should both be at least as wide
as the candle section of the candlestick. For a clear picture of what a spinning
top looks like, check out Figure 6-14.

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 109

Chapter 6: Single-Stick Patterns That Depend on Market Context

Figure 6-14:
Examples
of spinning
tops.

The color of a spinning top’s candle isn’t terribly important, although it’s nice
to see a dark body if you’re expecting a reversal of an uptrend (sell signal) or
a white body if you’re expecting a reversal of a downtrend (buy signal).
One of the best features of spinning tops as compared to dojis is that spinning tops appear much more frequently. Dojis are powerful signals, but they
can be pretty rare. I scanned many charts to come up with the examples for
this book, and it was much, much easier to find good examples of spinning
tops than it was to track down dojis. And with more appearances come more
chances to trade and make more profits!

Using spinning tops for profitable trading
Like dojis, spinning tops are nice indicators that a trend may be about to
change direction. Catching an early trend change can be a very profitable
endeavor, and in the sections below, I give you an idea of how you can
execute some fruitful trades by using spinning tops.

Recognizing a buy signal with a spinning top
Figure 6-15 is a chart of the futures contracts that trade on the Standard &
Poor’s 500 Index (S&P 500). The low of a downtrend culminates with a spinning top, and a trader who recognizes this signal is rewarded with a nice up
move if she shows a little patience.

109

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 110

110 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
For this reversal pattern, I wanted to use a chart that appeared to be failing
initially. Although the futures contract in Figure 6-15 didn’t immediately reverse
to an uptrend, it also didn’t match the low of the signal day. The contract came
close, but the low was never broken, so the signal was never violated. Such a
case may test your patience, but sticking with this buy signal would’ve been
rewarded after a few days of watching it go nowhere.

Looking at an example of a failing spinning top
On the flip side, take a look at Figure 6-16, which is a chart of the futures contracts that trade on the ten-year U.S. Treasury notes. I’ve highlighted a spinning top that appears in a downtrend. The next day shows a quick failure,
with the downtrend continuing for several days afterward. Although the
appearance of the spinning top on this chart may have been a hopeful sign
for someone choosing to go long, that hope was dashed pretty quickly.

Getting a nice short signal from a spinning top
Spinning tops may also be used quite effectively to recognize a shift from an
uptrend to a downtrend. Figure 6-17 is a chart of the futures contract on the
Euro currency. A spinning top appears just as an uptrend is rolling over, which
is a favorite situation of mine. The next day’s high comes very close to penetrating the high of the spinning top signal day, but doesn’t quite get there.
The result is a downtrend that lasts almost a month.

Figure 6-15:
A long
spinning
top on S&P
500 futures
contract
that yields
a nice profit.

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 111

Chapter 6: Single-Stick Patterns That Depend on Market Context

Figure 6-16:
A long
spinning
top that fails.

Figure 6-17:
A short
spinning
top on Euro
futures
indicates the
beginning
of a
downtrend.

To capitalize on the scenario presented in Figure 6-17, you would initiate a
short position on the futures contract either near the close of the day on
which the spinning top appeared or the next day, when the spinning top was
validated by the fact that the day’s high didn’t violate the high of the
previous day.

111

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 112

112 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
Seeing a failing spinning top short
Figure 6-18 shows a chart where spinning tops just keep failing. This chart is
of the stock for Yahoo!, which carries the symbol YHOO. I’ve highlighted
three spinning tops that appear after some small uptrends. Each fails pretty
quickly and miserably.

Discovering More about Belt Holds
More single-stick patterns that depend on market context and offer outstanding trend reversal signals are belt holds. But wait — if you read Chapter 5, you
and belt holds have already been introduced, although you may know them
by a different name.
Belt holds are exactly the same as marubozus that have no wick on the opening end of the candlestick formation. As with the other patterns in this
chapter, the difference is that the usefulness of belt holds as trend reversal
signals depends heavily on the market environments in which they appear.

Figure 6-18:
Spinning
tops on
a Yahoo!
chart that
don’t pan out.

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 113

Chapter 6: Single-Stick Patterns That Depend on Market Context

Spotting belt holds on a chart
There are two types of belt holds: bullish and bearish. Bullish belt holds feature an open equal to the low and a close near the high, which leaves a small
wick on the top of the candle. Bullish belt holds appear during downtrends.
For an ideal example of a bullish (long) belt hold, take a peek at Figure 6-19.
Bearish belt holds, on the other hand, open on their highs and close near
their lows, thus leaving a small wick on the bottom of the candle. Bearish
belt holds show up in the midst of uptrends. You can find a picture perfect
version of a bearish (short) belt hold in Figure 6-20.

Buckling down for some
belt hold-based trading
It’s time to investigate what it’s like to trade signals. These are pretty powerful and common patterns that can be used. The dramatic reversal from the
opens they represent often does show a trend change occurring over the
course of just one day.

Figure 6-19:
Textbook
example
of a long
belt hold.

113

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 114

114 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

Figure 6-20:
Textbook
example of
a short belt
hold.

The price action behind a belt hold is pretty directional. For example, a stock
in a defined downtrend may open on its low and then spend most of the day
rallying. As a downtrend presents itself, the bulls have finally had enough and
start buying. Prices reach a low enough level to encourage not just buying,
but aggressive buying.

Belt hold as a long signal
Figure 6-21 is a chart of Wal-Mart stock. The long belt hold pattern actually
shows up on the chart on the day after Christmas in 2006. I like this chart
because in addition to this being the company’s most important time of year,
it shows how sentiment changed relative to the retailing environment right
after the crucial holiday season had ended.
Two factors contribute to the strength of this long belt hold.
 The sheer length of the candlestick: Very aggressive buying is exhibited
by the size of the candle and overall candlestick.
 The fact that the gap from the opening price was filled: Also, you can
find another bullish indication in the fact that that the stock gapped
lower than the previous low on the open (it means that the price attracted
buy interest immediately). Notice that the whole price action of the previous day was covered. That’s bullish stuff.

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 115

Chapter 6: Single-Stick Patterns That Depend on Market Context

Figure 6-21:
Chart of a
long belt
hold in WalMart stock.

Belt hold failing on the long side
Want to know what happens when bullish belt holds go bad? Look at
Figure 6-22. This figure is a chart of the futures contract that trades on
soybeans. The bullish belt hold comes on the heels of some pretty bearish
trading that occurred over the course of a few weeks. For the sake of full disclosure, I’ll fess up and say that I actually traded this signal because I was
looking for a short-term bottom and was encouraged by the price action of
that day. However, I was a little less wealthy the next day because the signal
failed. Happens to the best of us.
Bearish belt hold signals occur when there’s an obvious uptrend with a day
that opens on its high and closes very near its low. This signal appears as a
dark candle with just a small part of the wick appearing on the bottom. It’s
a day when the bears rule for most of the day after being pushed around by
the bulls for several days prior.

Bearish belt hold working out
For a nice bearish belt hold scenario, look at Figure 6-23. This chart of
exchange traded funds represents a basket of biotech stocks also known as
the Biotech Holders (BBH). The BBH bears had been overtaken by the bulls,
but the short belt hold reveals that the bears are clawing their way back into
the action.

115

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 116

116 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

Figure 6-22:
Chart of a
failing
bullish
(long) belt
hold in
soybean
futures.

Figure 6-23:
Chart of a
nice short
belt hold
signal on
the BBH.

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 117

Chapter 6: Single-Stick Patterns That Depend on Market Context
Take a closer look at Figure 6-23. Notice any additional bearish patterns? I
chose this chart specifically to try to push you to start looking beyond what I
highlight on a chart. Give yourself a pat on the back if you notice the doji the
day before the belt hold. Give yourself two pats if you notice the doji’s short
signal was intact while you received a short signal from the belt hold. I’d give
you a chance to give yourself three pats on the back, but that can be hard on
your rotator cuff.

A failing bearish belt hold
Just so you’ll know what to look for if you suspect that a bearish belt hold
may be failing, check out Figure 6-24. It depicts the futures contract that
trades on the Japanese Yen.
It’s a really nice bearish belt hold pattern, except that it just doesn’t work
out. The belt hold appears during an uptrend that’s been in place for several
days, and it’s pretty encouraging that lower trading occurs during the next
few days. However, seven days after the signal appears, the Yen futures trade
over the high of the belt hold day and then trade much higher pretty quickly.
Sometimes signals take a few days to fail. They don’t immediately show signs
of failure, so stay on your toes and keep your eyes out for signs of trouble.

Figure 6-24:
Chart of a
bearish belt
hold on the
Japanese
Yen that
fails.

117

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 118

118 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
Deciphering between the Hanging
Man and the Hammer
The last single-stick patterns that rely on a specific market environment that I
present in this chapter are the hanging man and the hammer. I paired them
together in this section because they appear exactly the same. Don’t be
fooled, though — the two patterns aren’t identical. The hanging man is considered bearish, and the hammer is considered bullish, and the difference
between the two is where they appear on a chart.

Spotting and distinguishing the
hanging man and the hammer
The first step in working with the hanging man and the hammer is understanding how to spot them on a chart. The pattern is fairly distinctive, so
identifying it usually isn’t a problem.
The hammer or hanging man is recognized by a small candle that appears at
the very top of the pattern. There’s usually a pretty long wick on the bottom.
If you see this pattern at the bottom of a downtrend, you’re looking at a
hammer. If it appears at the top of an uptrend, it’s considered a hanging man.
(Both cases assume that the patterns are actually good signals, of course.)
Also, in less than ideal cases, it’s possible for a small wick to be sticking out
of the top of the candle.
For a classic example, look at Figure 6-25.

Figure 6-25:
A hammer
or hanging
man
(depending
on the
market
context).

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 119

Chapter 6: Single-Stick Patterns That Depend on Market Context
Although the hammer and the hanging man are individual patterns, there’s
one extra step to them: the confirmation of the pattern. The confirmation
comes on the following day’s opening price. If the opening price on the very
next day is in the direction of the signal, you’re working with a true hammer
or hanging man. If you think you have a hanging man appearing in an uptrend,
you wouldn’t trade on it unless it’s confirmed the next day with an opening
price lower than the previous close. By the same token, if a hammer appears
during a downtrend, you need to confirm it with an opening price on the next
day that’s higher than the hammer’s close.

Trading on the hanging
man and the hammer
To better illustrate the intricacies of the hanging man and the hammer, I show
you examples of both patterns that were either confirmed the next day or not
confirmed. If you’re planning to dig into later chapters and read more about
complex patterns, get used to the idea of confirming patterns, because it pops
up continually throughout the rest of the book.

Going long with a hammer pattern
Figure 6-26 is a chart of Dell, Inc. (DELL) stock with a hammer that pops up
during a downtrend. The following day, the stock opens higher than the close
of the previous day for DELL. That’s the confirmation that indicates that the
hammer is a good long signal, and you’d be very wise to wait for it before
buying. Be patient and wait for the confirmation, even if you’re completely
convinced that it’s hammer time!
The confirmation may cost you a little in profits because you pay a slightly
higher price, but Figure 6-27 shows what it may cost you if you choose not
to wait.
Figure 6-27 is also a chart of DELL. This one contains a potential buy hammer
that isn’t confirmed on the next day. In fact, the opening the next day is lower
than the low that occurred on the day that the hammer appeared. Not only
would you have saved yourself the effort of trading in and out of this stock by
waiting for confirmation, but you’d also have saved yourself a little in losses.
If a candlestick signal calls for some sort of confirmation, always wait for the
confirmation. Don’t try to get ahead of the confirmation day by trading in
early. In the long run, it catches up with you!
