
Burniske 01.indd 18

9/9/17 1:12 PM

The Basics of Bitcoin and Blockchain Technology

19

obvious for a system that specializes in securing transactions. Beyond the
financial services industry, others that are exploring the applications of blockchain technology include the music industry, real estate, insurance, healthcare,
networking, polling, supply chains, charities, gun tracking, law enforcement,
governments, and more.6
Throughout this book, we will focus on public blockchains and their native
assets, or what we will define as cryptoassets, because we believe this is where
the greatest opportunity awaits the innovative investor. Sometimes, crypto­
assets have the exact same name as their parent blockchain but with different capitalization. Other times there’s a slightly different name for the asset.
For example, the native asset of Bitcoin’s blockchain is bitcoin, the native asset
of Ethereum’s blockchain is ether, the native asset of Litecoin’s blockchain is
litecoin, etc.
Many public blockchains are markedly different from one another. Some
members of the early Bitcoin community feel the definition of what makes
something a blockchain should be very specific, in particular, that any blockchain must use proof-of-work as the means of consensus. We disagree with
that exclusive worldview, as there are many other interesting consensus mechanisms being developed, such as proof-of-stake, proof-of-existence, proofof-elapsed-time, and so on. Just as machine learning is not just one thing,
but composed of the Symbolists, Connectionists, Evolutionaries, Bayesians,
and Analogizers, so too can blockchain technology have many flavors. In
The Master Algorithm,7 Pedro Domingos hypothesizes that all these camps
of machine learning—which at times have been bitter rivals—will one day
coalesce. The same will likely be true of blockchain technology. If these distributed databases of value are to be truly transformational, they will have to
interoperate and value one another.
THE MANY USES OF THE WORD BLOCKCHAIN
Despite increased interest in blockchain technology, confusion remains as
to what it specifically means due to imprecision in the use of the term. For
example, “a blockchain,” “the blockchain,” “blockchain,” and “blockchain
technology” can all refer to different things.
Typically, when people say the blockchain, they are referring to the original, or Bitcoin’s blockchain. At the risk of redundancy but in pursuit of clarity,
we will always use “Bitcoin’s blockchain” instead of “the blockchain.”

Burniske 01.indd 19

9/9/17 1:12 PM

20 CRYPTOASSETS

On the other hand, terms such as a blockchain and blockchain technology
typically refer to derivatives of the original that now may have nothing to do
with Bitcoin. Meanwhile, blockchain is normally used to refer to the concept
itself, with no particular implementation in mind. It is the most amorphous,
so our least favored of the terms.

Burniske 01.indd 20

9/9/17 1:12 PM

Chapter 3
“Blockchain, Not Bitcoin?”

I

n drawing a line between public and private blockchains, we have entered
contentious territory that the innovative investor should understand. The
difference between these two types of blockchains and the groups that support them is full of tension, because the two camps have different goals for the
technology. At the risk of overgeneralizing, private blockchains are backed by
incumbents in their respective industries, while public blockchains are backed
by the disruptors.
To round out the context within which the innovative investor approaches
cryptoassets, it’s important to understand how the world evolved beyond a
single blockchain—Bitcoin’s blockchain—to include public and private blockchains. Otherwise, investors may be confused when they hear someone claim
that Bitcoin is no longer relevant or that it’s been displaced. Neither of these
claims is true, but it’s nonetheless helpful to understand the motivations and
rationale behind those that say they are.

BITCOIN’S EARLY YEARS
We left Bitcoin in Chapter 1 with Satoshi pleading on December 5, 2010, for
WikiLeaks not to accept bitcoin for donations to its site, because bitcoin was
still too young and vulnerable to attack. This was about two years after the
birth of Bitcoin’s blockchain, during which it had lived a mostly quiet and
nerdy life. That was all about to change.
21

Burniske 01.indd 21

9/9/17 1:12 PM

22 CRYPTOASSETS

A few months after Satoshi’s plea, a software application was released that
would make Bitcoin famous. Launched in February 2011, the Silk Road provided a rules-free decentralized marketplace for any product one could imagine, and it used bitcoin as the means of payment. You name it, the Silk Road
had it. Gawker put it succinctly in a June 2011 article, “The Underground
Website Where You Can Buy Any Drug Imaginable.”1 Clearly, this was one way
that Bitcoin developed its dark reputation, though it’s important to know that
this was not endorsed by Bitcoin and its development team. The Silk Road was
simply making use of this new digital and decentralized currency by building
an application atop its platform.
The Gawker article led to the first Google search spike in Bitcoin’s life, as
shown in Figure 3.1, and would drive the price of bitcoin from about $10 to
$30 in the span of a week.2 However, the Gawker article jump paled in comparison to the global Google search volume in March to April 2013, which
corresponded with a nearly eightfold increase in price, from roughly $30 to
$230 in about a month. The drivers behind this bitcoin demand were more
opaque than the Gawker spike, though many point to the bailout of Cyprus
and the associated losses that citizens took on their bank account balances
as the core driver. Bitcoin received ample interest for being outside of government control, making its holders immune to such events. Bloomberg ran
a story on March 25, 2013, with the eye-catching title, “Bitcoin May Be the
Global Economy’s Last Safe Haven.”3
While the spring of 2013 was notable, it was a preview for bitcoin’s grand
opening to global attention. This came six months later, in November 2013,

100

75

50

Bitcoin Rises from
~$30 to $230, 8-Fold
in a Month
Gawker Article about
the Silk Road, Bitcoin
Rises from ~$10 to $30,
3-Fold in a Week

Bitcoin Crosses $1,000
for First Time, 5-Fold
in a Month

25

0

1 Feb 2009

1 Aug 2013

Figure 3.1 n Google search spikes for the term “bitcoin”
Source: Annotation of Google Search screenshot

Burniske 01.indd 22

9/9/17 1:12 PM

“Blockchain, Not Bitcoin?”

23

when increased demand for bitcoin in China along with interest from the U.S.
Senate on the innovation led to a stratospheric ascent through $1,000 that
grabbed international headlines.4
THE UTILITY OF GOOGLE SEARCH TRENDS
Google search trends are a useful indicator of what is grabbing mainstream
attention. The innovative investor can go to https://trends.google.com/ and
explore the patterns of how people are searching for different topics. Google
even provides the option to explore search trends by geographical location,
giving charts of where interest is spiking, as well as showing what related topics are on the rise. For example, after typing in “bitcoin,” investors can look
at Google search trends for the last year, or five years, or a custom range, and
investigate how Nigeria differs from India. We recommend orienting with this
tool even beyond cryptoassets, as it’s a fascinating window into the global
mesh of minds.

At this point, bitcoin’s spike captured the attention of the People’s Bank of
China, which promptly implemented restrictions on bitcoin’s use, declaring it
was “not a currency in the real meaning of the word.”5 The China ruling, combined with the FBI’s capture of the creator of the Silk Road, Ross Ulbricht,6 and
soon thereafter the collapse of the biggest exchange at the time, Mt. Gox,7 put
many bitcoin investors on edge as to its long-term viability in the face of government and law enforcement crackdowns.8 Bitcoin’s subsequent price descent
through all of 2014, bottoming in January 2015, was volatile, prolonged, and
dispiriting for many early adopters who had been drawn to the new concept.
While bitcoin’s price was declining, its developers plowed forward with
improving the protocol and building applications atop it. During that time,
conversations about the underlying technology gained momentum, as early
Bitcoiners9 emphasized that Bitcoin was important not only because of the
decentralized currency aspect but also because of the architecture that supported it. This emphasis on the technology supporting Bitcoin came about just
as a slew of developers and enterprises began to investigate Bitcoin because of
the headlines that had grabbed their attention. Clearly, something was going
on, and newcomers to the technology were trying to figure out what.
The trifecta of current Bitcoiners defending and explaining the disruptive
potential of Bitcoin’s technology, bitcoin’s price descending dramatically, and

Burniske 01.indd 23

9/9/17 1:12 PM

24 CRYPTOASSETS

newcomers investigating the technology led to a seismic shift in the Bitcoin
narrative. Newcomers didn’t necessarily see the need for bitcoin in the ways
in which they wanted to use blockchain technology, and they felt reaffirmed
in their belief by the continued descent of bitcoin’s price through 2014. But to
Bitcoiners it had always been “bitcoin and blockchain.” The asset, bitcoin, was
what incentivized an ecosystem of players—miners, developers, companies,
and users—to secure and build upon Bitcoin’s blockchain, delivering means of
exchange and store of value services to the world.
Out of this examination of the technology underlying Bitcoin, two movements exploded in the blockchain technology space. One was the proliferation
of new cryptoassets that supported new public blockchains, like Ethereum.
These new public blockchains offered utility outside the realm of Bitcoin. For
example, Ethereum’s goal was to serve as a decentralized world computer,
whereas Bitcoin aimed to be a decentralized world currency. This diversity has
led to tension among players as some of these cryptoassets compete, but this is
nothing like the tension that exists between Bitcoin and the second movement.
The second movement that exploded on the scene questioned whether
bitcoin, or any cryptoasset, was necessary to get the value out of blockchain
technology. It is this second movement that we will investigate further in this
chapter, as it’s important for the innovative investor to understand why some
people will claim bitcoin and other cryptoassets aren’t needed to keep their
implementations secure and functioning: welcome to the world of private
blockchains.
SATOSHI NEVER SAID BLOCKCHAIN
The word blockchain was not mentioned once in Satoshi’s 2008 white paper.
It was early Bitcoin companies that popularized the word within what was
then a niche community. For example, blockchain.info, a popular Bitcoin
wallet service,10 was launched in August 2011. Satoshi, on the other hand,
frequently referred to the system as a “proof-of-work chain.” The closest he
came to saying blockchain was with phrases such as “blocks are chained” or
a “chain of blocks.” Since Satoshi only places “proof-of-work” directly before
“chain,” many early Bitcoiners are adamant that the term blockchain should
only be used if it is proof-of-work based. Remember that proof-of-work is a
mechanism whereby all the computers building Bitcoin’s blockchain remain
in sync on how to construct it.

Burniske 01.indd 24

9/9/17 1:12 PM

“Blockchain, Not Bitcoin?”

25

BLOCKCHAIN, NOT BITCOIN
Articles like one from the Bank of England in the third quarter of 2014 argued,
“The key innovation of digital currencies is the ‘distributed ledger,’ which
allows a payment system to operate in an entirely decentralized way, without
intermediaries such as banks.”11 In emphasizing the technology and not the
native asset, the Bank of England left an open question whether the native
asset was needed.
At the Inside Bitcoins conference in April 2015,12 many longtime Bitcoiners
commented on how many Wall Street suits were in attendance. While Bitcoin
was still king, there were growing whispers of “blockchain not bitcoin,” which
was heresy to Bitcoiners.
The term blockchain, independent of Bitcoin, began to be used more widely
in North America in the fall of 2015 when two prominent financial magazines
catalyzed awareness of the concept. First, Bloomberg Markets published an
article titled “Blythe Masters Tells Banks the Blockchain Changes Everything:
The banker who helped give the world credit-default swaps wants to upend
finance again—this time with the code that powers bitcoin.”13 In emphasizing
“the code that powers bitcoin,” this article quietly questioned the need for the
native asset, instead emphasizing the underlying technology. Masters was a
well-known and respected figure in financial services, one that people associated with financial innovation. Her choice to join a little-known firm at the
time called Digital Asset Holdings, after having been the head of global commodities at JPMorgan Chase, was reason to believe that blockchain technology
was no longer on the fringe of the business world. In the article, a quote from
Masters brought everyone to attention: “You should be taking this technology
as seriously as you should have been taking the development of the Internet in
the early 1990s. It’s analogous to email for money.”
The October 31, 2015, issue of the Economist featured “The Trust Machine”
on its front cover, and while the article tipped its hat to Bitcoin, its focus was
the more broadly applicable “technology behind bitcoin” and used the term
blockchain throughout.14
The combination of Masters, Bloomberg, and the Economist led to a spike
in interest in blockchain technology that set off a sustained climb in global
Google search volumes for “blockchain” that is still in an upward trend. In the
two weeks between October 18 and November 1, 2015, just after Bloomberg
and the Economist published their articles, global Google search volumes for
“blockchain” grew 70 percent (see Figure 3.2).

Burniske 01.indd 25

9/9/17 1:12 PM

26 CRYPTOASSETS

120
100
80
60
40
20

Dec-11
Feb-12
Apr-12
Jun-12
Aug-12
Oct-12
Dec-12
Feb-13
Apr-13
Jun-13
Aug-13
Oct-13
Dec-13
Feb-14
Apr-14
Jun-14
Aug-14
Oct-14
Dec-14
Feb-15
Apr-15
Jun-15
Aug-15
Oct-15
Dec-15
Feb-16
Apr-16
Jun-16
Aug-16
Oct-16

0

Figure 3.2 n The rise in Google Search trends for the term “blockchain”
Data sourced from Google Search Trends

Masters’s focus for blockchain technology in financial services is on private
blockchains, which are very different from Bitcoin’s blockchain. Pivotal to the
current conversation, private blockchains don’t need native assets. Since access
to the network is tightly controlled—largely maintaining security through
exclusivity—the role of computers supporting the blockchain is different.15
Since these computers don’t have to worry about attack from the outside—
they are operating behind a firewall and collaborating with known entities—it
removes the need for a native asset that incentivizes the build-out of a robust
network of miners.
A private blockchain is typically used to expedite and make existing processes more efficient, thereby rewarding the entities that have crafted the software and maintain the computers. In other words, the value creation is in the
cost savings, and the entities that own the computers enjoy these savings. The
entities don’t need to get paid in a native asset as reward for their work, as is
the case with public blockchains.
On the other hand, for Bitcoin to incentivize a self-selecting group of global
volunteers, known as miners, to deploy capital into the mining machines
that validate and secure bitcoin transactions, there needs to be a native asset
that can be paid out to the miners for their work. The native asset builds out
support for the service from the bottom up in a truly decentralized manner.
Public blockchains are not so much databases as they are system architectures

Burniske 01.indd 26

9/9/17 1:12 PM

“Blockchain, Not Bitcoin?”

27

spawned from the bottom up to orchestrate the creation of globally decentralized digital services. Over time, miner compensation will shift from the issuance of new bitcoin to transaction fees, and if global adoption is great enough,
then transaction fees will be sufficient to sustain miners.
The kernel of belief held by many avid proponents of private blockchains
is that the native assets themselves (such as bitcoin) are irrelevant; they can
be removed from the architecture and the best parts of the technology can
remain intact. For the use cases these people are pursuing, that’s true. For public blockchains, however, it’s not true. Enterprises that have come to explore
blockchain technology from the perspective of how they can use it to update
their current technology stacks, very much in the form of a database, most
often fall into the private blockchain bucket. Many financial services companies are the earliest adopters of this mindset.
Beyond questioning the need for native cryptoassets—which would naturally infuriate communities that very much value their cryptoassets—tensions
also exist because public blockchain advocates believe the private blockchain
movement bastardizes the ethos of blockchain technology. For example, instead
of aiming to decentralize and democratize aspects of the existing financial services, Masters’s Digital Asset Holdings aims to assist existing financial services
companies in adopting this new technology, thereby helping the incumbents
fight back the rebels who seek to disrupt the status quo.

BLOCKCHAINS AS A GENERAL PURPOSE TECHNOLOGY
While we have our beliefs about the most exciting applications of blockchain technology, we don’t ascribe to an exclusive world view. Instead, we believe Bitcoin’s
blockchain is one of the most important blockchains in existence, and that it has
given birth to a new general purpose technology that goes beyond Bitcoin.
General purpose technologies are pervasive, eventually affecting all consumers and companies. They improve over time in line with the deflationary progression of technology, and most important, they are a platform upon
which future innovations are built. Some of the more famous examples include
steam, electricity, internal combustion engines, and information technology.16
We would add blockchain technology to this list. While such a claim may
appear grand to some, that is the scale of the innovation before us.
As a general purpose technology, blockchain technology includes private
blockchains that are going to have a profound impact on many industries
and public blockchains beyond Bitcoin that are growing like gangbusters.

Burniske 01.indd 27

9/9/17 1:12 PM

28 CRYPTOASSETS

The realm of public blockchains and their native assets is most relevant to the
innovative investor, as private blockchains have not yielded an entirely new
asset class that is investable to the public.

WHERE IS BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY
IN THE HYPE CYCLE?
By now it will be clear to the innovative investor that the blockchain technology space is still working itself out and will continue to do so for years to come.
Captivating technologies have a gravitational pull that brings in new minds
with varied perspectives and that will push the boundaries of the technology.
The progression of a new technology, and the way it evolves as it gains mental mindshare, is at the core of Gartner’s Hype Cycle for Emerging Technologies
(Gartner is a leading technology research and advisory firm),17 which displays
five common stages of technology.18
•
•
•
•
•

Innovation Trigger
Peak of Inflated Expectations
Trough of Disillusionment
Slope of Enlightenment
Plateau of Productivity

First is the Innovation Trigger that brings the technology into the world. While
not very visible, just as Bitcoin wasn’t visible in the early years of its life, word
spreads and expectations grow. Over time the murmurs gain momentum,
building into a crescendo that is Gartner’s second stage, the Peak of Inflated
Expectations. The peak represents the height of confusion around the definition of the original technology, because people often apply it optimistically to
everything they see. No technology is a panacea.
As companies sprout to life and attempt to transition ideas into reality,
shifting from proof-of-concepts to at-scale implementations, it frequently
turns out that implementing a new disruptive technology in the wild is much
harder than anticipated. The new technology must integrate with many other
systems, often requiring a wide-reaching redesign. It also requires retraining
of employees and consumers. These difficulties slowly push the technology
into the Trough of Disillusionment, as people lament that this technology will
never work or is too difficult to deal with.
When enough people have given up, but the loyal keep working in dedication, the technology begins to rise again, this time not with the irrational exu-

Burniske 01.indd 28

9/9/17 1:12 PM

“Blockchain, Not Bitcoin?”

29

berance of its early years, but instead with a sustained release of improvements
and productivity. Over time the technology matures, ultimately becoming a
steady platform in the Plateau of Productivity that provides a base on which to
build other technologies.
While it’s hard to predict where blockchain technology currently falls on
Gartner’s Hype Cycle (these things are always easier in retrospect), we would
posit that Bitcoin is emerging from the Trough of Disillusionment. At the same
time, blockchain technology stripped of native assets (private blockchain) is
descending from the Peak of Inflated Expectations, which it reached in the
summer of 2016 just before The DAO hack occurred (which we will discuss in
detail in Chapter 5).
Cryptoassets beyond bitcoin are at different points between the Innovation
Trigger and the Trough of Disillusionment. These differ because they came
to life at different points after bitcoin and many are still emerging. Suffice it
to say, the promise is great, the tensions are high, and opportunity awaits the
innovative investor. Let’s now take a tour of the various cryptoassets that currently exist.

Burniske 01.indd 29

9/9/17 1:12 PM

This page intentionally left blank

Burniske 01.indd 30
