
Conservative Traders

Conservative traders tend to be risk averse and prefer strategies that are low impact that allow for
more time to contemplate a trade, and execution tactics that allow for the processing of as much
information as possible. These traders tend to prefer low-volatility stocks or environments,
incorporate smaller stops and moderate targets into their strategies, and focus more on maximizing
their accuracy edge—being right in a series of trades—than their monetary edge.
In his 1932 course Technical Analysis and Stock Market Profits , early technician Richard
Schabacker described the benefits and caveats of being a conservative market speculator:
The conservative student will err on the side of his nature. He may, for that reason, be more
successful in the long run. But … he must guard against over-conservatism, against overcaution, against too much doubt and timidity. The chief stumbling block for this type is
hesitation. He reasons out a perfectly clear and correct case for a certain type of direct and
definite action, then he weighs the opposite possibilities too carefully, and decides to wait.
The market movement gets away from him. His judgment was correct, but the longer he
procrastinates, the more hesitant he becomes, the more psychologically uncertain, and the
less likely to profit from his correct analysis. The result of such procrastination … is the
tendency finally to force himself to rush in [to a trade] without the usual careful analysis and
sound sense, at a time when the movement … is just about over with or is about to reverse
itself.
Schabacker reminds us that conservative traders have their place in the market and may be more
likely to experience long-term success, as their risk-averse nature allows them to remain capitalized
to endure the early learning curve in their career. In addition, their tendency toward deeper analysis
will better enable them to locate high probability/low-risk opportunities, provided they can act
decisively once they have found these opportunities.
Conservative traders must adopt strategies that align with their personalities and conduct their
evening analysis accordingly. These traders must not fall victim to the over-analysis trap, or paralysis
by analysis. A conservative trader will assess the odds, wait for the moment when the price chart
indicates a high probability setup, but then must act on that setup with minimal hesitation or doubt.
This is a balancing act that will remain with the trader throughout the entire career: too much analysis
leads to hesitation, but not enough analysis leads to impulsiveness.
In terms of execution tactics, conservative traders prefer to enter their trades after price rallies
upward from a support zone, often breaking above the high of a reversal candle or short-term
trendline in price. Instead of executing a trade as price tests a confluence support price exactly, a
conservative trader demands to see some sort of rally upward, particularly in the form of a reversal
candle, before committing capital to the position.
When compared to aggressive traders, conservative traders tend to take fewer trades and have a
higher accuracy edge or win ratio than their more aggressive counterparts. This greater accuracy edge
often comes at the expense of their monetary edge because they will be entering at a price further
away from their stop-loss order, which is under the confluence support zone, and closer to their
target, which slightly degrades edge by increasing the average losing trade and decreasing the size of
the average winning trade. Aggressive traders need less price proof before entering a position, and
thus have a superior monetary edge, but often at the expense of their accuracy edge.

Aggressive Traders

In contrast to conservative traders, aggressive traders focus more on the components of edge than of
accuracy, and need less information to execute a trade. Aggressive traders may spend less time on
analysis and trade more frequently than conservative traders. In general, more professional traders
tend to be aggressive than conservative, as the game of speculation tends to attract more risk-seeking
personalities to the arena. All games of speculation, from poker to trading, involve risks of loss that
not all people can tolerate psychologically. Risk-seeking personalities gravitate to risk-seeking
professions and activities, and trading stocks is no exception.
While a conservative trader waits to see proof of a price inflection upward off of a confluence
support zone, an aggressive trader would buy shares as close as possible to the confluence support
price before a candle reversal signal forms. They may even start to establish a position prior to price
trading exactly at the support zone, which may include a rising trendline, moving average, prior price
support line, or Fibonacci retracement.
By entering as close as possible to the confluence support price, aggressive traders can place
tighter stops in the event that price breaks downward through the expected support zone. This allows
them to have a higher reward-to-risk ratio, or monetary edge, because their stop-loss prices will be
closer to the price where they will exit a failed trade, which is often under a confluence support zone,
or above a confluence resistance zone if short selling. By executing a trade before price begins to
rally upward toward the higher price target, an aggressive trader also has more ground to cover as
price moves to the target. Because of these two factors, aggressive traders tend to have smaller
average losing trades and larger average winning trades than conservative traders.
But before you rush out to adopt aggressive trading strategies, understand that the higher monetary
edge often comes at a price: because an aggressive trader takes positions in advance of price
bouncing higher from a support zone, the trader will be forced to stop out of more positions than
conservative counterparts who waited for confirmation, and thus will have a lower accuracy rate as a
result. It is not uncommon for aggressive traders to report win rates close to 50 percent or lower,
though they profit over time due to the frequency of their trades and the increased monetary edge.

Conservative versus Aggressive Tactics
Let's visualize the example I have been describing when discussing conservative versus aggressive
trade execution tactics. Figure 8.1 gives us an idealized example of how conservative and aggressive
traders approach an identical setup.
FIGURE 8.1 How Conservative and Aggressive Traders Approach a Retracement Trade into
Confluence Support

In Figure 8.1, we see price as represented by arrows in a prevailing uptrend and rallying above the
20- and 50-period simple moving averages. This logic is the same for any time period you find a
trade setup. An aggressive and conservative trader see the same setup and wish to buy shares in
anticipation of a continuation of the uptrend and a rally off the confluence support at the $80.00-pershare level.
An aggressive trader would execute a position where the arrow ends, as price traded at the $78.87
level which reflects an exact confluence of three variables: the 20-period moving average, the 50period moving average, and the 38.2 percent Fibonacci retracement as drawn. Our aggressive trader
then decided to place a stop just under the 50 percent Fibonacci Retracement at $75.97 to allow the
market to fall slightly and potentially support on the 50 percent retracement if by chance buyers do not
support price at the $75.00-per-share level. Our aggressive trader targets a minimum of a continuation
of the uptrend to target the prior high at the $88.00 level, but intends to hold on to exit above $90.00
per share. To keep the analogy simple, we will assume that both our aggressive and conservative
trader will exit if price rallies to $90.00 per share.
While a conservative trader sees the identical setup and believes the same logic that the $79.00
area is a triple-confluence support zone to move up off support in the context of an uptrend, the
conservative trader wants to be sure that sellers do not push price through the support, which would
result in a frustrating losing trade. Instead, the conservative trader will enter only if price breaks
above a short-term rising trendline that began from the $88.00 level on the recent downswing to
$80.00 per share. In addition, the conservative trader would feel more confident in the entry if price
formed some sort of reversal candle, perhaps a bullish engulfing, doji, spinning top, or hammer
candle for confirmation. The conservative tarder would certainly get long with a break above the high
of the reversal candle and a break above the trendline.
Assume that the preferred reversal candle formed, and price broke the declining short-term

trendline at $81.00 per share. Our conservative trader is now long at $81.00 and plays for an upside
target of $90.00 per share, and has two decisions on whether to locate the stop-loss order in the event
that price does begin to fall back under $80.00 per share. If very conservative, the trader will prefer
the peace of mind that very tight stops can give, which means that very little will be lost in the trade.
If this is the case, then the conservative trader will place the stop just under the moving average
confluence and 38.2 percent retracement at the $78.87 level—perhaps at $78.80 (though you should
rarely place stops at round numbers like that). Placing the stop here does not offer protection if the
stock returns to test this level and then rallies higher—in that case, the trader will be stopped out with
a loss and sidelined in the event that the market rallied as expected.
The trader knows that the stop should be placed under the 50 percent Fibonacci Retracement, but
doing so would severely degrade the reward-to-risk ratio to the point where the trade would not meet
the criterion that each trade must have a strict two-to-one reward-to-risk ratio. If the trade is entered
at $81.00, a stop at $76.00 per share with a target of $90.00 per share results in a reward-to-risk ratio
of $9.00 to $5.00. This makes the ratio one point eight to one, which is just shy of the two-to-one rule.
The trader can still take the trade, but doing so would violate the trading plan. However, by choosing
to use the tighter stop price at $78.00 per share, the trader then achieves a reward-to-risk ratio of
$9.00 to $3.00, which is a three-to-one ratio. Our conservative trader decides to use a tighter stop.
Let us do the math for the aggressive trader. Our aggressive trader entered exactly on the test of
support at $79.00 per share, and placed the stop a safe distance beneath the entry, under a level that
price should not trade if this is a typical retracement swing. If sellers break under the 20 and 50
moving average as well as the 50 percent Fibonacci average, then odds are the price is experiencing
a reversal down instead of an expected retracement. The trader would not want to hold long under
$76.00 per share, so that is where the stop is logically and safely placed. Entering at $79.00 and
placing a stop at $76.00 while still targeting $90.00 per share gives a reward-to-risk relationship of
$11.00 to $3.00, which is a three-point-six-to-one reward-to-risk ratio, which is almost four to one
on a simple retracement trade setup with a reasonable and logical stop.
By entering exactly at the price retracement to confluence support, our aggressive trader plays for a
$90.00 target with a three-point-six-to-one monetary edge, but is not certain price will hold there. Just
like in poker, each trade is like betting on a hand in which you perceive the odds to be in your favor,
but you are uncertain of the outcome until all players reveal their cards. Finding high-probability
setups as described above is similar to betting when the odds favor a positive outcome in poker, or
passing on a trade or hand in poker (folding) when odds do not. Unlike in poker, you are not required
to pay an ante each time you analyze your probabilities in a potential trade setup. You decide when
the odds favor a successful outcome and you manage the trade either to the price target or fold with a
stop-loss execution if the odds shift while you are engaged in a trade.
The descriptions of conservative and aggressive traders above assume the best qualities of these
strategies and personalities. Schabacker hinted at the downside of conservative personalities as well
as aggressive strategies. While conservative traders are more likely to analyze a setup more deeply
before entering, preferring to wait for proof before committing capital to a trade, these same
beneficial qualities can also be their downfall. If a trader demands absolute perfection in a setup
before entering, that trader may never enter a position at all! There is no such thing as perfection in a
setup.

Ideal versus Real World Setups

Authors and educators select ideal examples or descriptions when they explain setups and strategies
to you. That is not a criticism, but a reality of trader education—educators present the best setups as
examples for you, but those setups rarely form with the same clarity while you assess the
probabilities of a setup forming before your eyes in real time. As a result, traders who demand
perfection defeat themselves when real-world events do not conform exactly to the expectations they
learned from the textbooks.
On the other hand, conservative traders may seek out too much information and overlay too many
indicators on their charts, and thus miss simple, high-probability setups because their conflicting
indicators obscure the pure signals from price. What is a trader supposed to do when a stochastic
says buy, reversal candle says sell, MACD says be flat, moving averages reveal an uptrend, and the
low ADX reveals a trading range? This is part of the reason aggressive traders take more trades than
conservative traders. However, there is a downside to over-aggression just as there is a downside to
over-conservatism.
Aggressive traders often enjoy the thrill of trading and enjoy exhilarating events in their personal
life. It is no surprise then that they are more prone to overtrading, trading without an edge, trading for
no reason other than entertainment, and risking too much money in their positions. An aggressive
trader who does not take the time to assess the probabilities may leap into a trade blindly as a market
simply tests a standard trendline. There may not be enough chart evidence to expect the trendline to
hold, and if it doesn’t, the trader just suffered an unnecessary losing trade. The trader may also put on
a larger position-size than is recommended for the trading account, and thus lose money very quickly
in a string of bad trades.
All of your trades should have a reason for entry. Think back to the first three chapters of the book
that explained three foundation price principles. Memorize these principles deeply and ask yourself
on which price principle you base the current trade you take. Is the price retracing off support in the
context of an uptrend? Are you buying the first pullback from a new momentum high? Where is price
in terms of the alternation principle—range or expansion?
Breakout strategies gain their edge from the price alternation principles; retracement strategies base
their edge in the trend continuity and momentum principles. Reversal trades utilize the divergences
and overextended trends for their edge. Know why you are expecting one outcome over another, and
build your confidence from these principles.
Aggressive traders should always pause to question the reason behind their next trade, while
conservative traders should not pause too long to find reasons to put on their next trade. Most traders
fall on a continuum between over-conservatism and over-aggression and can change tactics as they
gain more experience in the markets. However, traders do best to unite their own unique personalities
with the strategies and opportunities they select in their trading endeavors.
Now that we have covered foundation principles, explained how to recognize opportunities, and
defined ways to maximize edge via efficient trade execution tactics, let's combine everything we've
learned as we discuss basic types of trade setups, and then move into the culmination of our work by
identifying specific setups we can take as price gives us the opportunities to do so.

CHAPTER 9
Four Basic Trade Setups
This chapter presents four basic trades setups that you can use as templates when creating your own
trades. Allow your creativity to guide your analysis or depend more on the quantifiable mathematics
of the trade: the possibilities are numerous. These specific setups work for any market, stock, or
timeframe. Before we address the basic setups, we must start with a discussion on the four
components present in any trade you will ever take.

COMMON COMPONENTS OF EVERY TRADE
Any trade you take has a broader context, and no trade exists in isolation. Though it may seem simple
to non-traders, the act of entering and exiting a particular trade is actually much more difficult than
clicking a mouse button two times. To a non-musician, playing the trumpet may seem easy, as the
instrument only has three keys to press. There is a huge difference between blowing air into an
instrument while pressing one of the three keys and a professional trumpet player who masterfully
combines rhythm, tone, dynamics, and other elements of music as represented by pressing the three
keys at the right time in the right combination to the right rhythm. Professional traders perform a
similar incorporation of many factors at once to produce profits instead of music.
Entering and exiting trades is actually very simple, but doing it masterfully may take as long as it
takes for a musician to progress from a beginner to a professional. Trading is a performance
discipline not very different from the mastery of a musical instrument, sport, or vocation. Books such
as Dr. Brett Steenbarger's Enhancing Trader Performance (John Wiley & Sons, 2006) and Daniel
Coyle's The Talent Code (Bantam, 2009) are excellent resources for learning how to cultivate skills
and talents. You must first recognize an opportunity that gives you an edge, or else the trade is not
worth the risk. Then you must put on the trade, manage it properly, and eventually exit your position,
hopefully for a profit.
Before we discuss specific trade setups further, let us address the four common components of
every trade: recognizing the opportunity, entering the trade, managing the trade, and exiting the trade.
Each element has individual parts you can study and master to make yourself a better trader as you
develop your expertise.

Opportunity Recognition
There are hundreds of books and thousands of seminars that tell you how to spot opportunities in the
market, using new technology, indicators, and methods. Finding opportunities is actually not that
difficult for most traders. Traders report that execution (entry) and then management is difficult,
sometimes because they locate too many opportunities and are unsure exactly which one to take.
Paralyzed by indecision, a trader might not put on a trade at all. Before you put on a trade, you must

make sure you know why your trade has an edge and why the opportunity is a good one.
Experience helps, but this phase is where your education comes into the picture. Most traders must
learn the basics of opportunity recognition before placing trades, and often they write detailed rules
for what constitutes an opportunity and what does not. In your trading plan, you should include a
section that includes what specific conditions must occur before you commit your capital to a trade
opportunity. For example, if you trade a breakout strategy, label specifically what must occur on the
chart first before you deem it worthy to execute a trade.
The opportunity recognition phase consists of research, daily charting, knowledge of trade setups,
and price principles, along with an assessment of the pertinent chart features such as trend structure,
volatility environment, key support or resistance levels to watch, any developing price patterns, or
any number of factors appearing in technical analysis. Because traders will discover different
opportunities in the same chart, it is important to have a set of rules that guide your behavior. After
all, if you cannot recognize an opportunity on the chart, you should not execute a trade. Boredom is
not a reason to put on a trade! It is also not a sufficient reason to enter a trade because of a suggestion
from a person on television, Twitter, or the Internet. By doing your own research and finding specific
opportunities, you will have the confidence to enter a position and then manage it with confidence to
completion.

Trade Entry
After finding an opportunity, you face a go-or-no-go decision, wherein you enter as price reaches
your expected price and meets your conditions for trade entry, or you do not. As discretionary traders,
it is easy to let doubt destroy an edge and keep us sidelined when we observe that the odds favor
putting on a trade as opposed to not doing so. But again, unless you work for a trading firm, no one
can force you to enter or exit a trade, which gives you unique freedom that can be either a blessing or
a curse.
Other traders, eager for the thrill of the action, leap into a trade before specific criteria are met, and
thus jump the gun just to feel excited. There is a balance between waiting for confirmation, which can
lead to missed opportunities, and jumping the gun, which can lead to a quick unprofitable stop-loss
execution. In his Trading in the Zone, Mark Douglas expressed trade entry by describing that the
market offers endless possibilities, but you must be the one to determine when the trade starts and
when it ends. You choose when to participate by putting on a position, and then you later choose to
exit either when price achieves your target, or when the pain of holding a losing position is too great
for you to endure if you let the price run beyond your stop-loss order.
Once price meets your specific criteria for entry, you can enter using the specific trade execution
tactics described in Chapter 8, which includes placing a market or limit order depending on the type
of trade. In addition, you must decide whether to use aggressive tactics, which favor edge over
accuracy, or conservative execution tactics which favor price making a confirmed move in your
expected direction before executing a position. Conservative tactics often result in a higher
probability of a successful trade outcome, but at the expense of edge as the stop will be further away
from entry and price will be closer to your target when compared to the execution of an aggressive
trader on the same setup. Again, the decision of conservative or aggressive entry tactic rests with you
alone, and you should match the decision with your personality, be it one of risk-aversion or riskseeking.
