
A : Trust me, it happens, I try and keep that as my goal, breakeven
to a dime and you're not going to get cut up too badly.

Q.: what is your day like now?

A : It’s changed a lot, and it keeps changing as the years go on
because I do something different outside the market. Where I used
to trade from 8:30 A.M. and turn it off at 3 and it was great. It was
a good lifestyle. But I’m just trying to do more stuff now.

Q.: Do you do some mentoring?

A : Yes, I got into consulting over two years ago. Now, every
other month, I go overseas to China and trade/train for a week.
Currently, I have 85 traders now under my mentorship.

262


THE GREAT ADAPTER

Q -hat must be an experience.

A : Yes [laughter]. If two years ago you said I was even going
to China, much less trading over there, I would be surprised. It’s
quite an experience.

Q: Do you find the same flaws and phobias of human nature
there or do you find the Chinese to be more disciplined in their
approach?

A : After my first trip I saw some of the traders and met some peo-
ple, and I thought, wow, what an opportunity, because I thought
these people are the hardest workers, They're supposed be smarter
and more disciplined. You think of all that. You're like wow, what
a great resource, what a perfect person to turn into a disciplined
trader. After about six months, I realized they are no better than
any average American kid whom I used to trade with.

Q.: Human nature is universal.
A : Yeah [laughter].

Q.: Now some of them I had to teach capitalism. I have a lot of
drive and passion, and I think you really just had to instill that in
them. Some of them don’t take to it well. The ones that do, and
run with it become good traders. There are some kids over there
who produce right along with me and some out produce me. So
I’m thrilled.

Q.- That's great. In China do they trade their own stock market
or do they trade Nasdaq with you?

A: No, all the U.S. equities.

263


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q - you trade Nasdaq basically from there?

A : Yeah, I do the exact same thing I would do if I was sitting in
my office.

Q.: The only difference is do you trade overnight there? What
time does the market open there?

A : Yes. It’s the inverse of New York, so it’s 9:30 P.M. to 4 A.M.

Q.; But stepping back to Chicago, when you have your own
business, how is the day? Is it still basically 8:30 you're on the
desk? Do you trade from home? Do you trade from prop?

A : Well, over a year ago I left the office and set up at home just
because I moved out to the suburbs from the city and the commute
was just killing me. I hated it. I thought I would try it and see if
it was possible. I never thought you could trade from home unless
you actually ordered up a T1 and spent the money to do it right.
Which I was willing to do, but I thought I would go ahead and try
it because I noticed my Internet at home—DSL—was getting a
lot faster. So I set up at home and was shocked that it was actually
better than being at the office because you weren't connected
through the office servers. 1 was piping directly into New York
versus going through all the servers that serviced 100 or so of our
traders in the office. Less issues, less problems, fast, if not faster.
So I run cable and DSL from home.

Q.- For redundancy?

A : Yes, exactly.

: What kind of a setup do you have? How many screens are
you looking at?

A : Three CPUs. I have six screens—but one is just for instant
messaging other trading buddies. Also one is just a full page of the

264


THE GREAT ADAPTER

live briefing news, and another just for e-mailing. I trade using two
or three.

: So how many stocks do you watch on a day-to-day basis? Are
you back to four or five core stocks, or are you watching more?

A. No. Over the years, since the market changed, I find I rely
mostly on filtering. So now I have about eight filters running. I'll
try anywhere from 20 to 40 stocks in a day.

: And these are filters where you are looking at volatility,
volume, things that could give you a clue that there’s momentum
in the stock?

A : Exactly. I am looking at volume, specific chart patterns, and
momentum plays.

Q.at the core of it, you're still ultimately a momentum trader.
That is still what you like to do best, which is follow the flow, right?

A : Right, I never really tried to predict. I just tried to react to
what was going on.

: Now you said you have a news screen. Before, in 2002 to
2005, did you know the fundamental story behind the stocks you
were trading or were you really not interested?

A: No, I didn’t care.

Q.- You just watched price action, right?
A : Right. That and the overall market, which way it was going.

265


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: When you are doing all these filters, let’s say there’s a stock
that you're just not familiar with, do you need to know what the
story is behind the stock?

A : No, I don’t have to know anything. I don’t think it helps for
what I do, which is momentum. Ifthe Level 2 looks right, the chart
lines up and it’s going the right direction, I'll get onboard.

Q : 80 you really think that fundamental news is a detriment
because it kind of biases your reaction time?

A: Oh, I won’t say it’s bad; I just don’t have the time typically. ’m
basing my entry off the way the filters are set up, and my trading
style. I really don’t care about anything else besides that. But on
the flipside, I run full briefing news now and another audio news
service. I'll jump on a news trade here and there.

Q.: using sort of fundamental, momentum play, where there's
news on the stock that’s going to materially impact it. You want to
be the first guy to the ball?

A : Exactly. And I won't play too many of them—probably one
or two a day. I'll jump on, and if I’m 50 percent successful I’m
pretty happy. This week we caught a couple of nice ones. For
example, say an FDA approval is announced, first on the squawk,
then briefing, and everybody’s buying, then it comes across CNBC
a couple minutes later.

Q.- you can sell it to those guys, right?

A : That’s right. I’m not going to hold it for long. Sell it to the late
buyers . . . [laughter].

266


THE GREAT ADAPTER

OQ): These days, what would you say is your average holding time

in a position?

A : Good question. It differs. If I take the average, I would prob-
ably say seven minutes now.

Q.- How many filters do you have running?

A: Eight.

: Are these filters a result of your experience? How did you
come to designing these filters?

A : Experience is some of it, and the other is just tweaking them,
a lot of trial and error. You can get pretty advanced now.

: And you use all those tools? You will use chart ideas, volume
ideas and other tools in your filters?

A : Right. I’m not a real technician; ’'m more of a momentum
trader.

Q.: When did you start to move to more of a filter-based trading?

A : Probably 2004, definitely all of 2005. I pretty much don’t have
any staple stocks I go to, like I used to.

Q : 80 you don’t have emotional attachment to any of these
positions. It might as well be an A-B-C-X-Y-Z symbol in many
ways?

A : Right.

267


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q_: During the day, are you trading intensely every hour from
8:30 A.M. to 3 P.M.?

A: Yes, as long as the market is active. I think to me, or at least for
what I’m doing, it’s getting harder the longer I’m in the business.
So I’m actually working harder. I'll probably start now at about 7 or
7:30 A.M., and I'll even trade after hours now when the earnings are
released. I don’t get out much. My wife brings me a bowl of cereal
at noon and that’s about it [laughter]. I just lock myself downstairs
and trade.

Q.: How do you maintain your focus for seven, eight hours a day
like that?

A : Well, the market hours are only six-and-half hours long. I
always thought if you can’t work six-and-half hours you're in big
trouble. It’s a heck of a job and lifestyle, and I enjoy the freedom
to sacrifice six-and-half hours versus going out and working 8 to 12
for somebody else—that scares me worse. So I have no problem
sitting here.

Q_.: Trading these days obviously costs so much less. You went
from a penny and a half now to basically about a half a penny per
share. Also leverage is quite different these days. Can you talk a
little about how your account is structured now? Do you maintain
as much capital as you used to or do you maintain only a sliver of
equity in your account and keep most of the money elsewhere?

A : Yeah, the model really changed. It went from 2-to-1 buying
power to 4-to-1, so that helps. The LLC model is popular, very
similar to that of a prop model. They pool the buying power and
require a reasonable amount of risk capital.

: And then every month you sweep your profits out of the
account and maintain a certain amount?

268


THE GREAT ADAPTER

A : Every month they send me a wire from my account for what
I'm up that month, and they retain an agreed amount of risk
capital.

Q.: Do you have a core group of buddies or students whom you

trade with during the day, whom you communicate with on IM?

A : [would say three—and those are all guys in the U.S.—and then
I have multiple IMs up in China. But it’s more for management.
I don’t try and interact too much with their trading when I’m not
there. I’m not calling out trades to them.

Q.:Do you find that actually to be a major distraction to call out
trades?

A : Sometimes. That’s one of the benefits of being with just two
or three guys on a daily basis.

: What is the conversation between those three guys and you
usually about?

A : It’s typically typing a stock symbol and a question mark. An
opinion or two about the potential trade might be exchanged. If
we both enter, we might discuss exit points or point out something
we like or dislike about the trade.

: So you sort of communicate in shorthand with your close
friends?

A : Yes, just a couple guys I have been trading with in an office.
Actually, one amazingly since I started trading in 99, and one guy
that I’ve been trading with since ’03 to ’04. I trust the way they
trade and visa versa. We are very similar.

269


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.:s0 you guys sort of electronically point out certain interesting
things that you are seeing and sharing, sometimes pooling your
ideas.

A : Exactly. Sometimes trades happen so quickly that I can’t type,
“Hey, join me.” Or maybe the stock is too thin, but maybe after the
fact I'll say, “I caught this one for 30 to 40 cents. It looks like a good
one to watch for the rest of the day.” Just alerting one another to
stocks that are good to put on a watch list for later.

Q.: once you find a mover in your filters, something that’s really
going strong, will you go back to it the next day and the next day
to see if there is more juice to be squeezed from the fruit?

A : Yes. If they're really good ones, we'll keep them on our “in-
play list.” Last week there was an IPO, and we’ve been on it every
day. Until it runs dry, we'll keep hitting it.

Q.:s0 you close shop essentially three, maybe four o’clock—do
you then do some after-hours trading, some news trading if there
are earning releases, or things like that?

A : Yeah. Then my second job starts, till five or six.

Q.- Your mentorship job that you do with China?

A : Yes. It’s a lot of e-mails, looking at reports, doing some analysis
either on traders or their trades. I’m working with another guy now
on some automated trading programs as well.

: There’s a lot of projects on your plate. This year, since you
pretty much go flat every single day, how many winning days—no

270


THE GREAT ADAPTER

let’s ask the question differently—how many losing days have you
had out of about the 200 trading days that we've had so far this
year?

A : Since I started trading I average around 80 percent winning
days. I’ve probably had around 50 down days in 2006.

: How do you handle that? Are there months where, let’s say,
you have eight bad days? That means almost half your trading
month is negative. Which means it’s probably going to be a pretty
flat month, how do you mentally handle that kind of situation?

A : [ think, the first thing I do is I check around me, check with
my trading partners, not specifically dollar-wise, but to get a feel
about how their month is going. I definitely have China as a good
gauge; I’ve got 80-plus people doing what I’m doing. How are they
doing? Are their numbers going way down this month? If I’m in
check with them, no alarms go off. But if everybody else is doing
well around me and I’m just sitting idle or going the other way,
then I know it’s something with me.

Q.: Do you set a hard money target for yourself every day?

A : Yes, I change it from month to month depending on what the
market is doing. But yeah, I'll typically go in and say, at minimum,
I want to make 500 bucks a day. And that way, when the markets
moving decently and things are going my way, I will definitely target
$1,000 to $1,200 plus a day. This way you are working towards
something every day. I am a big fan of goal-setting.

Q: say you reach $1,200 by 10 o’clock your time. What happens
then? Do you keep on trading, do you stop?

A : No, I don’t stop, I just keep going. When you try to average
$1,000 a day and have to average in flat or a few down days, you

271


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

really have to strive to get some nice days in. I will put a stop to
the downside as well. If I’m up $1,200, I want to guarantee that I
walk out with $900 or $1,000. I'll keep trying to drive forward and
I’ve seen those 1,200-dollar days have the possibility to turn into
three- or four-grand days.

Q.:on the other hand, let’s say you start slipping. Your $1,200
slips back to $900, do just watch stocks for the rest of the day, or
do you physically turn off the screen and walk out of office?

A : Pl sit tight. I just call it sitting on my hands. I'll still go through
the motions. I pull up stocks with my filters, but I won’t get in unless
I’m at least 90 to 95 percent certain. That keeps me pretty much at
bay for the rest of the day. Walk out and leave? Never! [laughter. ]
I probably should at times.

Quis it the excitement? Is it the game that keeps you in front of
the screen so much? The love of the action?

A : Yes, I really enjoy it. I will say I enjoyed it a lot more in
previous years because it has become so much harder I think.
But, yes, I enjoy it and again it’s only six-and-half hours. If I lose
that discipline, I would hate to see the other side. I love the daily
competition and strive to improve every day.

: Has it gotten harder because volatility has compressed? Or
has everybody become sort of sharper and better in markets, less
of an edge there?

A : would say volatility has a lot to do with it—the automation
and all of these computer programs in the market. I heard that
they now trade upwards to 70 percent of all the volume—which is
fine if you can figure out the program and you use them to your
advantage, but I think they're getting better.

272


THE GREAT ADAPTER

Q, - Theyve gotten a lot sharper in their algorithms.
A : Oh, yeah very much.

QO: are you still doing maybe 50 to 60 trades per day? Or are you
doing a little bit less now?

A : At least. I’m trading over a 100,000 shares a day, every day.
Typically I trade 2 to 3 million shares per month now.

Qs Just a couple of last questions. What’s your number one rule
for trading?

A : Don’t hold losers. Others: Keep a positive mindset. Think like
a winner. Go to the market every day and take out some money.
Be patient, be disciplined, be passionate.

Q.: Best trade ever?

A : Ever? It wasn’t the biggest profit trade, but it was the biggest
point gainer. And I can’t remember what year it was—O1 or
’02—somebody had put something on the Internet about a stock
called Emulex.

Q.- Yeah, Emulex.

A : So it just started tanking. I watched it and I watched it
and this is one thing I typically don’t do—fade stocks—but I just
thought this is crazy spike down [laughter]. I bought 100 shares and
I swear 10 seconds later it was halted. “Oh brother, what have I
done? I’m so stupid.” I thought. After it was unhalted, I think
I made close to 60 points on it. That wasn’t my biggest P&L
trade, but I would say my most memorable was the fact it was so
fast.

273


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.:The Emulex saga was a very famous story of the Internet age,
when a fake press release caused the stock to plummet and then
bounce back hundreds of points in one day. Worst trade ever that
you can remember?

A : Oh boy. It would have to be probably some of the overnight
bleeders that I held back in the day. Some of these stocks don’t
trade anymore. I do recall one that we traded a lot before it got
bought out. It was a stock that traded over $400 and we would
typically try and make the spread on it because it would carry a
10- to 20-point spread at times. We might flip 100 or 200 shares
and, if we made the spread, it was a nice little winner. Actually it
traded north of $600.

Q:s0 these were very big stocks?

A : Yeah, in the Nasdaq. We thought we could play the bid-offer
game on some thin pricey stocks. The bad trade I was shorting,
and I actually got too many on, can’t remember—at least 400 or
500 shares—and the news came out: A buyout. I got steamrolled
probably for like $20K.

Q.: ouch. Was the stock halted?

A : Yeah, it halted, came unhalted, and I just got rolled. It was
such a thin stock and, of course, any volume at that point was just
volume coming in to buy it.

Q. So you are short the stock. It gets halted—takeover
news—what’s going on in your mind at that point? What did you
decide to do the moment you heard all that news?

A : Pucker up, it’s going hurt. Nothing good was going to come
out of it. So I just had to get out.

274


THE GREAT ADAPTER

Q.: and getting out meant you were taking any offer that was
going to be out there. You didn’t try to get cute, go to the bid?

A : I tried a combination because the spread was so wide. But
yeah, I was taking offers that were way out there. Then I proceeded
to trade it the whole following week and half and made it all back.

Q- You did? Was that revenge trading?

A : Maybe a small inkling of it was [laughter]. But I knew over
the past couple years of trading that I did very well trading it.

Q.:s0 you had a good feel for the stock?

A : Yes. After the initial craziness was over, it was good actually
because it had more volume after the buyout. So it was trading
more actively.

Q.:s0 you could make more bid/ask?

A : Right. I was now flipping 200 to 300 shares because the volume
was there.

Q.- Yeah, you did what you had to do. Final questions. What do
you find to be the most interesting part of this job?

A: The competition. The constant strive to become a better trader
and learn new things. Every day is a new game and usually differs
from the previous day.

Q_ : competition with yourself or the competition against others?

A : Both. I strive to be better and go to market and take money
out of it every day.

275


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.- Are you sports fan?

A : Yes, I am. Ideally, if could do something outside of trading,
I'd be a professional athlete. But my abilities just don’t allow for
it, [laughter] or my size. I’m not a sports fanatic, but I love watch-
ing football. I even watch golf now, which I never used to do. I
found that sports and competition is a real common thread of good
traders.

: Yes, we find that to be a very common personality trait,
particularly of equity day traders. Traders in other markets dif-
fer somewhat, but equity day traders tend to be very athletically
minded.

A : Right. On a China trip, I think it was over a year ago, I said let’s
go play some basketball in the morning after work. I just announced
whoever wants to play, show up. We met up at the university gym
and I noticed 95 percent of the 15 guys who showed up were the
top traders out of the 200 traders plus.

Q.: very interesting.

A : Yeah [laughter]. I think there’s some correlation to trad-
ing/competitiveness. And, you know, it all makes sense. But it was
just neat to see, so far from home, guys who aren't athletes but com-
petitive. It was the most unorganized, horrible game of basketball
ever played [laughter].

Qu was the spirit of the thing that mattered.

A : Yeah, they were hacking every chance they got. It was fun
though. The best part was I was the tallest guy! Rare chance for
me to dominate on the court!

276


THE GREAT ADAPTER

Q.- Lastly, what’s the most difficult part of this job?

A : Lwould say just the thought that—or maybe it’s just an inherent
fear—that someday I won't be able to adjust or they're going to
change rules in the marketplace. I hope it never happens, and I’ve
been able to adjust for seven years now. But you never know.

LESSONS FROM TYRONE BALL
Focus on Only a Few Stocks to Develop a Feel

Tyrone’s message is similar to Steve Ickow’s: If you chose to be a
jack-of-all-trades, you will be master of none. In order to succeed in
trading, you need to establish an expertise in a particular domain.
As in all professions, specialization pays. For equity day traders
such as Tyrone, specialization means focusing on only a select
group of stocks and watching their price action intently. This is the
only way to learn the particular quirks of the stock and to discover
who the dominant players are in that particular instrument. In the
parlance of the game, it is very important to know who is the axe
in the stock. The “axe” is simply a term used for the dominant
market maker who can literally make or break the price of the
stock. Knowing this information can help the trader to stay on the
right side of the trade.

Being Just a Little More Disciplined Than the Average
Guys Can Give You an Edge

The house edge in roulette is only 5.26 percent. That means that
on any spin of the wheel, the casino stands to win approximately
53 percent of the time while the player wins approximately 48
percent of the time. This illustration is not intended to compare
trading to gambling, but rather to demonstrate that it takes a very
small skew in the odds to create a very profitable enterprise. Casi-
nos bank billions of dollars of profit per year on what, at first glance,
may appear to be only a small advantage. Similarly, Tyrone’s most
interesting point is that one does not have be perfect, just a little
