reading its 1968 annual report.
5. Letter to partners, October 9, 1969. Buffett explained that he expected stocks to yield about 61/2% after
tax for the next ten years, roughly the same as a “purely passive investment in tax-free bonds.” Even the best
managers, he said, were unlikely to do better than 91/2% after tax. Compare this to the 17% return he had
projected to partners in the early years of the partnership and the 30% average he had actually achieved.
6. Letter to partners, December 5, 1969.
7. According to Buffett, a couple of them never were able to find anyone they trusted to manage their
money, and one ended up working as a fortune-teller in San Diego.
8. Letter to partners, December 26, 1969.
9. This statement is intriguing since Buffett had just named Dow Jones as the stock he would like to own on a
desert island. However, the Sun was not a good investment.
10. Emphasis added by author. By then, a small cult of Buffett-stalkers monitored his holdings, and curiosity
about Buffett’s intentions was rife among many partners. The importance of a clear statement of his
intentions—after more than a decade of obsessive secrecy—should have been unmistakable (at least with
hindsight).
11. Buffett indulged in a bit of score-settling with the underwriters in his letter to partners of December 26,
1969, saying that the deal was pitched “with a heavy weight” placed on a comparison to Sperry &
Hutchinson, the nearest competitor, but shortly “before the stock was to be offered, with the Dow Jones
Industrials much lower but S&H virtually unchanged, they indicated a price far below their former range.”
(Blue Chip at the time had declined significantly.) “We reluctantly agreed and felt we had a deal but, on the
next business day, they stated that our agreed price was not feasible.”
12. It was a little unclear what the filling stations’ actual beef was. They had given out Blue Chip stamps and
made money doing it. If there were five stamp companies in California, they might have given out stamps
that cost more, and it isn’t clear that they would have made more money—they might have made less.
13. This takes into account the approximately 90,000 shares of Blue Chip Stamps that were still tied up in
BPL because of the delay in the sale.
14. DRC’s 1971 annual report discloses $841,042 of notes issued “in exchange for common stock of an
affiliated company” due on varying dates, or within twelve months of the death of Warren E. Buffett. DRC
continued to issue these notes until 1978, for a total of $1.527 million. During the first year the notes were
also payable at the payee’s demand. Apparently the notes were reissued with this term eliminated in 1972
(according to the 1972 DRC financial statements).
15. 1970 Annual Statement for Reinsurance Corporation of Nebraska, Berkshire Hathaway, Diversified, and
Blue Chip, Forms 10-K and annual reports to shareholders.
16. Interview with Verne McKenzie.
17. Interview with Rhoda and Bernie Sarnat.
18. Interview with Charlie Munger.
19. Through chunks of stock large enough to almost certainly block an unfriendly takeover.
20. Blue Chip sales peaked in 1970 at $132 million.
21. A&P’s discounting program, Where Economy Originates, prompted other supermarket chains to adopt

discounting in 1972. “The Green Stamp Sings the Blues,” Forbes, September 1, 1973.
22. From the files of Berkshire Hathaway.
23. Interview with Bill Ramsey. The sale occurred because Laurence A. See, son of Mary See and a founder
of the firm, had died, and Charles See, his brother and executor of his estate, mentioned to an attorney
acquaintance while on vacation in Hawaii that he might want to sell. The attorney told Bob Flaherty, who
worked for Scudder, Stevens, and Clark, and Flaherty talked to Ramsey, who was also a client of the firm.
24. From Margaret Moos Pick, See’s Famous Old Time Candies, A Sweet Story. San Francisco: Chronicle
Books, 2005.
25. Interview with Ed Anderson.
26. Buffett and Munger paid 11.4x trailing twelve months earnings for See’s (i.e., a price equal to over eleven
years’ worth of the company’s earnings—at the past twelve months’ earnings rate). This was a remarkably
high price/earnings ratio for Buffett, who rarely paid more than ten times earnings. Paying more than book
value was also unprecedented. Susie told at least one friend that he “bought it for her,” because of her
chocolate obsession, which sounds like something he might have said as an endearment.
27. Since 1960.
28. Letter from John W. Watling to Harry W. Moore, December 3, 1971. Buffett was particularly involved in
tax aspects of the deal. He wrote a detailed memorandum outlining a proposed structure for the company’s
trademarks in order to obtain a tax basis equal to the effective purchase price without incurring the tax costs
that a sale would entail under tax law at the time, such as depreciation recapture and investment tax-credit
recapture. Price Waterhouse, the accountants for See’s, apparently were pleased that Buffett had done their
job and wrote a memo concurring with his proposal and explaining how it would be executed (letter from
Price Waterhouse & Co. to William F. Ramsey, January 18, 1972).
29. This account is an amalgamation of interviews with Munger and remarks at the Berkshire Hathaway 2003
annual meeting. Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger, “What Makes the Investment Game Great Is You
Don’t Have to Be Right on Everything,” Outstanding Investor Digest, Vol. XVIII, Nos. 3 and 4, Year End
2003 Edition.
30. Interviews with Ed Anderson and Chris Browne. Buffett’s reasoning in situations like this and Berkshire
was that he needed the stock to get control. However, his allies could have kept their stock and voted with
him. Indeed, in his younger days when he had less capital, Buffett had arranged such voting blocks.
31. Warren Buffett letter to Chuck Huggins, December 28, 1971.
32. During the early 1970s, the price of sugar increased sixfold. Although most news stories focused on the
price of meat, sugar and cocoa were the commodities that experienced the most wrenching price increases.
33. At the time a cult product that people carried home on airplanes after encounters on vacation in
Colorado.
34. Narrative is based on correspondence among Warren Buffett, Stanley Krum, and Chuck Huggins, 1972.
In a letter dated later in 1972, Buffett the teetotaler also says, “Maybe grapes from one little eighty-acre
vineyard in France are really the best in the whole world, but I have always had a suspicion that about 99%
of it is in the telling and about 1% is in the drinking.”
35. This is the lament of a number of the managers.
36. Warren Buffett letter to Chuck Huggins, September 25, 1972.

37. Interviews with Tom Newman, Raquel Newman.
38. Buffett also would have gone on the board of his favorite company, GEICO, had the SEC not concluded
that it would be a conflict because Berkshire Hathaway already owned an insurance company, National
Indemnity.
39. Interview with Peter Buffett.
40. Each of the advisory-board members invested about $7,000. Control of the bank was retained within the
African-American community. Some blacks did not want white investors. “They just thought we were trying
to put something over on them, I guess,” Buffett says.
41. Interview with John Harding.
42. Interview with Larry Myers. According to Myers, Buffett continued this level of involvement for
seventeen years. An advisory board is different from a regular board position and normally requires less time
commitment.
43. Roger Lowenstein, Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist. New York: Doubleday, 1996.
44. Interview with Hallie Smith.
45. Interview with Rhoda and Bernie Sarnat. Buffett recalls the story as well.
46. At an anniversary party for the Thompsons a few weeks earlier, the Buffetts’ cook served what came to
be known throughout Omaha as the “poisoned chicken.” Except for a rabbi and his wife, who ate tuna,
everyone present came down with salmonella. By then, Buffett was so well-known that the episode made the
Omaha World-Herald. Interview with Rabbi Meyer Kripke.
47. Interview with Ron Parks.
48. As Buffett tells this story he lost the game, but according to Roxanne and Jon Brandt, he was determined
not to lose to a six-year-old—and won.
49. According to a friend, Susie began to verbalize this attitude around the late 1960s. She later said these
words, as quoted, to Charlie Rose in an interview.
50. Interview with Milton Brown. Several sources confirm that Susie was frequently in contact with Brown
during this period.
51. Interviews with Racquel Newman, Tom Newman.
52. His mortgage was $109,000 in 1973.
Chapter 35
1. “Warming Up for the Big Time: Can John Tunney Make It as a Heavyweight?” Charles T. Powers, West
magazine (Los Angeles Times), December 12, 1971.
2. A letter from Senator Ed Muskie to Buffett, September 23, 1971, said that Muskie was “especially
intrigued by this concept,” which Hughes and Rosenfield had passed along to him. Later, the same notion,
with the more memorable and attention-grabbing name “misery index,” played a role in President Jimmy
Carter’s failure to win a second term.
3. James Doyle, “A Secret Meeting: Hughes Rejects Presidential Bid,” Washington Evening Star, July 15,
1971.

4. John H. Averill, “Hughes Drops Out as Democratic Contender,” Los Angeles Times, July 16, 1971.
5. Without naming the interviewer, this incident is cited by James Risser in “‘Personal’ Religion of Senator
Hughes,” Des Moines Sunday Register, July 11, 1971. Hughes appeared on Meet the Press on April 4, 1971.
6. James Risser and George Anthan, “‘Personal’ Religion of Senator Hughes.” Hughes said he “believes in
the ability of certain people to foretell the future.”
7. The way Hughes told this story (with Dick Schneider) in his autobiography, The Man from Ida Grove
(Lincoln, Va.: Chosen Books, 1979), differed slightly from the press account. Hughes freely discusses his
reputation as a “mystic” and mentions Rosenfield’s backing. He does not mention Buffett but recalls the
meeting as taking place in a California motel room instead of Washington, as reported. On the plane on the
way home, he saw “a vision of a red button” that would launch “an awesome nuclear attack” and says he
realized that, as President, he could not press the button. After asking God’s guidance, he decided not to run
for President.
8. John H. Averill, “Hughes Drops Out as Democratic Contender.” Most likely, the media would have
unearthed the story at some point anyway, and Hughes was saved from greater embarrassment later.
Hughes’s advisers subsequently denied in the Los Angeles Times that disclosing his beliefs in spiritualism and
his communication with his dead brother through a medium had influenced his decision not to run.
9. Interview with Tom Murphy.
10. This version of the story is an amalgamation of Murphy’s and Buffett’s versions. The stories are identical
except for trivial differences in their recollection of the dialogue.
11. The announcement of the sale of the Fort Worth Star-Telegram and the area’s AM and FM radio stations
to Cap Cities for $80 million was on January 6, 1973. However, the closing of the deal was delayed until
November 1974.
12. “I should have done it,” Buffett says. “That was really dumb. We would have made a lot of money with
that.”
13. According to Boys Town (now renamed Girls and Boys Town), the home opened on December 12, 1917,
with about six boys and grew to twenty-five within three weeks. The approximate date and number
(“between twenty and thirty”) are cited in Omaha’s Own Magazine and Trade Review, December 1928.
14. Howard Buffett “helped us greatly in securing our own post office for which we were deeply grateful,
because he came to us to assist us when we were badly in need of a friend.” Patrick J. Norton letter to
Warren Buffett, April 24, 1972. The post office was established in 1934 and the village became incorporated
in 1936, according to the Irish Independent, August 25, 1971. The post office was a key element in the
charm of Boys Town’s fund-raising appeals.
15. The average contribution at the time of the Sun’s story was $1.62. Transcript, Mick Rood interview with
Msgr. Nicholas Wegner.
16. Ibid. Robert Dorr, “Hard-Core Delinquent Rarity at Boys Town,” Omaha World-Herald, April 16, 1972.
17. Paul Williams, Investigative Reporting and Editing, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1978.
Williams was the editor during the Boys Town investigation.
18. Michael Casey, new director of special projects brought in after the Sun story, described the atmosphere
as a “minimum-security prison,” based on his experience working in prisons and mental hospitals, in
“Midlands News” of the Omaha World-Herald, March 10, 1974. According to Casey’s account, he was
forced to resign from Boys Town six months later and stated that reforms were window dressing. Father

Hupp says Casey left because his job was done—but Casey was an outspoken ex-convict, which may have
made him “too hot.”
19. Paul N. Williams, “Boys Town, An Exposé Without Bad Guys,” Columbia Journalism Review,
January/February 1975.
20. The Sun had a “four-way” staff that reported stories that would appear in seven editions of the paper.
These were the reporters working on the Boys Town story.
21. According to Paul Williams, in Investigative Reporting and Editing, Boys Town got school-aid funds and
state welfare and gasoline tax funds. While these were “relatively small change” in the context of the overall
budget, about $200,000 a year, the discrepancy was real and pointed to other possible problems.
22. Transcript, Mick Rood interview with Msgr. Nicholas Wegner. Wegner speaks of “this gal down there in
the Lincoln welfare department [who] tried to make a big thing, a big blow out of this…” which, he thought,
was personal rather than institutional. Nevertheless, he implied that Boys Town might move out of state if the
regulators pestered it too much because “our bylaws say WE’RE NOT OBLIGED TO STAY HERE.”
23. Paul Williams, Investigative Reporting and Editing.
24. Interview with Mick Rood. According to several sources, the “Deep Throat” of Boys Town, a role that
required courage in insular Omaha, was Dr. Claude Organ.
25. Jeannie Lipsey Rosenblum described his appearance at that time in an interview.
26. As a religiously affiliated organization, Boys Town was entitled to an exemption for the first two years
and could have filed with the archdiocese of Omaha. But it had filed separately anyway.
27. According to Paul Williams, the footwork in Philadelphia was done by Melinda Upp, a Washington
reporter whom he previously had tried to hire. Finally, the call came: Are you sure you want this? she asked.
The IRS charged a dollar a page and it was 94 pages long. The answer was, Hell, yes.
28. Interview with Randy Brown.
29. In his follow-up columns in the Sun.
30. The $25 million is combined fund-raising and investment income.
31. Interviews with Mick Rood, Warren Buffett.
32. The Sun published on Thursdays and worked around its own production schedule while trying to cut off
the opportunity for a preemptive response through the Omaha World-Herald.
33. Paul Williams, Investigative Reporting and Editing, and Craig Tomkinson, “The Weekly Editor: Boys
Town Finances Revealed,” Editor & Publisher, April 15, 1972.
34. Transcript, Mick Rood interview with Msgr. Nicholas Wegner.
35. The reporters interviewed thirteen of the seventeen board members. Two were too old or ill to be
interviewed.
36. Monsignor Schmitt, speaking at a press conference on May 22, 1972. Press conference transcript.
37. Interview with Randy Brown.
38. Paul N. Williams, “Boys Town, An Exposé Without Bad Guys.”

39. Michael D. LaMontia, director of the State Department of Public Institutions, which oversaw Boys Town,
called the Sun’s criticisms those of a “vocal minority” that should be ignored in a letter to Wegner, May 25,
1972. The Sun, he said, speaks “from a very low profile and is really not heard by many people. The person
being attacked can let it die a natural death….” He referred to the reporters as “scavengers” and
“professional losers.” Possibly Mr. LaMontia was merely being empathetic, but his tone seemed a little more
charged-up than that.
40. Paul N. Williams, “Boys Town, An Exposé Without Bad Guys.”
41. “Boys Town Bonanza,” Time, April 10, 1972; “Boys Town’s Worth Put at $209 Million,” Los Angeles
Times, March 31, 1972; “Money Machine,” Newsweek, April 10, 1972; Tomkinson, “The Weekly Editor.”
42. “Other Boys Homes Affected by Boys Town Story,” Omaha Sun, December 14, 1972.
43. Undated two-page letter from Francis P. Schmitt to Boys Town supporters printed on Boys Town
stationery; “Boys Town May Take Legal Steps to Initiate New Programs, Policies,” Omaha Sun, December
14, 1972; correspondence between Paul Williams and the “Irreverent Reverend” Lester Kinsolving of the
National Newspaper Syndicate Inc. of America, a muckraking religious columnist widely syndicated through
the San Francisco Chronicle. Schmitt was angry because, among other things, Boys Town’s marketing
domicile had backfired: Kinsolving wrote a follow-up story in the Washington Evening Star, “Boys Town
Money Machine” (November 4, 1972), and datelined it Boys Town, Nebraska. Schmitt (incorrectly) felt that
he had no right to do so.
44. Paul Critchlow, “Boys Town Money Isn’t Buying Happiness,” Philadelphia Inquirer, July 20, 1973.
45. The Reverend Monsignor Wegner, letter to a man who said he was an employee of the San Francisco
Examiner and worked in the composing room, June 1, 1973. The man wrote Lester Kinsolving at the San
Francisco Chronicle and asked that his name not be used in a story, probably because he was offering it to a
competing paper. Kinsolving apparently forwarded this material to Buffett.
46. Used with permission of the Omaha Press Club Foundation.
47. Warren Buffett letter to Edward Morrow, April 21, 1972.
48. Memo from Paul Williams to Buffett, October 13, 1972, including Buffett’s comments.
49. Mick Rood note to personal files, January 19, 1973. Transcript, Mick Rood interview with Msgr. Nicholas
Wegner.
50. The award was to “The Sun Newspapers of Omaha, of The Sun Newspapers of Omaha: For uncovering
the large financial resources of Boys Town, Nebraska, leading to reforms in this charitable organization’s
solicitation and use of funds contributed by the public.” It was the first time a weekly paper won for Local
Investigative Specialized Reporting (although according to Pulitzer Center staff, weeklies had won before in
categories other than investigative reporting).
51. However, Monsignor Wegner was described as “frail” and had had several recent surgeries. See Paul
Critchlow, “Boys Town Money Isn’t Buying Happiness.”
52. Among the consultants’ findings was that the Boys Town staff morale was now low, with many
long-tenured employees having worked for years on church-mouse wages on the impression that Boys Town
was barely getting by. In 1973, Boys Town actually raised more money than in 1972 (over $6 million),
according to the Omaha World-Herald (March 21, 1973). The main result of the exposé and reforms was
increased transparency and accountability over how the money was spent.
53. George Jerome Goodman (writing as “Adam Smith”), Supermoney. New York: Random House, 1972.

Goodman (known as Jerry) chose his pen name after Adam Smith, the father of market economics.
54. John Brooks, “A Wealth of Notions,” Washington Post, October 22, 1972.
Chapter 36
1. Interview with Stan Lipsey. Scripps Howard owned 60% of the paper but had been ordered by the
Department of Justice in 1968 to divest it on antitrust grounds because it also owned the Cincinnati Post &
Times-Star, a competing paper. Blue Chip bought 10% of the Enquirer’s stock and tried to get the rest for
$29.2 million in February 1971.
2. Scripps would have been interested in selling because it was looking at buying Journal Publishing and
Albuquerque Publishing and could not own all three.
3. Graham thought that the only alternative to going public was to sell one of the company’s TV stations,
which she did not want to do. To protect the business from an unfriendly bidder, Beebe and family lawyer
George Gillespie structured the stock sale in two tiers, with class A shares in the family’s hands and class B
stock, which carried diluted voting privileges, sold to the public. Katharine Graham, Personal History. New
York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1997.
4. Graham told this story to Buffett.
5. Katharine Graham, Personal History.
6. Katharine Graham letter to Charlie Munger, December 23, 1974.
7. Katharine Graham, Personal History.
8. Katharine Graham interview with Charlie Rose, February 5, 1997.
9. Some of the nonvoting B shares went to Kay’s brother, Bill, in exchange for an investment in the
company. Kay’s sisters were not investors in the Post. At the time, the unprofitable newspaper was less a
financial asset than a public responsibility and a source of prestige.
10. Buffett’s former golf coach Bob Dwyer was the office boy who performed this task, in between running
copy for the Post’s editorial department.
11. Katharine Graham, Personal History.
12. These anecdotes are from Personal History.
13. C. David Heymann’s The Georgetown Ladies’ Social Club (New York: Atria Books, 2003)—a
well-researched account of the most influential Washington hostesses and the private power they
wielded—gave examples, such as a black eye, that indicated that on at least some occasions Phil Graham
physically abused her.
14. Stories of the women with whom Phil Graham was involved and the allegation that he swapped girlfriends
with Kennedy, including the actress-model Noel-Noel, are contained in The Georgetown Ladies’ Social
Club.
15. In her memoir, Graham attributed this partly to the subservience of women in her time and partly to her
emotionally abusive upbringing. She seems to have had at least a partial grasp of her own role in enabling
Phil’s behavior.
16. Katharine Graham interview with Charlie Rose, February 5, 1997.

17. Ibid.
18. Interview with Don Graham.
19. Beebe had been a partner at Cravath, Swaine & Moore in New York and, under the direction of Don
Swatland, in 1948 was instrumental in designing the structure that protected the Post from a sale outside the
family.
20. Katharine Graham, Personal History.
