
P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

302

JWBT576-Brooks

TRENDS

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 18.1

above its high. Their entry would have been three bars later. Traders would also
have bought above the high of the inside bar that followed bar 28, since it was a
high 2 buy signal, ending two legs down from the high of the day. It was also a small
wedge bull flag where bar 25 was the first push down and bar 27 was the second.
A pullback is a minor trend in the opposite direction, and traders expect it to
end soon and for the major trend to resume. When GS began its second leg down
from the bar 24 high, it formed a lower high at bar 26 and the bears needed it to form
a series of lower highs and lows to be able to convince the market that the trend had
reversed to down. Some therefore shorted as the market broke out below the bar 25
swing low, hoping for a series of large bear trend bars. Instead, bar 25 was a small
bear trend bar and there was no follow-through. In fact, the rally up showed that
most traders instead bought the breakout below bar 25 because they believed that
the sell-off was only a pullback and doomed to be a failed attempt at reversing the
major trend into a bear trend. Since most reversal attempts fail, the first pullback
in a strong bull trend that has a second leg down usually is bought aggressively as
it breaks below the prior swing low, and many bulls bought this one, even though
it took several bars before they could turn the market up again. This was a sign
that they were not as aggressive as they could have been. This told traders that the
pullback might evolve into a larger trading range, which it ultimately did.
Many traders use trend lines for entering and exiting. Some would have taken
partial profits near the high of bar 7 as it moved above the trend channel line. They
also would have bought as bar 9 fell below the bull trend line and above the bar 9
high, since they saw bar 9 as a failed channel breakout. Bar 12 broke above a small
bear trend line, and traders bought as the bar moved above the line since they saw
that as the end of the pullback and the resumption of the bull trend. Bar 24 was
the third push up in the channel that followed the two-bar bull spike that began at
bar 14, and some traders would take profits on their longs above that line, even on
the strong bull close of bar 24. The bar was an especially large bull trend bar and
the third consecutive bull climax since bar 14, and the market was likely to have a
more complex correction. What better place to take profits than on a buy vacuum
test of a trend channel line on the third consecutive buy climax? The move down to
bar 28 broke below the bull trend line and held below it for many bars, so traders
wondered if a larger correction might be starting. This made many quicker to take
profits. When the move up from bar 28 could not produce any strong bull trend
bars, traders thought that the market might be in a trading range and therefore
took profits on the bar 29 test of the bar 26 lower high. This was a potential double
top bear flag and lower high trend reversal. The next bar was a bear trend bar,
which indicated that the bulls were becoming less aggressive and the bears were
becoming stronger.
When a bull trend is very strong, traders can buy for any reason if they use a
wide enough stop, and many traders like to buy on breakouts above prior swing

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

JWBT576-Brooks

Figure 18.1

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

EXAMPLE OF HOW TO TRADE A TREND

303

highs. However, buying pullbacks before the breakout generally offers more reward, smaller risk, and a higher probability of success. The breakout traders will
place buy stops at one tick above the old high and will be swept into their longs
as the market breaks above the old high. The most common reason for traders
failing to buy a pullback is that they were hoping for a larger or better-looking pullback. Many pullbacks have bear signal bars or follow two or three bar bear spikes,
making traders believe that the bull trend needs to correct more before resuming.
However, it is important to get long when there is a strong bull trend, and a trader
should place a buy stop above the prior swing high when the trend is very strong,
in case the pullback is brief and the trend quickly resumes. Reasonable entries included the bar 4 breakout above the bar 2 high and the breakouts up to bar 10 as it
moved above bar 7, the bar 14 spike as it went above bar 10, and the bar 20 spike
as it moved above bar 16. These old highs are often the highs of higher time frame
bars, like on the 15 or 60 minute charts, so the entry is usually a breakout above the
high of a prior bull trend bar on these higher time frame charts. Since higher time
frame charts have larger bars and the protective stop is initially below the signal
bar, the risk is greater and traders should trade smaller size, unless they are only
looking for a quick, small scalp. After the trend has gone on for a while, the pullbacks become deeper and last for more bars. Once the two-sided trading becomes
apparent, the strong bulls begin to take profits above swing highs rather than buying new positions, and the strong bears begin to scale into shorts as the market
goes above the old highs. For example, the bear bar after bar 20 and the bar 22 bear
bar were signs of selling pressure, so most traders would have used the move above
the bar 21 high to take profits rather than to buy more. At some point, most traders
will see new highs as shorting opportunities and not simply as areas to take profits.
Although many traders shorted below the bear bar after bar 24, most traders still
believed that the trend was up and that there would be a test of the bull high after
a pullback. Until there has been a strong bear move that breaks well below the bull
trend line, the strong bears usually will not dominate the market.
Since this was a trend day, a trader would ideally swing part, take profits along
the way, and then go back to a full position size on every pullback. However, most
traders cannot continue to hold part of their trade for a swing and also repeatedly
scalp the other part. Traders instead should try to put on a full position early and not
take additional signals, and instead scale out of their profits as the market works
higher. There are many ways to do this. For example, if they bought early on and
had to risk about $1.00 (probably less), they might have taken a quarter off after a
$1.00 profit and another quarter off at $2.00, and maybe a third quarter at $3.00, and
held onto the final quarter until either a strong sell signal formed or until the end of
the day. It was better if they instead waited until the market rallied $2.00, or twice
their initial risk, before taking their initial profit, because they had to sure that they
were adequately compensated for taking that initial $1.00 risk. It does not matter

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

304

JWBT576-Brooks

TRENDS

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 18.1

how they did it, but it was important to have taken some profit along the way in
case the market reversed down. However, since traders subjected themselves to
risk, they must resist the temptation to exit with too small a reward. As long as
the trend is good, it is always best to try to resist taking profits until the market
has gone at least twice as far as your initial risk. If traders are out of half of their
position but then see another strong buy signal, they might put part or all of the
other half back on, at least for a scalp; but most traders should simply stick to their
original plan and enjoy their growing profit.
With all of these buy signals, traders could have accumulated an uncomfortably large long position if they kept adding new longs, which they should not have
done. Instead, they should have simply held their position until a possible end of
the trend, like at bar 24, or they could have scalped out part after each new high
as soon as a bar had a weak close, like at bars 16, 21, or 24. Then they could have
put the scalp portion back on when they saw another buy signal. They would have
continued to hold their swing portion until the end of the trend.
When did traders see this day as a trend day? Aggressive bulls thought that the
gap up and strong bull trend bar had a reasonable chance of leading to a trend from
the open bull trend day, and they might have bought on the close of bar 1 or one
tick above its high. Their initial protective stops were one tick below the bar 1 low,
and they planned on holding part or all of the position until the close or until a clear
short signal formed.
Other traders always look for double bottoms on gap up days, and they would
have bought above the two-bar reversal that began at bar 3, which formed an approximate double bottom with bar 1 or with the low of doji bar that followed it.
Bar 4 was a strong bull trend bar that broke above the opening range and closed
above the bar 2 high. Some traders bought at one tick above the bar 2 high, and
others bought on the close of bar 4 or one tick above its high. This breakout bar
was a statement by the bulls that they owned the market, and most traders at this
point believed that the market was always-in long. For the time being, the best place
for a protective stop was one tick below its low, but since that was almost a dollar
lower, traders had to choose a small enough position size so that they were trading
within their comfort zone.
Most traders saw the day as a bull trend day by bars 5 or 7, and probably as
soon as bar 4 closed. Once traders believe the day is a trend day, if they are flat, they
should buy a small position either at the market or on any small pullback. Traders
could have placed limit orders to buy below the low of the prior bar and to buy at
a certain number of cents down, like maybe 20, 30, or 50 cents. Others would have
looked to buy above a high 2 on a stop or on a moving average pullback. Buying
above the bar 8 two-bar reversal was a reasonable long, as was the wedge bull flag
(some saw it as a triangle) that ended in a two-bar reversal at bar 12. The protective
stop would still have been below the bar 4 low or maybe below its midpoint. Traders

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

JWBT576-Brooks

Figure 18.1

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

EXAMPLE OF HOW TO TRADE A TREND

305

need to trade small enough so that their risk is within their normal risk tolerance.
Other traders had their stops below the bars 6 and 8 double bottom, and if they got
stopped out but the market then formed another buy signal and they believed that
the bull trend was still intact, they would have bought again.
The most important thing that traders must force themselves to do, and it is
usually difficult, is as soon as they believe that the day is in a trend, they must take at
least a small position. They must decide where a worst-case protective stop would
be, which is usually relatively far away, and use that as their stop. Because the stop
will be large, their initial position should be small if they are entering late. Once the
market moves in their direction and they can tighten their stop, they can look to
add to their position, but they should never exceed their normal risk level. When
everyone wants a pullback, it usually will not come for a long time. This is because
everyone believes that the market will soon be higher, but they do not necessarily
believe that it will be lower anytime soon. Smart traders know this and therefore
they start buying in pieces. Since they have to risk to the bottom of the spike, they
buy small. If their risk is three times normal, they will buy only one-third of their
usual size to keep their total dollar risk within their normal range. When the strong
bulls keep buying in small pieces, this is buying pressure, and it works against the
formation of a pullback. The strong bears see the trend, and they too believe that
the market will soon be higher. Since they think it will be higher soon, they will stop
looking to short. It does not make sense for them to short if they think that they can
short at a better price after a few more bars. So the strong bears are not shorting and
the strong bulls are buying in small pieces, in case there is no pullback for a long
time. What is the result? The market keeps working higher. Since you need to be
doing what the smart traders are doing, you need to buy at least a small amount at
the market or on a one- or two-tick pullback or a 10 or 20 cent pullback, and risk to
the bottom of the spike (the low of bar 4 for most traders, but some would have put
their stops below the low of bar 3). Even if the pullback begins on the next tick, the
odds are that it won’t fall far before smart bulls see it as value and buy aggressively.
Remember, everyone is waiting to buy a pullback, so when it finally comes it will
only be small and not last long. All of those traders who have been waiting to buy
will see this as the opportunity that they wanted. The result is that your position
will once again be profitable very soon. Once the market goes high enough, you can
look to take partial profits or you can look to buy more on a pullback, which will
probably be at a price above your original entry. The important point is that as soon
as you decide that buying a pullback is a great idea, you should do exactly what the
strong bulls are doing, and buy at least a small position at the market.
After the market moved above the bar 7 high, many traders trailed their protective stops below the most recent swing low, which was at bar 8. As long as the
market holds above the most recent swing low, the trend is likely still very strong. If
it starts to make lower lows, the market could be transitioning into a trading range

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

306

JWBT576-Brooks

TRENDS

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 18.1

or even a bear trend. In either case, traders would then trade it differently from how
they would trade a one-sided market (a trend).
Bulls would continue to buy pullbacks all day long, and after the market went
to another new swing high, they would move their protective stop to below the
most recent swing low. For example, once the market moved above the bar 16
high, traders tightened their protective stops to below the bar 19 low. Many traders
moved their stops to breakeven once there was a pullback that tested their entry
price and then the market reached a new high. They did not want the market to
come back down to their entry price a second time, and if it did, they would have
believed that the trend was not strong.
Bar 24 was the third push up from the spike up to bar 15 (bar 21 was the second
push up), so the market was likely to correct for a couple of legs sideways to down.
The bar after it was a bear inside bar so the market might have reversed down at
this point, especially since this would have been a failed breakout above the trend
channel line. The market made a couple of attempts to pull back to the moving
average earlier in the day, so it was reasonable to assume that it might succeed this
time. This was a good place to take profits on the swing longs. Aggressive traders
might have gone short for a scalp, but most traders would have waited to see if a
20 gap bar buy signal formed at the moving average.
Should traders try to take most of these entries? Absolutely not. However, if
they are watching on the sidelines, wondering how to get in, all of these setups are
reasonable. If they take just one to three of these swing entries, they are doing all
that they need to do and should not worry about all of the others.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c19

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:37

Printer: Donnelly

CHAPTER 19

Signs of Strength
in a Trend

here are many characteristics of strong trends. The most obvious one is that
they run from one corner of your chart to the diagonally opposite corner with
only small pullbacks. However, in the early stages of a trend, there are signs
that indicate that the move is strong and likely to last. The more of these signs that
are present, the more you should focus on with-trend entries. You should start to
look at countertrend setups only as great with-trend setups, with you entering on a
stop exactly where those countertrend traders will be forced to exit with a loss.
One interesting phenomenon in trend days is that on many of the days, the best
reversal bars and the biggest trend bars tend to be countertrend, trapping traders
into the wrong direction. Also, the lack of great with-trend signal bars makes
traders question their entries, forcing them to chase the market and enter late.
Finally, once you realize that the market is in a strong trend, you don’t need a
setup to enter. You can enter anytime all day long at the market if you wish with a
relatively small stop. The only purpose of a setup is to minimize the risk.
Here are some characteristics that are commonly found in strong trends:

T

r There is a big gap opening on the day.
r There are trending highs and lows (swings).
r Most of the bars are trend bars in the direction of the trend.
r There is very little overlap of the bodies of consecutive bars. For example, in a
bull spike, many bars have lows that are at or just one tick below the closes of
the prior bar. Some bars have lows that are at and not below the close of the
prior bar, so traders trying to buy on a limit order at the close of the prior bar
do not get their orders filled and they have to buy higher.
307

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c19

308

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:37

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDS

r There are bars with no tails or small tails in either direction, indicating urgency.
For example, in a bull trend, if a bull trend bar opens on its low tick and trends
up, traders were eager to buy it as soon as the prior bar closed. If it closes on or
near its high tick, traders continued their strong buying in anticipation of new
buyers entering right after the bar closes. They were willing to buy going into
the close because they were afraid that if they waited for the bar to close, they
might have to buy a tick or two higher.
r Occasionally, there are gaps between the bodies (for example, the open of a
bar might be above the close of the prior bar in a bull trend).
r A breakout gap appears in the form of a strong trend bar at the start of the trend
(a trend bar is a type of gap, as discussed in book 2).
r Measuring gaps occur where the breakout test does not overlap the breakout
point. For example, the pullback from a bull breakout does not drop below the
high of the bar where the breakout occurred.
r Micro measuring gaps appear where there is a strong trend bar and a gap between the bar before it and the bar after it. For example, if the low of the bar
after a strong bull trend bar in a bull trend is at or above the high of the bar
before the trend bar, this is a gap and a breakout test and a sign of strength.
r No big climaxes appear.
r Not many large bars appear (not even large trend bars). Often, the largest trend
bars are countertrend, trapping traders into looking for countertrend trades
and missing with-trend trades. The countertrend setups almost always look better than the with-trend setups.
r No significant trend channel line overshoots occur, and the minor ones result
in only sideways corrections.
r The corrections after trend line breaks go sideways instead of countertrend.
r Failed wedges and other failed reversals occur.
r There is a sequence of 20 moving average gap bars (20 or more consecutive
bars that do not touch the moving average, discussed in book 2).
r Few if any profitable countertrend trades are found.
r There are small, infrequent, and mostly sideways pullbacks. For example, if
the Emini’s average range is 12 points, the pullbacks will all likely be less than
three or four points, and the market will often go for five or more bars without
a pullback.
r There is a sense of urgency. You find yourself waiting through countless bars
for a good with-trend pullback and one never comes, yet the market slowly
continues to trend.
r The pullbacks have strong setups. For example, the high 1 and high 2 pullbacks
in a bull trend have strong bull reversal bars for signal bars.
r In the strongest trends, the pullbacks usually have weak signal bars, making
many traders not take them, and forcing traders to chase the market. For

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c19

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:37

Printer: Donnelly

SIGNS OF STRENGTH IN A TREND

309

example, in a bear trend the signal bars for a low 2 short are often small bull
bars in two or three bar bull spikes, and some of the entry bars are outside
down bars. It has trending “anything”: closes, highs, lows, or bodies.
r Repeated two-legged pullbacks are setting up with trend entries.
r No two consecutive trend bar closes occur on the opposite side of the moving
average.
r The trend goes very far and breaks several resistance levels, like the moving
average, prior swing highs, and trend lines, and each by many ticks.
r Reversal attempts in the form of spikes against the trend have no followthrough, fail, and become flags in the direction of the trend.
When a trend is in runaway mode, there will likely be no pullbacks for many
bars and the bars will be good-sized trend bars with mostly small tails. Since you
want to keep scalping more as the trend continues while still holding on to the
swing portion of your position, you might consider looking at the 3 minute chart
for additional with-trend setups. It often has more pause bars (countertrend inside
bars and one-bar pullbacks) that allow for with-trend entries. The 1 minute chart
also has with-trend entries but in addition it has some countertrend setups, which
can be confusing when you are trying to trade only with trend. This, along with the
speed of the reading required, can create too much stress during a runaway trend
and can interfere with your ability to trade effectively. Since you need to be making
sure that you catch every with-trend entry, it is best to trade only off the 5 minute
chart in a runaway trend. Once you become experienced and successful, you might
consider also looking at the 3 minute chart.
Over time, the trend weakens; more signs of two-sided trading develop and the
signs of strength begin to disappear. For example, in a bull trend traders begin to
take profits above the highs of the prior bars and above swing highs, and aggressive
bears begin to short above the highs of bars and above swing highs and will scale
in higher. The strong bulls will eventually only buy pullbacks. The initial bull spike
is replaced by a bull channel, and it eventually evolves into a trading range.
