
- 32 -

John Grisham

The Broker

deed be incarcerated for a very long time while his conspiracies faded away.
The crowd slowly broke up. The reporters got half the story they wanted.
The big men from the agencies left without speaking-some were pleased that
secrets had been protected, others were furious that crimes were being
hidden. Carl Pratt and the other beleaguered partners headed for the nearest
bar.
The first reporter called the office just before 9:00 a.m. Pratt had already
alerted his secretary that such calls were expected. She was to tell everyone
that he was to be busy in court on some lengthy matter and might not be
back in the office for months. Soon the phone lines were gridlocked and a
seemingly productive day was shot to hell. Every lawyer and other employee
dropped everything and whispered of nothing but the Backman news.
Several watched the front door, half expecting the ghost to come looking for
them.
Behind a locked door and alone, Pratt sipped a Bloody Mary and watched
the nonstop news on cable. Thankfully, a busload of Danish tourists had
been kidnapped in the Philippines, otherwise Joel Backman would have been
the top story. But he was running a close second, as all kinds of experts were
brought in, powdered up, and placed in the studio under the lights where
they prattled on about the man's legendary sins.
A former Pentagon chief called the pardon "a potential blow to our national
security." A retired federal judge, looking every day of his ninety-plus years,
called it, predictably, "a miscarriage of justice." A rookie senator from
Vermont admitted he knew little about the Backman scandal but he was
nonetheless enthusiastic about being on live cable and said he planned to call
for all sorts of investigations. An unnamed White House official said the
new President was "quite disturbed" by the pardon and planned to review it,
whatever that meant.
And on and on. Pratt mixed a second Bloody Mary.
Going for the gore, a "correspondent"-not simply a "reporter"- dug up a
piece on Senator Jacy Hubbard, and Pratt reached for the remote. He turned
up the volume when a large photo of Hubbard his face was flashed on the
screen. The former senator had been found dead with a bullet in the head the
week before Backman pled guilty. What appeared at first to be a suicide was
later called suspicious, though no

- 33 -

John Grisham

The Broker

suspect had ever been identified. The pistol was unmarked and probably
stolen. Hubbard had been an active hunter but had never used handguns. The
powder residue on his right hand was suspicious. An autopsy revealed a
stout concentration of alcohol and barbiturates in his system. The alcohol
could certainly be predicted but Hubbard had never been known to use
drugs. He'd been seen a few hours earlier with an attractive young lady at a
Georgetown bar, which was fairly typical.
The prevailing theory was that the lady slipped him enough drugs to knock
him out, then handed him over to the professional killers. He was hauled to a
remote section of the Arlington National Cemetery and shot once in the
head. His body came to rest on the grave of his brother, a decorated Vietnam
hero. A nice touch, but those who knew him well claimed he seldom talked
about his family and many knew nothing of the dead brother.
The unspoken theory was that Hubbard was killed by the same people who
wanted a shot at Joel Backman. And for years afterward Carl Pratt and Kim
Boiling paid serious money for professional bodyguards just in case their
names were on the same list. Evidently, they were not. The details of the
fateful deal that nailed Backman and killed Hubbard had been handled by
those two, and with time Pratt had loosened the security around himself,
though he still carried a Ruger with him everywhere.
But Backman was far away, with the distance growing every minute. Oddly
enough, he, too, was thinking of Jacy Hubbard and the people who might
have killed him. He had plenty of time to think- fourteen hours in a folddown bunk on a rattling cargo plane did much to deaden the senses, for a
normal person anyway. But for a freshly released former convict who'd just
walked out of six years in solitary lockdown, the flight was quite
stimulating.
Whoever killed Jacy Hubbard would want very much to kill Joel Backman,
and as he bumped along at 24,000 feet he pondered some serious questions.
Who had lobbied for his pardon? Where did they plan to hide him? Who,
exactly, were "they"?
Pleasant questions, really. Less than twenty-four hours earlier his questions
had been: Are they trying to starve me to death? Freeze me?

- 34 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Am I slowly losing my mind in this twelve-by-twelve cell? Or losing it
rapidly? Will I ever see my grandchildren? Do I want to?
He liked the new questions better, troubling as they were. At least he would
be able to walk down a street somewhere and breathe the air and feel the sun
and perhaps stop at a cafe and sip a strong coffee.
He'd had a client once, a wealthy cocaine importer who'd been snared in a
DEA sting. The client had been such a valuable catch that the feds offered
him a new life with a new name and a new face if he would squeal on the
Colombians. Squeal he did, and after surgery he was reborn on the north side
of Chicago, where he ran a small bookshop. Joel had dropped in one day
years later and found the client sporting a goatee, smoking a pipe, looking
rather cerebral and earthy. He had a new wife and three stepchildren, and the
Colombians never had a clue.
It's a big world out there. Hiding is not that difficult.
Joel closed his eyes, grew still, listened to the steady hum of the four
engines, and tried to tell himself that wherever he was headed he would not
live like a man on the run. He would adapt, he would survive, he would not
live in fear.
There was a muted conversation under way two bunks down, two soldiers
swapping stories about all the girls they'd had. He thought of Mo the mob
snitch who, for the last four years, had occupied the cell next to Joel's, and
who, for about twenty-two hours a day, was the only human he could chat
with. He couldn't see him, but they could hear each other through a vent. Mo
didn't miss his family, his friends, his neighborhood, or food or drink or
sunshine. All Mo talked about was sex. He told long, elaborate stories about
his escapades. He told jokes, some of the dirtiest Joel had ever heard. He
even wrote poems about old lovers and orgies and fantasies.
He wouldn't miss Mo and his imagination.
Unwillingly, he dozed off again.
Colonel Gantner was shaking him, whispering loudly, "Major Herzog, Major
Herzog. We need to talk." Backman squeezed out of his bunk, and followed
the colonel along the dark cramped aisle between the bunks and into a small
room, somewhere closer to the cockpit. "Take a seat," Gantner said. They
huddled over a small metal table.
Gantner was holding a file. "Here's the deal," he began. "We land

- 35 -

John Grisham

The Broker

in about an hour. The plan is for you to be sick, so sick that an ambulance
from the base hospital will meet the plane at the landing field. The Italian
authorities will do their usual quick inspection of the paperwork, and they
might actually take a look at you. Probably not. We'll be at a US. military
base, and soldiers come and go all the time. I have a passport for you. I'll do
the talking with the Italians, then you'll be taken by ambulance to the
hospital."
"Italians?"
"Yes. Ever hear of the Aviano Air Base?"
"No."
"Didn't think so. It's been around in US. hands since we ran the Germans off
in 1945. It's in the northeast part of Italy, near the Alps."
"Sounds lovely."
"It's okay, but it's a base."
"How long will I be there?"
"That's not my decision. My job is to get you from this airplane to the base
hospital. There, someone else takes over. Take a look at this bio for Major
Herzog, just in case."
Joel spent a few minutes reading the fictional history of Major Herzog and
memorizing the details on the fake passport.
"Remember, you're very ill and sedated," Gantner said. "Just pretend you're
in a coma."
"I've been in one for six years."
"Would you like some coffee?"
"What time is it where we're going?"
Gantner looked at his watch and did a quick calculation. "We should land
around one a.m."
"I'd love some coffee."
Gantner gave him a paper cup and a thermos, and disappeared.
After two cups, Joel felt the engines reduce power. He returned to his bunk
and tried to close his eyes.
As the C-130 rolled to a stop, an air force ambulance backed itself close to
the rear hatch. The troops ambled off, most still half asleep. A stretcher
carrying Major Herzog rolled down the gateway and was carefully lifted into
the ambulance. The nearest Italian official was sitting inside a US. military
jeep, watching things halfheartedly

- 36 -

John Grisham

The Broker

and trying to stay warm. The ambulance pulled away, in no particular hurry,
and five minutes later Major Herzog was rolled into the small base hospital
and tucked away in a tiny room on the second floor where two military
policemen guarded his door.

- 37 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Fortunately for Backman, though he had no way of knowing
and no reason to care, at the eleventh hour President Morgan also pardoned
an aging billionaire who'd escaped prison by fleeing the country. The
billionaire, an immigrant from some Slavic state who'd had the option of
redoing his name upon his arrival decades earlier, had chosen in his youth
the title of Duke Mongo. The Duke had given trainloads of money to
Morgan's presidential campaign. When it was revealed that he'd spent his
career evading taxes it was also revealed he'd spent several nights in the
Lincoln Bedroom, where, over a friendly nightcap, he and the President
discussed pending indictments. According to the third person present for the
nightcap, a young tart who was currently serving as the Duke's fifth wife, the
President promised to throw his weight around over at the IRS and call off
the dogs. Didn't happen. The indictment was thirty-eight pages long, and
before it rolled off the printer the billionaire, minus wife number five, took
up residence in Uruguay where he thumbed his nose north while living in a
palace with soon-to-be wife number six.
Now he wanted to come home so he could die with dignity, die as a real
patriot, and be buried on his Thoroughbred farm just outside Lexington,
Kentucky. Critz cut the deal, and minutes after signing the

- 38 -

John Grisham

The Broker

pardon for Joel Backman, President Morgan granted complete clemency to
Duke Mongo.
It took a day for the news to leak-the pardons, for good reason, were not
publicized by the White House-and the press went insane. Here was a man
who cheated the federal government out of $600 million over a twenty-year
period, a crook who deserved to be locked away forever, and he was about
to fly home in his mammoth jet and spend his final days in obscene luxury.
The Backman story, sensational as it was, now had serious competition from
not only the kidnapped Danish tourists but also the country's largest tax
cheater.
But it was still a hot item. Most of the major morning papers along the East
Coast ran a picture of "The Broker" somewhere on the front page. Most ran
long stories about his scandal, his guilty plea, and now his pardon.
Carl Pratt read them all online, in a huge messy office he kept above his
garage in northwest Washington. He used the place to hide, to stay away
from the wars that raged within his firm, to avoid the partners he couldn't
stand. He could drink there and no one would care. He could throw things,
and curse at the walls, and do whatever he damn well pleased because it was
his sanctuary.
The Backman file was in a large cardboard storage box, one he kept hidden
in a closet. Now it was on a worktable, and Pratt was going through it for the
first time in many years. He'd saved everything- news articles, photos,
interoffice memos, sensitive notes he'd taken, copies of the indictments, Jacy
Hubbard's autopsy report.
What a miserable history.
In January of 1996, three young Pakistani computer scientists made an
astounding discovery. Working in a hot, cramped flat on the top floor of an
apartment building on the outskirts of Karachi, the three linked together a
series of Hewlett-Packard computers they'd purchased online with a
government grant. Their new "supercomputer" was then wired to a
sophisticated military satellite telephone, one also provided by the
government. The entire operation was secret and funded off the books by the
military. Their objective was simple: to locate, and then try to access, a new
Indian spy satellite hovering three hundred miles above Pakistan. If they
successfully tapped into

- 39 -

John Grisham

The Broker

the satellite, then they hoped to monitor its surveillance. A secondary dream
was to try to manipulate it.
The stolen intelligence was at first exciting, then proved to be virtually
useless. The new Indian "eyes" were doing much the same thing the old ones
had been doing for ten years-taking thousands of photographs of the same
military installations. Pakistani satellites had been sending back photos of
Indian army bases and troop movements for the same ten years. The two
countries could swap pictures and learn nothing.
But another satellite was accidentally discovered, then another and another.
They were neither Pakistani nor Indian, and they were not supposed to be
where they were found-each about three hundred miles above the earth,
moving north-northeast at a constant speed of 120 miles per hour, and each
maintaining a distance of four hundred miles from the other. Over ten days,
the terribly excited hackers monitored the movements of at least six different
satellites, all apparently part of the same system, as they slowly approached
from the Arabian Peninsula, swept through the skies over Afghanistan and
Pakistan, then headed off for western China.
They told no one, but instead managed to procure a more powerful satellite
telephone from the military, claiming it was needed to follow up some
unfinished work with the Indian surveillance. After a month of methodical,
twenty-four-hour monitoring, they had pieced together a global web of nine
identical satellites, all linked to each other, and all carefully designed to be
invisible to everyone except the men who launched them.
They code-named their discovery Neptune.
The three young wizards had been educated in the United States. The leader
was Safi Mirza, a former Stanford graduate assistant who'd worked briefly at
Breedin Corp, a renegade US. defense contractor that specialized in satellite
systems. Fazal Sharif had an advanced degree in computer science from
Georgia Tech.
The third and youngest member of the Neptune gang was Farooq Khan, and
it was Farooq who finally wrote the software that penetrated the first
Neptune satellite. Once inside its computer system, Farooq began
downloading intelligence so sensitive that he and Fazal and Safi knew they
were entering no-man's-land. There were clear color pictures of terrorist
training camps in Afghanistan, and govern

- 40 -

John Grisham

The Broker

ment limousines in Beijing. Neptune could listen as Chinese pilots bantered
back and forth at twenty thousand feet, and it could watch a suspicious
fishing boat as it docked in Yemen. Neptune followed an armored truck,
presumably Castro's, through the streets of Havana. And in a live video feed
that shocked the three, Arafat himself was clearly seen stepping into an alley
in his compound in Gaza, lighting a cigarette, then urinating.
For two sleepless days, the three peeked inside the satellites as they crossed
Pakistan. The software was in English, and with Neptune's preoccupation
with the Middle East, Asia, and China, it was easy to assume Neptune
belonged to the United States, with Britain and Israel a distant second and
third. Perhaps it was a joint U.S.-Israeli secret.
After two days of eavesdropping, they fled the apartment and reorganized
their little cell in a friend's farmhouse ten miles outside of Karachi. The
discovery was exciting enough, but they, and Safi in particular, wanted to go
one step further. He was quite confident he could manipulate the system.
His first success was watching Fazal Sharif read a newspaper. To protect the
identity of their location, Fazal took a bus into downtown Karachi, and
wearing a green cap and sunglasses, he bought a newspaper and sat on a
park bench near a certain intersection. With Farooq feeding commands
through a ramped-up sat-phone, a Neptune satellite found Fazal, zoomed
down close enough to pick off the headlines of his newspaper, and relayed it
all back to the farmhouse where it was watched in muted disbelief.
The electro-optical imaging relays to Earth were of the highest resolution
known to technology at that time, down to about four feet-equal to the
sharpest images produced by US. military reconnaissance satellites and
about twice as sharp as the best European and American commercial
satellites.
For weeks and months, the three worked nonstop writing homebrewed
software for their discovery. They discarded much of what they wrote, but as
they fine-tuned the successful programs they became even more amazed at
Neptune's possibilities.
Eighteen months after they first discovered Neptune, the three had, on four
Jaz 2-gigabyte disks, a software program that not only increased the speed at
which Neptune communicated with its numerous

- 41 -

John Grisham

The Broker

contacts on Earth but also allowed Neptune to jam many of the navigation,
communications, and reconnaissance satellites already in orbit. For lack of a
better code name, they called their program JAM.
Though the system they called Neptune belonged to someone else, the three
conspirators were able to control it, to thoroughly manipulate it, and even to
render it useless. A bitter fight erupted. Safi and Fazal got greedy and
wanted to sell JAM to the highest bidder. Farooq saw nothing but trouble
with their creation. He wanted to give it to the Pakistani military and wash
his hands of the entire matter.
In September of 1998, Safi and Fazal traveled to Washington and spent a
frustrating month trying to penetrate military intelligence through Pakistani
contacts. Then a friend told them about Joel Back- man, the man who could
open any door in Washington.
But getting in his door was a challenge. The broker was a very important
man with important clients and lots of significant people demanding small
segments of his time. His flat fee for a one-hour consultation with a new
client was $5,000 and that was for those lucky enough to be looked upon
with favor by the great man. Safi borrowed $2,000 from an uncle in Chicago
and promised to pay Mr. Backman the rest in ninety days. Documents in
court later revealed that their first meeting took place on October 24, 1998,
in the offices of Backman, Pratt & Boiling. The meeting would eventually
destroy the lives of everyone present.
Backman at first had seemed skeptical of JAM and its incredible
capabilities. Or perhaps he'd grasped its potential immediately and chosen to
play it sly with his new clients. Safi and Fazal dreamed of selling JAM to the
Pentagon for a fortune, whatever Mr. Backman thought their product might
fetch. And if anyone in Washington could get a fortune for JAM, it was Joel
Backman.
Early on, he had called in Jacy Hubbard, his million-dollar mouthpiece who
still played golf once a week with the President and went barhopping with
big shots on Capitol Hill. He was colorful, flamboyant, combative, thricedivorced, and quite fond of expensive whiskeys-especially when purchased
by lobbyists. He had survived politically only because he was known as the
dirtiest campaigner in the history of the US. Senate, no small feat. He was
known to be anti- Semitic, and during the course of his career he developed
close ties with the Saudis. Very close. One of many ethics investigations
revealed

- 42 -

John Grisham

The Broker

a $1 million campaign contribution from a prince, the same one Hubbard
went skiing with in Austria.
Initially, Hubbard and Backman argued over the best way to market JAM.
Hubbard wanted to peddle it to the Saudis, who, he was convinced, would
pay $1 billion for it. Backman had taken the rather provincial view that such
a dangerous product should be kept at home. Hubbard was convinced he
could cut a deal with the Saudis in which they would promise that JAM
would never be used against the United States, their ostensible ally.
Backman was afraid of the Israelis-their powerful friends in the United
States, their military, and, most important, their secret spy services.
At that time Backman, Pratt & Boiling represented many foreign companies
and governments. In fact, the firm was "the" address for anyone looking for
instant clout in Washington. Pay their frightening fees, and you had yourself
access. Its endless list of clients included the Japanese steel industry, the
South Korean government, the Saudis, most of the Caribbean banking
conspiracy, the current regime in Panama, a Bolivian farming cooperative
that grew nothing but cocaine, and on and on. There were many legitimate
clients, and many that were not so clean.
The rumor about JAM slowly leaked around their offices. It could
potentially be the largest fee the firm had yet seen, and there had been some
startling ones. As weeks passed, other partners in the firm presented varying
scenarios for the marketing of JAM. The notion of patriotism was slowly
forgotten-there was simply too much money out there! The firm represented
a Dutch company that built avionics for the Chinese air force, and with that
entree a lucrative deal could be struck with the Beijing government. The
South Koreans would rest easier if they knew exactly what was happening to
the north. The Syrians would hand over their national treasury for the ability
to neutralize Israeli military communications. A certain drug cartel would
pay billions for the ability to track DEA interdiction efforts.
Each day Joel Backman and his band of greedy lawyers grew richer. In the
firm's largest offices, they talked of little else.
The doctor was rather brusque and appeared to have little time for his new
patient. It was, after all, a military hospital. With scarcely

- 43 -

John Grisham

The Broker

a word he checked the pulse, heart, lungs, blood pressure, reflexes, and so
on, then from out of the blue announced, "I think you're dehydrated."
"How's that?" Backman asked.
"Happens a lot with long nights. We'll start a drip. You'll be okay in twentyfour hours."
"You mean, like an IV?"
"That's it."
"I don't do IVs."
"Beg your pardon."
"I didn't stutter. I don't do needles."
"We took a sample of your blood."
"Yeah, that was blood going out, not something coming in. Forget it, Doc,
I'm not doing an IV."
"But you're dehydrated."
"I don't feel dehydrated."
"I'm the doctor, and I say you're dehydrated."
"Then give me a glass of water."
Half an hour later, a nurse entered with a big smile and a handful of
medications. Joel said no to the sleeping pills, and when she sort of waved a
hypodermic he said, "What's that?"
"Ryax."
"What the hell is Ryax?"
"It's a muscle relaxer."
"Well, it just so happens that my muscles are very relaxed right now. I
haven't complained of unrelaxed muscles. I haven't been diagnosed with
unrelaxed muscles. No one has asked me if my muscles are relaxed. So you
can take that Ryax and stick it up your own ass and we'll both be relaxed and
happier."
She almost dropped the needle. After a long painful pause in which she was
completely speechless, she managed to utter, "I'll check with the doctor."
"You do that. On second thought, why don't you poke him in his rather fat
ass. He's the one who needs to relax." But she was already out of the room.
On the other side of the base, a Sergeant McAuliffe pecked on his keyboard
and sent a message to the Pentagon. From there it was sent almost
immediately to Langley where it was read by Julia Javier, a
