
Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 7.7)
•
•
•
•

•

•

•

Shift down to the next-lower time frame and analyze that pattern in detail. This focuses
timing and identifies hidden forces that drive the potential price decline.
The smaller chart uncovers a descending triangle (4) with a whipsaw (3) that generates a 2B
top reversal. The combination of these two patterns looks more bearish than either by itself.
The continuation and exhaustion gap (2) completes one successful test on 5/16 (7) but
finally fills as the triangle pattern breaks and marks new resistance.
A small rally to 147 (5) after the breakdown signals a perfect CV×4 short sale opportunity
for the impending channel break. It represents the pullback to triangle resistance, the top of
the filled gap, and the 38% Fibonacci retracement. It also prints a bearish reversal
candlestick.
The channel line (1) holds through the test of the triangle breakdown. This complex
resistance traps longs and sets up an explosive situation. A 30-minute time window permits
low-risk entry in the two small bars that sit right on the channel line beneath 144.
The line breaks at 143 but rapid movement makes further short sales difficult to execute.
The combined patterns draw so much selling power that price never pulls back to retest the
line.
Tight congestion forms under the 62% retracement (6) and could indicate an imminent rally
back above S/R. But examine the three failed tests before the market closes that day. An
observant swing trader with a very strong stomach might consider an overnight hold with
correct interpretation of that bearish action.

Reward:Risk
Risk decreases sharply as different patterns and time frames all point to the same outcome. This
setup combines the 2B top, descending triangle, continuation gap, and Fibonacci into a single
profitable channel break trade. These overlapping patterns occur very often in modern markets, but
they require a skilled eye to see and an experienced hand to guide through profitable execution.

FIGURE 7.7

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

INTRODUCING THE 7-BELLS
The world of market noise buries many profitable opportunities. Swing traders apply a variety of
search tools to uncover these hidden signals and prepare active positions. Self-reliant participants
build powerful charting databases to find dependable setups. Many other players rely on someone
else’s knowledge to find the best patterns. Stock picks work well as long as they first pass internal
trading filters that limit execution to specific qualifications. They fail miserably when used as a
substitute for personal effort and discipline.
Effective strategy must guide each setup from identification to exit, regardless of origin. Robust
scans can sift through all the market garbage in minutes and find excellent plays that wait for
execution. But at some point the swing trader must set aside the processor and rely on gray matter
to guide critical decision-making. Market survival lies near this center of human and machine
interaction.

ORIGINAL SETUPS AND EXECUTION
Mathematics and vision must work together to accurately predict short-term price movement. The
7-Bells capitalize on highly predictable crowd behavior through the application of classic Pattern
Cycle techniques. They also define numerical scans for original setup criteria that represent
outstanding profit opportunities. Market knowledge misses many lesser-known price patterns. 7Bells returns these forgotten trades into the arsenal of modern tactics. These highly original setups
reveal powerful mechanisms that feed directional price movement. They expose key elements of
crowd psychology, multiple time frame events, and complex breakout triggers. And they represent
advanced trading strategies to step in front of, stand behind, or fade the emotional crowd.
Consider both probability and time frame before using the 7-Bells candidates. Although these
setups uncover outstanding prospects for short-term profit, many fail to trigger promising trades
within a specific holding period. Swing traders should review the limitations of each pattern as well
as their powerful predictive characteristics before they execute positions. Not surprisingly, this is
also true of all successful market strategies. The greatest value of 7-Bells has little to do with the
daily output. Stock charts repeat these familiar patterns over and over again in all time frames.
Internalize their mechanics and understand their powerful message. Then watch market vision grow
and new opportunities come quickly.
Remember that 7-Bells represent setups that may never happen. Lazy participants will lose money
if they just take candidates and enter blind positions without completing their own analysis. These
patterns display characteristics associated with predictable and profitable outcomes. But a specific
stock may never act according to expectations, and only personal skill and excellent timing will
book a profit, even if everything lines up perfectly.
Each bell setup focuses on a different aspect of market behavior. Some define breakout conditions
while others signal the start of swing movement. Several of the patterns may break either way and
require strategies that choose direction based on subsequent price movement. Extend focus and
planning beyond the first bar that follows the original bell signal. Price action often lags the pattern
by several bars and rewards patience.
Review the patterns and decide which ones fit into the current personal trading plan. Experiment
with a few ideas that consistently produce the best results and master them before moving on to
others. Participants should not try to execute all of the setups at the same time. Choose only the
strongest candidates from each type of opportunity and cross-verify the patterns with other
landscape features. Marginal setups will fail unless overall conditions strongly support the play.
Short-term market conditions always favor some setups over others. Dip trips and coiled springs
respond well to strong bull markets. 3rd watch candidates may dry up during corrections. Finger
finders and power spikes continue to print through all environments. Identify the broad Pattern
Cycles before choosing a bell strategy, and align tactics to current sentiment. Then move to other
opportunities if an original setup fails to do its job.

7-BELLS CHARACTERISTICS
Dip Trip—Price That Moves against a Strong Trend Will Rebound Sharply

This bell recognizes that buyers wait for pullbacks from strong rallies. It seeks to locate the natural
level where a primary trend will reassert itself and force a reversal. Some dip trips head naturally to
new highs after they bounce. Others eventually fail and roll over into new declines. The swing
trader must execute dip trips defensively and take whatever profit the market offers.

Coiled Spring—Constricted Price Gives Way to Directional Movement

This classic trade recognizes the importance of NR7 narrow range events. It points to potential
empty zone interfaces between directionless negative feedback and the eruption of positive
feedback momentum. The setup looks for stocks with very high relative strength that favors upward
price expansion to new highs. But the best trading results build a bilateral strategy that enters a
position in whatever direction that price eventually breaks. Coiled spring expansion often occurs
two to three bars after the 7-Bells signal appears.
Finger Finder—Candles Flag Reversals in the Next-Smaller Time Frame

Hammers, dojis, and haramis represent one-bar predictive candlesticks when they print at certain
levels. Finger finders locate these important reversals and advise the swing trader to study the chart
under the event. This setup provides early warning for several profitable opportunities that
capitalize on subsequent price behavior. In favorable conditions, movement in the next-smaller time
frame allows specific strategies to beat the crowd in the door.
Hole-in-the-Wall—Gap Downs after Strong Rallies Signal a Trend Change

Classic gap theory rarely discusses countertrend gaps that occur at the end of dynamic uptrends.
Tops should take time to dampen buying pressure and roll over. But the hole-in-the-wall points to a
single bar that signals a major trend change. The gap may look like a breakaway gap that appears
without a major topping formation. The hole prints suddenly and invites swing traders to look for
low-risk short sales while the crowd still believes the uptrend is in progress.
Power Spike—High-Volume Events Print the Future Direction of Price

Volume events reveal the will of the crowd. Power spikes uncover several different scenarios
where participation peaks and establishes an important market direction. The swing trader must
identify which type of spike prints before choosing an appropriate strategy. Some power spikes
point to breakouts or breakdowns, while others evolve into pivoting ranges, with price that swings
across the level attained during the event.
Bear Hug—Weak Markets Drop Quickly after Rallying into Resistance

The bear hug combines two specific patterns that flag impending low-risk short sales. The first
searches the markets for stocks in major bear markets that rally into resistance and reach
overbought levels. The second finds declining stocks with low relative strength and other criteria
that favor downward price expansion out of an NR7 congestion. Each pattern requires a different
strategy to maintain risk management and capitalize on the breakdown.
3rd Watch—Breakouts through Triple Tops Signal Major Uptrends

The markets rarely break out on the first test of a prior high. 3rd Watch recognizes this double top
failure and looks for strong stocks that exceed the old highs after another pullback. This classic
setup flags major breakouts after well-defined bases as well as cup and handle events. 3rd watch
also works through all time frames and identifies intermediate opportunities in smaller congestion
patterns or short-term ranges.

TRADING STRATEGIES
The next seven chapters discuss each bell pattern in detail. Most swing traders can access these
promising setups through review of their favorite charts. Daily 7-Bells candidates are also available

free online at the Hard Right Edge (http://www.hardrightedge.com). This financial portal publishes
top scan output daily within 90 minutes of the traditional U.S. market close at 4:00 p.m. ET (U.S.).
Technically-oriented traders who wish to recreate these scans for their own personal databases can
find this information through Hard Right Edge as well. But keep in mind that simple pattern
recognition will find these original opportunities in all markets and time frames.
A detailed narrative follows the description of each pattern. This describes the environment that
creates the opportunity, the crowd that drives it, and various methods to capitalize upon its
behavior. It provides a background on the chart structure that generates the price movement and
presents illustrations of characteristic moves. Also use this narrative to investigate the bell’s
mechanics in different time frames.
The materials offer tips and suggestions to master specific strategies associated with each original
setup. These may include timing, risk management, charting landscape features, and time frame
hierarchy. Look here to examine expected Fibonacci retracements and central tendency outcome as
well as crowd behavior observations.
The applications sections offer detailed case studies that present trading guidelines for many bell
strategies. They review reward:risk considerations and stop loss for a variety of pattern scenarios.
Specific trading rules within each presentation broaden tactical considerations and build effective
position management. These segments also provide detailed illustrations to assist with pattern
recognition and trade planning.

8 CHAPTER
DIP TRIP

CHARACTERISTICS
Strong rallies generate sudden corrective movement to shake out weak hands. Swing traders can
buy these pullbacks within a tick or two of a major reversal under the right conditions. The dip trip
setup recognizes that many of these selloffs represent low-risk buying opportunities. But
countertrends often last longer than expected, and no one wants to be stabbed by a falling knife. So
effective risk management requires careful stock selection, the right decline, and precise timing.
Markets tend to pull back at the same angle that they rise. This tendency supports quick visual
analysis for different types of trading candidates. Steep sell-offs bounce sharply, but only
experienced swing traders can manage their increased risk. Healthy bull flags offer lower volatility
and well-defined entry points but require a longer holding period to book profits. The most
successful positions execute with very strong stocks that decline on low volume into solid support.
These profit vehicles also display one other common trait: the pullbacks don’t violate any important
S/R levels.
Dip trip prints within a momentum market but invokes classic swing tactics. It offers interesting
variations that appeal to speculators in all time frames. Raschke and Connors discuss one related
strategy with their Holy Grail setup in Street Smarts. The bell also tracks the classic investor
behavior of ‘‘buying on the dips,” although the swing trader must exercise better timing due to the
very short holding period.

TRADE MECHANICS
Greed-based bull psychology controls the physics of rally movement. This hidden crowd support
reduces the risk that a sharp dip will trigger an important trend change. Carefully evaluate volume
on the decline to confirm that no concealed factors drive the selloff. Natural profit-taking should
print less participation than the last few rally bars. High-volume pullbacks may bounce sharply but
generate instability as the last downdraft draws in new sellers. Stay away from these undependable
conditions.
Dip trip favors candidates in earlier trend phases and avoids overbought markets. This reduces risk
and promotes a higher reward. But promising setups may still appear after moderate climax events.
These selloffs tend to carry further but bounce more strongly than simple pullbacks. However,
cautiously avoid major blowoffs where candle reversals suggest that significant supply now
overhangs that market. These may appear as high-volume dark cloud cover or shooting star
formations.
The setup carries a high %WIN with careful execution in favorable conditions. The disciplined
swing trader may profit on 60–75% of all positions. The key to success lies in defensive
management and an appropriate exit strategy. Some dips carry to new highs immediately, but others
just bounce weakly and roll over to new lows. Pattern analysis often suggests which outcome has
the higher probability for the specific setup, but both reversals can still lead to profitable trades. Use
a trailing stop loss or an expansion exit to take whatever the market decides to give after the
bounce.
FIGURE 8.1
Exodus Communications pulls back to a well-established Fibonacci retracement after each trend wave of this
powerful 300% rally. Hammers mark the major reversals as they reach across the barrier but then pull back by the

bar’s close. Note how each congestion zone tests the retracement low with a second candle that completes a small
double bottom pattern.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Dip wave mechanics often depend on a B wave correction rather than a primary first-wave impulse.
This suggests that the bounce will eventually dry up and fail. The most defensive strategy requires
that swing traders take their profits as soon as momentum from the bounce starts to fade. More
aggressive participants can place a stop under any short-term congestion near this high and hope
that the market shoots higher. In either case, don’t wait around for a test of the initial entry level.
The odds favor price violating support if a subsequent decline reaches that far.
Corrections may retrace 38–50% of a strong rally before a significant bounce. Countertrends often
deny a profitable entry when they occur in small increments. Trends pull back through both price
and time. When price takes too long to reach a specific target, declining volatility dampens the trade
mechanics and bounces lose elasticity. Alternatively, when corrections strike the target within a few
bars of the prior high, the subsequent reversal can exhibit great range and profit potential.
Time absorbs price. Always compare the time proportionality of each selloff to the prior rally
before taking a position. In other words, the time that a market takes to reach a countertrend bottom
affects its ability to generate a profitable bounce within the holding period. Time also absorbs
volatility. Low volatility induces flat markets that empty trading accounts as efficiently as losing

positions. Count the number of bars within the last rally wave to measure time’s impact on the
expected bounce. Compare that number to the bar count since the dip began. Corrective moves
should complete in less time than the prior trend in all cases.
Active markets shorten the window of opportunity. A setup signal may trigger a strong reversal as
early as the next open under the right conditions. Risk increases when the pattern requires buying
the target price without confirmation and holding through a possible shakeout. But reward also
increases in this volatile environment because price can respond with a sharp rally. Decide quickly
to enter or stand aside before the opportunity disappears.
FIGURE 8.2
The dip trip may bounce to a new high or quickly reverse and roll over. Rallies typically correct through simple ABC
patterns before they gather enough strength to move higher. Profitable dips signal at the end of A and C waves. The B
wave eventually fails but can produce a profit if the swing trader exits at the first sign of danger. The impulse (1) that
follows the C wave may eject to a new high after overcoming resistance.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Slower markets offer greater entry precision. Build a strategy that relies on a longer holding period
to capture larger profits. Sit back and watch the price action very closely in anticipation of a
bounce. Once price reaches a buying target, shift attention to the next-lower time frame to confirm a
substantial reversal before considering a position. Less active conditions also offer cleaner escape
opportunities when trades go sour.

DIP STRATEGIES
Target low-risk entry through Fibonacci and other charting landscape features. Locate natural
pattern S/R that converges with key retracement percentages. For example, look for a reversal at a
prior high that also marks the 62% correction of the last rally. Always read the unique pattern of the
moment. Pullbacks should bounce at 38%, 50%, and 62% but often overshoot the mark before they
turn. One classic strategy aligns retracements through several time frames before execution at a
classic percentage (see the 38-62 in Applications). This 3D analysis seeks lower-risk entry with
fewer whipsaws.
Place a Fib grid across the rally to uncover natural pullback S/R. The second bottom of a double
bottom pattern often presents a better starting point than the actual low. Place more grids within
smaller time frames to examine detailed price behavior. These lines slowly enclose the ascending
major lows and final high. Look for primary retracement levels across different grid lengths to
converge. This results from the internal mathematics within trend movement.
A dip trip series can occur in sequence in a strongly trending market. These require remeasurement
and fresh analysis after each surge. Every trade must stand on its own merits, and some trend thrusts
will offer better reward:risk than others. Favor earlier trends before the market reaches an
overbought level, and keep the rule of alternation in mind. Congestion tends to alternate between
simple and complex patterns in dynamic trends.
Dip trips print in all time frames and trigger profitable intraday trades. A simple 5-minute bar chart
provides an effective framework to locate profitable dips. Broaden intraday setup analysis with
original methods. Common retracements of the first-hour range or 2-day range can signal excellent
dip trades. Try to align reversals through several time frames, but a single view will suffice if the
trade lasts only a few minutes. Remember that profitability increases when positions synchronize
with broader retracements and classic indicator settings.
Fibonacci works well on intraday dips, but expect more noise as holding periods shorten. A single
tick will throw off key retracement levels on short-term charts. Stick with liquid markets and more
powerful trends before looking at intraday Fibonacci. Then accept small violations at all levels and
use the tool for secondary reinforcement only after other pattern features point out promising
opportunities.
Watch the next morning closely after an active market reveals an encouraging signal. Major
bottoms often print within 45 minutes of the open. Follow-through selling tends to climax around
this time and lead to a short-term bottom pattern.
This will flag a low-risk entry if external conditions support the trade. Avoid buying a dip trip
during the final hour, especially if the stock sits near its low for the day. Wait until the next
morning, even if that means missing the opportunity.
The first test of a continuation gap marks an excellent bounce point. The market retraces from a
fifth-wave top all the way back to the middle of the third wave to reach the gap. Continuation gaps
rarely fill on the first try, and they raise the odds for a profitable dip trip. Consider execution even
when the gap fills as long as volume remains low through the selloff to the other side of the hole.
But less aggressive traders should reduce risk and stand aside until price remounts the gap. Real
broken gaps should telegraph their shock through high volume or a bearish Island reversal
formation (see Figure 11.8).

FIGURE 8.3
Sapient bounces off a 38%, 50%, and 62% retracement at the same time. Multiple trend legs coexist through individual
rallies. Use Fibonacci grids to isolate each separate wave and then look for converging retracement percentages to
predict major reversals that remain hidden from the crowd.
