ed him up for church. She decided he was a hick. He might be the head coach of the University of Tennessee but he didn’t have half the wit or charm of Nick Saban, not to mention his looks. (“I happen to think Nick Saban is a very good looking man.”) Seconds later Collins raced down the stairs, a giant pair of black slacks in hand, chased by Michael, in his underpants, hollering at the top of his lungs, “Give me my pants!” He caught her in the living room, tucked her under his arm as if she were a football, looked up, and saw the head coach of the University of Tennessee. If Fulmer was disturbed by the scene, he didn’t show it. “Michael wasn’t impressed by anyone who walked through our door,” said Collins. “He just thought: ‘Oh, here comes someone else I don’t want to talk to who’s trying to tell me why I need to go to their school.’” Now, airborne, she looked up at the Tennessee head football coach, said hello, and explained, “Michael is trying to wear black pants with his blue blazer to the awards ceremony. Tell him that doesn’t match.” Collins watched Fulmer stand there, uneasily. She assumed he was trying to decide if he should agree with Michael or tell the truth. He told the truth. It had no effect. Fulmer took Michael, in his black pants and blue blazer, away to the banquet, during which Michael had many pictures of his oddly dressed self taken by many newspapers. Afterwards, Fulmer insisted on driving him back home. This time when he and his entourage of assistant coaches walked through the door, Leigh Anne was waiting for them. Phil Fulmer may not have thought Miss Sue worthy of his attention but he quickly set about ingratiating himself with Leigh Anne. He didn’t notice her Windsor valances and draw drapes. He noticed the swimming pool. (“Y’all gotta pond! Ooooo, look at that pool out there.”) Then he started making promises, and there wasn’t much, it seemed to Leigh Anne, that the coach wouldn’t promise if it meant getting Michael Oher to play for the University of Tennessee. To allay her concerns that she knew absolutely no one in Knoxville, Tennessee, he offered the Fulmer guesthouse as a home away from home. To make her feel better about the fact that Michael might be too far away to get home for Thanksgiving, he suggested they all have Thanksgiving dinner together, at the Fulmers’. Every year! He couldn’t be nicer in his own hokey way, thought Leigh Anne, kind of like the Andy Griffith character in Mayberry R.F.D. He couldn’t have been phonier, thought Collins, who walked away and said, “That was just a lot of good ol’ country boy hoopla. He was blowing a lot of smoke up our butt.” Leigh Anne didn’t see the point of thinking ill of a football coach just trying his best to get what he most desperately wanted, but it did cross her mind that “the difference between Phil Fulmer and Nick Saban was the difference between dealing with the town mayor and dealing with the White House.” The town mayor, for a start, didn’t know when to leave. These visits usually lasted a couple of hours. It was ten o clock at night and neither Fulmer nor his retinue showed any signs of tiring. Finally Leigh Anne realized that he was waiting to have a word with the man of the house—so she got on the phone and told Sean to quit hiding and come home, so she could go to bed. While they waited, Sean Junior seized the moment to take the floor. “Can I ask my question?” he said. Maybe it was Coach Fulmer’s demotic southern manner, or maybe it was just that SJ was growing bolder with age and experience. But this time he put his question bluntly. “What I want to know,” he said, after explaining the access he’d been promised to various SEC football locker rooms, “is what’s in it for me?” “Locker room, hell,” boomed Fulmer. “You ever been to a UT football game, son?” He set the scene: one hundred and seven thousand people all dressed in orange and screaming at the top of their lungs. The band forming a capital T on the field before the game. The Tennessee football team bursting out of the locker room and running through the T, led by none other than Phil Fulmer. When he’d finished, he said: “First home game is on national television. It’s me and you running through the T, arm-in-arm.” “And I’ll have the other arm,” said his recruiting director, Trooper Taylor. “That’d be good,” said Sean Junior. And so it was that Sean Senior returned home to find in his living room a very self-satisfied Tennessee football coach. He knew that Fulmer knew that there were only three schools left standing: Ole Miss, LSU, and Tennessee. Ole Miss had just fired its coach, and LSU had just lost theirs to the Miami Dolphins. That left Fulmer as the last man standing. Fulmer gave Sean his pitch—“the minute Michael walks on campus he’s my starting left tackle”—and then told him, in the spirit of Grant consoling Lee, that he understood completely that such a prominent Ole Miss Rebel might have trouble watching his son become a Tennessee Volunteer. “Phil,” said Sean, “if Archie can sit in the Tennessee stands for four years, I can sit in the Tennessee stands for four years.” Archie was Archie Manning, the Ole Miss football legend whose son Peyton had just been named the MVP of the NFL. Before that he had spurned his father’s alma mater, Ole Miss, to go to Tennessee, where he had one of the greatest careers in the history of college quarterbacking. After Peyton announced he was going to Tennessee, the Manning family had death threats. Ten years later, there were still large numbers of Ole Miss alums with whom Archie Manning was no longer on speaking terms. Leigh Anne heard the exchange and said, “That’s fine. But I don’t look good in orange so I’m not wearing it.” With that, Phil Fulmer, his assistant coaches, and Hugh Freeze walked out the front door. Fulmer asked Michael to walk him to the car, and Michael—who never said no—walked him to the car. A minute became two minutes became three minutes. Sean turned to Leigh Anne and asked, “You think he’s telling Fulmer that he’s going to UT right now?” Leigh Anne didn’t even want to think about it. At length, Michael came back inside. “Did you commit to Tennessee?” asked Sean. Michael just looked at him, and walked upstairs and went to bed. Sean didn’t leave it at that, of course. He was perfectly happy to seem as if he had no control over the process; he wasn’t at all happy actually to have no control. He picked up the phone and called his friend, and Phil Fulmer’s agent, Jimmy Sexton. Fulmer had only been on the road five minutes and yet Sexton had already spoken to him. “I just hung up with Phil,” he said, “and Phil thinks he has him.” At that moment Sean decided to drop his pose of indifference. “If he thinks he’s going to Tennessee,” he said, “he’s not going to Tennessee. I’m going to get LSU back in here.” He couldn’t make Michael go to Ole Miss without crossing some kind of line he didn’t want to cross. But he had no official ties to LSU; there was nothing the slightest bit unethical about putting him on Air Taco to Baton Rouge. Sean was from Louisiana, knew people at LSU, and could control Michael’s experience there, in a way he could not at Tennessee. Hugh Freeze must have sensed Sean’s intent to upset his own best-laid plans. One night when it was just the two of them, Hugh finally broke and hollered at Sean: “Coach Tuohy, you got to let him go to Tennessee!” But until Michael declared his intentions, Sean would do nothing at all. And, left alone, Michael didn’t declare anything. “I know Michael better than anyone,” said Sean. “And I would look at him and say: what is going on in that head?” Michael flew off to San Antonio on Air Taco and played in Tom Lemming’s U.S. Army All-American game. Lemming invited him after Hugh Freeze called and told him “it was Michael’s lifelong dream to play in the Army all-star game,” and that the reason he hadn’t filled in the forms was that he was embarrassed by his penmanship. Sean thought Michael had fled his meeting with Lemming in haste because “he thought that to play he was going to have to join the Army.” Lemming didn’t actually believe any of this, but he had a last-minute need for someone to play center for the East squad. Michael had never played center in his life, but he did the job beautifully. After the game, Lemming forgot his dark suspicions of Michael’s character and declared in print that Michael Oher was far and away the nation’s finest offensive line prospect. At the all-star game, ESPN reporters poked microphones into the faces of the nation’s top prospects and asked them to declare their plans for college. Michael declined to answer. Two weeks later, Ole Miss found itself another head coach. With USC about to play for the national championship, the USC defensive line coach, Ed Orgeron, formally agreed to replace David Cutcliffe. He flew to Mississippi for the press conference, where he announced that his first order of business was to persuade Michael Oher to become an Ole Miss Rebel. The press conference began in Oxford at one in the afternoon; at five Coach O was marching through the Tuohys’ front door in Memphis. Memphis had never before seen or heard anything like him. This new coach had a neck that ran like a drainage pipe from his chin to his chest, and a chest that seemed to extend all the way down to his ankles. The ankles were thin and strangely feminine, and so the effect of the whole was of a great wooden barrel teetering on toothpicks. From the depths of the barrel emerged sounds so clotted and guttural that, when you first heard them, you did not recognize them as English, or, for that matter, human speech. “YAAAWWW BEEE BAAWWW!” Huh? “YAAAWWW BEEE BAAWWW!” That’s what he bellowed as he burst through the door and got his first look at Michael in the flesh: “YAAAWWW BEEE BAAWWW!” (“You a big boy!”) Then he gave Michael a huge bear hug, followed by the sales pitch. Michael listened to the hearty Cajun coach for a good thirty minutes, as he listened to the other coaches, only in Coach O’s case there was a twist: Michael couldn’t understand a word he said. He seemed to be saying something about being a really good recruiter, who planned to turn the Ole Miss football program around, but that he needed a star recruit like Michael Oher to kick-start the process. “It was scary,” said Michael later. “I never heard anything like that.” Leigh Anne, Collins, and Sean Junior were equally lost. Only Sean, who grew up in southeast Louisiana, could understand what Coach O was trying to say. “Coach O is pure one hundred percent coon-ass,” he explained, “and I grew up surrounded by coon-asses.” Still, as Michael never said anything to the coaches, or even signaled nonverbally his interest in what had been said, he was, in his way, Coach O’s ideal listener. He sat in silence and pretended to understand. When Coach O finally finished, Michael asked his first sincere, formal question of the entire five months’ recruiting process. “What,” he asked, “are you going to do for the kids that already committed to Ole Miss?” “My jaw about hit the floor,” said Collins, who had been fixing something in the kitchen. “Michael spoke!” Coach O sensed, shrewdly, that there was a right answer and a wrong answer to this. “Lemsday!” he bellowed. “Let them stay!” “That’s all I want to know,” said Michael. With that Coach O, who apparently had been forewarned, turned on Sean Junior, and beat him to the punch. “All right big boy what you got for me?” he boomed. “I know you got something.” Even SJ was startled: word traveled fast. Apparently Coach O had heard that if he wanted to dance with Michael Oher, he’d need to pay the little fiddler. SJ’s speech grew longer with each passing coach. He now explained that Ole Miss had initially offered a locker-room pass, but then LSU had topped that offer with the offer of not merely a locker-room pass but a locker. But then Coach Fulmer came along and tossed in his wild card: running with the team through the T in front of 107,000 screaming fans. When he was done, Coach O was ready to join the bidding war. “Son,” he said, in a grave tone. “First game of the season, you and Coach O will be walking through the Grove together.” “The Grove” was Ole Miss’s answer to the T. Before each home game, tens of thousands of Rebel fans did not so much gather as swarm. They ate and drank and prepared their bodies for the chemical jolt of an SEC football game. The pre-game ritual climaxed with the Ole Miss players marching along a narrow brick path through the Grove that led to the stadium, known, more than a little hopefully, as “The Walk of Champions.” The whole shebang was conducted in the spirit of an ancient rite, when it was in fact the brainchild of an Ole Miss football coach in the early 1980s. “That’d be good,” said Sean Junior. On the way out the door, Coach O, obviously anxious to know what sort of impression he had made on Michael, asked Sean, “Whataamoo baadaat kwestON?” (“What did he mean by that question?”) “He wanted to know what you are going to do about Justin,” said Sean. Justin was Justin Sparks, the Briarcrest placekicker and provider of jet transport to Michael, who was now planning on kicking for Ole Miss. Coach O signaled his relief with a smile and said, “Shaaa! Cudda tow me baaaa fo ahwak-n-heee.” (“Sean! You could have told me that before I walked in here.” ) “Don’t worry. You gave him the right answer.” Actually, Michael was after something more important than the fate of his Briarcrest teammate. “I wanted to see what type of person he was,” he said later. “If he’s pulling scholarships that they’d promised kids, would you want to play for that kind of person? Be around that kind of person?” Coach O wasn’t that kind of person, he decided; more interestingly, Coach O was the only coach who didn’t promise him he’d crack the starting lineup his freshman year. Michael decided Coach O was all right. The whole recruiting process had been interesting to Michael, in its way. It told him a lot about the people who had taken an interest in his future. His high school coach had used him to get himself a college football coaching job, and by the end he had taken to calling Hugh Freeze “The Snake.” After Hugh laughed about it—this was the way their world worked—the nickname stuck. Michael had put Sean in a position to pressure him if he wanted, and Sean hadn’t, at least not overtly. Leigh Anne and Miss Sue had pressured him plenty but for what seemed to him to be legitimate reasons—if he went too far away they couldn’t take care of him, and he needed a lot of taking care of. Sean Junior was the most nakedly ambitious, but Michael sort of enjoyed the boy’s naked ambition. “SJ worked it,” said Michael, laughing. “He had locker-room passes, trips through the T. If I’d a kept on, he’d a been playing on a team.” The Orange Bowl was the cherry on top of the process, at least for Sean Junior. The Tuohys went to the national championship game as a family, and Coach O had arranged for them to attend USC’s pre-game practice. While it was against NCAA rules for Coach O to so much as wink at Michael Oher, there was nothing that said his players couldn’t amuse Michael. At the end of the practice USC’s two biggest stars, quarterback Matt Leinert and running back Reggie Bush, along with the entire USC offensive line, came over to Michael, surrounded him, and offered fulsome praise of Coach O. As he eavesdropped on their banter, Sean Senior noticed a pair of shocking facts: (1) Michael was bigger than all the USC linemen; and (2) Sean Junior had somehow wormed his way into the scrum, and was sidling up to Reggie Bush. “Hey, Reggie,” Sean Junior was saying. The future Heisman Trophy winner looked down, obviously a little surprised. How did this little kid get in here? “Whazzup dawg?” said Reggie Bush. “You know, that’s my brother,” said SJ, pointing to Michael. “Oh really,” said Reggie Bush, perhaps thinking two words would suffice to abort a weird conversation. They didn’t. “Can I have your sweatbands?” said Sean Junior. On February 1, 2005, Michael Oher held a press conference to announce where he intended to go to college. He faced a bank of microphones and explained how he’d decided he’d go to Ole Miss, as that’s where his family had gone. To hear him talk, you’d have thought he’d descended from generations of Ole Miss Rebels. He answered a few questions from reporters, without actually saying anything, and then went home and waited for all hell to break loose. Up in Indianapolis, the NCAA was about to hear a rumor that white families in the South were going into the ghetto, seizing poor black kids, and adopting them, so that they might play football for their SEC alma maters. But it was still weeks before the NCAA investigator would turn up in the Tuohy living room. After his press conference, Michael had to attend to the important business of playing miniature basketball with Sean Junior. Up they went into SJ’s room, whose walls were a shrine to his father’s Ole Miss playing career: trophies, pictures, flags, newspaper articles. Over the bed was a beautifully framed basketball net, with bloodstains on its cords. This was the net Sean Senior had cut down on national television, right after he’d led Ole Miss to its first and only SEC Tournament Championship. The net said something that never would be put into words, about the relationship between Ole Miss and the Tuohys—that the school was less source of identity than foil. Sean was always the smallest man on the court, and he was forever taking cheap shots and rising bloodied from the floor. Blood dripped from his chin as he cut down the net, sullying and sanctifying his prize. The moment he’d come down from the rim, however, his coach had grabbed the net from him, and claimed it as the property of the University of Mississippi. Into the Ole Miss trophy case the net went. The next night Sean had gone out to a playground, cut down another net, broken into the Ole Miss trophy case, and swapped the net he’d stolen for the one he’d earned. “That’s my blood,” he said simply. “And so that’s my net.” Under the bloody net Sean Junior and Michael resumed their endless struggle for supremacy in miniature basketball. SJ was far less interested in old school ties than his private haul of booty. “I was hoping to go to LSU,” he said. “I had a locker and a field pass for the whole season.” Special access to the hallowed ground of SEC football, inside the T and the Grove, was nice, but it didn’t beat having his own locker in the locker room of the national champions. About Michael’s motives, or his thinking, SJ couldn’t have cared less. He never prodded him with the questions that obsessed the grown-ups, because they never occurred to him. But now he was, faintly, curious. “When d’you decide?” asked Sean Junior. “Back in September,” said Michael. As the wooing of Michael Oher had started, in earnest, in September and run all the way to February, a lot of other people’s valuable time had been wasted: all along Michael had known he was going to Ole Miss. “It was running across my mind to go to Tennessee, because everyone was saying I shouldn’t go to a place in transition,” he said. “But deep down inside I wanted to go to Ole Miss. It just felt like home.” It felt like home, of course, because home now felt a lot like Ole Miss. “But,” he now told the little boy he loved like a brother, “it was kind of cool having all those coaches around here.” “Uh-huh,” said Sean Junior, and promptly lost what little interest he’d had. The Blind Side (The Tuohy family) A photo of Michael Oher when he was around ten years old. The Blind Side (The Tuohy family) Michael (#50) going up for a basket during the Briarcrest versus U.S.J. game in 2003. The Blind Side (The Tuohy family) Michael during a Briarcrest Christian School game. The Blind Side (The Tuohy family) Michael leaving a game with Leigh Anne. The Blind Side (The Tuohy family) The Tuohy Christmas card (Sean Jr., Michael, and Collins). The Blind Side (The Tuohy family) Family lunch at the country club. The Blind Side (The Tuohy family) High-school graduation, May 2005. The Blind Side (The Tuohy family) Michael and Leigh Anne. The Blind Side (Ole Miss Athletics Media Relations) Michael (#74) playing during the Ole Miss-Kentucky game in 2005. The Blind Side (Photograph by Tabitha Soren) The Blind Side (Photograph by Neal Slavin) Michael’s freshman season playing for Ole Miss. The Blind Side (Photograph by Neal Slavin) Michael Oher and his lineup: (left to right) Big Tony Henderson; Collins Tuohy; Sean Tuohy Jr.; Hugh Freeze, Michael’s football coach at Briarcrest and now assistant coach at Ole Miss; Sue Mitchell, Michael’s tutor; Leigh Anne Tuohy; Sean Tuohy; and Steven Payne, one of Michael’s friends and Big Tony’s son. The Blind Side (Photograph by Tabitha Soren) The Blind Side (The Tuohy family) The Tuohy family on the Ole Miss football field. The Blind Side The Blind Side CHAPTER EIGHT The Blind Side CHARACTER COURSES “THIS IS JOYCE THOMPSON, assistant director of enforcement at the NCAA. Today’s date is March 30, 2005. And I am currently talking to prospective student-athlete Michael Oher. There are other individuals in the room at this time and I would like for them to state their names for the record.” “Sean Tuohy,” said Sean. So began the investigation of Michael Oher. Leigh Anne refused to participate, on the grounds that the whole thing was offensive. Collins was busy. Sean Junior failed to see the upside. But then, the upside was hard to see. Some college football coach, and quite possibly more than one college football coach, had gone to the NCAA and accused the Tuohys of abducting Michael and showering him with possessions in exchange for becoming the future left tackle of the Ole Miss Rebels. The NCAA had sent this lady to investigate. The lady was young, black, intelligent, childless, private school-educated, and with a manner and an accent that made her impossible to place as anything other than generically American. She had an off-the-rack professional quality about her, too, and if she didn’t make a good living shining a faint light on the shady dealings between high school football players and the college boosters who love them, she probably could have made a better one reading the news at any local television station in the country. She settled into one of Leigh Anne’s antique English chairs and took in her surroundings. On a cabinet behind her stood a framed copy of the page in USA Today on which Michael Oher had just been named a First Team High School All-American football player. Joyce Thompson politely explained that she had come to find out if Michael Oher had violated any NCAA regulations. If he had, and she could prove it, he could put aside his football career for a while. Then she switched on her tape recorder, and asked Michael for his name, address, phone number, and the names of the people with whom he lived. These he effortlessly supplied. It was the next question that tripped him up: “And who are your siblings?” “Collins Tuohy and Sean Junior,” said Michael. She was about to move on but Sean, unbidden, jumped in. “That’s his siblings here,” he said. “He’s got other siblings.” “And so who are your other siblings?” she asked. Michael looked at her. “Uh—name ’em all?” he said, as if she had asked him to recite the Kama Sutra in the original Sanskrit. Miss Joyce Thompson laughed. Yes, she said, could he please name them all. Michael sat with his hands folded in his lap—and now his fingers were extended. He was trying to count, without seeming to. It was humiliating not to be able to come out quickly with the names of his brothers and sisters, especially before this well-dressed, privately educated black lady from the NCAA. “Marcus Oher. Andre Oher, Deljuan Oher,” he blurted out. The lady scribbled as fast as she could to keep up. “Deljuan?” she asked. “Can you spell that?” “D…E…L…” the letters came slowly at first, then charged out of him in a wildly uncertain bull rush. “J-U-A-N?” “Okay,” she said, with a big smile. “Rico Oher,” he continued. “Okay,” she said. “Carlos,” he said. “Okay,” she said. “John,” he said. “Okay,” she said. He’d stopped. Still staring at his hands in his lap, he repeated: Marcus, Andre, Deljuan, Rico, Carlos, John. He sounded like a small child reciting the alphabet from the beginning in an attempt to propel his mind to whatever follows “G.” “All brothers?” asked the lady from the NCAA. Michael nodded and relaxed, and it was clear to Sean that he was going to seize on the finality in her voice to leave it at that. Marcus, Andre, Deljuan, Rico, Carlos, John. Sean didn’t know how many there were, but he knew there were more than those six. “No,” said Sean. “We’re not finished.” Michael thought. “Denise,” he said, finally. “Okay,” said the lady from the NCAA, uneasily, putting pen back to notepad. “Tyra,” said Michael. Or, perhaps, “Tara.” “Tyra?” asked the NCAA lady. “T-Y-R-A?” “Uhhhh…” He was unsure. “Yes,” he finally said. “Okay,” she said, then began to laugh. “Are these still Oher?” “Uhhhh—” said Michael, thinking for a moment. “Yes.” “He dudn’t know that,” said Sean. “Some are.” “Depthia,” added Michael. Sean watched Michael. He might not know the length of Michael’s bloodlines but he knew the depth of his anxiety. Confronted by alien authority figures, Michael froze. He was more likely to tell this woman what he thought she wanted to hear than the truth. “Depthia?” said the lady. “Can you spell that for me?” “D—” Michael starts, and then gave up. “No.” “Oher or Williams?” asked the lady—because she knew that Michael’s legal name was Michael Jerome Williams. “Oher.” “They can’t all be Oher!” said Sean. He knew that there were at least five different fathers. “It is Oher,” Michael insisted. Then he thought some more. “Marcus Young,” he said. “Okay,” said the NCAA lady. She was now shaking her head in wonder. “David Young,” said Michael. “Okay,” she said, scribbling away. “How many’s that?” asked Sean, with genuine curiosity. “Thirteen,” said the NCAA lady. “Thirteen?” asked Michael. It was as if he couldn’t imagine how she’d arrived at such an absurdly big number. Sean Senior took the list and handed it to Michael to study. Michael stared at this list for a very long time. As he did, the NCAA lady giggled nervously. Michael announced, “You put John down twice.” “So there’s two Marcuses?” she said, taking back her list. “Not two Johns?” That was right. Or so he said. It had taken ten minutes just to sort out the names of Michael’s brothers and sisters. And that would be the easiest piece of personal information for the NCAA investigator to extract from Michael Oher. “How did it come to be that—uh—you began living with the Tuohys?” she now asked. “Uh—” said Michael. “When I came to Briarcrest my tenth-grade year. Uh. Coach Tuohy was—uh—a volunteer coach…. And, uh, I met him there. I decided to live with him summer after my junior year. He talked to me all the time. He was in my situation.” “Okay,” said the lady, dubiously. “He didn’t have much growing up and I didn’t have much growing up,” said Michael. “Okay,” said the lady, even more dubiously. “It wasn’t the summer,” said Sean. “It was before your birthday. It was about March of 2004….But he lived here off and on all the way to then.” “Describe your living situation at the time,” said the lady. “Because when you say that, you know, that Mr. Tuohy was in your same situation, I don’t necessarily know what that means. So can you describe a little more about your situation?” “How he didn’t have a lot coming up,” said Michael. To which he added nothing. Her boss back in Indianapolis was an NCAA lifer named Dave Didion. Didion oversaw the investigations of the nation’s top football prospects, and said he very much enjoyed the work because “it’s like a jigsaw puzzle that comes in a box with no pictures on it.” This jigsaw puzzle was even more perplexing: the box came locked. When the NCAA investigator asked Michael when he had last seen his father, he said, “When I was about ten,” and left it at that. When she asked him why he didn’t live with his mother, he didn’t say anything at all. When she asked him who had paid his tuition at Briarcrest, he said he had no idea. When she asked him what he had done for food and clothing, his answer suggested he didn’t really need food or clothing. Exasperated, she asked Sean if perhaps he had bought clothes for Michael. To which Sean replied he’d bought him “maybe a T-shirt”—which might have been strictly true, as Leigh Anne did the shopping. Sean didn’t trust these people. They didn’t think in terms of right and wrong. All they cared about was keeping up appearances. The NCAA rules existed, in theory, to maintain the integrity of college athletics. These investigators were meant to act as a police department. In practice, they were more like the public relations wing of an inept fire department. They might not be the last people on earth to learn that some booster or coach had bribed some high school jock, but they weren’t usually the first either. Some scandal would be exposed in a local newspaper and they would go chasing after it, in an attempt to minimize the embarrassment to the system. They didn’t care how things were, only how they could be made to seem. A poor black football star inside the home of this rich white booster could be made to seem scandalous, and so here they were, bothering Michael. The lady said she was just trying to establish the facts of the case, but the facts didn’t describe the case. If the Tuohys were Ole Miss boosters—and they most certainly were—they had violated the letter of every NCAA rule ever written. They’d given Michael more than food, clothing, and shelter. They’d given him a life. It didn’t help that his new market value had already led Michael to become more cynical of the people around him. The point the NCAA lady was driving toward was now never very far from his mind: maybe these rich white folks had been so helpful to him the past two and a half years only because they had identified him as this precious asset. Case in point: his own high school coach. The Snake, who had been in quiet negotiations with Tennessee for a coaching job, had tried to talk him into going to Tennessee. Then right after Michael announced he was going to Ole Miss—and not Tennessee—The Snake announced that he, too, was going to Ole Miss. Coach O had offered him a job. Sean tried to explain to Michael that that was just how the world worked—that Hugh Freeze was born to coach football and Ole Miss was lucky to have him—but Michael reserved the right to dwell on the selfish motives of others. For his senior yearbook, he’d selected his quote, from a rap song, which he’d expurgated for Briarcrest Christian School consumption: “People ask me if I ever reach the top will I forget about them? So I ask people if I don’t reach the top will y’all forget about me?”* He didn’t go so far as to treat Leigh Anne with suspicion but, as Leigh Anne put it, “with me and Sean I can see him thinking, ‘If they found me lying in a gutter and I was going to be flipping burgers at McDonald’s, would they really have had an interest in me?’” The thing was, you never knew when these doubts would surface. When the NCAA lady finally quit bugging him about his clothes, she turned to the matter of his new pickup truck. (Who had told her about the truck?) She asked Michael if Sean had bought the truck for him as a reward for signing with Ole Miss. Sean had tried to cut her off at the pass, and treated the question as absurd. But Michael had just chuckled. “You mean, I’d a got a truck if I’d gone to Tennessee?” he asked Sean, right there in front of the NCAA investigator. He might have been joking. Then again, he might not have. The woman let that one go, or seemed to. Putting food, clothing, and transportation to one side, she moved on to shelter. Where, she asked, had Michael slept at night, both immediately before he had come to the Briarcrest Christian School, and immediately after? “At Tony Henderson’s,” said Michael. Big Tony. The man whose mother’s dying wish had led him to cart his son, and Michael Oher, out of the hood. Now, when Michael thought at all about Tony, he wondered why he was working so hard to stay friends with him. Once a week, it seemed, Tony reminded him of all he had done for him. “Did you live with Tony all the way from eighth-grade year to sophomore year—or were there stops in between?” she asked. “Stops in between,” he said. “And so tell me…” she began. “You ain’t got enough paper for this,” said Sean. “You tell me where you lived,” said the NCAA lady to Michael, ignoring Sean. “’Cause that’s what I’m going to ask you. Was it just different stops per night? Who would you be living with?” Michael began, haltingly, to list families, black and white, who had sheltered him during just the first year and a half at the Briarcrest Christian School. The lady took down the names, as she had taken down the names of his brothers and sisters, with growing incredulity. In how many different homes could one sixteen-year-old boy sleep? “This is a huge undertaking,” said Sean. “This is like an eighty-five-page document. This is a monstrous undertaking. It was a nomad existence.” “Okay,” she said, but to Michael, not Sean. “And that’s because of your limited resources growing up.” Michael didn’t say anything, just nodded. “That and because his mom was in and out of rehab centers constantly,” said Sean. “Is it safe to assume that you didn’t have a permanent address with your mom?” asked the NCAA lady. Michael nodded. The woman became even more curious: then where on earth had he lived before he stumbled so luckily into Big Tony’s house? How had he survived? Had he been homeless as a child? That’s when Michael mumbled something about “foster homes.” Sean was aware that Michael had had some contact with the foster home system but not because Michael had volunteered the information. Not long before, the Briarcrest football team had thrown a party for itself at the Chickasaw Country Club. The busboy had come by their table, spotted Michael, and nearly dropped his tray. Michael had jumped up and given the busboy a bear hug. Then they both began to weep. When Michael sat back down he explained, in a very few words, that they had been in a foster home together for a year, when he was around eight years old. Further details he declined to offer. The NCAA lady now wanted the answer to a question the Tuohys had never asked: how many foster homes had Michael been in? Michael sat there thinking to himself. “How many?” asked Sean. “Two? Three?” He was beginning to wonder why the NCAA needed to know all this stuff. “Um,” said Michael, finally. “Two, I think.” “And that’s here in Memphis?” asked the lady. Michael nodded. “I’m saying,” said Sean. “It’s a book.” Not a good one. Michael’s answers were as nourishing as a bag of stale potato chips, and as vexing as a Rubik’s Cube. The lady was now officially frustrated. She’d come all the way from Indianapolis to interrogate Michael Oher, but she was getting no answers from Michael Oher, and too many from this rich white Ole Miss booster whose roof, for some reason, Michael Oher lived under. She stared intently at Michael and said, “Michael, you have to talk to me.” It had no obvious effect. The most basic facts of his own life he either didn’t know or didn’t recall. She must have decided that Sean was the problem because when Sean tried to answer yet another question she’d directed at Michael, she turned on him and said, “I’ll interview you later.” She might as well have said, “Shut the hell up.” “I’m just concerned,” said Sean. “With Michael, you got to pull it out of him. And I’ll help you pull it out of him.” If Michael disagreed with this assessment, he didn’t let on. “Okay,” said the NCAA lady, wearily. For the next five hours the two of them tried, each in their own way, to coax from Michael Oher his personal history. This investigation obviously turned on the Tuohys’ motives, and his. To understand motives she needed to know, or thought she needed to know, the complete biography of Michael Oher. But the biography of Michael Oher was a slippery subject. Indeed, the more you questioned Michael, the more you understood that his answers depended on the way you’d phrased the question. Ask him how many foster homes he had lived in and he would say he wasn’t sure. Ask him if he had lived in two or three different foster homes, he would treat it as a multiple choice test, with two options, and would answer “two” or “three.” Ask him, instead, if he had lived in nine or ten different foster homes, and he would have said “nine” or “ten.” He treated the NCAA investigator as he treated everyone who asked him about himself: as an intrusion. To his one-word answers he would add nothing—not a scintilla of color commentary or new information. Five hours into the interrogation, at ten o’clock at night, Miss Sue arrived and announced that she and Michael needed to study for a test. At that moment, late in Michael’s senior year, his grades fell so short of the NCAA’s requirements that whatever crimes against college football recruiting this NCAA lady found him to have committed were irrelevant. He wouldn’t be allowed to attend Ole Miss on academic grounds. “But I’m not finished,” protested the NCAA lady. Sean asked how much more time she needed and she said, “At least five more hours.” Five more hours, both Sean and Miss Sue said, was exactly what Michael didn’t have, and wouldn’t have for many weeks. And with that, the NCAA investigator walked out the door and past the statue of Colonel Rebel in the Tuohys’ front yard. She’d be running this information by her superiors at the NCAA, she said. If they shared her dissatisfaction, she’d be back for more. When she was gone, Michael shed his stone face for a quivering one and went and found Leigh Anne. “That lady upset me,” he said, tears in his eyes. “I never want to talk to her again.” Leigh Anne’s head swiveled angrily until her eyes found Sean. “Don’t you let that lady back in this house,” she said, as if he had any control over the NCAA. And Sean thought: Chalk this down as another sleepless night. TO GET INTO THE NFL Michael Oher needed to first get into college, and to get into college he needed to meet the NCAA’s academic standards. The NCAA had a sliding scale of ACT scores and grade point averages; the higher the ACT, the lower the required GPA. Given Michael’s best ACT score (12), to play college football he would need a 2.65 overall GPA. He’d finished his sophomore year with a 0.9. A better performance the back end of his junior year, when he’d moved into the Tuohy home, had raised his cumulative average to 1.564. That’s when Leigh Anne took over more completely. Before Michael’s senior year, she called every teacher at Briarcrest and asked them to tell her exactly what Michael must do to earn at least a B in their class. She didn’t expect them to just hand Michael a grade—though she wouldn’t have complained if they did. But to her way of thinking a B was the fair minimum to give any normal person willing to take the simple steps. She would hound Michael until he took those steps. Just give me the list of things he needs to do, she told the teachers, and he will do them. And he did. Two days into his senior year he had come home, dropped his massive North Face book bag onto the kitchen table, and said, “I can’t do this.” Leigh Anne thought he was about to cry. The next morning she told him to suck it up and pushed him right back out the door. But that’s when Leigh Anne had brought in Sue Mitchell. As a tool for overhauling the grade point average of Michael Oher, as well as for broadening his experience of white people, Sue Mitchell had a number of things to recommend her. In her thirty-five-year career she had taught at several of the toughest Memphis public schools. At Bartlett High School, her final stop, she had taken over the cheerleading squad and whipped them into five-time national champions. She had applied to work at the Briarcrest Christian School, but Briarcrest had rejected her out of hand because, though Miss Sue said she believed in God, she had trouble proving it. (“The application did not have one question about education,” Miss Sue said. “It was all about religion, and what I thought about homosexuality and drinking and smoking.”) She hadn’t been Born Again, and she didn’t often go to church. She also advertised herself as a liberal. When Sean heard that, he hooted at her, “We had a black son before we had a Democrat friend!” Still, in spite of these presumed defects, Miss Sue was relentless and effusive—the sort of woman who wants everything to be just great between her and the rest of the world but, if it isn’t, can adjust and go to war. And that’s what she did. She worked five nights a week, four hours each night, for free, to help get Michael Oher into Ole Miss. The Tuohy family looked on with interest. “There were days when he was just overwhelmed,” said Collins, who saw the academic drama unfold both at school and at home. “He’d just close his book and say, ‘I’m done.’” When he did this, Miss Sue opened the book for him. She didn’t care about football, but she cared about Ole Miss football, and it gave her pleasure to think she was contributing, in her way, to the Lost Cause. She also, fairly quickly, became attached to Michael. There was just something about him that made you want to help him. He tried so hard, and for so little return. “One night it wasn’t going so well and I got frustrated,” she said, “and he said to me, ‘Miss Sue, you have to remember I’ve only been going to school for two years.’” His senior year he made all A’s and B’s. It nearly killed him, but he did it. The Briarcrest academic marathon, in which Michael had started out a distant last and instantly fallen further behind, came to a surprising end: in a class of 157 students, he finished 154th. He’d caught up to and passed three of his classmates. When Sean saw the final report card, he turned to Michael with a straight face and said, “You didn’t lose, you just ran out of time.” Then they both fell about laughing. He’d had a truly bizarre academic career: nothing but D’s and F’s until the end of his junior year, when all of a sudden he became a reliable member of Briarcrest’s honor roll. He was going to finish with a grade point average of 2.05. Yet, amazing as that was, it wasn’t enough to get him past the NCAA. He needed a 2.65. And with no more classes to take, he obviously would not get it. Now it was Sean’s turn to intervene. Watching him pore over the NCAA rule book searching for ways to raise Michael’s grades after grades had ceased to be given out called to mind a rich man’s accountants cracking the tax code. He approached American higher education with cold calculation and joyful cynicism. One of the lessons he had picked up from his own career as an NCAA student-athlete was that good enough grades were available to anyone who bothered to exploit the loopholes. When Sean first arrived at Ole Miss, he learned, just in time, that freshman English had flunked many a jock. He went looking for a loophole and quickly found one: Beginner’s Spanish. For some reason he didn’t care to know, Ole Miss allowed freshmen to substitute a foreign language for the serious English class. He’d had eight years of Spanish in school, so the returns were impressive: two A’s in Spanish without lifting a finger instead of the two D’s in English for which he’d have had actually to read books. Now Sean had been out of school for twenty-two years and so his grade-rigging skills were a bit rusty, but the skill for avoiding books was among the last to abandon the aging athlete. Plus he had help. Coach O was on board. Having completed his move from USC to Ole Miss, Coach O was now giving speeches to auditoriums filled with Ole Miss boosters. They didn’t understand a word he said, but he could still whip them up into a frenzy. At some point in every speech he’d say that every championship team had a rock on which it was built and the name of his rock was Michael Oher. From Coach O, Sean learned about the Internet courses offered by Brigham Young University. The BYU courses had magical properties: a grade took a mere ten days to obtain and could be used to replace a grade from an entire semester on a high school transcript. Pick the courses shrewdly and work quickly and the most tawdry academic record could be renovated in a single summer. Sean scanned the BYU catalogue and his eyes lit upon a promising series. It was called “Character Education.” All you had to do in one of these “Character Courses” was to read a few brief passages from famous works—a speech by Lou Gehrig here, a letter by Abraham Lincoln there—and then answer five questions about it. How hard could it be? The A’s earned from Character Courses could be used to replace F’s earned in high school English classes. And Michael never needed to leave the house! There was a hitch, of course; there was always a hitch. But like every great prestidigitator Sean knew that a hitch was also an opportunity. The BYU courses might be used to replace F’s on Michael Oher’s transcripts with A’s, but only if they were taken during the school year—and the school year was almost over. That’s when Sean discovered, deep in the recesses of the NCAA rules, yet another loophole: the student-athlete was allowed to generate fresh new grades for himself right up until August 1, so long as that student-athlete was “Learning Disabled.” Whatever that meant, thought Sean. He had no idea if Michael was actually learning-disabled, but now that it was important for him to be learning-disabled, Sean couldn’t imagine any decent human being trying to argue that he wasn’t. But just in case some dark soul wanted to make that case, Sean began to compose the rebuttal in his head. “He’s just got to be LD,” he said, as he flipped through the yellow pages of his mind looking for someone to provide him with the necessary paperwork. “It’s some brain disorder in most people, but in his case it’s ’cause he didn’t sleep in a bed for the first fifteen years of his life.” Of course he couldn’t just declare Michael learning-disabled himself: he needed a document signed by some pointy-headed shrink. Sean had no idea where to find such a person, and so he called the Briarcrest academic counselor, Linda Toombs, who came up with the name of a bona fide licensed psychological examiner—a woman named Jakatae Jessup. A few days later Sean wrote a big check to cover the cost of a battery of tests, and dropped both it and Michael at the front door of Jakatae Jessup’s office in East Memphis. Jakatae Jessup was white. She and her colleague, Julia Huckabee, also white, had no interest in God, or in football, or in the vast majority of East Memphis defined by both. They were, by Memphis standards, charming oddballs. “Krogerites,” they called themselves—and defined the term as people who shopped at the Krogers grocery store on Sunday mornings, while the rest of Memphis went to church. Most of the children they tested came referred by public or private school administrators. These kids would be dropped off right after school and stay for several hours, with a break for dinner, which, as a part of the deal, the psychologists supplied. When Michael came through their door to have his brain examined, they were shocked by the implications. “My first thought,” said Huckabee, “was that we’re not going to have enough money to feed him.” They gave him the Wechsler Intelligence Test, and then a series of achievement tests. They asked him what 1 plus 1 equaled. They showed him a picture of an apple and asked him what it was. They asked him to draw a picture of a house. (Michael later told Leigh Anne he thought they were testing him for insanity.) The holes in his mind were obvious enough. He was still working well below grade level. He would probably never read a book for pleasure. He’d never been taught phonics or, if he had, he’d been taught so badly that he might as well have not been taught at all. When a child knows the sound that goes with the letter, depending on its position in the word, and knows the sense of the word, depending on its position in the sentence, he can instinctively decode the language. A child who had been taught phonics can be given a nonsense word—“deprotonation,” for example, or “mibgus”—and still be able to pronounce it. Michael had no idea. “I don’t think he knows how to read yet,” said Jessup. “I think he’s just memorized a tremendous number of words.” When he sat down with a reading assignment, he was like a man with a partial combination trying to open a locked safe. Still, it didn’t take his testers long to see that the new subject was highly unusual. They saw lots of children with glitches in their hard wiring, but they’d never seen anyone like Michael. He was eighteen years old, and he obviously hadn’t learned very much—yet he had both the ability and the desire to learn. “You can watch somebody taking an IQ test and see how they learn from experience,” said Jessup. “They get a problem, then a slightly harder version of the problem, and they can apply what they learned from the first problem to the second. Michael learned something from every single thing I put in front of him.” Reptile eggs look a lot like bird eggs. Some are____while others are oblong. Michael knew the answer—“round”—but he wanted them to confirm it for him. “You’re not supposed to tell a kid whether he’s right or not,” said Jessup, “but it was life or death for Michael. And it was clear we weren’t going to go on until I wrote it down. I’ve never seen kids this old still absorbing knowledge the way he is. You see it in seven-year-olds.” At the age of sixteen, when he arrived at Briarcrest, Michael could still have been taught phonics. He wasn’t, the psychologists surmised, because he had worked very hard to disguise his grotesque deficiencies from his teachers. “He was not letting people at Briarcrest know what he could or couldn’t do,” said Jessup. “Only Michael knew that there was a big gap between where he was and where he was perceived to be.” Fearing that he wouldn’t be given the chance to catch up on the sly—that he’d be outed as stupid—he was faking it, and hoping no one noticed. But he wasn’t stupid. Far from it. “He’s great if there is any context at all,” said Jessup. “He can figure it out. He just needs a basic literacy program to decode words.” But that’s not what most interested his intelligence testers. Michael Oher had been tested, and more than once, as a child. Those tests had pegged his IQ at 80. Now the two psychological examiners established that his IQ was currently somewhere between 100 and 110—which is to say that he was no more or less innately intelligent than most of the kids in his class at Briarcrest. The mind described by the new IQ test was not recognizably the same mind that had been tested five years earlier. “I compare it to photographs,” said Jessup. “If you put Michael then side by side with Michael now, you would not be able to recognize these two people as the same.” That wasn’t supposed to happen: IQ was meant to be a given, like the size of one’s feet. It wasn’t as simple as that, of course, but Jessup had never seen such concrete evidence of the absurdity of treating intelligence as a fixed quantity. “We speak of fluid and crystallized intelligence,” she said. “Fluid is your ability to respond on the spot to a situation. Crystallized is what you’ve picked up along the way. The two are obviously related—how can you respond if you have no experience? When they tested Michael in the Memphis City Schools he was probably already deficient—both of those things had become compromised. He had so little experience. Then he had this rich drowning in experience that fed both of those.” Neither she nor her partner had ever seen anything like it, and they’d both been administering these sorts of tests for twenty years. She knew the literature and so she knew that studies of the effects of environment and nurture on mental development tend to create two study groups, the haves and the have-nots. “The have-nots learn whatever words they happen to hear on TV, the haves hear a million different words by the age of three,” said Jessup. “But you only get to compare the two groups. You almost never see a case where the subject moves from one group to the other.” Those low IQ scores Michael generated as a child, they guessed, were caused by his encountering, inside the problems, a hole in his experience, and then simply giving up. Problems on the page, he’d come to assume, were problems beyond his ability to solve. “What they [Briarcrest] taught Michael was not just reading and writing and math,” said Jessup. “They taught him how to solve problems and how to learn. He stopped giving up.” When she’d finished the testing, Jessup called Sean Tuohy. She wanted to see him in person; what she had to say was too interesting to relate over the phone. She drove to the Tuohy home and delivered a fairly long lecture to which Sean listened politely. (“I understood about two words she said,” he noted later.) When Jakatae Jessup was done, he had only one question for her. “Is this going to get me by the NCAA, or not?” he asked. It was. If Michael’s IQ really was as low as advertised, Jessup explained, he wouldn’t have been classified as learning-disabled: he was just learning as well as his brain would allow. Now that he was established to have greater capacities, his problems could only be interpreted as a disability. Michael, to everyone’s delight, was certifiably LD. THUS BEGAN THE great Mormon grade-grab. Mainly it involved Miss Sue grinding through the Character Courses with Michael. Every week or so they replaced a Memphis public school F with a BYU A. Every assignment needed to be read aloud, and decoded. Here he was, late in his senior year in high school, and he’d never heard of a right angle, or the Civil War, or I Love Lucy. But getting the grades was far easier than generating in Michael any sort of pleasure in learning. When Briarcrest had given him a list of choices of books to write a report on, Miss Sue, thinking it might spark Michael’s interest, picked Great Expectations. “Because of the character of Pip,” she said. “He was poor and an orphan. And someone sort of found him. I just thought Michael might be able to relate.” He couldn’t. Pygmalion came next. Again, he hadn’t the faintest interest in the thing. They got through it by performing the work aloud, with Michael assigned to the role of Freddie. “He does wonderful memory work,” said Miss Sue. “It’s a survival technique. You can give him anything and he’ll memorize it.” But that’s all he did. Engaging with the material in any deeper way seemed impossible. He was as isolated from the great works of Western literature as he was from other people. “If you asked him why we’re doing all this,” she said, “he’d say, ‘I got to do it to get to the league.’” It was always work, and so it was always tiring, and every now and again Miss Sue needed a break. One night the Detroit Pistons were playing the San Antonio Spurs in the NBA finals, and Michael insisted on watching the game out of one eye. With the other eye he watched Miss Sue, and some book. If he wasn’t going to take any more interest than that, she thought, why should she? That’s when Sean came through the door. Miss Sue handed Sean the reading assignment—Character Education I, Lesson II—and went to stretch out on the Tuohys’ sofa. The text was “The Charge of the Light Brigade.” That Sean Tuohy would know a poem was as likely as Sylvia Plath hitting a jump shot at the buzzer, but Sean knew “The Charge of the Light Brigade.” He hadn’t seen it in twenty years but he still could nearly recite it by heart. He grabbed the sheet, got between Michael and the NBA finals, and said, “You ready, Bubba?” Then he boomed: Half a league, half a league, Half a league onward, All in the valley of Death Rode the six hundred. “Forward the Light Brigade!” “Charge for the guns!” he said: Into the valley of Death Rode the six hundred. Rather than stop to explain, he raced on to the next, his favorite verse: “Forward, the Light Brigade!” Was there a man dismay’d? Not tho’ the soldier knew Someone had blunder’d: Their’s not to make reply, Their’s not to reason why, Their’s but to do and die: Into the valley of Death Rode the six hundred… Now he realized he should give Michael a bit of help. “You know Death Valley at LSU?” he asked. “Death Valley” is what LSU football fans had nicknamed the LSU football stadium. Michael had visited Death Valley. Now he was planning to ride into it, on the opposing team’s bus. “Well, this is where it comes from,” said Sean. “This guy,” he said, waving the work of Alfred, Lord Tennyson, “is writing about Ole Miss–LSU.” “The Charge of the Light Brigade” was now a football story, and Sean read it all the way through. Performed it, really. Then he read it again, more slowly. In his crackly North Mississippi–West Tennessee baritone, its sounds couldn’t have been much less stately than the sounds Tennyson heard as he wrote: Cannon to right of them Cannon to left of them, Cannon in front of them Volley’d and thunder’d… He stopped again and asked: “So where are they now?” He compelled Michael to imagine the valley, and the surrounding artillery. Prostrate in the adjoining room, Miss Sue saw Michael’s body language change. He usually leaned away from the lesson; this time he was leaning toward it. “Michael holds back so many things,” she said. “Even his interest.” For the first time since she met him, she could sense that he was conceding an interest. In a poem! She knew that he absorbed only what he could visualize. She thought: Sean is making him SEE the poem. Sean charged on. Toward the end, Michael tried to stop him. Twice he asked, “Did they all die?” “Did they all die?” But Sean kept booming on, right through to the final stanza: When can their glory fade? O the wild charge they made! All the world wondered. Honor the charge they made! Honor the Light Brigade, Noble six hundred! “They’re all going to die?” asked Michael, when it was over. “They’re all going to die,” said Sean. Michael leaned over and switched off the NBA finals. “What’s a league?” he asked. Sean actually didn’t know. Obviously, though not to Michael, a league was a unit of distance. Fortunately, BYU kept a crib sheet on line and Sean went to the computer and pulled it up. They went through the poem and replaced several of what Sean conceded were “goofy words”—league, blunder’d, battery, shatter’d and sunder’d—with words Michael knew. “Saber” was the exception. Michael didn’t know what a saber was but when Sean explained, “it’s a big long-ass sword, bigger than the knives you used in the hood,” they agreed to let Tennyson keep it. Then Sean read it again. Half a mile, half a mile, Half a mile onward… After the second reading Michael said, “Why would anybody do that?” “The point is that this is about courage,” said Sean. “But they’re going to all get killed!” he said. “And you honor that,” said Sean, “because they used courage, even if it was dumb.” From the next room Miss Sue hollered, “Michael Oher, if there’s a war broke out, you head straight to Canada! Do you hear me?” If Michael heard her he didn’t show it. “And sometimes courage is dumb,” said Sean. “What they are saying is not that it’s right or wrong. What they are saying is that it’s not for us to question the coach. If you’re the left tackle and the coach tells you to block the whole other team, you do it first, and you ask questions later.” “Why didn’t we read any great poems like that at Briarcrest?” asked Michael. And Sean thought: You did. But it didn’t mean anything to you, because they took it for granted that you knew what a saber was. “Let’s read it again,” said Michael. NEARLY A MONTH after her first visit, Miss Joyce Thompson from the NCAA returned. This time she arrived early and found Michael at home alone. They sat together uncomfortably. She started to explain all over again the purpose of her visit—there were these rules forbidding people affiliated with college football programs doing any favors for big-time high school football players, etc.—when Michael interjected. “I should be paid,” he said. She laughed, but nervously. “They’re making all this money off football,” he said. “Why shouldn’t they pay the players?” She treated it as a silly question. It wasn’t. The reason the NCAA needed investigators roaming the country to ensure that college football teams, and their boosters, weren’t giving money or food or clothing or shelter or succor of any sort to the nation’s best high school football players is that the nation’s best high school football players were worth a lot more to the colleges than the tuition, room, and board they were allowed to pay them. The NCAA rules had created a black market—and done for high school football players what the Soviet police had once done for Levi’s blue jeans. A market doesn’t simply shut down when its goods become contraband. It just becomes more profitable for the people willing to operate in it. There were a number of colleges—and Ole Miss was one of them—for which the expropriation of the market value of pre-professional football players was something very like a core business. Whether NCAA investigators impeded, or enabled, this state of affairs was an open question. Michael, newly alert to his own market value, had wondered about that: if he was allowed to auction his services in the 2004 market for college football players, how much, exactly, would they have paid him? The going black market rate for a Memphis high school superstar five years earlier appeared to have been around $150,000. One hundred fifty grand is what the University of Alabama booster Logan Young paid to the high school coaches of Albert Means, in exchange for persuading him to play for the Crimson Tide. Who knows what the University of Alabama might have paid if it could have cut a deal with Means directly? At any rate, in 2004, one hundred fifty grand sounded almost quaint. But the NCAA lady didn’t want to engage Michael on the subject. If there wasn’t a principle to prevent rich college boosters from feeding, clothing, and educating black inner-city football players, the NCAA investigative unit would be out of business. She went back to trying to determine which rich white person had given what to Michael Oher. Before she got very far, one of those rich white people came through the side door. He wasn’t happy to see her. The first time the NCAA lady had walked into his living room, Sean Tuohy had been all false bonhomie. He’d held out his pleasantness the way a trainer, faced with an ill-tempered horse, might hold out a carrot, with the clear implication that it could always be withdrawn. Now it was. As Joyce Thompson, NCAA investigator, switched on her tape recorder and asked the very same questions he had already spent five hours answering, Sean began to redden. “Michael,” she asked. “Who took care of your basic needs?” She went over the same questions: food, clothing, shelter, the truck. What about spending money? She had no more luck getting satisfying answers out of Michael this time than she had the last. But this time she had a Plan B. If he wasn’t going to talk to her about who gave him what, she was going to press him about his grades. She’d seen his transcripts: how did he intend to get himself academically qualified? Michael didn’t know, but Sean told her that they had just started the BYU program of correspondence courses. “Can you tell me how you’re doing it?” she asked. Sean offered a basic summary, and then disclaimed any more detailed knowledge. The great Mormon grade-grab was being managed by Michael’s tutor, Miss Sue. “Do you take the test on the computer?” the lady asked Michael. “In a book?” Once again Michael didn’t answer. Sean did. And what followed sounded like a courtroom exchange. Sean: I have no idea. You’d have to ask her [Miss Sue]. She’s doing it. NCAA Lady: But Michael’s taking the class! Sean: I have no idea, and I know he doesn’t either. She’s conducting it, so you’d have to ask her. NCAA Lady: That wasn’t explained? Or you don’t know how that’s done? Whether or not you take a lesson, you grade it, you hand it in? Sean: No! I mean I think I was clear: I’m not being flippant. I don’t know. And neither does he. We’ll find out for you. And you can keep asking. NCAA Lady: It just surprises me. Sean (hollering): Well, it can surprise you. But we don’t know. NCAA Lady: You don’t know what core subjects they are going to be in? Sean: There’ll be an English and a math. Michael: Depends on how the ACT turned out. That was another loophole Sean had found. Now that Michael had been certified as learning-disabled, he was allowed to retake the ACT tests as many times as he wanted, with Miss Sue on hand to help him parse the questions. That’d be worth a few extra points, and a few extra points on the ACT meant fewer needed on the GPA. “Okay,” said the NCAA lady, obviously hoping to encourage Michael, and not Sean, to elaborate. He didn’t. “I figure when I get to the second course, I’ll look for the third one,” said Sean. “And when I get to the third one, I’ll look for the fourth one.” NCAA Lady: Okay. Sean: What’s wrong with that answer? You rolled your eyes. Let me tell you now: that’s really rude. To look at me and roll your eyes like I don’t know what I’m talking about. Or that I’m trying to mislead you. NCAA Lady: All right. Now may I answer you? Sean: Absolutely. NCAA Lady: It’s not that— Sean: And I won’t roll my eyes and accuse you of anything! NCAA Lady: First of all, I’m not accusing you of anything. Sean: It’s the body language I’m getting. NCAA Lady: Can I finish my statement? Sean: Sure! She then explained how surprised she was that Sean didn’t know the details of the BYU study program, given how he seemed to have calculated every other angle on the court. How could he not know, for example, even the subject matter of these courses? “It could be one of nine different courses,” shouted Sean, brandishing a copy of Michael’s high school transcripts. “He’s still got eight F’s on here.” Which brought them to the nub of the NCAA lady’s displeasure. She must have been feeling like a Keystone Kop. She didn’t understand these BYU courses. She didn’t know exactly what Michael was doing to get himself academically up to snuff. She remained unclear who had given what to Michael, and when, so she had no real idea exactly how many of their rules against booster graft had been violated. All that was bad enough. But what really bothered her was that Michael wasn’t talking. “This is the interview for Michael,” she said to Sean. “And like last time you’re doing most of the talking. And I need to hear from Michael.” “Well,” said Sean, as if she’d just made the world’s most preposterous demand. “He doesn’t know.” NCAA Lady: Well, if that’s the case, say, “I don’t know.” Sean: He said he didn’t know. NCAA Lady: But you’re still answering all his questions! Sean: He said he didn’t know. And so I did my best to answer it for you and you just didn’t like the answer. NCAA Lady (now staring straight through Michael): Well…I’m just trying to make sure that you don’t know. Sean: What part of “I don’t know” fooled you? NCAA Lady: That you’re his legal guardian and you don’t know if he’s supposed to take English or math or science. That’s the part that still baffles me. Sean: Ma’am, I hate that it baffles you. But all you asked me to be is truthful. You didn’t ask me to be smart. It was then that Michael’s face broke into a smile. More than a smile. When he registered what Pops had just said, he let loose this wheezing laugh…heh…heh…heh…heh. He sounded just like Muttley, the cartoon character, sidekick to Dick Dastardly. Michael Oher might never be sure of Sean Tuohy’s deeper motives. But he could be sure of this: Pops was funny! Michael watched with something like amusement as Sean and the NCAA lady sparred for the next few hours. The NCAA lady did what she could to remain calm and polite and retain the high ground while Sean yelled at her and turned red in the face and hurled abuse from the ground below. (He kept calling the NCAA “The Evil Empire.”) The NCAA lady asked some detailed question, and one of two things followed. Either Michael supplied an unsatisfying answer or Sean hollered at her. Finally, the NCAA lady gave up, and let Michael go off to get another A in some course he couldn’t even describe. Once Michael was gone, the blood drained out of Sean’s face. Out came the carrot. He apologized for being so upset, but said she had to understand that Michael had found the first round of questioning very disturbing. He felt he had failed Michael, he said, by letting her grill him like that. As he spoke, the NCAA lady studied him. “Nothing was promised to you or your family?” she asked. “Me?” said Sean. “I don’t need anything.” His arms were extended in a way that said—Behold! Do you not see the million-dollar house gorgeously appointed with hundreds of thousands of dollars in furnishings? Did you somehow miss the five cars in the driveway? The BMW? Do I need to call my pilots and order Air Taco to buzz NCAA headquarters? Sean made this one point—that both he and Michael were too rich to be bought—several times. Once, after the NCAA lady had asked Michael if any Ole Miss boosters had given him any money to go to Ole Miss, Sean had said, “Ma’am, he’s richer than any Ole Miss boosters.” Sean Tuohy was up from nothing and now he had done so well for himself and his family that no one could give him anything he couldn’t buy. He’d lived his life to be able to say that. “Well, I know that” the NCAA lady said. Then she laughed, and relaxed. “But I just have to ask the question.” For the first time, she seemed human. Girlish, even. She ceased to be an investigator from the NCAA and became a woman named Joyce Thompson. And Joyce Thompson was genuinely curious about this domestic situation. A poor black giant monosyllab of the Memphis ghetto comes to live with, and apparently be loved by, a rich white right-wing family on the other side of town: how did that happen? She offered to turn off her tape recorder—Sean told her he didn’t care if she left it on—and then set about satisfying her honest curiosity. Joyce: Is he normally quiet like that? Sean: When I met him that was talkative. Joyce: How many times would you say he was here? Sean: Hundreds. It was an open door to him. Joyce: Did he just show up? Sean: A lot of times he’d just show up. She took that in. Joyce: How did you two ever meet? Sean: I told him I was Collins’s daddy. That’s how I introduced myself to him. Joyce: Did he open up to you? Sean: No. Gosh no. I barely got his name out of him. Joyce: And so at some point he came over here and he spent the night. When’s the first time he spent the night? Sean: I don’t know. Sometime during that basketball season…. This sounds bad but he was probably left at school one day, and I happened to be there. She asked about Michael’s childhood, and he told her how little they still knew of it. They talked about the problems of parenting. She confessed that she didn’t know them firsthand. But she wondered how any mother could let her child wander the world looking for a bed without caring to know where he wound up. She wondered why on earth a rich white happy family in East Memphis would go to all this trouble for some poor black kid. And, finally, she wondered how Sean now felt about the experience. That final piece of curiosity led Sean to think aloud about the implications for his family of Michael Oher. “It’s ruined us,” he said. “Because so far as I can see, there’s no downside. We can’t look at a kid who’s in trouble now without asking, ‘If we had him, could we turn him around?’ So what do we do when he leaves? Do we do it again?” It was then that Joyce Thompson vanished and out came the NCAA investigator, with barely disguised shock. “Have you thought about doing this again?” she asked. THERE WAS ONE final piece of unfinished business in Michael Oher’s Briarcrest career. The senior yearbook picture was due, and Michael didn’t have one. It was a Briarcrest tradition for every senior to have his baby picture in the annual. Her lack of a baby picture for Michael drove Leigh Anne to distraction. “You don’t want to be the only senior who doesn’t have a baby picture in the annual!” she said. She had made Michael give her the name of the foster home he admitted to having lived in when he was eight years old. She called the foster mother, who sounded vague; at any rate, she had nothing on him. She went down to his biological mother’s apartment and harassed her for pictures. Finally, she had come upon a single shot, taken by an employee of Memphis Children’s Services, when Michael was about ten years old. She had come home with it and given it to Michael. Michael had looked at it and exclaimed, “Mama, that’s me!” “That sure is you!” she said. Then he’d taken it into the den and stared at it for fifteen minutes. But the picture didn’t solve the problem. It wasn’t a baby picture. One night Leigh Anne had an idea. She flipped on her computer and went online and found, as she put it, “the cutest picture of a little black baby I could find.” She downloaded the stranger’s photo, and sent it in to Briarcrest. Briarcrest held its graduation ceremony in a church. The Tuohys were all in the audience, of course, and they had brought Miss Sue with them. Steve Simpson was there and so was Jennifer Graves, who said she’d never seen anyone work so hard for a piece of paper as Big Mike had worked to get his Briarcrest diploma. Big Tony was on hand—even though his son, Steven, wouldn’t graduate until the following year. In spite of Big Tony’s efforts to coax her out of her apartment, Michael’s mother didn’t make it. Dee Dee had told Big Tony that she wanted to see her son graduate from high school, as no one in her entire family ever had gotten past the tenth grade. Big Tony had arranged to pick her up that morning. But when he got to Dee Dee’s apartment he found the lights out and the door locked. He thought he heard someone inside, but whoever it was refused to answer. The Briarcrest president gave a long speech filled with many words of warning to the graduating class. He explained that when they left Briarcrest and went out into the world, they would encounter “all kinds of groups that claim some kind of privilege based on their lifestyles or perversions.” (There was no need to say “gay” they knew all about sodomy.) He spoke sternly about the danger of “seeking false happiness in a variety of narcissistic pleasures.” After that final jolt of fear from God, the graduates were called down from their tiered seats at the back of the stage to collect their reward. Steve Simpson called their names, one by one; one by one they filed down. Michael wasn’t called down until nearly the end. He sat waiting on the top tier, upper lip tucked beneath lower, either choking back his emotion or settling his nerves. “Michael Jerome Oher,” said Steve Simpson, and smiled. The crowd had been told not to cheer for individuals, but a few people just had to break the rules. Miss Sue cried. Leigh Anne hooted and laughed and clapped. Collins was graduating too, but there was never any doubt Collins would graduate. It was Michael that was the news on this day. “He’s so fired up,” she said, as she watched him amble down, trying to keep his little scholar’s cap from falling off. Sean smiled too, but Sean was paying closer attention to the small group of underclassmen in formal wear gathering on the side of the stage. The Briarcrest Choir. One of the kids, a whey-faced doughboy, was twice as large as the others. “You see that big guy in the middle,” said Sean. “That might be Michael’s replacement at left tackle. That’s not comforting, that he sings in the choir.” The NCAA needed its proof of Michael’s new and improved grade point average by August 1. On July 29 Michael took his final BYU test—another Character Course. Sean sent the test to Utah by Federal Express, and the BYU people promised to have the grade ready by two o’clock the following afternoon. “The Mormons may be going to hell,” said Sean. “But they really are nice people.” With Michael’s final A in hand, Sean rushed the full package to the NCAA’s offices in Indianapolis. The NCAA promptly lost it. Sean threatened to fly up on his plane with another copy and sit in the lobby until they processed it—which led the NCAA to find Michael’s file. On August 1, 2005, the NCAA informed Michael Oher that he was going to be allowed to go to college, and play football. Now came the time to figure out what that meant for his football career. In big-time college football it was highly unusual for a freshman to walk onto campus and start playing. And, when the freshman was an offensive lineman, it was almost unheard of. The offensive line had the most intellectually demanding jobs on the field, apart from the quarterback. Even the best ones expected to spend a season practicing with the team, learning the plays, but not actually playing in the games. In return, they were granted by the NCAA an extra year of eligibility. But Coach O wasn’t having any of this. He called Sean and told him (a) that Michael was already his best lineman, and (b) that Michael was such a high-profile recruit he needed to become a kind of shop window for future high-profile recruits. Michael would have to start for the Ole Miss Rebels his freshman year. Sean drove down to Ole Miss to have a word with Coach O. He didn’t think he could talk him out of sticking Michael in the starting lineup, and he wasn’t sure he wanted to anyway. He thought it would be good for Michael to see right away what he was up against—to learn that natural ability might not be enough to “get to the league.” But he worried that Coach O might not fully understand what a challenge big-time football would be for Michael. Michael had just turned nineteen. He’d never lifted weights or trained for football in the way that serious football players usually do. He hadn’t had the time. He had played fifteen games in high school on the offensive line. In less than a month, he’d be starting in the SEC, across the line of scrimmage from grown men of twenty-two who had spent the past four years majoring in football, and were just six months away from being drafted to play in the NFL. As these beasts came after him, he’d need to think on his feet. Coach O wasn’t one for sitting behind a desk. When he had people into his office at Ole Miss, he’d install them on his long black leather sofa while he marched back and forth, giving pep talks. The subject of Michael Oher brought out the student in him; when Sean came, he sat behind a desk. Coach O actually had a yellow pad to write on. He didn’t get up. He didn’t answer the phone. He took three pages of notes. The two of them talked about many aspects of Michael Oher, but eventually Sean got around to his mental development. Michael’s mind, Sean said, “is like a house built on sand. He doesn’t know what ‘agenda’ means, but he knows eight thousand more complicated words.” Sean didn’t worry all that much about Michael’s schoolwork, as he planned to ship Miss Sue down to Oxford with him; Miss Sue could take care of Michael’s grades. What he was worried about was Michael’s ability to understand football plays. “Michael can read,” he said, “but it just doesn’t register very well. If you give him a play book filled with X’s and O’s, he’ll say, ‘Yeah, I get it.’ Then he’ll run on the field and won’t have any idea what he’s supposed to do. If you think you can just put it on a chalkboard and he’s going to know the play, it’s not going to happen. But if you take him aside and explain it to him using mustard bottles and ketchup bottles—some visual aide that enables him to see it—not only will he remember it, he’ll remember it for the rest of his life.” “This is very important,” said Coach O, scribbling notes. “Coach,” said Sean. “My faith believes that the Lord sends down gifts for everyone and our job is to find those gifts. Michael’s gift is the gift of memory. When he knows it, he knows it.” Coach O stopped scribbling and looked up. “I’m going to tell you one thing, Sean,” he bellowed. “He’s got some pretty good fucking feet, too. You seen them feet? Now them feet: that’s a fucking gift!” The Blind Side The Blind Side CHAPTER NINE The Blind Side BIRTH OF A STAR THE REDBRICK MONSTROSITY rises from a hollow beside a quiet road in the Buckhead section of Atlanta. To call it a home would be to give the wrong impression. It’s less a shelter than a statement: the long sweeping driveway, the lawn that could double as a putting green, the giant white columns, the smooth stone porch inscribed with greetings in Latin. Through the leaded glass windows can be glimpsed sleek marble floors leading to a grand staircase lit by chandeliers with enough wattage to illuminate an opera house. It’s the sort of place where the door really should be answered by an English butler, but Steve Wallace answers his own door. He wears shorts, T-shirt, and sandals, and has the pleasantly surprised air of a man who has just woken up from a dream that he is rich only to discover that he’s actually rich. The only thing that the home and its owner have in common is that they are both huge. He walks across his great stone porch and onto his lawn to adjust the sprinkler. He limps; but they all limp. One nasty scar runs down his right knee and another lines his left ankle. Former NFL linemen age painfully and die young. No life insurance salesman in his right mind sells them coverage at the usual rates. Hard as it is to believe now—as he returns to his mansion and passes through its stone halls toward the magnificent den with its elaborate audiovisual system—there was a time when Steve Wallace worried about such financial trivia as life insurance. He worried about making a living. He wasn’t born with money; all he knew how to do was block, and in 1986, when he started his NFL career, blockers didn’t get paid much. His first contract guaranteed him $90,000 a year, which was pretty good, but he wasn’t sure how long it would last. He sat on the bench, and waited, without knowing exactly what he was waiting for. It turned out he was waiting for Bubba Paris to eat himself out of a job. After the 49ers won their first Super Bowl, in 1982, Bill Walsh had used his first draft choice to select Paris. Bubba was meant to be the final solution to Walsh’s biggest problem, the need to protect Joe Montana’s blind side. “At three hundred pounds or less,” said Walsh, “Bubba would have been a Hall of Fame left tackle. He was quick, active, bright, and he had a mean streak.” Bubba also had a history of putting on weight, but, as Walsh said, “we felt we could deal with that. And we did. Briefly.” Walsh fined Bubba for being overweight. He inserted clauses in Bubba’s contracts that paid him bonuses for showing up for work under 300 pounds. He sent Bubba to Santa Monica to live at the Pritikin Diet Center. He even hired a fitness instructor to drive over to Bubba’s house every morning and feed him less than Bubba fed himself. Walsh did everything he could think of to keep Bubba from expanding. And then one day the fitness instructor showed up at Bubba’s house and, as Walsh put it, “The car was in the driveway, the drapes were closed, and nobody answered the door.” In his first four seasons Bubba’s weight jumped around, but the trend line pointed up. Offered many choices between carrots and sticks, Bubba reached every time for another jelly doughnut. The 49ers won the Super Bowl again, after the 1984 season. But the next three seasons they went into the playoffs with high hopes and were bounced in the first round. In 1985 and 1986, they were beaten badly by the New York Giants, and in both games Lawrence Taylor wreaked havoc. He’d been too quick for Bubba. The 49er offense, usually so reliable, had scored only three points in each of those games. Joe Montana had been knocked out of the 1986 game with a concussion. The hits didn’t always come from the blind side but the blind side was the sore spot. As 49er center Randy Cross said, “Increasingly, we game-planned specifically for that rush guy on the right side.” The right side of the defense, the left side of the offense, was the turf Bubba Paris was meant to secure. “There’s that old Roberto Duran idea from boxing,” said Cross. “Get the head and the body dies. More and more teams were coming for our head.” It was at the end of the 1987 season that Bill Walsh’s frustrations with his promising left tackle peaked. That left side of the line was now, obviously, the pressure point that a very good pass rusher could use to shut down the 49er passing game. And Bubba Paris just kept getting fatter, and slower, and less able to keep up with the ever-faster pass rush. During the regular season Bubba’s weight hadn’t mattered very much. He was waddling onto the field at well over 300 pounds, and the 49ers still cruised through the season. They’d finished with a record of 14–2. Amazingly, they had the number one offense and the number one defense in the NFL. Going into the playoffs, they were viewed as such an unstoppable force that the bookies had them as 14-point favorites to win the Super Bowl, no matter who they played. They appeared to be a team without a weakness; but then, the regular season is not as effective as the playoffs at exposing a team’s weakness. The stakes are lower, the opponents generally less able, their knowledge of your team less complete. It’s when a team hits the playoffs that its weaknesses are most highly magnified; and in the 1987 playoffs, Walsh discovered that his seemingly perfect team had a flaw. The first game was against the Minnesota Vikings, and it was supposed to be a cakewalk. But the Vikings had a sensational six five, 270-pound young pass rusher named Chris Doleman, and he came off the blind side like a bat out of hell. He was fast, he was strong, he was crafty, he was mean. He wore Lawrence Taylor’s number, 56, and when he was asked who in football he most admired, Doleman said, “The one guy who has the desire to be the best, and the tenacity, is Lawrence Taylor. I’m not saying I want to be exactly like Lawrence…” Every blind side rusher knew about the anxiety of influence. Doleman wasn’t exactly Lawrence Taylor but he was exactly in the tradition of Lawrence Taylor. He’d been drafted as an outside linebacker, but in the 4–3 defense, which the Vikings played, the outside linebacker wasn’t chiefly a pass rusher. Finally it occurred to the Vikings coaches to try him as a right defensive end—that is, to make him a pass rusher. To give him the role in the 4–3 that Taylor played in the 3–4. He was an instant success. Fearing that Doleman might shut down his passing game, Bill Walsh considered his trick of pulling a guard to deal with him. John Ayers had moved on, and the 49ers had no one quite so well designed to the job. Anyway, the trick was old: the Vikings would see it for what it was and quickly move to exploit the hole left in the middle of the 49er line. They had a weapon to serve just this purpose: right tackle Keith Millard. He lined up beside Doleman, and was himself—oddly, for a tackle—a speedy pass rusher. Send the guard to help with Doleman and you left Millard to run free. Walsh couldn’t do that. Thus Bill Walsh received another lesson about the cost of not having a left tackle capable of protecting his quarterback’s blind side. This time the lesson was far more painful than the last. This time he had expected to win the Super Bowl. He had built the niftiest little passing machine in the history of the NFL, manned with talented players, and this one guy on the other team had his finger on the switch that shut it down. Chris Doleman hit Joe Montana early and often, but even when he didn’t hit Montana he came so close that Montana couldn’t step into his throws. Backup left tackle Steve Wallace watched from the sidelines. “He never let Joe get his feet set,” he said later. What Doleman did to Joe Montana’s feet was minor compared to what he did to his mind. “Every time Joe went back, he was peeping out of the corner of his eye first,” said Wallace, “then looking at his receivers.” The pass rush rendered Joe Montana so inept that in the second half Walsh benched him and inserted his backup, Steve Young. Young was left-handed, which enabled him to see Doleman coming. Young was also fast enough to flee—which he did, often. Against a team they were meant to beat by three touchdowns on their way to an inevitable Super Bowl victory, the 49ers lost 36–24. Afterwards, Vikings coach Jerry Burns told reporters that “the way to stop [the 49ers] is to pressure the quarterback. Our whole approach was to pressure Montana.” A football game is too complicated to be reduced to a single encounter. Lots of other things happened that afternoon in Candlestick Park. But the inability of his left tackle to handle the Vikings’ right end was, in Walsh’s view, a difference maker: it created fantastically disproportionate distortions in the game. “Bubba got beat,” he said. “Doleman and Millard just dominated the game.” After the game, Walsh was so shattered he walked right out of Candlestick Park without pausing to speak to his players. Always a bit leery of the way Walsh viewed them—as cogs in his intricate machine—the players would later point to that playoff loss as the beginning of the end of their feeling for their ingenious coach. “Walsh couldn’t talk to us the day after,” defensive back Eric Wright later told the San Francisco Chronicle. “He lost a lot of respect with the players. When it was going well, he was there. When the ship was shaky, he couldn’t face us.” Walsh coached football just one more season, and he decided to hang his fortunes on something more dependable than the Bubba Paris Diet. But Bubba had no obvious replacement. His backup was Steve Wallace, and Wallace hadn’t been trained as a left tackle. He’d been drafted by the 49ers in the fourth round in 1986, and was known chiefly for having blocked for running back Bo Jackson at Auburn. The joke was that Auburn had only three plays: Bo left, Bo right, and Bo up the middle. Having spent most of his college career run blocking, Wallace had to teach himself how to pass-block; but Wallace was a student of the game, willing to pay a steep price to play it, and the recipient of Walsh’s highest compliment: nasty. As in: “Steve Wallace was a nasty football player.” A year after their loss to the Vikings, the 49ers found themselves in exactly the same place: in the playoffs, facing the Minnesota Vikings. The 49ers weren’t as good as they had been the year before, and the Vikings were better. They, not the 49ers, now had the NFL’s number one defense. It was led by Chris Doleman who was, if anything, even better at sacking quarterbacks. The night before the game, Steve Wallace didn’t sleep. “I’d just try to go to bed early and hope somewhere along the way I fell asleep,” he said. The inability to fall asleep on the night before the game had already become a pattern for him. Apparently, it came with the left tackle position. Will Wolford, who protected Jim Kelly’s blind side for the Buffalo Bills, had exactly the same experience. He started out his career as a guard—and slept—then moved to left tackle—and didn’t. Late in his career, he moved back to guard, and, presto, he could sleep again. The left tackle position, as it had been reconceived by the modern pass-oriented offense, presented a new psychological challenge for the offensive lineman. In the old days, no one could really see what you were doing, and you usually had help from the lineman on the other side of you. That was still true at the other line positions. A mistake at guard cost a running back a few yards; a mistake at left tackle usually cost a sack, occasionally cost the team the ball, and sometimes cost the team the quarterback. And—here was the main thing—you only needed to make one mistake at left tackle to have a bad game. The left tackle was defined by his weakest moment. He wasn’t measured by the body of his work but by the outliers. “You have this tremendous ability to be embarrassed,” said Wallace. “You know you can’t afford three bad games in a row. They gonna say, ‘Nice knowing you.’ And it only takes one play—if he has one sack, then he’s interviewed after the game. And you’re the guy who gave up the sack. I could be good on thirty-four out of thirty-five pass plays, and all anyone would remember was that one sack.” This point was driven home to him the Saturday before the Vikings game, when Bill Walsh called the team into the auditorium for the pleasurable viewing of its past highlights. Walsh did this before every game. He thought it helped his players to see themselves at their best before they went out to play. The players watched Jerry Rice dash into the end zone, Ronnie Lott intercept a pass, and Joe Montana thread the ball between defenders. They whooped and hollered and cheered for each other. It was all good fun, all positive. But at the very end of the highlight reel, Walsh, perversely, had inserted a single negative play: the Doleman sack. The sack came during the regular season in a game the 49ers won, 24–21. Doleman had got by Wallace just that once, but he had crushed Joe Montana. Wallace didn’t need to be reminded of the play. That one sack was all he had thought about for days. Doleman had beaten him to the outside. Wallace had reached out to punch him but he, not Doleman, had lost his footing. Doleman rose up off Montana, jumped around celebrating, and then found Wallace, to editorialize. “You got this all day,” he’d said. Wallace responded as he had done thirteen other times that season, by starting a fight. “I remember thinking: if I don’t do something, he may get ten sacks,” he said. “So I decided to mix it up.” The NFL hadn’t yet begun to levy big fines for fights, and Wallace had taken full advantage of the freebies. He now had a reputation as one of the league’s dirtiest linemen—because he started so many fights. “I thought that’s how it had to be,” he said. “I had to fight if I was going to make it. And I had some folks to feed. And when you have some folks to feed you have a whole different mentality.” That really was how Wallace thought about these beasts bent on killing Joe Montana: you go by me and my family goes hungry. And it wasn’t all that far from the truth. His first paychecks would be so thoroughly consumed by the $1,426 monthly note on the new house his parents had bought for themselves that he’d finally summoned the nerve to tell them to sell the house. He was deeply insecure. People were saying that he wasn’t a good pass blocker, and he wasn’t all that sure they were wrong. Just that morning—the morning Walsh played the tape of the Doleman sack—Doleman was quoted in the paper saying “the reason Wallace fights so much is to cover up his lack of ability.” Now he had to face Doleman again. Doleman was about to go to the Pro Bowl for the second straight year. No one on the team had forgotten what Doleman and Millard had done to them in the playoffs the year before. And yet Bill Walsh felt the need to replay that one sack. Over and over again Wallace watched Doleman beat him and crunch Joe Montana. He didn’t understand why Walsh needed to humiliate him. He said nothing, of course, but was at once livid and ashamed. He wasn’t going to sleep tonight anyway; now he wasn’t going to sleep with a vengeance. “All night long I’m laying there thinking: why did he show that one play? A lot of times you can’t understand what Walsh was doing until he’s done it.” At some point that night he decided “the lesson for me was to concentrate one play longer. As hard as you can possibly work, you can do it for one more play.” The next day, after he’d suited up, Wallace received another explanation for Walsh’s perverse behavior. John McVay, the team’s director of football operations, pulled him aside in the hallway and said, “You are going to be the key to this game. The game is going to turn on your performance.” This wasn’t the front office pep-talking. McVay was a former NFL head coach—and he was completely serious. This was new. Until this season, his first as a starting NFL left tackle, Steve Wallace had never experienced line play as an individualistic event. But that is what the left tackle position had become: a one-on-one encounter, a boxing match. The passing game, increasingly, was built around the idea of getting as many receivers out into patterns as quickly as possible. More receivers meant fewer pass blockers. Fewer pass blockers meant the left tackle had to deal with whatever was coming at him all by himself. Every now and then a running back might nip at Doleman’s heels on his way out to catch a pass. On very rare occasions a tight end might line up beside Wallace and lend a shoulder. But mostly it would be just him and Doleman, one on one. And the importance of the private battle was now clear to him. “No one had ever said anything like that to me before,” said Wallace. “No one had ever said, ‘The game depends on you.’ I never thought a lineman could be that important. I started thinking, ‘Oh my goodness…’” NUMBER 74 TROTS to the edge of the tunnel leading from the locker room to the field. He loves this moment. This moment is the offensive lineman’s one shot at positive recognition. Later in his career he’ll milk it for drama. He’d sprint so fast from the tunnel that the other players wouldn’t put a hand out to slap his “because they were afraid I’d break it off.” When he’d started playing football as a kid, he wanted to play tight end; even then, he preferred basketball. He enjoyed attention. It’s still not natural to him to play a game in front of millions of people and go completely unnoticed. It’s like playing the cantaloupe in the school play. “At left tackle, Number Seventy-four, Steve Wallace!” His name is announced to the packed stadium and he runs out. He’s still so nervous and new that he concentrates on not stumbling. The day is sunny and bright but the turf, he notices, is slick and muddy. That’s a break. Opposing teams who came to Candlestick Park were deceived by the sunshine. They’d think: on such a nice day the ground just must be firm. The ground was seldom firm. By the second quarter they’d be slipping and sliding, yet they wouldn’t think to change their cleats. A pass rusher like Doleman counted on traction to turn the corner. If he forced Doleman to carve especially tight turns, Wallace knew, the turf might do the rest. When he reaches the 49ers’ sideline he looks across the field, to find Doleman. “I’m looking to see if he’s all cocky, like, ‘I’m gonna kick your butt,’ you know.” Back when Bubba was starting, he’d engaged in this tribal chest-pounding ritual with certain opponents. Before the game he’d look across the field, find the guy he was going up against, and literally start howling and beating his chest. Wallace is too worried about the task at hand to pound his chest. In any case, he doesn’t catch Doleman’s eye; but as he looks around, he notices another piece of luck: Jerry Markbreit. Markbreit will referee the game. He’s Wallace’s favorite ref. Jerry let left tackles get away with a lot, like where they’d line up. On passing plays he’d want to line up a few inches further back from the line of scrimmage than was strictly legal. If it became a race to cut off Doleman on a wide loop, those few inches might make all the difference. A lot of other refs would just flag you for not being exactly on the line. Jerry at least warned you before he flagged you. The Vikings got the ball first. Steve Wallace thinks: just get to halftime. Worry about the rest of the game then. He couldn’t even think about an entire game. Before he mucked out the Augean stables, Hercules probably carved them in half in his mind, too. Wallace thinks in terms of getting through the half without humiliation. He thinks: make it to halftime without a sack, you got a chance. He watches the 49er defense try to stop the Vikings offense and prays they don’t leave the 49er offense with their backs to their own goal line. If we get the ball in a bad place, he thinks, Doleman’s gonna be even harder to handle. They give up a field goal: 3–0 Vikings. The offense takes over on its own twenty-yard line. That was fine. Wallace had made up his mind before the game that he would take a different approach. He’d play within himself. Doleman’s words in the paper had stung: the reason Wallace fights so much is to cover up his lack of ability. “I said to myself: no matter what happens, I’m not going to fight him today. And it helped me to become a true left tackle.” When he looks back over his career from the end of it, he will say that this was the day he embraced his position. He is focused on his technique—on where his feet are, where his hands are, the timing of his contact. He adjusts according to the tiny hints that Doleman gave him of what he plans to do next. Wallace keeps a mental list of the different moves of pass rushers. He has names for them: the spin, the swim, the power, the shoulder grab, the arm drag, the hand slap, the hip toss, the dead leg (“they fake as if they’re stopping just to make you freeze your feet”). Each guy was a little different; each guy had his own moves. Doleman hasn’t yet learned to spin. He’d develop a spin move later and it would make him so good at getting to quarterbacks that he’d break the NFL’s single-season sack record. But he has a swim move, where he brings his arms crashing down on top of the left tackle’s arms, to break his hold. He also has a speed move—which is what he’d used to beat Wallace during the regular season. Wallace worries about Doleman’s initial move. He worries even more about the move Doleman will make in response to whaever Wallace has done to defend himself against the initial move. “It’s all feet and hands,” said Wallace. “Once your body gets engaged with a guy, he can very easily use a counter—once you’ve stopped his initial move, he pushes off. That’s why you can’t stop moving your feet.” The first series is a bust in which he plays no role. Bill Walsh decided, uncharacteristically, to open the game running the ball. He achieved nothing but predictability. After two runs for losses, on third and very long, everyone in the stadium knows that Montana will pass. The Vikings blitz with what appears to be their entire team and sack Montana. Three plays, minus nine yards, and punt. But the defense quickly gets back the ball. It’s during this second series that the heavyweight bout between Chris Doleman and Steve Wallace really begins. On the first play, Montana takes a five-step drop and Doleman comes with the same speed rush that he used to beat Wallace the first time they met. Wallace now understands that he’d gotten beat that one time because he’d been too jumpy, too eager to make contact. He prides himself on playing offense with the aggression of a defensive player, but that aggression is now counterproductive. The left tackle position is all about control—of self, and of the man coming at you. “Control the number,” Wallace tells himself. “Control that inside number. As long as I can control that inside number, I can push through him.” He fixates on the “6” on Doleman’s jersey, the way a basketball defender stares at the midsection of the dribbling opponent. Doleman lines up far outside and, at the snap of the ball, sprints straight upfield. He’s quicker than Wallace, and has the distinct advantage of running straight ahead while Wallace backpeddles. Wallace can’t get a purchase on him; his only hope is to give him a single hard push at exactly the right moment. If he hits Doleman the moment after the snap, he will achieve nothing. He’ll throw himself off balance, just as he did before, and speed Doleman on his journey upfield, en route to Joe Montana’s back. What happens on this first serious encounter between these two huge men happens so fast it’s nearly impossible to comprehend with the naked eye in real time. Doleman sprints upfield, probably expecting to collide with Wallace on his first or second step—but he doesn’t. Wallace has taken a new angle. “I had to make sure that his body was completely by me…Wait…Wait…Wait…Then I hit him.” He’d met Doleman as deep in the backfield as he possibly could without missing him altogether. They collided, briefly, at the spot where Doleman wanted to be making a sharp left to get at Montana. The hit kept Doleman from turning, and drove him further upfield. Steve Wallace had traded the pleasure of violence for the comfort of real estate. Nobody notices, of course. His contribution was the opposite of drama. He’d removed the antagonist from the play entirely. What the fans and the television cameras see is 49er wide receiver John Taylor come wide open in the middle of the field. Joe Montana hits him with a pass, and Taylor races for a gain of twenty yards. Doleman must have thought that first play was a fluke, because on the next one he tries exactly the same move. Upfield he comes, at speed, and once again Wallace takes him right on past the action. What the fans see is Jerry Rice catching a touchdown pass. What Chris Doleman sees, from a distance, is Joe Montana throwing a touchdown pass. What the fans at home hear is the announcer, John Madden, saying, “The 49ers need production out of three key people. Two of them just produced.” The three key people to whom Madden refers are Montana, Rice, and running back Roger Craig. They are stars; they accumulated the important statistics: yards, touchdowns, receptions, completions. Wallace is not considered a producer. He has no statistics. The next time the 49ers get the ball, Steve Wallace suspects that Doleman might adjust. Doleman now knows that Wallace is quick enough and agile enough and intelligent enough to deal with his speed rush. He’ll come with his bull rush. In the playoff game the year before—which Wallace had watched from the sidelines—Doleman had opened the game with a bull rush and knocked Bubba Paris flat on his back. (“When you knock a three-hundred-thirty-pound guy on his ass,” Wallace observed, “that’s a very serious thing.”) He expected the bull rush early. If Doleman established his ability to knock Wallace flat on his back—to run right over him—he’d force Wallace to plant his feet early, to brace himself. Planted feet doom a left tackle. Planted feet are slow feet. If he plants his feet, Wallace knows, Doleman will see that his feet are planted—and then he’ll go right back to his speed rush. When a left tackle plants his feet, he gives the pass rusher a half step head start in his race to the quarterback. That half step might be the difference between a productive Joe Montana and a Joe Montana being carried off the field on a stretcher. As in sumo wrestling, the awesome crudeness on the surface of the battle disguised the finesse underneath. Keeping Doleman off Montana’s back is less a matter of brute force than leverage, angles, and anticipation. The outcome of the struggle turns on half steps and milliseconds. “I know early there are maybe three plays where he is going to try to bull-rush me,” says Wallace. “And you know that if you’re not ready, he’s going to beat you like a dog for the rest of the day, because then you are setting with slow, controlled feet rather than happy feet. The trick is to see that bull rush coming early, and go out and pop him. You deliver a quick karate blow—Pow!—like a real quick punch, to stun him. But your feet never stop. If your feet ever stop, you’re beat.” Here comes the payoff for all those hours he spent studying game tape. He’s watched many hours of Chris Doleman rushing passers. He’s learned that Doleman tips his bull rush—and how can he not?—by the set of his stance, the tilt of his body, his attitude. Now Doleman comes with the bull rush. And he’s ready for it. What the fan sees is…nothing. Doleman is 270 pounds of raw, explosive muscle. There is probably not a human being among the 62,457 present who could withstand the force of his furious charge. To the naked eye, however, it looks like he’s not even trying. He’s just stuck on the line of scrimmage, leaning against Steve Wallace. Why watch that? Watch, instead, the real action: Jerry Rice catches another touchdown pass! The next time the 49ers have the ball (they now lead 14–3), Wallace looks up to find Doleman gone. Doleman has moved to the other side of the field, in search of a better venue to practice his black art. On the other side of the field, however, he’s in Montana’s line of vision. He also must deal with two blockers, the right tackle plus the tight end. Two plays into the experiment he returns to his natural point of attack. For him it’s the blind side, or nothing. Today, it’s nothing. Not one sack. A single tackle, and that comes on a rare play when Wallace isn’t assigned to block him. “When you’re locked in,” says Wallace, “you can’t explain it. You just feel it.” Today, he was locked in. At halftime the score is 21–3. Joe Montana has thrown three touchdown passes. Just as Montana received more than his share of the credit when things went well, he received more than his share of the blame when things went badly. Before the game, a lot of people were saying and writing that Joe Montana was washed up. Finished. Over the hill. Montana was only thirty-two years old. But the 49ers had lost their previous three playoff games. In those three games Montana had thrown four interceptions, zero touchdown passes, and for a grand total of 529 yards. This one half he’d thrown three touchdown passes and had been, as John Madden put it, “about as efficient as a quarterback can be.” All talk of Joe Montana being finished, said the announcers, was obviously silly. Joe Montana was going to keep on playing, and become maybe the greatest quarterback ever to play the game. No one ever mentions Steve Wallace’s name. The cameras never once find him. His work is evidently too boring to watch for long without being distracted by whatever’s happening to the football. Worse, the better he does his job, the more boring to watch he becomes. His job is to eliminate what people pay to see—the sight of Chris Doleman crushing Joe Montana. In Instant Replay, a diary of a year playing on the offensive line for Vince Lombardi’s Green Bay Packers, Jerry Kramer points out that without instant replay technology no one would ever notice line play. As Steve Wallace arrives in his magnificent rec room, and begins to fiddle with the remote control to his VCR, he suggests that there are limits to what instant replay will do for a lineman. He finds the old tape of the 1988 Vikings–49ers playoff game. He fast-forwards through the first three quarters of the game, pausing the tape only three times, after each of Jerry Rice’s touchdowns. Each time Rice arrives in the end zone and turns, he is lifted high in the air by…Steve Wallace. Wallace made a habit of sprinting at full tilt downfield after a touchdown. The main side effect of this behavior was for a picture of Steve Wallace to appear, briefly, in the middle of the television screen. The blocks that made the touchdowns possible, he assumed, weren’t worth watching. Midway through the fourth quarter, the former left tackle locates a final moment of interest. The 49ers lead 28–9, and have the ball. The game is all but over. Just then, Roger Craig takes a handoff and sprints through the left side of the line for an 80-yard touchdown, the longest in 49er playoff history. Craig has sprinter speed but he barely has time to turn and raise his arms over his head before he collides with…Steve Wallace. Craig ran a forty-yard dash in about 4.5 seconds, and Wallace ran it in about 5.5 seconds, so, in theory, it should have taken at least 2 seconds for Steve Wallace to reach Roger Craig. If so, they were the briefest 2 seconds in the history of time. “Did you see who the first guy down there with him was?!” shouts John Madden, who alone among the announcers paid some attention to offensive linemen. “The first guy in the end zone with Roger Craig is Steve Wallace! Steve Wallace was the guy who made the first block to break him loose!” Wallace smiles and rewinds the tape—the game ended with the 49ers on top 34–9. Doleman had more or less given up trying to get to Montana by the middle of the third quarter. None of it matters. Steve Wallace wants to see this one play again. This business of All-for-one-and-one-for-all-and-who-cares-if-I-get-any-attention-or-credit-for-myself-so-long-as-the-team-wins was nice as far as it went. But it didn’t go down to the bottom of Steve Wallace. “As long as you’d play hard and get a little grimy and dirty, Madden would take care of you,” said Wallace. But even Madden needed a little help: that’s why you chased the running back 80 yards to the end zone. “The first guy in the end zone with Roger Craig is Steve Wallace! Steve Wallace was the guy who made the first block to break him loose!” Having reviewed his one moment of glory a second time, the former left tackle clicks off his big-screen television, settles back into his fine leather sofa, and smiles. “It’s all part of it,” he says. THAT SEASON THE 49ERS won the Super Bowl. After the game, Bill Walsh retired, but his innovation continued to sweep the league in various forms. The passing game grew ever more important, the quarterbacks ever more valuable. Yet there was still little change in the value of the people who protected the quarterback. Steve Wallace had no sense that he would one day be rich, and neither did any other lineman. The purest case study was Anthony Muñoz. By the late 1980s, Muñoz was regarded as the finest left tackle ever to play the game. He was quick, huge, versatile, and athletic—in addition to playing football at USC, he’d played third base for the baseball team. He came into the league in 1980 and became a fixture at the Pro Bowl. Even he was constrained in his financial demands by the conceit that one good lineman was no different from any other. All for one and one for all. “They would actually say that linemen are interchangeable and can be replaced at any time,” Muñoz recalled. “They’d actually say we can just take another guy and toss him in there. But you were aware that the left tackle was especially important. He just wasn’t paid as if he was especially important.” In 1987, after he had been to six straight Pro Bowls, a lot of people were saying Anthony Muñoz might just be the greatest offensive lineman in the history of the game. With his contract about to expire, Muñoz and his agent walked into the Cincinnati Bengals’ front office and asked for a raise. The best NFL quarterbacks were now making more than $2 million dollars a year and the best pass rushers were making $1 million. “We were asking for half a million a year,” recalled Muñoz, “and we were told that there was no lineman alive who was worth that much.” The people who evaluated football players and football strategies understood that the parts were inextricable from the whole, of course. You didn’t get Joe Montana and Jerry Rice’s “production” without production of some sort from Steve Wallace. Bill Walsh and John McVay obviously understood that if Wallace didn’t do his job, then Montana couldn’t do his. Take a half second away from Joe Montana’s pocket time, and all those people saying Montana was washed up might have been right. But there was a difference between saying that Steve Wallace was necessary and acknowledging that what Steve Wallace did was extremely difficult—that it wasn’t a job for just any old lineman. The market for football players was rooted in subjective judgments and ancient prejudices. “Before free agency, they just paid you whatever they felt like paying you, and your only recourse was to withhold services,” said Tom Condon, an offensive lineman for the Kansas City Chiefs in the 1980s who went on to become a leading players’ agent. But there were hints of how a free market in football players might differ from a shackled one. The amateur draft, for example, which had aspects of an open market. College players had no say in which NFL team they played for, but the NFL teams were free to choose among the college players, and the order of their choices revealed their preferences. And in 1988 the preferences of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers shocked a lot of football people. Ray Perkins was the Buccaneers’ head coach at the time, and Perkins had been the head coach of the New York Giants when they’d drafted Lawrence Taylor. Perkins had the fourth pick of the first round and was expected to take one of the two available star wide receivers, Sterling Sharpe or Tim Brown. Instead, he took a left tackle named Paul Gruber. “We had Gruber rated the highest player on the board,” Perkins told a New York Times reporter. “We would have taken him if we had the first pick of the draft. I’ve changed my mind about the left-tackle position. It’s now a skill position because he lines up against more and more teams’ best athlete, their right defensive end or linebacker, the Lawrence Taylor types. That’s why I feel good about Gruber. He is one of the best athletes I’ve ever seen.” Whatever had caused Ray Perkins to change his mind about the left tackle was causing a lot of other people to change their minds, too. That became clear after the 1992 season when, to put an end to labor strife, NFL players and owners agreed to a new labor deal. The players accepted salary caps tied to leaguewide revenues, so that salaries would rise with revenues. In addition, players were granted the right of free agency. The new deal had a number of immediate effects. One was to make it possible for teams to go out and buy the players they thought they needed on the newly open market. Another was to focus NFL front office minds on how to allocate their dollars. Every team now had more or less the same number of dollars to spend on players—the number dictated by the cap—and so the team that spent the dollars most efficiently should win. What was the best way to spend those dollars? On a quarterback? On defense? The new market officially opened on February 1, 1993, the day after the Super Bowl. Two months later, Peter King of Sports Illustrated reported its shocking early verdicts. More than any other football writer, King had earned the trust of NFL’s front offices, and so was able to channel their thoughts. All the players lucky enough to be entering free agency were cutting sweet deals for themselves, he reported. But the real shock was the dollar value the new market assigned to offensive linemen. Just a few years earlier, the Bengals had told Anthony Muñoz that no offensive lineman on earth was worth half a million dollars a year. The Denver Broncos quickly signed a couple of free agent linemen, Brian Habib and Don Maggs, for three times that amount. A few days later, Vikings center Kirk Lowdermilk moved to the Indianapolis Colts for $2 million a year, then groped for the adjective to describe his feelings. “Stunned is not the word,” he told King. “There is no word in the English language to describe it.” A few days after Lowdermilk grappled with his new dollar value, the Green Bay Packers paid $1.52 million a year over three years to buy a guard named Harry Galbraith away from the Miami Dolphins. The strange bidding frenzy for offensive linemen no one had ever heard of persisted. After the Los Angeles Rams offered $1 million a year to bid away a guard named Leo Goeas from the San Diego Chargers, the San Diego Union-Tribune ran an article under the headline: “Farewell, Leo Goeas, Whoever You Were.” The newspaper sought comments from the Chargers’ old left tackle Billy Shields, who had retired in 1983. “I played eleven years,” said Shields, “and I didn’t make a million dollars over my entire career.” That was the general drift of public commentary from NFL insiders: bafflement. The Bengals’ offensive line coach Jim McNally called the explosion in pay for linemen “a fast rush to get players who probably aren’t worth it.” One AFC coach called the Habib deal “the worst contract I’ve ever seen in this league.” Another skeptic pointed out that Don Maggs was a B-list left tackle and certainly not the guy to be guarding John Elway’s blind side. Just the past season Maggs had been badly beaten by…Chris Doleman. Retired NFL linemen were the most disturbed; when Friedrich Engels coined the term “false consciousness” to describe the inability of the working class to understand the nature of its oppression, he might just as well have been writing about NFL linemen. The offensive linemen had swallowed hook, line, and sinker other people’s opinion of their worth. They accepted as plain truth the widely held view that they were the team’s most fungible members. You didn’t see a lot of former quarterbacks wondering why current NFL quarterbacks were being paid millions of dollars; but these old linemen couldn’t understand the new value placed on linemen. “There’s a lot going on in football right now that makes no sense,” said old Chicago Bears center Mike Pyle, who made fourteen grand a year back in the 1960s. “And this tops the list.” Of course the people shelling out the millions tried to explain themselves. They argued that the numbers spoke for themselves: just the previous season, nineteen out of the twenty-eight starting NFL quarterbacks had been knocked out of games with injuries by mid-November. The Broncos’ director of football operations, Bob Ferguson, pointed out that his team’s star quarterback John Elway had been sacked fifty-two times: Maggs and Habib were being paid to stop that kind of thing from happening. Ferguson actually went so far as to thank Broncos’ owner Pat Bowlen for his willingness to spend football money in ways football money had never been spent. “You have to give credit here to Pat,” he said, “because these were not famous guys. When I talked to him about Habib, he kept calling him ‘Rashid.’” In the midst of this upheaval, the only free agent A-list left tackle, Will Wolford of the Buffalo Bills, announced his new deal: he’d be leaving the Bills for the Indianapolis Colts, who had agreed to pay him $7.65 million over three years. That was more than any lineman had ever been paid, of course, but the money wasn’t what was most astonishing. Wolford’s agent, Ralph Cindrich, later said that at least four other teams had been willing to match the Colts’ offer. What had set the Colts apart from the other bidders was a clause they agreed to insert into Wolford’s new contract. It guaranteed that Will Wolford, left tackle, would remain the highest paid player on the Colts’ offense for as long as he played on it. Better paid than the Colts’ running backs, the Colts’ wide receivers, or any of the other acknowledged stars. Even if the Colts went out and got themselves the NFL’s most expensive quarterback, Wolford’s salary would rise to eclipse his, too. “I thought linemen would get a little more money from free agency,” said Wolford later. “But I didn’t think that would happen. I was numb.” He wasn’t the only one. The Bills were furious: how could any lineman demand a clause that guaranteed him he would be paid more than star quarterback Jim Kelly, or star running back Thurman Thomas? The NFL didn’t like the idea of any player having a clause in his contract guaranteeing him more money than his teammates, and it made noises about voiding the deal. That’s when Ralph Cindrich went on the warpath. He asked, pointedly, if the league would have the same reservations if the clause had been in some quarterback’s contract. He accused the league, in the pages of the New York Times, of “discrimination against offensive linemen.” And the NFL let the deal slide, but only after saying no such deal would be permitted in the future. “There’s a mentality about linemen that goes back to high school,” said Cindrich. “When you picked your football team, these were the last guys picked.” There wasn’t a left tackle in the game who imagined himself to be as valuable as the star running back, much less the quarterback. How could this happen? How could the people paying these vast sums assign a value to a player that he wouldn’t dare assign to himself? How could they justify it, when the left tackle had no statistics to measure his value—no “production”? Bill Polian was the general manager of the Bills in 1986, when the team used its first-round pick to take Will Wolford of Vanderbilt University. When Wolford jumped to the Colts, Polian was working in the league office and found himself embroiled in the discussions over the disturbing new contract. Then in 1997 he left—to become the GM of the Colts. “You want to know why this organization gave Will that contract?” he asked. “He got it for the simple reason that he shut down Lawrence Taylor in the Super Bowl.” Left tackles everywhere failed to sleep the night before they faced Lawrence Taylor. What they didn’t appreciate was that there was gold in their anxiety. Their fear was a measure of their value. A year earlier, the Bills had lost to the New York Giants in Super Bowl XXV, 20–19. Yet Lawrence Taylor hadn’t been a factor—and a lot of front office executives apparently noticed the relative tranquillity on the blind side of Bills quarterback Jim Kelly. In effect, they had asked themselves a question: if we were to play the Giants, how much would I pay to have Lawrence Taylor erased from the field of play? The number was higher than they ever imagined. Until the next year—because the number kept rising. And in 1995, Steve Wallace of the San Francisco 49ers became the first offensive lineman to sign a contract worth $10 million. The quarterback might still get all the glory. But the guy who watched his back would be moving into a bigger house. That was the beginning of what became a massive revaluation of the left tackle position. The NFL had a new designation: the “franchise player.” A team could claim one player as its franchise player, and thus prevent him from becoming a free agent. In exchange, the team had to pay him the greater of 120 percent of his old salary or the average of the league’s top five salaries at his position. Of the twenty-eight franchise players named in 1993, nine were left tackles, the most at any one position. (Steve Wallace was one of them.) These moves simply reflected the left tackle’s rapidly rising cost. NFL teams saw, instantly, that a left tackle even after he’d been designated a franchise player was cheaper than a left tackle purchased on the open market. All through the 1980s and into the 1990s, offensive linemen had competed with tight ends and kickers for the title of lowest paid players on the football field. In 1990, for instance, the average starting offensive lineman was paid $398,000 a year, while the average wide receiver made $504,000 a year, the average defensive end made $551,000 a year, the average running back made $620,000 a year, and the average quarterback made $1.25 million a year. The left tackle, Anthony Muñoz pointed out, made his living trying to prevent a guy making twice as much as he did from killing a guy who made three times more.* By the 2005 season, the left tackle would be paid more than anyone on the field except the quarterback, and the percentage difference between the two of them had shrunk dramatically. The average pay of the top five starting left tackles was $7.25 million a year, compared to $11.9 million for the quarterbacks. The curious thing about this market revaluation is that nothing had changed in the game to make the left tackle position more valuable. Lawrence Taylor had been around since 1981. Bill Walsh’s passing game had long since swept across the league. Passing attempts per game reached a new peak and remained there. There had been no meaningful change in strategy, or rules, or the threat posed by the defense to quarterbacks’ health in ten years. There was no new data to enable NFL front offices to value left tackles—or any offensive linemen—more precisely. The only thing that happened is that the market was allowed to function. And the market assigned a radically higher value to the left tackle than had the old pre-market football culture. And still no one really knew who he was. If he was never distinguished from his fellow linemen, it was because his contribution had always been indistinguishable from theirs. His exact value had always been a mystery, in part, because he never did anything by himself. To say that one lineman was more important than the others was as preposterous as arguing for the special value of a single synchronized swimmer. That was about to change: football strategy had broken up the collective. Or, rather, it had yanked this one member of the collective out into his own private business. Hardly anyone knew who he was—yet. But they knew the guy he was paid to stop! And two days after the game it would occur to them that Chris Doleman or Lawrence Taylor or Bruce Smith hadn’t factored into the game. It was as if the star hadn’t played. That was the great left tackle’s shot at recognition. He wasn’t himself in the spotlight. No one was taking his picture. But he reflected the light of the star across from him. He was a kind of photographic negative. UNTIL THEY STARTED paying left tackles huge sums of money, the NFL talent evaluators didn’t really have a rigorous idea of what one looked like. There was no prototype. And for a brief period, right after the birth of free agency, all sorts of unlikely characters who would soon be dismissed as physically ill-equipped for the position made a fortune playing left tackle. Steve Wallace knew he could have used another 50 pounds. “I’d have given myself a big wide ass,” he said. “I didn’t have that girth in the butt.” Will Wolford wasn’t the prototype, either. In college he’d played right tackle; his first year with the Bills he’d played right guard. Like Wallace, he had been thrust into this strange new role on the offensive line—head to head with this wildly dangerous beast bent on killing the quarterback—and figured it out. He got by on guile rather than sheer physical ability. Like Wallace, he could have used a few more pounds. Plus his arms were too short. Judged physically not up to the task, he was moved back to guard in 1996 and retired after the 1998 season. As late as 2006 he said, “If I had long arms I’d still be playing.” Once the money started to fly, the talent evaluators became connoisseurs of left tackle flesh. The Wallaces and Wolfords were exposed as physically inadequate; the left tackle now had to meet a list of physical specifications rarely found in a human being. “I can sit in the draft room today and tell you the most likely things the scouts will say, when they talk about a college lineman,” said Ernie Accorsi, the general manager of the New York Giants. “The first is, ‘He’s a tackle, but he’ll have to be a guard in the pros.’ The second is, ‘He played left tackle in college, but he’ll have to play right tackle in the pros.’” The left tackle was now meant to be the 300-plus-pound guy who was also among the best athletes on the field. Now that he was making rarefied sums of money, he was expected to be, by definition, rare. “It’s tough to find three-hundred-fifty-pound guys who can move their feet,” said Accorsi. “They are either six two, or their arms are too short or their hands are too small or their feet are too slow or they simply aren’t athletic enough. You can coach a lot of things but you can’t coach quick feet. You can’t make a guy’s arms longer, or his hands bigger. And you can’t make them taller.” Accorsi inadvertently made an interesting point. It was probably true that the NFL couldn’t lengthen the arms or stretch the torsos of fully grown men. On the other hand, they could wave millions of dollars in the air and let the American population know that the incentives had changed. Boys who thought they might make careers as power forwards, or shot putters, might now think twice before quitting the high school football team. Huge sums of money were there for the taking, so long as you met certain physical specifications. Case in point: Jonathan Ogden. At the dawn of free agency, Ogden, the son of a Washington, DC, investment banker, had just graduated from the St. Albans School. He was six nine and weighed nearly 350 pounds, but his weren’t the right sort of pounds, at least to begin with. When he arrived at UCLA, to play football and put the shot, Ogden’s nickname was “Fat Albert.” He liked football but he loved the shot put—and had a legitimate chance to make the U.S. Olympic team. At St. Albans he had played right tackle and enjoyed it, because teams typically ran the football behind the right tackle and run blocking was fun. At UCLA, his new coach told him he was moving to left tackle and becoming, chiefly, a pass blocker. Ogden bridled. “I called my father,” he said, “and I told him, ‘They’re trying to make me play left tackle!’ My dad told me just to do it—because if I was going to play football, left tackle was the position to play.” For a few years after the birth of free agency it helped a young man suited to play left tackle to have an investment banker for a father. After that the finances became so obvious that no one needed an investment banker to interpret them. Jonathan Ogden remained unsure of his future in football. His freshman year at UCLA wasn’t especially encouraging. The leap from high school to college was giant, much bigger, in his view, than the leap from college to the pros. “My entire freshman year,” he said, “was a blur.” His high school team had about ten plays; his college team ran, more or less, a pro offense. Pass blocking—which struck him as an almost passive activity—was a lot less interesting to him than run blocking. But by his sophomore year he had figured out where he was meant to go, and what he was meant to do, and it came naturally to him. After that season—the 1994 season—four of the defensive ends he’d faced were taken in the first round of the NFL draft. He’d gone head to head with four extremely good blind side pass rushers—Willie McGinest, Shante Carver, Trev Alberts, Jamir Miller—and hadn’t allowed a single sack. “It was then I thought, ‘If they can be first-round picks, why can’t I be a first-round pick?’” Good question! Nobody called him Fat Albert anymore. Ogden had slimmed from 350 to 310 pounds and then built himself back up in the UCLA weight room to 345 pounds. Muscle had replaced fat. He was faster and quicker and stronger and altogether terrifying. Six foot nine inches and 345 very mobile pounds. “I had some weeks in college where I could have had a cup of coffee in one hand and blocked the guy with the other,” said Ogden—and when this elicits a laugh, he raises his hand and says, “No. Seriously.” There were games when they’d just give up, and he’d look around and say, “They’re not rushing!” His junior year was when he first heard himself described with a term he’d hear ad nauseam for the rest of his football career: freak of nature. He heard scouts say, also, that he was a “finesse” player. He reckoned that scouts always had to have one critical reservation, and so they’d dreamed that one up for him, as he had no flaw. “Coming out of college I was the best pass blocker in the country,” he said. “It wasn’t even close. They had to have one ‘but.’” But…to accuse him of being a “finesse” player? “Who the hell were they looking at?” he asked. The job might not call for aggression. But the player was ferocious. At the end of Ogden’s junior season, UCLA was getting creamed by Kansas in the Aloha Bowl. They were down by 31 points going into the fourth quarter, the game was clearly over, and yet the defensive end he’d been manhandling all day just kept coming hard. Ogden thought he could see what he was up to: he thought he might beat Jonathan Ogden and make a name for himself. Maybe the guy had been reading the stuff the NFL scouts were saying about him in the newspapers—that deep down Jonathan Ogden was soft. “He kept coming,” said Ogden. “So I picked him up, slammed him to the ground, and drove him into the dirt. When I was on top of him, I said, ‘Look, man, it can either be like this for the rest of the quarter or we can relax and finish the game.’ And he actually slowed down!” The Baltimore Ravens selected him with the fourth pick in the 1996 draft—and handed him the largest signing bonus of his year: $6.8 million. He celebrated with a trip to Las Vegas. He was sitting at the blackjack table when someone tapped him on the shoulder and said, “Hey, aren’t you Jonathan Ogden?” He turned around: it was Charles Barkley, the basketball legend. Here he was, a supposedly obscure offensive lineman, and Charles Barkley knew who he was. And he hadn’t played a down in the NFL. After that, Ogden put aside his ambition to put the shot for the U.S. Olympic team. As a boy, Ogden had been terribly shy. When he’d been required to compete in a spelling bee he had turned his back on the audience, as he couldn’t face them and spell at the same time. A few years into his sensational NFL career you couldn’t find a soul who would describe Jonathan Ogden as shy. He was bright and chatty and funny—and about as sure of himself and his abilities as a human being can be. And why shouldn’t he be? He did what he did alone, and he did it as well as anyone ever did it. He had the proof: his quarterbacks never got sacked. When they went back to pass, they knew that what was behind them didn’t matter. Opposing players weren’t pleased to see him. “It can be intimidating if you allow it to be,” legendary pass rusher Bruce Smith told the Washington Post when the reporter asked him what it was like to go head to head with Jonathan Ogden. “I know when I walk up to the line of scrimmage and I have to look up, I only think to myself: ‘What in the world did his parents feed him?’” Before the 2000 season the Baltimore Ravens re-signed Ogden to a six-year deal worth $44 million. That was what one prominent agent referred to as “one of the great what-the-fuck moments in the history of pro football negotiations.” At that moment Jonathan Ogden was being paid more money than any quarterback in the NFL—and eight times more than Trent Dilfer, the quarterback he’d be protecting. Now the highest paid player on the field, Ogden was doing his job so well and so effortlessly that he had time to wonder how hard it would be for him to do some of the other less highly paid jobs. At the end of that 2000 season, en route to their Super Bowl victory, the Ravens played in the AFC Championship game. Ogden watched the Ravens’ tight end, Shannon Sharpe, catch a pass and run 96 yards for a touchdown. Ravens center Jeff Mitchell told The Sporting News that as Sharpe raced into the end zone, Ogden had turned to him and said, “I could have made that play. If they had thrown that ball to me, I would have done the same thing.” Having sized up the star receivers, Ogden looked around and noticed that these quarterbacks he was protecting were…rather ordinary. Here he was, leaving them all the time in the world to throw the ball, and they still weren’t doing it very well. They kept getting fired! Even after they’d won the Super Bowl, the Ravens got rid of their quarterback, Trent Dilfer, and went looking for a better one. What was wrong with these people? Ogden didn’t go so far as to suggest that he should play quarterback, but he came as close as any lineman ever had to the heretical thought. “If you’re going to throw the ball,” he said, “just make it work. Nothing against all the quarterbacks we’ve had since I’ve been here—all twenty of them, it seems. But if we’re going to complete ten of thirty passes, no TDs and two picks, then let’s just run the ball. At least I can have some fun.” The left tackle had become a star, but of a curious kind. He knew he was a star, and his teammates and coaches knew it, too. But to the general fan he remained obscure. The TV cameras still weren’t on Ogden, and their indifference to his work hadn’t escaped him. “There’s a little bit of satisfaction in playing well, but not that much,” he said. “Nobody pays any attention to what I do as a lineman. All those offensive linemen in the Hall of Fame. I mean, they all deserve to be there. But who knows who they are? The first one you can think of is Anthony Muñoz. The only one you can think of is Anthony Muñoz.” Generally overlooked, Ogden offered conspicuous displays of his athletic ability, just for the hell of it. It was as if he wanted the coaches who sat down and studied the game film to know how he measured up against the people getting all the attention. That game against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, for example. The Ravens quarterback throws an interception. The cornerback who has picked off the pass flies down the sideline—it’s 60 yards to the end zone and there’s nothing between him and it. Most of the Ravens just watch: there’s no chance they’ll catch the speedster, so why bother? A couple give it the old college try and lumber after him for twenty yards or so, with no real intention of catching him, like old dogs chasing after a new sports car. Jonathan Ogden, however, actually tries. He doesn’t have an angle, and, really, how is a six nine, 350-pound man going to catch a five eleven, 185-pound man employed specifically for his foot speed? The angle is all wrong, and yet…he seems to be catching up. As Ogden runs, you can’t see his facial expressions or read his mind, but his body language is eloquent: you little supposedly fleet-footed sonofabitch. Me and you. One on one. Twenty-yard dash. I’ll leave you in the dust. There’s no way that Jonathan Ogden, NFL left tackle, can be faster than an NFL cornerback, but don’t tell him that. He knows that he’s special—one of a kind. Or, perhaps, first of a breed. “To be the next me, it’s really not easy,” he said. “’Cause you really can’t teach some of the things I’ve been able to do. You can’t teach someone to be six nine. You can’t teach someone how, when they are off balance, to recover. To be good, you almost have to be born to play left tackle.” To be born to play left tackle you must be born to do a great deal more than play left tackle. With the cornerback 15 yards from the end zone, Ogden still trails him by 10 yards. Between the monster and the midget is a single player, another Tampa Bay defensive back serving, unnecessarily, as an escort. Realizing, finally, that he won’t catch the cornerback, Ogden decides to use this poor unsuspecting fellow as a human missile. Still running at full tilt, he grabs this 200-pound man and launches him at his teammate—and just misses. The cornerback who picked off the pass and ran it back for a touchdown has no idea what nearly hit him. He races into the end zone and celebrates his wonderful self. The crowd cooperates, and gives him all their attention. But they shouldn’t have. The Blind Side The Blind Side CHAPTER TEN The Blind Side THE EGG BOWL IN 1958, WHEN A BLACK TEACHER from Gulfport, Mississippi, named Clennon King tried to enroll in Ole Miss, and was instead carted away by Mississippi state troopers to an insane asylum, the football coach couldn’t have imagined it had anything to do with him. When, in 1962, James Meredith came and stayed, the campus was engulfed in riots, and the football coach watched as his practice field became a staging area for army helicopters—but his team still went 10–0 and ended the season as national champions. But not long after that Ole Miss coaches set out to recruit the black athlete and found that history interfered. “There just aren’t that many white guys in Mississippi who can play,” said one of the Ole Miss football coaches. “The game is so much about speed now. The defense is so much about speed now. We need the best black kids if we’re going to have a chance.” But they seldom attracted the best black players; and since the early 1970s the Ole Miss football team has had about it a delicious fatalism. The civil rights movement achieved many things, and one of them was to create a plausible analogy between Ole Miss football and the Confederate army. In part because of the needs of their local football team, there wasn’t a town in America more concerned than Oxford, Mississippi, with seeming to have dispensed with race as an issue. The effort the locals put into avoiding obvious racism rendered the near-total lack of interaction between black people and white people in Oxford, Mississippi, almost as invisible as it was in the rest of the country. The history of the place was inescapable, however, if for no other reason than all these extremely annoying outsiders kept dragging it into otherwise pleasant conversations. As late as the fall of 2004 coaches from other SEC schools—including the University of Alabama—were phoning up Michael Oher and telling him that he shouldn’t go to Ole Miss because black people weren’t welcome there. And if Michael Oher hadn’t put down the phone and found himself staring at his very own white Ole Miss family, he might have taken an interest in the subject. Mississippi’s past had created the climate for Mississippi’s present, and it would continue to do so until the present was otherwise notified. Bobby Nix, a white Ole Miss graduate from the early 1980s who now tutored football players, made this point routinely. To help the black kids feel as if they belonged at Ole Miss, Nix often took them into the places frequented by the old white affluent Ole Miss crowd. The Grove, say, or the Square. Usually he would end up feeling awkward and self-conscious. “When you show up with them,” he said, “you’ll get this look. It’s like you have the crying baby on the airplane.” That look could have meant any number of things. The color of their skin was just the beginning of what set the Ole Miss football players apart. They had gold caps on their teeth and blue tattoos on their skins. They wore different clothes: oversized ersatz sports apparel so loose fitting that every stiff breeze threatened to leave them naked in the streets. They drove different cars—these jalopies outfitted with hubcaps worth twice the market value of the entire vehicle. You’d see them driving around in these bizarre-looking rigs with the front seats tilted so far back that the driver appeared to be an astrologist hard at work in a fully reclined Barcalounger. Many of them didn’t speak or write standard English; to all but the most attentive white Ole Miss football fan, the black football players were barely comprehensible. Many of them, according to their tutors, were less well prepared for college than Michael Oher. The typical incoming player in Michael’s class had third-grade level reading skills. Several had never taken math. Ever. But if they wanted to play college football—if they wanted a shot at “the league”—they had to go through the tedious charade of pretending to be ordinary college students. Of the seventy players who survived Coach O’s first grueling spring practice, more than forty were classified as “academically at risk,” which meant, among other things, that they spent a great deal of their time inside a redbrick building with dark windows on the fringes of the Ole Miss campus, being spoon-fed books by an army of tutors. “We tell them that they are employees of a corporation,” said Nix, one of the more experienced of those tutors. “And that they might be dropped at any time for lack of performance.” A big part of the tutor’s job was to steer the players away from the professors and courses most likely to lead to lack of performance. The majority of the football team wound up majoring in “Criminal Justice.” What Criminal Justice had going for it was that it didn’t require any math or language skills. Criminal Justice classes were also almost always filled with other football players. Of course, football players weren’t the only Ole Miss students majoring in Criminal Justice. But when the Criminal Justice program took the field trip to Parchman Farm—aka the Mississippi State Penitentiary—the football players were the only students with friends on the inside. When people on the streets looked at the black football players, and made Bobby Nix feel as if he was holding the crying baby on the airplane, they might have had other things in mind but the color of their skin. And in other places, Nix might have discounted those looks. Here in Oxford he couldn’t. Here every look was filtered by the past. The perception that Ole Miss’s treatment of black people might not be up to the high standards of, say, the University of Alabama was just one of the many problems Coach O faced when he set out to convince the region’s top high school football players to come play for him—but he couldn’t ignore it. Coach O had been hired by Ole Miss in large part because he had proven himself to be a gifted recruiter of black football players. He’d never been a head coach, or run a football offense. And while he had an obvious knack for firing up a football defense, his single most important career achievement was to have recruited a pair of national championship football teams for the University of Southern California. When Coach O had arrived in the late 1990s the USC football team was faring poorly, and losing the best Los Angeles inner-city athletes to other schools. Coach O decided that what he needed was an example. Talk just one great inner-city high school player into committing to USC, prove that he can have a great experience, and others would follow. His opinion leader had been a defensive lineman named Shaun Cody—a USA Today High School All-American who, after three years at USC, went on to become a second-round draft pick of the Detroit Lions. When Coach O looked at Michael Oher, he saw Shaun Cody. But he was more than that. Not only was Michael Oher black, famous, and the best offensive lineman anywhere near Oxford, Mississippi. Michael Oher had a white sister who was an Ole Miss cheerleader and belonged to one of the snootiest white sororities on campus. The possibilities were endless. IT DIDN’T TAKE LONG for word to arrive back at Ole Miss that the new head coach was out there saying he planned to build his football team on the back of Michael Oher. Ole Miss’s two starting tackles, Bobby Harris and Tre Stallings, dug out Michael Oher’s high school recruiting tape just to have a look at this new guy everyone was talking about. Stallings and Harris both were entering their senior seasons with at least a shot at playing in the NFL—Stallings would be taken in the sixth round by the Kansas City Chiefs, and Harris would sign a free agent contract with the San Francisco 49ers. Stallings, especially, expected to be the center of attention when people paid attention to Ole Miss offensive linemen. Then he rolled the tape of Michael Oher playing left tackle for the Briarcrest Christian School. “We both just laughed,” said Harris. “I’d have to say he was the best lineman I’d ever seen with my own eyes—Terrence Metcalf [of the Chicago Bears] would be second. He was just maulin’ people. Tre and me just looked at each other and said, ‘He a beast!’” Coach O handed the same tape to George DeLeone. DeLeone, in his thirty-sixth year of coaching offensive linemen, in college and the pros, had just arrived at Ole Miss from Syracuse University. He popped in Michael’s tape, and as he watched he thought, Oh my God. “The flexibility in those hips! The arch in that back! That mass! Those feet!” he exclaimed, as he rewatched. DeLeone had seen plenty of future star NFL linemen back as college prospects. “Orlando Pace,” he said, “or Andre Gurode with the Cowboys. In my judgment Michael Oher looks just like those guys did at this stage. It’s a kinesthetic sense. You can’t teach it.” In modern times Ole Miss’s football team had enjoyed only the briefest and most fleeting moments of glory but had always been good at sending offensive linemen to the NFL. In the most recent NFL draft—the draft of 2005—their center Chris Spencer was picked in the first round by the Seattle Seahawks, and one of their guards, Marcus Johnson, was taken in the second round by the Minnesota Vikings. Before that, Terrence Metcalf had gone to the Bears, Todd Wade to the Texans, Stacey Andrews to the Bengals, Ben Claxton to the Falcons, Tutan Reyes to the Panthers, and Key-drick Vincent to the Steelers. None of those players had been in the starting lineup his freshman year. George DeLeone assumed Michael Oher would be treated like any other great offensive line prospect. He’d be red-shirted, sit out a year, and learn the system. In his thirty-six years of college coaching DeLeone had inserted a freshman into his starting lineup just once. And that had been back in 1986, on a losing Syracuse team, in a far weaker college conference than the one Ole Miss played in. Even then, Blake Bed-narz—that was the kid’s name—had started several years in high school, weight trained seriously, and arrived at Syracuse with a good understanding of his position. And he’d stunk! “Blake ended up being a great player for us,” said DeLeone, “but he wasn’t one that year.” Now Coach O was insisting that Michael Oher start for Ole Miss…immediately! The kid had played a grand total of fifteen high school games on the offensive line. “He’s a kid who has never really been in a weight program,” said DeLeone. “And he’ll be going up against grown men who have been in the weight room for five years. And he’s doing it in the best league in the country for defensive linemen.” To make matters worse, the college game had grown a lot more complicated in the past twenty years. The Ole Miss offense would be a combination of the Atlanta Falcons’ running game and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers’ passing game. DeLeone assumed that no matter how quickly the kid took to the game he’d need a full season to learn whom to block, and how to block him—and now he was being told by Coach O that Michael had some kind of learning disability, and that he’d have to teach him the plays using ketchup and mustard bottles. “A visual learner,” Coach O had called him. Whatever that meant. With the first game of the season less than two months away, DeLeone hopped in his car and drove the hour and a half from Oxford, Mississippi, to the Tuohy home in Memphis. Ditching the Ole Miss playbook with its X’s and O’s, he gamely set out to teach Michael Oher what was essentially an NFL offense. The kitchen chairs stood in for linebackers. The fancy dining room chairs—the Tuohy lady had just enough of them, luckily—served as the defensive and offensive lines. Coach O had told him to get the kid out on the field as quickly as possible, so DeLeone turned him into a right guard. It wasn’t the kid’s natural position. His natural position was left tackle. But the right guard had physical help on either side of him, and verbal instructions, from both the center and the tackle. It was the easiest position to learn, but, even so, DeLeone did not believe any true freshman could learn it. “Michael Oher is without question one of the greatest athletes I have ever seen for a guy his size,” said DeLeone. “But what we’re asking him to do is impossible to do.” In the safety of the Tuohys’ kitchen they made progress—the kid was driving the fancy dining room chairs off the line nicely—when Leigh Anne came through the door. When she saw Michael firing off the line and getting fit with her furniture she took control of the defense. “The linebackers can stay,” she said, tensely. “But you put my two thousand dollar dining room chairs back! Right now!” She then proceeded to tell him that she had examined his playbook with its X’s and its O’s and that it was “never going to work.” Coach DeLeone had a better idea than changing the playbook: keep Michael on the bench. How could an offensive line coach in good conscience stick any freshman into an SEC football game, much less a lineman who didn’t know the plays? The first few games he actually tried this ploy. Coach O had made him start Michael Oher; but in the middle of the second quarter, when Coach O’s attention was diverted, he’d have an upperclassman tap Michael on the shoulder and quietly inform him he was being replaced. Michael would go sit on the bench until Coach O noticed he was there, and flip out. Leigh Anne he assumed he could ignore; Coach O he assumed he could not. “Everyone who coaches college football is intense,” said DeLeone. “But O’s intensity is at another level.” ALRIGHTEERIGHTEERIGHTEE righteeerighteeeee!! Hooo!…Hooo!…Hooo!…Hooo! LessgoooooLessgoooooLesssgooooo!” It was seven o’clock in the morning, and already Coach O was out roaming the halls of the practice facility, hollering at the top of his lungs. The players filed past him, wearily. The linemen came as a group, a study in ectomorphism. Fourteen 300-pound men lumbering down a narrow hallway was a sight worth seeing. Their movements were regular, synchronized, and slow. Each step was a discrete event, requiring conscious effort. They transferred all their weight onto one leg, paused in preparation for the next three-foot-long journey, and then shoved off. They looked like a herd of circus elephants. All but one, the biggest of them all, who skipped along lightly on the balls of his feet. Michael Oher now had a swagger about him. A lot of people he didn’t know were talking about him. Before the season Sports Illustrated had named him one of the five freshman football players in the country to watch. At one of his first practices, newly installed at right guard, Michael could only shake his head as a defensive end bull rushed the left tackle and sacked the quarterback. But after the play he walked over to the defensive end and said, “If I was left tackle you wouldn’t know what our backfield looked like. You’d need a road map.” But he wasn’t the left tackle; Bobby Harris was. “Hoo! Hoo! Hoo! Bobbah Harris YouWAKEyet????!!!! C’mon Bobbah Bobbahbobbahbobbah!…WhatyouthinkBobbyHarris??” “Aw-rye coach,” said Bobby Harris. “Mikka Oh! Mikka Oh! Howdooosaaaaaa!” (Michael Oher! Michael Oher! How you doin’ son?) “ReddostahCOMpeet’n?” (Ready to start competing?) “Lessturnbackdaclock. Two a days all over again! Hoo! Hoo! Hoo! Hoo!” His voice broke and became a piercing, dog-whistle-like shriek, and then he vanished around a corner. A human geyser of adrenaline and testosterone, he had maintained this pitch from the first day of spring practice until this morning, the day before the team was scheduled to play its final game of the season. He’d done it in spite of presiding over what had to be one of America’s most dysfunctional football teams. He’d been handed a weak and dispirited group of players and instantly set about trying to determine who among them met his standards. After three grueling weeks of spring practice, seventeen of Ole Miss’s eighty-five football players quit. Some decamped for other colleges; some just went home. Coach O immediately went looking for their replacements. Now, as the season entered its final week, his nose for available football carrion would be the envy of any vulture. He knew by heart the rosters of many junior college teams. He knew where to post ads on the Internet to solicit college football players. When Hurricane Katrina drove the Tulane University football team out of New Orleans, there, at the city limits, stood Coach O, hoping to lure away Tulane’s finest—prompting the Tulane head coach to call him, publicly, “lower than dirt.” Coach O wasn’t lower than dirt. He was a desperate man in a dire situation. Here he was in his first, and possibly only, shot at making it as a head coach in big-time college football. And he had no players! His defense was actually very good—and Coach O, who ran the defense, ran it well. But Coach O had no real experience with a football offense, and his offensive coaches weren’t giving him a lot of help. Each week they trotted out plays that might be run with success only by physically superior football players. And each week the Ole Miss offense ran onto the field without the faintest hope of success. Going into the final game of the season the Rebels were 3–7, but their record did not capture the flavor of their despair. In seven SEC games they were 1–6 and their lone win came against Kentucky, which was seldom a thing to be proud of. Their offense had scored the grand total of 77 points. Of the 117 Division I-A football teams Ole Miss ranked 115th in points scored. “We must have the worst offense in college football,” said Michael, and he wasn’t far wrong. The coaching staff had passed through all the stages of grief—denial, shock, anger, sadness, resignation—and entered a stage overlooked by the psychology textbooks: the terror of total humiliation. They were about to travel to Starkville, Mississippi, to face the Mississippi State Bulldogs. The Ole Miss–Mississippi State game was called the Egg Bowl, in honor of the egg-shaped trophy passed back and forth for the previous twelve or thirteen centuries between the two schools. It had been several years since Ole Miss had lost the egg; no senior on the Ole Miss football team had suffered the indignity of surrendering the egg. It had been several years, for that matter, since Mississippi State had beaten any other team in the SEC. As Hugh Freeze, who was now Coach O’s closest confidante and chief aide de camp, put it, “This is a game we don’t need to be losing. You don’t lose to Mississippi State.” A football game between Ole Miss and Mississippi State was more than just a football game—but then that was thought to be true of many Ole Miss football games. Before the previous game, against LSU, the second-to-last game of the season, Ole Miss’s dean of students, Sparky Reardon, tried to explain the extreme emotions associated with the event. “It’s kind of like the situation in the Middle East,” he told the Ole Miss student newspaper. “Fans of one grow up hating the other and really don’t know why.” The twist to the Mississippi State rivalry was that the fans knew exactly why they hated each other. The game served as a proxy for the hoary Mississippi class struggle, between the white folks who wore shirts with collars on them and the white folks who did not. Mississippi State was a land grant college, originally called Mississippi A&M. The desperate contempt Ole Miss football fans felt for Mississippi State was echoed in the feelings of fans of the University of Texas for Texas A&M and fans of the University of Oklahoma for Oklahoma State—formerly known as Oklahoma A&M. These schools were not rivals; they were subordinates. Theirs was not a football team to be beaten but an insurrection to be put down. This notion was most vivid in the Ole Miss imagination: that the state of Mississippi, with the sole exception of the town of Oxford, was once a Great Lake of Rednecks. In recent decades the earth had warmed, and the shores of Great Lake Redneck had receded, so that, strictly speaking, perhaps it should not be described as a lake. But still, the residue was a very large puddle. And the one place in the puddle deep enough to ruin a shiny new pair of tassel loafers was Starkville, Mississippi. And now the only thing between the players and the game was this final morning of preparation. The players stumbled in and parsed themselves into small groups according to their positions. The running backs went off into a room with their fellow running backs, the linebackers disappeared with linebackers. The fourteen offensive linemen herded themselves into what instantly appeared to be an inadequate room, and settled behind desks that seemed designed for midgets. Michael took his usual seat, in the back of the room. If Michael Oher felt any social anxiety leaving Memphis for Oxford he hadn’t shown it. Once or twice he’d asked questions of Miss Sue about Ole Miss that suggested a certain vague apprehension. “Is it true they got fraternities that won’t let in black guys?” (It was true.) “Will I be the only person at Ole Miss who doesn’t drink?” (The small club of teetotalers was accepting all applicants.) But his wasn’t the ordinary story of the boy going away to college. He’d left home, but home had come along for the ride. Miss Sue was still his private tutor. Hugh Freeze was still his football coach. Sean and Leigh Anne were, on many nights, in the house they’d built a couple of hundred yards off the Ole Miss campus. Before the first home game of the season Sean Junior had walked just ahead of him through the Grove, hand in hand with Coach O. And when they’d gotten to the stadium Collins was right there on the sidelines, leading cheers. He felt right at home, in his own way. He didn’t run with a crowd but he had many friends. He floated back and forth between white Ole Miss and black Ole Miss. He enjoyed his own company and kept much of himself to himself. When the other linemen chattered he just sat and watched them. “There was a transvestite in Chevron this morning,” said one of the other linemen. “It was scary.” Several of them started, at the horror of it. The circus elephants had stumbled upon their mouse. “And it wasn’t buying anything either,” said the 300-pound lineman. “It was just standing there. Staring.” “Aw, man!” said another gargantuan fellow. “Jesus,” said a third. Michael just shook his head and said nothing. When the digital clock turned from 7:29 to 7:30 Coach DeLeone came into the room, hunched and limping and deeply weary. T-shirt, sweat pants, reading glasses, gray hair cut in the style of a marine sergeant: if you had to guess what he did for a living you would guess George DeLeone was a retired military man, with a string of Purple Hearts. In fact he was a former undersized college lineman whose knee injuries still plagued him. He didn’t look happy, but then he had no reason to be happy. The offense had been abysmal, and the Internet pundits and the newspaper columnists were pointing to his offensive line as the problem. His situation was grim: he was on the verge of losing his job. Now he hoped to persuade his linemen to join him in grimness and to see the gravity of their predicament. “All right, men,” he said, as he fiddled with the overhead projector. “I want to thank you for everything you’ve done for me this year.” No one said a word. Then one of them realized: “Coach, was that a joke?” They all laughed, even Michael. “We all set, ready to go, or we gonna laugh?” barked DeLeone, wrong-footing them utterly. “Guys! Can we just have one game where we come in on Sunday, look at the tape, and say, ‘This is how we can play as an offensive line’? Let’s play this game with some frickin’ pride on the offensive line. That means something to me, and I hope it means something to you. We can laugh next week. Laugh Sunday night. Now…” He calmed down, without any help from his players, and pulled out his plastic sheets—the sheets with the X’s and O’s on them. Then he switched on the overhead projector and assumed his usual position beside it. Bobby Harris gave a huge yawn. “Sit up please, Bobby,” said Coach DeLeone. Bobby sat up. “Thank you.” The final lesson of their miserable season took the form of a pop quiz: Coach DeLeone called the name of a lineman and a play. The lineman was meant to respond with his assignment on that play. The air was soon thick with jargon and code. “Rip” and “Liz” and “Willie” and “Philly” and “Rum” and “Pookie” and “Trios” and “A-Gaps” and “3-Techniques.” A gifted student of language would require a month to grasp it all. Throughout DeLeone kept one eye on his most troubling pupil, Michael Oher. Michael was now Ole Miss’s starting right guard. A third of the time he had no idea where he was meant to go, or whom he was meant to block. The other two thirds, when he knew what he was supposed to do, and was sure of himself, he’d beaten up on much older opposing players. He’d pancaked a linebacker at Tennessee, and another at Alabama, both future NFL draft picks. After he’d crushed the Tennessee kid, and as he sat on top of him, he’d gotten into his face and said, “You lucky, if I’d come here to school, you’d be getting this every day.” You had to like the kid’s confidence—taking it that way to a senior all-conference linebacker. And, as confused as he was at times, he’d had games after which the film revealed him as the best performing lineman on the team. “He’s getting by on his raw athletic ability,” said Matt Luke, a former college lineman himself turned Ole Miss assistant coach. “It’s the best I’ve ever seen. And my entire college line except me is in the NFL.” The games in which Michael had excelled also happened to be the games before which Sean Tuohy had sat down with him for six hours or so and reviewed the plays. Now he sat rubbing his knees, pushing down so hard on them with his hands he seemed to be trying to rip off a layer of his own skin. (“That’s a nervous reaction he has,” said Leigh Anne.) He’d put fifty hours into this course for every hour he had put into math or English. But of all the courses he had taken, the course in playing offensive line had proved the most difficult. It was the most difficult. The plays were all new to him, and in a code foreign to him, and on each play there were a mind-numbing number of variations. On a football team, only the quarterback experienced the same level of complexity as the offensive line. As Michael struggled to organize inside his mind the blizzard of new material, this sixty-something-year-old coach with his funny East Coast accent kept hollering in his ear. Coach DeLeone prided himself on his rigor and the high expectations he had for his players. “One of my players misses a class I’m here at six in the morning running him,” he said. “I know this: I don’t see a lot of history professors out there running people around the building.” Today—the last day of preparation for the Mississippi State Bulldogs—is in theory a review. In fact, the coaches, grasping at straws, have put in new plays, with new terminology. Michael Oher isn’t the only lineman who has no clue what’s going on. “Michael Oher!” Michael stirred, uneasily. “Twenty-eight Gem,” barked his coach. “Gem tells the right guard to do what?” “Go get the Mac,” Michael said. The Mac is the middle linebacker. Unless he’s the Mike. The main thing is he’s not the Willie or the Sam—the nicknames for the other linebackers. “Go get the Mac,” said DeLeone, approvingly. Michael knew that much. But—he was thinking, as he sat there—the Mac moved around. So did every other player on a college defense. What if the Mac wasn’t where he was supposed to be? “The problem is,” he said later, “I got eight guys running in front of me two seconds before the ball’s snapped.” Back at Briarcrest they had three basic running plays, and Michael had been assigned to block the same man no matter what the defense. Ole Miss had dozens of running plays, with half a dozen different blocking assignments on each of them. Whom he blocked, and how he blocked them, depended on where the defenders stood at the snap of the ball. There was a good reason for the new complexity. In high school if some defender came free and went unblocked—well, the team would take that risk for the sake of keeping things simple. In college the coaches couldn’t risk a defender going completely unblocked, because the defenders were so routinely dangerous. A defender who went completely unblocked in the SEC could end the quarterback’s season. “This is the last time to talk about these assignments,” DeLeone shouted. “We got to nail this, men!” It was as if Coach DeLeone had read his thoughts. Even though he’d given him the right answer, the coach seemed upset. He was getting himself all worked up again. “You must step up!” shouted Coach DeLeone. He’d changed gears. He meant this literally—that when the ball was snapped the linemen needed to step forward, not backward. “Both guards last week stepped on the quarterback,” the line coach continued. “This cannot happen this week.” Last week they’d played LSU and lost 40–7. Against LSU the Ole Miss quarterback had gone down several times, in the most embarrassing way possible, with his foot pinned to the ground by one of his own linemen. At least one of those feet had been Michael’s. “You must step up!!” He was screaming again. “You must step up!! We got that, Michael Oher??” Coach DeLeone’s face was red, but his toenail was still black and blue from having been stepped on during practice, two months before, by Michael Oher. “Yes, sir,” said Michael. He thought: If this old guy doesn’t calm down, he’s gonna have a heart attack right here and die. But, once again, the coach calmed himself. “What’s the deal with Mississippi State?” he asked, innocently. The linemen searched in each other’s blank faces for the right answer, but failed to locate it. It was Bobby Harris who finally ventured a guess. “That we hate them?” he said. “Someone is saying that the Mississippi State coach is guaranteeing a win,” said DeLeone, incredulously. “They think that much of us that they’re guaranteeing a win?” Ah—that was it. A faint stab at a motivational speech. But that wasn’t Coach DeLeone’s job. Which was just as well, as it was time to go listen to Coach O. TEN MINUTES LATER Coach O had his football team arranged before him. One final pre-game speech to deliver before he could put this dreadful season behind him. He waited for them to quit horsing around, which they always seemed to need to do for at least ninety seconds, and then strolled with authority to the podium. “Let me say this about Mississippi State,” he began. He paused for dramatic effect. “They hate you, we hate them.” He paused again. No one could disagree. “I purposefully have not had much for the other team. ‘Cause I don’t respect them much. I say I respect them in the paper. I don’t respect ’em. I don’t have nuthin’ for them. The other guy has been putting up the scores of last year.” He hardly needed to explain himself because everyone in the room already understood. They might not have read the papers but they had at least heard the rumor that Sylvester Croom, Mississippi State’s head coach, has been riling up his players by posting the scores from past defeats at the hands of Ole Miss. Croom also stood accused of trash-talking. He’d gone in front of a group of Mississippi State boosters, spoken about Ole Miss, and gotten himself quoted in the papers. All he’d actually said was “I don’t ever think about Ole Miss. If our kids play as well as they can, we’re going to beat their butt.” But every right-thinking Ole Miss football fan and player must agree that Croom has violated football decorum—which is of course only what you’d expect from a Mississippi State football coach. “This is totally wrong,” Coach O now says. “Let’s put these guys way below our program. Think about class and Ole Miss. Think about how we are, think about how they are.” A Great Lake of Rednecks! “Understand that their team is going to come out fired up,” he continues. “He [Coach Croom] didn’t even let ’em go home for Thanksgiving. Wanted ’em all living in a hotel in Starkville. Dumpy ass hotel in Starkville. I can just about imagine it.” Coach O actually didn’t share the social pretensions of his employer. He was just a good ol’ boy who didn’t present himself as anything but a good ol’ boy—he said his boyhood idea of going out to a fancy restaurant was driving thirty miles to Kentucky Fried Chicken. He’d have been perfectly content in a dumpy ass hotel in Starkville. He was just speaking from the Ole Miss script—and doing it well, in view of the circumstances. The circumstances were that the Ole Miss football team, like the Mississippi State football team, consisted mostly of poor black kids from Mississippi. When the Ole Miss defense gathered in a single room, the only white people were coaches. On the football field the players became honorary white people, but off it they were still black, and unnatural combatants in Mississippi’s white internecine war. Even as Coach O worked to fire them up for the game, many of the seniors had their bags packed and their cars running. After the game they’d vanish, en masse, from the Ole Miss campus. They’d just walk right out of the locker room and get in their cars and drive away. Several who might have stayed and picked up their degrees will decide it wasn’t worth hanging around five months to do it. They’ll have spent four years shuttling between their off-campus apartments, their Criminal Justice classes, and football practice on the off chance of making it to the NFL. Coach O was finished imagining the dumpy ass hotel in Starkville. It clearly pained him to dwell on the negative qualities of their opponents; he was by nature a positive man. He wanted to end on a positive note. “You come to school here,” he said, seriously. “You graduate. You go to the NFL. That’s what I want our program to be.” And then he began to ramble, sounding like a man talking in his sleep. “Just gonna win tomorrow,” he said. “Focus. Details. Let’s focus.” THE NEXT MORNING the Ole Miss Rebels’ buses rolled into Starkville. At Ole Miss there was money in the air; here there was just hostility, and the sights and sounds of resentment. Every State fan carried a cowbell, and rang it incessantly, as they hurled insults at the Ole Miss players. The players changed into their uniforms on cold concrete floors, and hung their street clothes in old wooden cubbyholes. Once dressed, they crowded into the foyer outside the locker room, like soldiers on a troop carrier about to storm a beach. That’s when one spotted, beneath a pile of cardboard boxes, empty Gatorade bottles, and surgical tape, an oddly shaped trophy badly in need of polishing. “Dat da egg?” he asked, incredulously. Another player looked over, then another. The Ole Miss staff had brought the old trophy along with them, in case they lost and had to hand it over. “Dat is da egg,” said someone else. With that, they raced out onto the field, to the clanging of cowbells and hoots of derision. Never mind the barnlike quality of the locker room; never mind the rickety old stadium itself: the football field was a work of art. There was no substance on earth more lush or thick or green or beautiful. Turfology, as it happened, was Mississippi State’s great academic strength. At the mention of State’s turf-tending skills, the Ole Miss snob would become serious and acknowledge that, whatever you might want to say about State, they knew how to grow golf courses. “Don’t forget to look down and check out the grass!” had been one of two pieces of advice Sean had given Michael before he left for the game. The other was, “Never take your helmet off in Starkville.” And Michael didn’t, but more out of shame than fear of being brained by a beer bottle. The game took the Ole Miss team through a speeded-up version of the emotions of their season. First came hope: five plays into the game the Ole Miss quarterback, Ethan Flatt, hit his fastest receiver, Taye Biddle, for a 41-yard touchdown pass. But Biddle, one of the seniors who would quit school immediately after the game, might as well have kept on running out the back of the end zone and into his car. Ole Miss never called that play again. Instead, their offensive brain trust decided to use their unbelievably slow, fifth-string running back to test the strong interior of the Mississippi State defense. In the press box before the game, the Ole Miss offensive coordinator, Noel Mazzone, happened to walk past a TV on which was playing a North Carolina State football game. Six months earlier, Mazzone had left his job running the North Carolina State offense to take the job of running the Ole Miss offense. Seeing his former team on TV he snorted and said, loudly enough for journalists to overhear, “Should have stayed there, at least they had some players.” Bill Walsh had shown how much an imaginative coach might achieve even with mediocre talent; Noel Mazzone was demonstrating how little could be achieved by a coach who did not admit any role for the imagination. The next five times Ole Miss had the ball Mazzone used the opportunity to prove that his slow, fifth-string running back couldn’t run through a giant pile of bodies in the middle of the field. Once the Ole Miss offense faced third and long, as it invariably did, everyone in the stadium knew a pass was coming. There was nothing for the Ole Miss quarterback to do but drop back and wait to be buried under the Mississippi State blitz. Most of the time, just before he was crushed, he managed to throw an incomplete pass or an interception. Three punts and two interceptions later Mississippi State led 21–7. Rather than try a different strategy—say, the surprising pass play that had worked the first time they had the ball—the Ole Miss coaches tried different players. First they switched their fifth-string running back out for their sixth-string running back. (Between them they ran the ball twenty-five times for 31 yards.) Then they switched their first-string quarterback out for their second-string quarterback—the fellow who had started the season as the first-string quarterback. (Between them they threw four interceptions.) The frantic search for the right combination of players reflected their more general football worldview: they believed in talent rather than strategy. They placed less emphasis on how players were used than who they were. Whoever had the best players won: it was as simple as that. It was a bleak and deterministic worldview, implying, as it did, that there was little a strategist could do to raise the value of his players. More to the point, it was a false view, at least for running a football offense. The beauty of the football offense was that it allowed for a smart strategist to compensate for his players’ limitations. He might find better ways to use players, to maximize their strengths and minimize their weaknesses. He might even change the players’ sense of themselves. But Ole Miss not only lacked a smart strategist: it lacked a coach who understood the importance of strategy. The genius of Bill Walsh was missing; so, for that matter, was the genius of Leigh Anne Tuohy. There wasn’t a soul on the Ole Miss sidelines thinking seriously how to make the most of what another person could do. They were all stuck dwelling on what other people couldn’t do. After each failed series the linemen trotted to the bench and plunked themselves down for a chalk talk delivered by assistant line coach Matt Luke. This served mainly to highlight their near-total confusion. After one series the right tackle, Tre Stallings, confessed he had gone the wrong way because he thought the center, Daryl Harris, had shouted “Philly,” when he had in fact shouted “Willie.” After another series there ensued a long argument—for them—about the difference between “G” and “Gem.” After a third series three of the linemen got screamed at for firing out and blocking linebackers instead of blocking the linemen right in front of them. After a fourth series a coach thrust a headset at Michael Oher so that Michael could listen to Coach DeLeone, up in the press box, holler at him to try harder. After a fifth series the left guard, Andrew Wicker, hurled his helmet on the ground and shouted, “We’re getting our ass kicked by State.” And they were—largely because none of them had any clear idea what he was meant to do on any given play. By halftime hope was rapidly giving way to denial. At the start of the third quarter denial gave way to depression, with hardly a pause for the intermediate stages of bargaining and anger. The change came on a single play. With Ole Miss down 21–14, the team had the ball and began, slowly, to move it. It was, as always, third and long, and the Ole Miss quarterback, Michael Spurlock, called for a pass. That in itself posed a problem, as he was only about five nine, and unable to see over the linemen. To compensate for his stature, Spurlock had the habit of just taking off toward the sideline the minute he received the ball. The price he paid for his new view of the field was to render himself nearly useless as a passer—he was running too fast to throw the ball with accuracy—and to confuse the linemen assigned to protect him, as they had no idea where he was. On this play it hardly mattered. Ole Miss had lined up with two tight ends: both ran the wrong way and missed their blocks. Ole Miss had a tailback: he, too, ran the wrong way and failed to block the defender he was meant to block. Three of the five Ole Miss linemen—Michael plus the center plus the left guard—all blocked a single Mississippi State defensive tackle. With most of Ole Miss’s blockers ungainfully employed, a Bulldog linebacker shot through a gap and sacked the Rebel quarterback for a 20-yard loss, almost killing him in the bargain. After that Coach DeLeone, watching from the press box, yanked Michael Oher from the game. Michael ended his season on the bench, a simmering symbol of his coach’s frustration. From his seat beside his wife, high in the stands, Sean Tuohy watched the loss take shape with the calm of an asset manager who long ago banked his annual returns. In the grand scheme of Michael’s career this one game—this entire season—didn’t matter. Just by taking the field as a freshman, Michael’s stock remained high. Sean’s main goal had been to make sure that Michael didn’t have the same experience of college sports that he had had, and that Michael didn’t wind up depending on the mercy or the intelligence of his coaches. Now Sean understood that the Ole Miss coaches needed Michael far more than he needed them. Their careers were at stake; Michael could always transfer—a fact Leigh Anne had brought to the attention of the Ole Miss coaches more than once. Leigh Anne had already told Coach O that if Noel Mazzone and George DeLeone returned to run the Ole Miss offense for one more year, Michael would not—and the two coaches were almost sure to be gone after this game. Michael didn’t need to worry about the bigger picture; the bigger picture was arranging itself to maximize his value. “See how his face looks right now,” said Sean, his binoculars trained on Michael. Michael’s upper lip was tucked under his lower, and his eyes stared straight ahead at nothing. “That’s how he looks when he’s planning on not talking to anyone for a while.” He could afford to pout. THE DAY AFTER his team’s embarrassing 35–14 loss to Mississippi State, Coach O fired his offensive coordinator and began to look for a new offensive line coach. Then he sat down and wrote out his depth chart for the 2006 football season. The first name he moved around was Michael Oher’s. Michael became Ole Miss’s starting left tackle. “If I could do it over,” said the head coach, “I’d have just put him there to begin with and let him figure it out.” The plan started with Michael Oher but didn’t end there. Coach O might not have Bill Walsh’s gift for taking average talent and tricking it into being better, but he knew how to find and attract great talent. Over the next few months he set out to pluck the finest football talent from the junior colleges and high schools of America—and, to judge from the high marks he received from the recruiting services, he appeared to have succeeded. At the center of this effort, oddly enough, was Michael Oher. “In every conversation Michael’s name came up,” he said. “He was my tool. And when we had the top guys on campus, I had him show them around.” Michael walked away from his freshman season wondering what that had all been about. And then, strangely, the honors began to roll in. He was named a First Team Freshman All-American, and First Team Freshman All-SEC. He was named pre-season All-SEC by magazines and also by the SEC’s coaches. College Football Weekly listed him the best player on the Ole Miss offense. His value, once perceived, was indestructible. He could play on one of the worst football offenses in the nation and nobody would hold it against him. The experience had been a blur. But all anyone seemed to care about was that (a) he was still the biggest guy on the field and a freakishly gifted athlete, (b) he’d picked up the college game faster than anyone had the right to expect, and (c) when he knew what he was supposed to do, he’d knocked some folks around. And while that wasn’t as often as anyone would have liked, it had been often enough that players and coaches now knew he’d eventually figure it out. So often given the benefit of doubts, Michael Oher now set out to confirm the wisdom of the people who showed such faith in him. After the season, for the first time in his life, he hit the weight room. Six months later he emerged a different shape; he went in a square and came out an inverted triangle. He went in being able to bench-press 225 pounds and came out bench-pressing nearly 400 pounds. He went in weighing 345 pounds and came out weighing 320—without, it seemed, an ounce of fat on him. But there still lingered this ominous feeling about him. He might be injured at any time, of course, but that wasn’t the source of the feeling. There was another, more disturbing risk, because it was harder to pin down. He could never shake entirely the place he had come from, and he could never change entirely who he was born. Every now and then, for instance, he’d go back to his old neighborhood and when he did bad things often happened. At Leigh Anne’s urging he had gone to see his mother—and the next thing Leigh Anne knew she was getting a call from a clearly flustered Big Tony, and the only words she could understand were “truck” and “dead” and that Michael was in the custody of the Memphis police. When Michael had arrived at his mother’s house he’d found the police there, arresting her. For some reason she’d been driving around in a truck that belonged to a man the police had just found, murdered. The police had asked Michael why he was there, he’d told them, and they’d put him in handcuffs and taken him to central lockup. Sean had sprung him, then given Michael a little speech about black people and the police and the unlikelihood of the former being treated graciously or even fairly by the latter. When a police officer told Michael to do something, no matter how rudely he put it, Michael was to say “yes, sir” and do it. And his first telephone call should be to Sean Tuohy. In theory, when Michael went away to Ole Miss, he put some distance between himself and the hand reaching out from his past. But Michael had left behind inner-city social risks only to find that inner-city social risks had followed him to Oxford, Mississippi. One friend and teammate, having failed his Ole Miss classes, left school and went right back to his old neigborhood to peddle drugs—because it was the only way he knew how to make money. His three closest friends on the Ole Miss team all had children. One, Jamarca Stanford, had become a father at fifteen. Another friend was a tough defensive end named Peria (he pronounced it Pur-Ray) Jerry. Peria had so little knowledge of math or English he might as well never have been to school. Miss Sue not only tutored him, and got him reading and adding fractions, she mothered him incessantly. Michael didn’t fully approve—he thought Miss Sue was his. One day he blurted out to Miss Sue, “You love Peria more than you love me.” “I’ll never love any of them more than I love you,” said Miss Sue. “But he’s catching up!” said Michael, outraged. And he was: one day Peria looked at Miss Sue with tears in his eyes and said, “Nobody ever loved me till you,” and it was all Miss Sue could do not to break down right there. Peria was so big that you forgot he was still, in most ways, just another needy child. There were at least a dozen black football players from impoverished backgrounds auditioning for the role of Eliza Doolittle. (“I wish I could get me an adopted family,” said Peria.) No one asked Leigh Anne for a shirt with a little alligator on it. But they all longed for some connection and the sense of being taken care of. Michael brought them home to Memphis, and so Leigh Anne got some idea of the risks to keeping Michael on the straight and narrow. To Thanksgiving dinner, for instance, Michael had invited a freshman linebacker named Quentin Taylor, who had no place else to go. At the start of the meal Michael leaned over and whispered, sternly, “Quentin, you’re supposed to put your napkin in your lap.” Right after that, Quentin let it drop that he had fathered three children by two different mothers. Leigh Anne pulled the carving knife from the turkey and said, “Quentin, you can do what you want and it’s your own business. But if Michael Oher does that I’m cutting his penis off.” From the look on Quentin’s face Michael could see he didn’t think she was joking. “She would, too,” said Michael, without breaking a smile. All these surprisingly good things were happening to Michael Oher. Still there was a sense that something surprisingly bad could happen at any time. And it did. ONE AFTERNOON, long after their miserable season was over, Michael sat on the front steps of his dormitory with a couple of teammates. Up walked another teammate, a freshman linebacker named Antonio Turner. Antonio had visited the Tuohy home in Memphis, and apparently he didn’t like what he had seen. Now he made a number of unflattering remarks about white people generally and about Michael’s “cracker family” specifically. When he called Michael a “cracker,” Michael gave him a shove, and Antonio punched him in the face—then ran. Michael gave chase, and the two of them raced in circles around a parked car like a couple of cartoon characters. Finally, Antonio said something about Collins and Leigh Anne Tuohy. What exactly he said no one ever exactly learned—and Michael refused to repeat it. But it had something to do with Antonio’s intention to have sex with Michael’s white sister, but only after he’d had sex with Michael’s white mother. Whereupon Michael said he was going to his dorm room to change his clothes, because he didn’t want to get Antonio’s blood on his nice shirt. When Michael walked back into the dorm to find a shirt he didn’t mind spoiling with Antonio’s blood, Antonio took off at a sprint. He ran to the redbrick study hall with the darkened windows used by the football players and monitored by tutors. Surrounded by teammates and white tutors, he figured he’d be safe. He figured wrong. Michael knew he didn’t need to run. He knew where Antonio had gone—there was no place else to go where Antonio would think he was safe. Michael walked across campus, calmly stalking his prey. Finally, he came to the study hall. There, in a small room filled with half a dozen players and tutors, he found Antonio, and charged. Force equals mass times acceleration, as Hugh Freeze said, and when Michael’s mass comes at you at Michael’s speed, it’s just an incredible force. With that incredible force he drove Antonio into the ground. Then he picked him up with one hand by the throat and lifted him straight off the ground. Antonio weighed 230 pounds but in Michael’s big hand he looked, as one player later put it, “like a rag doll.” Michael beat Antonio around the face and threw him across the room as, around the room, huge football players took cover beneath small desks. That’s when a lot of people at once began to scream hysterically and Michael noticed the little white boy on the floor, in a pool of blood. He hadn’t seen the little white boy—the three-year-old son of one of the tutors. Who had put the little white boy there? When he’d charged Antonio, the boy somehow had been hit and thrown up against the wall. His head was now bleeding badly. Seeing the body lying in his own blood, Michael ran. Antonio, a sobbing wreck, was taken to the home of running back coach Frank Wilson, for his own protection. He was still alive, and the Ole Miss coaches planned to keep him that way. Back in the study hall Miss Sue sat listening to another football player, a linebacker named Robert Russell. She told him she didn’t understand why these disputes must be resolved with violence. “Miss Sue,” he said, “Michael and I weren’t raised that way. No matter how much you try to wash us up behind the ears, we’re going to go back to what we know.” Hugh Freeze called Leigh Anne, who was up in Memphis. Like a zoo director discussing a crazed rhinoceros with its trainer, he said, “You got to get down here and find him. You’re the only one who can control him.” Leigh Anne jumped in her car, took off for Oxford—and then stopped. Michael was gone, no one knew where he was, and she didn’t actually believe she could find him. She pulled over to the side of the road and called Sean, who was somewhere on the West Coast with the Memphis Grizzlies. It was Sean who said, “He’s running because that’s all he knows how to do.” He wasn’t out looking for someone to kill. He was just trying to escape his predicament. Just a few months earlier Sean would have been shocked. But now he knew that when Michael got into trouble, he ran. He knew it because not long after Michael had left for Ole Miss he’d had an argument with Miss Sue and vanished for two days. He wouldn’t return phone calls—nothing. Late one night, Sean and Leigh Anne had turned to each other in bed and considered the possibility that Michael Oher might never come back. That he’d just used them to get what he’d wanted and that he actually had no real feelings for them. “You think this is it?” Leigh Anne had asked. And the truth was, Sean didn’t know. “Your mind does funny things when it’s idle,” said Sean. “But that’s when I decided that the downside was that we’d helped some kid—so even if he’d been playing us all along there really was no downside.” But he knew something else, too. He knew that Michael had spent his life running. Not long before, he’d been in his Memphis office when a woman named Bobby Spivey, who worked for the Tennessee Department of Children’s Services, finally returned his call. Spivey was the officer who had handled Michael’s case. Sean had phoned her three times to see what he could learn about the missing years in Michael’s life, and each time he found himself in conversation with Spivey’s voice mail box.* Now, finally, Spivey herself was on his speaker phone, and embarrassed to say that most of the details of Michael’s case were unavailable. The Department of Children’s Services had lost his file. She remembered very clearly some things about Michael Oher, however. She recalled, for instance, the night that Children’s Services had sent the police to remove seven-year-old Michael Oher from his mother’s care. “It was raining that night,” said Bobby Spivey. “She was homeless. She was on drugs. Someone called the police and said she was walking around in the rain with her kids.” She recalled that Michael Oher had been taken away and put into a foster home—but that he hadn’t stayed. “He was a runaway a majority of the time,” she said, laconically. “He was real quiet. He wasn’t disrespectful. He just ran.” Eventually, the Memphis branch of the Tennessee Department of Children’s Services had given up looking for Michael Oher. “He ran so much that we stopped trying to stop him,” said this woman who had handled his case. The government had officially taken charge of Michael at the age of seven, she said, but lost track of him around his tenth birthday. She was curious to know what had become of him. The Blind Side The Blind Side CHAPTER ELEVEN The Blind Side FREAK OF NURTURE NCAA Lady: Can I ask you this— Sean: He has no hate. No animosity. His memories are all good. NCAA Lady: To be quite honest with you—do you fully know his childhood? Sean: Oh, absolutely not. First of all he doesn’t have a great relationship with me. Because he never had a daddy. I’m more of just an older man. He’ll talk to my daughter or my wife. But we don’t ask questions like that. Because a lot of times we don’t want the answers. NCAA Lady: You don’t care. Sean: I only care about what he cares about. NCAA Lady: You don’t ask, I should say. Sean: We’re trying to take care of geometry class tomorrow. What happened when he was four years old—if he’s okay by it, we’re okay by it. The timeline to us, we figure it’ll come one day. We’re in no hurry. We got a long time. DENISE OHER COULDN’T SAY who murdered her father—just that he had been shot several times in his bed when she was a little girl. She couldn’t tell you exactly when she had been removed from her mother’s custody. She knew her mother was an alcoholic and totally incapable of taking care of her and her half-brother, Robert Faulkner. Her mother never cooked her a meal, read her a book, or took her to school—at least, not that she could recall. One day the police came for them, and took her and Robert away to an orphanage. She still didn’t feel especially cared for—she never felt loved or anything like that. She skipped plenty of school, and even more when, at the age of fifteen, her mother somehow sprung her from the institution. Once out she fell in with the wrong crowd. It led her to drugs and other things and, at twenty, she gave birth to a baby boy. Four more babies soon followed. Around the neighborhood people would say, “Dee Dee is a breeder.” And she was: inside of six years she had five little boys. Their father, she felt sure, was a man named Odell Watkins, but he declined the offer from the Department of Children’s Services to acknowledge his paternity. Instead he took a DNA test. The test proved, just as she’d said all along, that Odell Watkins was the father. By the late summer of 1985 Dee Dee was twenty-seven years old, and finished with Odell Watkins. She wasn’t even half-finished having babies, however, and the father of her next child had just arrived on her front porch. He came directly to her from Robert, her brother. Since they’d left the orphanage Robert had gotten the nickname “Skillet.” Oddly enough, it was a skillet, and then a horseshoe, that Robert later used to crush his wife’s skull after she told him she wanted a divorce. His wife’s brutal murder landed Robert on Death Row at River Bend over in Nashville; but that all came later. The first time Robert had been thrown in jail for murder he’d been sent away for just a few years. Denise couldn’t tell you who Robert had killed, or why. She just knew that her brother had been convicted for murder and sent away to Fort Pillow prison, where he’d met a man named Michael Jerome Williams. Why Michael Jerome Williams had been in jail Dee Dee either didn’t know or would soon forget. All she knew was that Robert had wanted to send word to her of his well-being and that Michael Jerome Williams, on his way out of jail, had been kind enough to serve as messenger. “When I met him I wasn’t with nobody,” said Dee Dee. “We got to talking and we wound up together. But he was a little bitty fellow. Five foot six, maybe.” Soon after Michael Williams visited her, Dee Dee discovered she was pregnant again. She had no money, no job, and was now flirting with a serious drug problem—but still she didn’t worry about the welfare of this new baby. “God put it there,” she said, “and He ain’t going to put no mouth on this earth he can’t feed.” Unlike Odell Watkins, Michael Williams didn’t dispute his paternity, and she named the baby after him: Michael Jerome Williams. But right around the time the child was born, Michael Jerome Williams vanished. The Department of Children’s Services went looking for him, and it was a full year before they found him—back in prison. By then Dee Dee had decided she didn’t want her baby named for Michael Jerome Williams. Though she made no effort to change the baby’s legal name, she began to call him “Michael Oher.” Oher was her family name, which she had taken from her mother. In the next four years Denise bore four more children, by several different fathers, none of whom stuck around. By the time Michael was five years old, and his memory kicked in to record events for posterity, Dee Dee was caring for seven boys and three girls, all under the age of fifteen. Only she wasn’t really caring for anyone, as she’d become addicted to crack cocaine. “On the first of the month she’d get a check,” recalled Marcus, Michael’s eldest brother, “and she’d leave and we wouldn’t see her until the tenth…. Them drugs tear everything up.” As Dee Dee had no income except for whatever the government sent her on the first of each month, the children had no money for provisions. They had no food or clothing, except what they could scrounge from churches and the street. Surprisingly often, given the abundance of public housing in Memphis, they had no shelter. When asked what he recalls of his first six years, Michael said, “Going for days having to drink water to get full. Going to other people’s houses and asking for something to eat. Sleeping outside. The mosquitoes.” The winter was cold, but the summer was worse because the heat was so oppressive and the mosquitoes bit all night long. Yet, by the time Michael turned seven his greatest fear was that some man in a uniform would come and take him away from his mother. His mother had her problems but she was never overtly cruel: she never hit them, for instance, and she often said she loved them. She just wasn’t around that much and, when she was around, had nothing to give them. Marcus, now sixteen years old, knew that the police sometimes broke up families such as theirs. They’d heard snippets about foster homes, and the snippets hadn’t been reassuring. The police just took you away and dumped you with people whose only interest in you was the cash they received for your presence. Michael’s brothers spoke of the possibility that the police might take them away, and decided that, whatever happened, they would try to stick together. On April 14, 1994, the Memphis courts, for the first time, registered Michael’s existence. Listing Michael’s name, as well as the names of his siblings, it rendered the following verdict: “It appears to this Court that said children are in need of immediate protection of this Court and that said children are subject to an immediate threat of said children’s health to the extent that delay for a hearing would be likely to result in severe or irreparable harm.” A month before Michael’s eighth birthday, the police cars rolled up in front of the shed behind the cottage that Denise had told the children belonged to a cousin of hers. The three little girls were out in front. Andre and Rico were someplace else. The four other boys—Marcus, Deljuan, Carlos, and Michael—were inside the shed. “We seen them pull up and we already knew what they were coming for,” said Marcus. “We done seen it happen before with other people. We really thought they were going to scatter us up.” Seeing the police, Marcus turned to his brothers and said, “Run!” Michael prided himself on his foot speed. “I can fly,” he liked to say. Speed was essential to the new plans he had for himself—plans he would cling to, with an amazing tenacity, for the next ten years. On June 20, 1993, he had been inside someone else’s house and seen a basketball game on television. On that night Michael Jordan was using the Phoenix Suns as his foil for the public display of his greatness. The moment he saw Michael Jordan play basketball, Michael Oher knew who he was meant to be: the next Michael Jordan. Because he was seven, he thought it was an original idea. Because he was quiet, the idea went unexpressed, and so undisturbed. But Michael Oher now had a secret ambition, and it would define much of what he did with himself for the next ten years. The ambition stood in defiance of a world that had assigned him no value. His father hadn’t valued him enough to meet him. His mother hadn’t valued him enough to feed him. He’d never been to a doctor, or been given medicine of any sort. He’d missed nearly as much school as he’d made. His older brothers cared for him and were good at finding food. But they had their own problems; they had no real ability to nurture. No one invested in Michael Oher, and so he yielded no visible returns. Michael did not consider himself without value, however. From the moment he laid eyes on Michael Jordan, he was, himself, destined to become the richest and most famous black athlete on earth. When the police cars came and his brother screamed at him to run, Michael didn’t really know what was going on. He just saw Marcus (sixteen), Deljuan (thirteen), and Carlos (eleven) sprinting out the back door. He flew after them. To be the next Michael Jordan, Michael Oher needed to be quick and agile—and he was. His older brothers were still faster than he was, but Michael pumped his little legs as fast as they’d go, and he finally caught up to them. When they’d finished running they stood on the second floor of an abandoned auto repair shop down the street, huffing and puffing. From a broken window they watched their mother scream as the police took away her three baby girls—Denise, Tara, and Depthia—and put them in the back of the squad car. Marcus told his brothers that they’d probably never see those little girls again, and he was right. Dee Dee wasn’t capable of caring for her children, and she knew it, but she didn’t want anyone taking them away from her. The boys wanted to stay together; they felt safe together; together they at least had each other. They all knew that the police would be back for the boys, and so they left the shed. Dee Dee got her hands—she wouldn’t say how—on an old beat-up Monte Carlo. For weeks she and the seven boys slept in the car. “Bodies on top of each other,” is how Deljuan, who was now thirteen, recalled it. “We’d get up in the morning and go wash ourselves in the bathroom of a service station.” Unwilling to leave the small area on the west side of Memphis where she’d been born and raised, Dee Dee found herself at a disadvantage. A few weeks after the police nabbed her daughters, they caught up to Carlos and Michael on a day they attended school. The police took them from school to the home of a woman they’d never met, named Velma Jones. “Velma was a big lady,” said Carlos, “about three hundred seventy-five pounds, and she got angry when you made her move.” The children found her terrifying—and their fear was only heightened when she showed them what she did to children who misbehaved: sat on them. That was Michael’s most vivid memory of the first few days, being sat on by Velma Jones. Carlos recalled being taken, with Michael, to the home of Velma’s equally gargantuan twin sister, Thelma, who made them mop out the raw sewage that had spilled into her basement from a burst pipe. It was the first of a long series of unpleasant chores the boys were expected to perform for the fat twins. BUT THAT WAS JUST the beginning of their misery. The house teemed with other foster children, older and bigger than Michael and Carlos, who picked on them. (When asked how many foster children the State of Tennessee had deposited with her, Velma later said, “I really don’t know. I just got so much love and patience and energies. They just brought ’em to me.”) Velma had a single biological child whom, in Carlos’s view, she spoiled. She sent Carlos and Michael out to sell newspapers on Sundays, and when they returned she took away the money they’d made and gave it to her child. “Living with The Twins wudn’t no happy thing,” said Carlos. “They just treated us like we weren’t people. Every night Mike cried hisself to sleep.” The two boys slept in their first bunk bed, only Michael’s lower bunk couldn’t be called a bed, as it had no mattress. “I was sleeping on wood,” he said. Carlos remembers Michael saying, almost every night, ‘Carlos, I just want to go home.’” Two nights into their stay Michael ran away, all by himself. (“I can fly.”) He was just seven years old, but still he ran right across Memphis and found his mother. Dee Dee told him that she had to take him right back to the foster home or they would all get in trouble, and Michael cried all the way back. A few weeks later he ran again—with the same result. Once his mother came to visit him. “That was a happy day,” he said. “Yes, that was my one happy day.” He and Carlos stayed with Velma Jones for nearly two years. Then, one afternoon, Velma sat them down and told them they were going to be sent to Knoxville. She might as well have said they were being sent to the moon. Neither had ever left a tiny little area in western Memphis. She told them to go back to their room, pack their few things, and prepare to leave. They went back to their room, ignored their few things, and jumped out the window. This time it took the police two days to track them down. The Department of Children’s Services had noted by now that Michael was a runner, and they must have requested some sort of psychological evaluation. At any rate, instead of packing him straight back to foster care, they took him to St. Joseph’s Hospital. There he was deposited on what he took to be “the floor for bad kids.” They subjected him to tests that caused him to conclude later that they were seeing if he’d gone crazy. But it wasn’t half-bad; and the living conditions were a vast improvement on the foster home. “We had good food,” he said. “I had a bed with a mattress. They even had videos.” Michael had just turned ten years old. After two weeks in the hospital, he ached to go home. “It got old,” he said. “You want to be free after a while.” Incredible as it might seem to anyone who knew only the bare facts of his case rather than his emotional predisposition, he missed his mother. It was as if Dee Dee had been put on earth to answer a question: how little can a mother care for her children and still retain their affection? His mother hadn’t cared for him, but still he loved her. “I guess you’re just supposed to love your mom,” he said later. “Just because she’s your mom.” That hard-to-shake feeling would explain why, much later, when he was asked for the first time about his mother and her problems with drugs, he would stare blankly and pretend the subject didn’t bother him. But when asked a second time, his brown eyes filled with tears. The doors on both ends of the floor were locked. The hospital was old—it would soon be torn down—and Michael noticed that the big metal doors at one end of the hall rattled. “I remember it like it was yesterday, actually,” he said later. “We’d play up and down the floor. And at the end of the floor was an exit. One of those two-door exits that closed together with a lock between ’em. I got a sheet of paper and folded it together and stuck it down there. And it opened.” At his moment of discovery there were too many people wandering around for him to escape cleanly. He kept his secret, and his piece of paper, to himself the rest of the day. “That night when I went to bed I kissed the paper and put it under my little pillow,” he said. Between his room and the locked door a nurse’s station intervened. The nurse at the window could monitor the entire hall. Early the next morning, when the halls were clear, he crawled on his belly directly beneath the window of the nurse’s station. He reached the door without being seen, jimmied it open with his paper tool, and fled. Now he found himself in a dark, concrete stairwell. Downward he plunged. “Door here, door there, and I was out,” he said. “Like a thief in the night.” (“We never did figure how he got out of there,” said Bobby Spivey, of the Memphis Department of Children’s Services.) When he reached the street Michael still had no idea where he was. He wound up wandering for hours to cover what he later realized had been no more than half a mile between the hospital and a housing project called Dixie Homes. He arrived to find that his mother had moved again, from Dixie Homes into one of the most depressing public housing projects in Memphis: Hurt Village. Hurt Village had been built for white people back in the 1950s. The opening of its 450 units spread over 29 acres had been hailed by the mayor as “a great day in the history of Memphis.” By the late 1980s it was occupied only by blacks, who were fleeing the place as fast as they could. Hurt Village had become an inferno of gangs and drugs and crime. The city had decided to rip it down, but didn’t have the money to do the job. To spare themselves the expense of relocating the residents, the Memphis Public Housing Authority simply stopped maintaining their apartments. Without functioning air-conditioning, stoves, or refrigerators, the units became so unlivable that anyone who could leave, did. Once they’d left, the city came in and boarded up the abandoned apartment. It was in Hurt Village that Michael found his mother. He checked in, then ran back to Dixie Homes and hid inside the place she’d vacated. Carlos soon materialized, and together they went on the lam. During the day they remained hidden; at night they came out and foraged. “Every day you were scared that the police might get you,” said Michael. “You see the police, you just duck and dive.” Two weeks later, feeling pretty sure they were in the clear, they left the vacant apartment at Dixie Homes and rejoined their mother at Hurt Village. The Hurt Village apartment had only two bedrooms, and Dee Dee had borne still more children. She kept one bedroom for herself; the seven children now in her charge shared a bed in the other. “Lots of feet, lots of hands, lots of heads—but we managed,” said Michael. This place in which Michael would grow up over the next five years was, by 1996, a portrait of social dysfunction. Hurt Village still had roughly a thousand residents. There were no two-parent families: zero. Only a tiny handful of the residents held jobs. They had a mean education level between fourth and fifth grade. Seventy-five percent of the adult residents suffered from some form of mental illness. (Drug addiction counted as a mental illness.) Knowing that Hurt Village was soon to be torn down, and replaced with some other social experiment, a group of social scientists from the University of Memphis, funded by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, began to collect data on the place. “It was its own little community,” said Cynthia Sadler, an anthropologist who worked on the project. “They did not associate with people outside of Hurt Village, and people outside of Hurt Village did not associate with them.” The zip code for Hurt Village, 38105, was social poison outside of Hurt Village. Several residents told the researchers that they’d ceased looking for work because potential employers would see their zip code and reject them out of hand. “In all our travels,” said another researcher, TK Buchanan, “we never came across a single Cadillac welfare queen.” By the time Michael arrived, Hurt Village was largely controlled by gangs. The Vice Lords were the biggest gang in Memphis, but the Gangster Disciples were the fastest growing and they ran Hurt Village. Delvin Lane ran the GDs, and he had an army of fifty-eight gang members in Hurt Village alone. In the early 1990s Delvin had been a dynamic quarterback for Booker T. Washington High School. He’d been set to go off to the University of Wyoming on a football scholarship. That opportunity vanished when he was sent off instead to jail, on an aggravated assault charge. He remained a natural leader, a quarterback, and, when he got out of jail, he used his talent to administer a huge and growing drug business. The GDs sold several different drugs but crack was most profitable, Delvin said, because it was the most portable and the most easily hidden. The first of the month, when the welfare checks rolled in, he made sure he had plenty of crack cocaine. Dee Dee would be waiting, cash in hand. For Michael’s first three years in Hurt Village, Delvin was the closest thing to the man in charge. Delvin didn’t actually live in Hurt Village but he held meetings there, and when he and his army rolled in for these they were an impressive sight: a caravan of twenty to thirty fancy cars from which emerged these expensively dressed guys completely unarmed. Everyone knew they had no guns on them, in case the police showed up; everyone also knew that within yards they had stashed an arsenal of Uzis and 380s and sawed-off shotguns, in case the Vice Lords showed up. A twelve-man security squad armed with 17-shot 9mm pistols—two clips apiece—controlled key positions. Flanking Delvin were his two biggest bodyguards. One was called “Tombstone.” Tombstone was six four, 310 pounds, and the most frightening human being anyone had ever seen—until they caught sight of Delvin’s second bodyguard, Rico Harris. Rico was known as “Big Brim,” and he stood six seven and weighed 450 pounds. Big Brim’s official title was “Chief of Security,” and his job, literally, was to watch Delvin’s back. His blind side. “Big Brim was extremely valuable to me,” said Delvin. “Especially in a club environment. Big Brim could hit one person and knock five of them down. If I’m in a club and Brim is there, I got no worries. But if it’s a smaller guy there, I got to find other guys to help.” For the first eighteen months after he’d fled St. Joseph’s, Michael stayed away from school, for fear of being taken by the authorities. For that year and a half he played what he thought of as a game of hide and seek with the Department of Children’s Services. In retrospect, it was never clear that the State of Tennessee knew the game was on. The amazing thing, thought Michael, was that no grown-up ever turned him in, or even questioned his status. Hundreds of adults saw him on the streets day and night—people from Hurt Village, people who knew his mother—and no one ever wondered what he was doing running around in the middle of a weekday. “No one ever said, ‘What are you doing out of school?’ he recalled. “No one made me do anything.” He guessed that if he hid out for long enough, the bad people at the Department of Children’s Services would give up looking and forget about him. And they did. By the time he turned twelve years old Michael Oher was completely free of social obligations. He might as well have been alone on a raft floating down the Mississippi River—which flowed, unnoticed, less than a mile from Hurt Village. He stole a bike and rode it wherever he wanted to. He played games from morning until late at night. Every now and then the older guys started shooting their guns at each other—but that was just pure entertainment. “We’d sit on the hill and watch them shoot it out,” Michael recalled. “It was like being in the Wild West.” He didn’t feel himself unsafe; the older guys with the guns left him and the other little kids alone. He played basketball ten and twelve hours a day, and grew ever more certain that he was destined to be the next Michael Jordan. Hurt Village had long since come to epitomize the despair of inner-city life, but it didn’t occur for a minute to Michael to leave. “It was fun,” he said. “Everything was fun. Nobody stopped me from doing anything.” He still had the old problems: where to find food and clothing. But now that he was older he was more capable of caring for himself. He got better at foraging for food, from neighbors and churches and the street. “I knew that on the first of the month you were supposed to have money to eat,” he said. “Everyone else got food and you got nothing.” He was growing so fast in every direction. Often he’d fall, and sometimes when he’d fall he’d hurt himself. Once he went over the front of his bike and opened a great gash on his elbow. He never went to the hospital; he didn’t even know what stitches were. Instead, he assumed that there was no injury, left untreated, that would not heal. The insight extended into his internal well-being. He must have calculated that emotional connections with other people were more trouble than they were worth, for, with one exception, he stopped making them. The exception came when his basketball got away from him and broke a neighbor’s flower pot. The lady was nice about it; it turned out she was new to Hurt Village and had a son named Craig. Craig Vail was a shy, quiet, small boy, who also loved to play basketball. He and Craig soon became inseparable; and Michael would later say that Craig was the one person in the whole world he fully trusted. He also now had a kind of shadow brother: Big Zach. Zachary Bright lived a few doors down from Michael in Hurt Village. Big Zach was ten years older than Michael, but their resemblance was a constant source of wonder to the neighbors. “Everybody used to say, ‘Zach, you got a brother!’” recalled Zachary Bright. “‘Guy down the sidewalk looks just like you!’” Zach went and had a look at Michael Oher for himself and couldn’t deny the family resemblance. Their skin color was an identical dark chocolate. Their features, in the context of their huge selves, seemed small and delicate. They both had ears designed for men half their size, and narrow eyes that closed almost shut when they laughed or became angry. They shared a similar athletic ability, too. In 1994, two years before Michael turned up in Hurt Village, Zachary Bright had graduated from Kingsbury High School. After his junior year he’d been one of the most highly sought after college football prospects in Tennessee. He’d had scholarship offers from nearly every major football school in the country. In a high school all-star game Big Zach’s backup was Cletidus Hunt—who eventually went on to play for the Green Bay Packers. And in that game Big Zach had played defensive tackle, which wasn’t his natural position. His natural position was left tackle on offense. He was six six and, while he weighed only 265 pounds, he had a frame that would support a lot more, once he received proper nutrition. He had great long arms and the grace and agility of a star basketball player. “Zachary Bright has the potential to be a big-time offensive tackle,” Tom Lemming had written in his annual review of high school football stars. Coach Bobby Bowden of Florida State had the same thought. Bowden had flown Big Zach down to Tallahassee, where he’d spent two days and nights being wined and dined by Heisman Trophy winner and future NBA guard Charlie Ward and future NFL superstar Derrick Brooks. Florida State had his locker ready and a jersey (No. 71) with BRIGHT stenciled on the back. But Big Zach’s girlfriend had already given birth to their first child. She didn’t want to go to Florida State, and the truth was he didn’t really feel like doing his schoolwork or making his grades. Surrounded by friends who told him that he’d be wasting his time to even try college, he quit. He never even finished high school. When the next school year started, and Big Zach didn’t show up for it, Bobby Bowden himself came up from Florida State to Hurt Village, in search of his prized recruit. Big Zach hid out with his girlfriend and their new baby until Bowden was gone. Big Zach would one day reflect upon that strange and wasteful period in his life. “Guys who were around said, ‘Everyone can’t make it to the NFL,’” he said. “Telling me I wasn’t really gonna make it. Years passed by. I was still thinking I was at the top of my game. But my time was passing me on by. After a while I decided I was too old for it.” He’d shake his head in wonder at all he had thrown away and say, “I feel like I could a did something, if I were to start over and do it again. I didn’t know how close I was. All I had to do was knock on the NFL door.” But the wisdom, and the sadness, came much later; in 1996 he was just two years out of high school and still having fun. And suddenly all these people started coming up to him to ask if that kid now living a few doors down the block was his little brother. He grabbed the kid and took him out on the basketball court to see how he handled himself. Well, as it turned out. (“But it was more like football than basketball,” said Zach.) Michael Oher was no longer Michael Oher: he was “Big Mike.” Michael loathed that nickname; it was the enemy of what he hoped to become. “I didn’t want to be big,” said Michael. He wanted to be lithe and fast; he wanted to be Michael Jordan. The wider he became the more preposterous was that ambition, but it proved easier to ignore his width than to abandon his dream. Everyone might be calling him “Big Mike,” but no one ever took a picture of him. There weren’t many mirrors around, either. He seldom was faced with his own reflection. He fiddled with optical illusions, and took to wearing his shoes too small and his clothes too big. He did push-ups and sit-ups, thinking they kept him thin. He developed the odd habit—for a boy his size—of always looking for something high over his head to jump up and hit, or tap, or jump up on. Every game they played he arranged it so that his role in it stressed, and trained, his quickness and his agility. Craig was his only real friend, and Craig reassured him that no matter what anybody called him he was still, like Jordan, a born outside threat. He just had to keep working on his quick first step and his crossover dribble. Of course, Michael could sense his own swelling mass, but only by its effects. He was pleasantly shocked when one day, while wrestling, he just picked up a kid as if he weighed nothing and hurled him across the yard. On the other hand, he was no longer winning the foot races against the other kids—but at least he was still running them. They’d go out into the turning lane on Danny Thomas Boulevard like they always did, but now he’d be given a head start. He devoted so much time and energy to defying his own size that it couldn’t help but yield results. Even as he became one of the biggest human beings in Hurt Village, he remained quick and agile. He willed himself to be graceful—to remain a little man, inside a big man’s body. Later, college coaches who came to watch him would see a freak of nature. But where had nature left off, and nurture taken over? It was, as always, hard to say. Between the ages of ten and fifteen Michael Oher was left alone with his fantasy. He learned nothing in school, confined himself to the incredibly narrow life available inside Hurt Village, and developed nothing in himself apart from his athletic ability. No one told him he should be doing anything other than what he was doing. If Hurt Village was an island in the Memphis economy, Michael’s home was a hidden cave on that island. It probably helped that Delvin Lane’s Gangster Disciples discouraged its members from messing with little kids. At any rate, Michael didn’t have anything to do with the gangs or anyone else but Craig. He dipped in and out of school, and was moved along from one grade to the next, meaninglessly. He watched every one of his older brothers drop out. Marcus quit after the ninth grade, Andre and Deljuan and Rico after the eleventh, and Carlos after the tenth. Each had fathered at least one child, and among them they had fathered ten. But Michael remained happy and free, without the faintest premonition that anything would ever change, or needed to. Then, just before his fifteenth birthday, he met Tony Henderson. Big Tony had grown up in Hurt Village, too. He came back often in search of kids to play for the football and basketball teams he coached. If you had the skills and the size, it was hard to hide from Big Tony. Big Zach had played for Big Tony; so had Tombstone and Big Brim. Big Tony’s first impression of Big Mike was that his family life was unusually troubled, even by the standards of Hurt Village. His second impression was that Big Mike had no friends. “I never saw him hanging around nobody,” said Tony. “He was real quiet.” He quickly figured out that Big Mike, like half the other kids he knew, was living to be the next Michael Jordan, and Tony did what he could to help him realize the dream. The summer before Michael’s freshman year in high school Tony, through a friend, sneaked Michael into the basketball camp run by Carver High School. The first day Tony’s friend called him to say that Big Mike had fled the camp. Big Tony hustled on over and found Big Mike walking the streets, a mile away, with tears streaming down his face. He was fifteen miles from Hurt Village and he didn’t have a dime in his pockets. He was walking home, he said. The coaches had taken one look at him and told him he wasn’t a perimeter player—that he wasn’t Michael Jordan. And once he’d taken his newly assigned position in the low post, the bigger older kids alongside him had started shoving and hitting him. “Mike was a big ol’ kid,” said Tony, “but he didn’t want to be touched. They got mad at him because he wouldn’t knock the other kids down. The coach told him he’d never be nothing, and Mike started crying.” Big Tony was friends with Harold Johnson, the basketball coach at Westwood High. Westwood was a long way from Hurt Village, but Tony figured if he was driving his son Steven to Westwood he might as well drive Big Mike, too. At Westwood Big Mike played football, too, but his heart wasn’t in it. The coach just threw out the balls and went and sat in the shade, and Big Mike coasted through the year as a defensive tackle on a bad team. That was a shame, thought Big Tony, because Big Mike was getting seriously big. He reminded Tony of Big Zach: his size alone meant he’d attract the attention of college football coaches. For that to happen, however, he needed to get through high school, and that didn’t seem even remotely possible. He was failing his freshman classes and, on many days, didn’t even bother to show up for them. Other days Big Tony would drop Steven and Big Mike at school, and return that afternoon to find only Steven waiting. “He wasn’t going back,” said Big Tony. “Big Mike was going to drop out.” The only reason Big Mike hadn’t already gotten himself into a world of trouble, Big Tony thought, was that he was so loosely connected to the people around him. He wasn’t at the same risk as Big Zach for the simple reason that he didn’t have a crowd of friends tempting him with the fast life. Still, there was only so much distance any young man who dropped out of high school could put between himself and the ’hood. “He didn’t have nothing to turn to,” said Big Tony. “What chance did he have to go straight? He had no chance.” As Michael neared the end of his freshman year in high school, he had before him one obvious career path. Once he quit school he would have waiting for him a single, well-paying, high-status job: bodyguard to Delvin Lane. Or rather, since Delvin had moved on, to Delvin’s successor. The job was to watch the back of the guy who ran the only real business in the neighborhood. Left tackle of the ghetto. That’s when Betty Boo died, and stated as her dying wish that her grandson receive a Christian education. And as odd as it felt to Big Tony to put Steven in his car and drive him into the heart of rich, white Memphis, it felt odder still to ignore his mother’s dying wish. And Big Tony thought, if I’m taking Steven I might as well take Big Mike, too. ONE OF THE TACTICAL disadvantages of being a six five, 350-pound black kid in a school built for white kids is that other people tend to recall their encounters with you in far more vivid detail than you do. The main thing Michael Oher would remember of his first few weeks at the Briarcrest Christian School was his own terror and confusion. All white kids looked alike; and they were all bizarrely enthusiastic and friendly. “Everyone was exactly the same,” he said. “For three or four weeks, every time I turned the corner I’d see some white kid shouting hello to me and I’d think: I just saw you!” His senior year he’d figure out that, while he hated to read, he liked to write. Assigned to write a personal essay, he chose as his subject his first days at Briarcrest. “White Walls,” he titled his piece. It began: I look and I see white everywhere: white walls, white floors, and a lot of white people…. The teachers are not aware that I have no idea of anything they are talking about. I do not want to listen to anyone, especially the teachers. They are giving homework and expecting me to do the problems on my own. I’ve never done homework in my life. I go to the bathroom, look in the mirror, and say, “This is not Mike Oher. I want to get out of this place.” The other thing he remembered about those first frightful days was his hunger. The free food had been the main reason he bothered to go to public school as often as he had. These Christians didn’t give you lunch, and that shocked him. Hunger and confusion did not prevent him from noting significant details about white people. He’d had no interaction with them before this. Now as he studied them he judged them ill-designed for survival. Astonishingly prone to exaggerating the severity of the most trivial illness or injury, they were forever racing off to doctors and hospitals, as if they were about to die. “They’d get a twisted ankle or something and they’re walking around school with a boot!” Michael said. “I was like, ‘What are y’all doing? You got to just walk it off!’” In addition to their pathological friendliness, and their constant need for medical attention, they exhibited a bizarre tendency to leave their most valuable possessions unattended. Steven was in the grade below him, and so they didn’t cross paths very often, but when they did they shared their incredulity: these white kids left gold watches, hand TVs, name brand shoes, and wallets just lying around. It was as if the doors to Ali Baba’s cave had sprung open. The boys’ locker room alone was a cornucopia; all you had to do was swoop your hand through once and you’d come away with fistfuls of cash. “A burglar’s dream,” Michael called it. One night they came home with money that wasn’t theirs, and Big Tony found out and tried to explain to them a little bit about white people and how, lacking street smarts, they had established some rules to preserve their species and that, odd as those rules might seem, Steven and Michael needed to obey them. Rule number one was that a kid did not steal, or fight, or get into trouble of any sort; and what was a rule for white kids was an iron law for a black kid. Because a black kid who got into trouble in the white world was a black kid on his way out of that world. The Blind Side The Blind Side CHAPTER TWELVE The Blind Side AND MOSES STUTTERED IN THE HOURS FOLLOWING Michael Oher’s disappearance, hell broke loose. The Ole Miss study center for football players became a crime scene. The ambulance came for the little white boy, who continued to bleed from his head wound, and took him away. Campus police raced in, followed by the Oxford city police. Miss Sue screamed into the phone to Leigh Anne: “He’s going to jail! They’re going to put him in jail!” The teammate Michael had attacked, Antonio Turner, was hustled off, bruised and battered, to a coach’s house, to be guarded like a witness in a protection program. The little boy’s father—Bobby Nix, the tutor who had been at such pains to get the black players out into white Oxford—was understandably beside himself. He and his wife had already lost a child, and now he’d just seen his three-year-old son lying on the floor in a pool of blood, a victim of a black football player’s rage. He said he was pressing charges. Michael saw none of it: he was long gone. Ignoring the calls from Leigh Anne and the text messages from Sean, he drove around Oxford in a fog of anger and confusion. He was angry because Antonio had said what he’d said and then struck him; he was confused because he was newly vulnerable. He now had these people he loved, who loved him. Through them, other people could get to him. He was no longer just another poor black kid going nowhere. He understood that most people, white and black, treated him a lot differently than they would have if he wasn’t a football star. But he couldn’t bring himself to be cynical about the Tuohy family. He knew other people, white and black, were saying that these rich white Ole Miss boosters had identified him early on as a future NFL lineman and bought him the way you’d buy a cheap stock or a racehorse. That they might not need his money but they liked his status, and had envisioned how he might serve the Briarcrest and Ole Miss football teams. Michael didn’t believe it. “I wasn’t anything when I first got to them, and they loved me anyway,” he said. “Nothing was in it for them.” A few hours after he’d fled the scene of the crime, he noticed that the tone of Sean’s text messages had changed. They started out urgent. Now they were just funny. Mike Tyson! U coming back into the ring for another round? Michael began to compose himself. Three years ago he’d have just kept on running and never looked back. He wouldn’t admit that he was different, but he couldn’t deny that things were different. He was no longer a black object skipping along the surface of a white background; he’d been woven into the white fabric. So…why was he running? Who was he running from? For that matter—where was he running to? He opened his cell phone. At that moment Sean was sitting on the floor of a movie theater’s lobby in Seattle, worrying that Michael might be looking for a bridge to throw himself from. He’d been traveling with the Memphis Grizzlies, and the team had an off day. Sean and his friend Brian Cardinal, the Grizzlies’ forward, had gone to see a movie, 16 Blocks with Bruce Willis. The first call about Michael had come as they walked into the theater. With his cell phone nearly out of juice, Sean found the plug in the lobby and set about trying to fix things. First he called Coach O, who, bless his heart, refused to be anything but calm. Then he called Hugh Freeze, and learned that (a) the little boy needed stitches in his head but was otherwise fine, and (b) the police, if and when they found Michael, intended to take him to jail. That wasn’t good. Jail meant, at the very least, news stories. Jail meant the wrong kind of reputation. Sean now considered how to play it. The poor white kid had been born with a talent for seeing the court, taking in every angle and every other player, and then attacking in the most efficient way possible. The talent translated beautifully from basketball into life. He knew that Leigh Anne had cheered for one of the senior officers of the Ole Miss campus police, Michael Harmon, back when he’d been a flanker on the Ole Miss football team, and considered him a friend. Bobby Nix, the father of the injured boy, had been Sean’s fraternity brother at Ole Miss. Dr. Thomas Wallace, the vice chancellor of the university and an old friend of Sean’s, was now serving as Michael’s “mentor.” Sean sat there on the theater floor, thinking how best to play this possession, while, every ten minutes, Brian Cardinal popped his head out of the theater door and said, “You haven’t missed anything yet.” And he hadn’t—the real action was right there on the lobby floor. After he’d left yet another text message for Michael—make it funny, he thought, so he doesn’t throw himself off a bridge—Sean decided he needed a lawyer. The Ole Miss football team, and the school itself, he decided, should be allowed to handle matters as they saw fit. (Especially since he knew how they’d see fit.) And so he called his old friend Steve Farese. Farese was the defense attorney then representing, among other clients, the nice lady in Selma, Tennessee, who had shot her Baptist preacher husband in the back and killed him. For Steve Farese, a single bullet fired into one’s husband’s back counted as a trivial offense: a human being could hardly think up a thing to do that Farese couldn’t construe as innocent. The FedEx pilot accused of stuffing his wife in the trunk of his car and setting it on fire? Innocent! The rapper charged with rape? Innocent! The Ole Miss quarterback, Eli Manning, charged with peeing on the side of a campus building? Off and starting for the New York Giants! When Sean reached Farese, and explained that the police were about to take his son in and book him, Farese became excited. “Oh, no, no, no, no, they are not,” he said. “Sean, this is just an unfortunate accident.” That’s when Michael called. “Pops,” he said, “you’re my first call. Just like I promised.” “Michael,” said Sean, “this isn’t exactly what I had in mind.” Sean sorted it out; of course he sorted it out. He told Michael to turn himself in to campus police who, he felt sure, would keep him from the clutches of the Oxford police. He called Bobby Nix and anyone else whose opinion might matter. He explained the situation in a way that they’d completely understand and offered to pay for whatever needed paying for. And, after a long round of fulsome apologies and ten hours of community service, Michael was restored to his former status of model citizen—and the incident never even hit the campus newspaper. It just went away, the way it would have gone away for some well-to-do white kid. Of course, lessons were learned and points of view exchanged. Coach O, for instance, pulled Michael into his office to discuss The Responsibilities of Being Michael Oher. Rather dramatically, Coach O extracted from his desk a thick folder stuffed with newspaper clippings, and dropped it with a thud. “Dajus da crap dey wrote bout me last sittee days!” he boomed. (That’s just the crap they wrote about me in the last sixty days!) He went on to lecture Michael on the burdens of conspicuous success. “Let me tell you something, son,” he concluded (in translation). “It is lonely at the top. I hate you had to learn about this at such a young age, but there are going to be many Antonio Turners. This is the first of many incidents.” MICHAEL OHER’S CAREER as a football player wasn’t a sure thing—there was no such thing in football as a sure thing. But his odds in life had changed, dramatically. In just the past three years he had encountered countless threats to his future that might have put an end to it had he remained socially unconnected to white people: illiteracy, bad grades, car crashes, a night with the Memphis police, an NCAA investigation, men in the street who offered to become his agent. Any one of these might have sent him right back to the prison of his past. It was part of being hopelessly poor that events conspired to keep you poor; if it wasn’t one thing, it was another. That cycle, in Michael’s case, had been broken. He was like a quarterback who had gone from playing in an unimaginative offense, incapable of making him look good, to playing in an offense designed by Bill Walsh. There’s an instant before it collapses into some generally agreed-upon fact when a life, like a football play, is all conjecture and fragments and partial views. Everyone wants to know the whole truth but no one possesses it. But Michael Oher already had collapsed into a generally agreed-upon fact: he was a success. The world that had once taken no notice of Michael Oher was now so invested in him that it couldn’t afford to see him fail. Of course, he wasn’t the first black kid to rise from poverty and make it in the white world. But Michael was different, because the white world had so unusually aided and abetted his rise. The white world had watched Michael Oher happen, or thought they had, and so could imagine how he might be replicated. He haunted that world. The Briarcrest Christian School, for starters, wrestled internally with the implications of Michael Oher. Applications to the school from black inner-city kids shot through the roof—“They all saw what happened to Michael and they now want to go to Briarcrest, too,” said Sean. The school’s new president, Bill McGee, did not like the idea of throwing open the doors to poor black athletes who couldn’t read or write, but the school’s staff could see the benefits. “Yeah, we helped Michael Oher,” said Carly Powers, the Briarcrest athletic director. “But I tell you something else. Michael Oher helped our school. He gave a lot of people here some hope that if you help some of these kids, it is possible that they’ll come around and make something of their lives.” Jennifer Graves, who oversaw students with special needs, and so supervised Michael’s academic life, saw an even higher purpose in Michael. “Michael got saved when he was at Briarcrest,” said Graves. “What better way to spread the word of Jesus than for Michael Oher to stand up and say it? What kid in the Memphis City Schools wouldn’t listen?” She knew that Michael was still intensely private—and that his gift for avoiding social entanglements had probably made a lot of what had happened to him possible. But when it was pointed out to her that Michael didn’t seem like the most obvious spokesman for any cause, she just smiled and said, “And Moses stuttered.”* The coaches who had come to Briarcrest to woo Michael Oher also had trouble banishing him from their thoughts. Nick Saban was now coaching the Miami Dolphins, but he sent the Tuohys a Christmas card. (“If I was still at LSU Michael would be playing for me!”) And, every now and again, Saban mentioned to scouts and sports agents that he was waiting for this phenomenal left tackle at Ole Miss to age, so that he could draft him. If Nick Saban was still interested, Phil Fulmer was obsessed. Fulmer’s University of Tennessee, widely considered before the 2005 season to have a shot at the national championship, had finished a disastrous 5–6. But at the start of the season they scored a huge victory at home against the highly ranked LSU Tigers. After the game the euphoric Fulmer spoke to the television cameras on the field, then rumbled into the Tennessee locker room. He found his agent, Jimmy Sexton, waiting for him. “He’d just beaten LSU,” recalled Sexton, “and the first thing he says to me is ‘See if you can get Michael Oher to transfer.’” Fulmer returned to the Briarcrest Christian School. With the departure of Hugh Freeze—and Michael Oher—the Briarcrest football program fell on hard times. But the team still had one big-time prospect, a pass rushing defensive end named Greg Hardy. “The Freak,” as he was known, because he was six six and 245 pounds with lightning reflexes and sprinter speed. The Freak was a quarterback’s worst nightmare. The Freak was also black and, right up to the moment Briarcrest let him in, the recipient of a Memphis public school education. He wasn’t a great student, but his grades were good enough to qualify him to play college football. And Phil Fulmer was seriously interested in him. But, as Fulmer stood on the sidelines of the Briarcrest practice field and watched, he couldn’t help but notice, just down the sideline, a familiar figure: Sean Tuohy. The Tennessee football coach edged a little closer until at length he caught Sean’s eye. “You gonna adopt this one, too?” he asked. “I don’t know,” said Sean. “I’m waiting to see how good he is.”* He was only half-joking. His experience with Michael Oher had left Sean alive to the possibilities. If these poor black kids were good enough at sports that the wider world had a natural interest in them, all they’d need was a little push, in the form of love and attention from someone like Leigh Anne, and they’d be on their way. “The problem isn’t intelligence,” he said. “It’s access to the system.” But Briarcrest had a new policy of shunning the inner-city black athlete, and it infuriated him. “They really aren’t as obsessed as they should be with giving opportunities to academically challenged kids,” he said. Sean was willing to provide the funds to pay for kids to go to Briarcrest, and yet Briarcrest was newly unwilling to take them. SEAN JUNIOR MUST HAVE noticed his father’s new interest in helping out, financially, every poor black boy who could hit a jump shot and every black girl who could pitch a softball. SJ was the only white player on his twelve-and-under AAU basketball team, and most of the black players were conspicuously poor. Just about every one of them had applied to Briarcrest, and if Briarcrest hadn’t rejected them, his father was ready to bankroll them all. It got SJ to thinking about his own situation. He now had a question he wanted to ask. Three years earlier, Sean Junior, like his big sister Collins, had been more than happy to take Michael in. He didn’t really view Michael as black or poor or a potential drain on the family’s resources. He was more interested in Michael’s capacity to serve as an entertaining big brother and wily co-conspirator. Still, now that Collins and Michael were off at Ole Miss, SJ couldn’t help but feel left out. Collins was Miss Everything and dating Cannon Smith, the son of the billionaire founder of Federal Express. Michael was already being spoken of as a first-round NFL draft pick. Just the other day, a scout for the Chicago Bears had taken Michael aside and told him that he could be the best lineman ever to come out of Ole Miss. Even if he didn’t actually have any money yet, SJ thought, Michael was sure to become really rich. And all he had gotten out of the deal was a single trip with Coach O through the Grove. And so he had a question. He was in the back of a car one day, being chauffeured by his mother to one of his AAU basketball games, when he thought to ask it. “Mom,” he said, “can I ask you something about you and Dad’s will?” “Uh huh,” she said, warily. “Collins is going to marry Cannon and so she’ll be a billionaire,” he said. “I wouldn’t say that’s a done deal.” “Michael is going to be a first-round draft choice in the NFL, so he’ll be really rich.” “Uh huh,” she said. “So?” “So” asked Sean Junior, “why are they even in the will?” “Because,” said Leigh Anne. “That’s just the way it’s done.” THE TUOHY MOST directly responsible for the transformation of Michael Oher, Leigh Anne had the most trouble ignoring his implications. “Look at him,” she would say, whenever Michael stood more than about ten feet away. “He has everything: integrity, ambition, and a future.” Then she’d think a moment, with the critical detachment of a sculptor whose work was nearly, but not quite, finished. “The only thing he needs now is to learn to give.” Then she’d think again. Michael might be, very nearly, a finished product. He didn’t need her time and attention—but that only raised an obvious question: who did? The inner city of Memphis alone teemed with kids whose athletic ability had market value. Very few ever reached their market. As Michael himself said, “If all the guys who could play got a chance to play, there would have to be two NFLs because one wouldn’t be enough.” Sports was the closest thing in America to pure meritocracy, the one avenue of ambition widely thought to be open to all. (Pity the kid inside Hurt Village who was born to play the piano, or manage people, or trade bonds.) And Michael Oher was in possession of what had to be among the more conspicuous athletic gifts. Apart from the seven foot tall basketball player, the six five, 350-pound kid who could fly had to be about the easiest future star to identify. And yet, without outside intervention even his talent would quite likely have been thrown away. Michael Oher would have become just another big fat man: Big Mike. If Michael Oher’s talent could be missed—whose couldn’t? Those poor black kids were like left tackles: people whose value was hidden in plain sight. Leigh Anne thought about this, a lot. And one morning in early 2006 Sean was interrupted from lifting himself out of bed by his wife, who was brandishing the sports section of the morning paper. The Memphis Commercial Appeal had reported the story of a young man named Arthur Sallis. Sallis had been the star fullback on Memphis’s East High team, which had been state champions in 1999 and runners-up in 2000. He’d averaged, incredibly, more than 10 yards a carry. “When I’m dreaming,” he once told a reporter, “I’m suiting up and going on the field. It’s like there’s no stopping me. It’s like I can’t go down.” Before Sallis’s senior year, his high school coach Wayne Randall received phone calls from every head coach in the SEC. The Kentucky coach, Hal Mumme, told Randall that Sallis was one of the finest football players he had ever seen. Sallis had been offered scholarships by the University of Kentucky and Ole Miss, but he never took them. High school proved to be the end of Arthur Sallis’s football career. His grades were poor, and he was disqualified by NCAA rules. Prevented by the NCAA from going to college on a football scholarship Sallis had stayed home, in his old neighborhood, on the west side of Memphis. In this Arthur Sallis was only typical. As it happened, East High—Sallis’s public school—had been part of a study made of Memphis inner-city athletes. The study revealed that, for every six public school kids with the ability to play college sports, five failed to qualify academically. What was unusual about Arthur Sallis was the persistence of his desire to make something of his life, in spite of the odds against him. He never knew his father, and his mother was an alcoholic in and out of jail. “From the time he was a little boy Arthur lived by himself, out on the streets,” said Coach Randall. In high school he’d gotten into all kinds of trouble, but most of it was driven by his need to get money to live. “I used to joke,” said Randall, “that Arthur was the only football player I ever had who I had to keep a lawyer on retainer for.” But after high school, with his football coach’s help, Arthur Sallis had gone straight. He eked out a living with his own carpet cleaning business. He’d fathered a baby girl, and was raising her by himself. “He was doing all the things a responsible person should be doing,” said his former coach. Then, a few months after Arthur Sallis left high school, he caught two men stealing a car and tried to stop them. For his trouble he got himself shot, point-blank, once in the back and once in the chest. He very nearly died. When his old high school coach visited him in the hospital Sallis told him, “If God gets me out of this, Coach, I’m never going to be out on the street again.” He had been true to his word. The newspaper Leigh Anne dropped in Sean’s lap told the story of what happened next. Arthur Sallis wasn’t on the streets, but at home with his four-year-old daughter, when three men broke in. Sallis grabbed one, and another shot him three times in the head. Arthur Sallis could have been a teammate of Michael Oher’s at Ole Miss. Instead, at the age of twenty-two, he was dead. Sean was only just waking up, and yet his wife was pacing back and forth in front of him, angry and upset. She was crying but she was also pissed off, and that, in his experience, was a dangerous combination. “Do you realize that you could take this kid’s name out and put Michael’s name in and have the same story?” she said. “Why didn’t this kid fall on our doorstep?” Then and there Leigh Anne made a decision: she wasn’t finished. “I want a building,” she said. “We’re going to open a foundation that’s only going to help out kids with athletic ability who don’t have the academics to go to college. Screw the NCAA. I don’t care what people say. I don’t care if they say we’re only interested in them because they’re good at sports. Sports is all we know about. And there are hundreds of kids in Memphis alone with this story.” Sean was now fully alert. Hundreds of kids. A building. His personal finances were always a bit more uncertain than he let on, even to his wife. Sean’s way of life depended on his ability to hide his fears and anxieties. Everything was always good and if it wasn’t, he could fix it. He conveyed the impression so well that people naturally handed him things to fix; and people who were broken drifted to him, in hopes of being fixed. His own success and well-being were taken as given, but they weren’t. Four years ago Taco Bell had been in a down cycle, and he’d teetered on the brink of bankruptcy. In the nick of time, Taco Bell made some changes in its menus and its sales had boomed. (“The quesadilla saved my ass,” he explained.) But his fast-food stores were never a sure thing. “I’m not financially secure where I can sit back and do nothing,” he said. “But I like my chances.” On the other hand, if his wife was now going to attack single-handedly America’s most intractable social problem, he liked his chances a bit less. Leigh Anne must have seen him thinking because she left him to get himself up and dressed, found her phone, and called Michael Oher. “Michael, you better get off your ass and get to work,” she said. “Because we got things we got to do with your money.” It wasn’t clear to Michael what, if anything, he owed the world. He now received lots of phone calls from poor black friends and family, and all of them wanted money. His mother called him a lot more than she used to, and it bothered him enough that he often didn’t return her calls. “People don’t understand that I made the newspaper but nothing comes with that,” he said. “I haven’t made a dollar yet.” Not long after college coaches informed him that he had a future in the NFL, Michael informed Leigh Anne that, if he indeed made it to the NFL, he intended to buy a house with thirteen bedrooms so that his mother and siblings would be guaranteed shelter. Now he wasn’t so sure he wanted to do that. “They had the same chances I had,” he said. “They need to get off their lazy asses and work. They need to start hearing ‘no.’” People are no better at seeing the various paths their lives might have taken than football fans are at seeing the many different things that might have happened on any single play. People note outcomes, and reason backward from them. Michael noted his outcome and concluded that his life was always going to work out. He refused to believe there was ever the faintest possibility that he was going to be anything other than a huge success. He had set out to become Michael Jordan and he was fulfilling that destiny, in his way. “I was always going to college,” he said. “I guess I thought that if things didn’t work out in the NBA, I’d have the NFL as my backup.” If he didn’t give a lot of credit to others for having changed his life—if he didn’t feel that he owed much to many—it was, in part, because he didn’t really believe he had changed. “I’m the same way I’ve always been,” he said. “I’m exactly the same guy I was back in Hurt Village. The only thing that’s changed for me is the environment.” The change in environment was no small thing, and it took the help of many people—Big Tony, the Briarcrest teachers, the families that had housed him—for him to function in the new environment. Still, when Michael thought about who he wanted to help, if he had the power to help, the only person he could think of was Craig. In his first year and a half at the Briarcrest Christian School, Michael hadn’t seen as much of Craig as he would have liked. Craig lived back on the west side of Memphis and that suddenly seemed a long way away. But the moment Michael had gotten his driver’s license he knew what he wanted to do with it. When he and Leigh Anne arrived home from the DMV, Michael asked Leigh Anne if he could drive back to western Memphis and bring back an old friend. For nearly a year Leigh Anne had been pressing him to bring home his old friends, but he’d never done it. Off he drove and soon returned with this shy, quiet, sweet-natured boy whom Michael introduced as “Craig.” This was the one friend Michael had told them about—his one close friend in the world—in whose existence Leigh Anne had ceased to believe. She had come to think of Craig, like Harvey the rabbit, as an imaginary friend. Now Harvey stood uncomfortably in her foyer. “I never been this far from home,” Craig said. Michael claimed that Craig was the one person in the world he fully trusted, and so Craig became a regular visitor to the Tuohy home. For his part Craig was perplexed: his friend leaves the ’hood to go to a new school and the next thing he knows he’s not merely shacked up with these rich white people on the other side of Memphis but claiming they are his family. “Big Mike call me one day and I ask him what he’s doing,” said Craig. “He say, ‘I’m just driving to get something to eat with my brother.’ I ask him, ‘Which brother is that?’ He say, ‘My brother, Sean Junior.’ I say, ‘Who?’” Now Michael said, “If I ever make it to the NFL Craig has to come. We got so close ’cause he just like me. We the same people, just different size.” Craig didn’t have any more money than anyone else from his former life. And while Craig was his only real friend, Craig had never asked him for a thing. “I offer him something, he says, ‘I’m good, I’m all right.’” That was one of the traits he admired most in Craig: he didn’t go around acting like some victim. He had his pride. At any rate he and Craig now spent more time together. One night Michael took him to see the Memphis Grizzlies play. They were making their way toward Sean’s courtside seats when Craig noticed that a lot of people were staring at them and pointing. “They were all saying, ‘That’s Michael Oher! That’s Michael Oher!’” Craig already knew that people in poor black Memphis assumed that Michael Oher was going to the league. “They all talk about him,” he said. “Nobody call him Big Mike anymore. They just call him Michael Oher.” Now he saw that Michael’s fame had spread beyond poor black Memphis, to courtside at the Memphis Grizzlies game, and realized: “Everyone in Memphis know who Michael Oher is!” As they found their seats, Craig asked Michael if he noticed the many people pointing and staring at him. Michael smiled and Craig could tell that he not only noticed but loved it. “What if you don’t make it to the NFL?” was the question Craig wanted to ask next, but he didn’t. Instead he asked, “When you think you be ready for the league?” At that Michael laughed and said, “I’m ready now.” Craig laughed. The world might have changed, but his friend had not. “He’s the same guy,” Craig said. “Everyone say Michael got cocky. What they don’t know is that he was always cocky. He just didn’t show it.” Still, Craig thought Michael must be joking. He wasn’t. “I could take Dwight Freeney right now,” said Michael, seriously. Dwight Freeney played for the Indianapolis Colts. He was the most feared pass rushing defensive end in the NFL, and maybe the fastest the NFL had ever seen. He’d arrived in the NFL in 2002 with his 4.3 forty-yard dash and his wild spin moves, and quickly figured out where he needed to be: the blind side. Two seasons later he rocked the order of the football universe when he went by Jonathan Ogden and sacked the Ravens’ quarterback not once but twice. No one went by Jonathan Ogden—but Freeney had. Freeney understood he was a man working in a tradition. When he was eight years old he’d seen a highlight film of Lawrence Taylor and right then and there knew who he was going to be when he grew up. “If you ask me to list my favorite players, I’d tell you LT and there’d be nobody second,” he said. “There’d just be LT.” Freeney took it for granted his job was to defeat the superstar of the offensive line. Best on best. That was his great strength: finding ways to win the most important one-on-one contest on the football field. And so when he heard that there was this kid down in Memphis who thought he was on his way to the league and said he “could take Dwight Freeney right now,” he just laughed and said, “That’s the way he’s got to be.” But he was curious enough to ask, “Who is this kid?” Dwight Freeney stood outside the Colts’ locker room, sweating in his pads, helmet in his hand, and listened patiently to a summary of the brief career of Michael Oher. How Michael had been one of thirteen children born to a mother who couldn’t care for them, and so had more or less raised himself on the streets of Memphis. How he hadn’t reported to serious football practice until his junior year in high school—but by then was six five, 350 pounds, and had been timed running the forty-yard dash in 4.9 seconds. How his forty-yard dash time didn’t really capture his speed: to appreciate his quickness you needed to watch him in short bursts. How he’d been one of the best basketball players in the state of Tennessee, and held his own on the court with high school All-Americans, and still secretly believed his natural position was shooting guard. How, on the brink of adulthood, with a measured IQ of 80, no formal education and no experience of white people, he had so insinuated himself into rich white Memphis that white people no longer noticed the color of his skin. How he was now six six and 325 pounds and the starting left tackle at Ole Miss, and a fair bet to be named to the All-SEC team at the end of next season. How, fast and strong as he had been at 350 pounds, he was faster and stronger now. How every day he felt a little bit less a lost boy and a little bit more a man with a mission. Dwight Freeney understood the rules of his game. In the NFL, on the quarterback’s blind side, you came and you went. You had your moment when you played so perfectly in the sun that you were mistaken for the sun—and then you were eclipsed. The summer before the start of the 2006 season was still his moment, and would remain his moment—until it wasn’t. Until he lost a step. Or got hurt. Or until the next Jonathan Ogden showed up and was maybe a step quicker, or fractionally more gifted, than the original. As he listened to the biography of Michael Oher, Dwight Freeney’s expression changed. He was no longer smiling. “What’s his name again?” he asked. “Michael Oher.” “You tell Michael Oher I’ll be waiting for him,” he said, and walked into the locker room. Table of Contents The Blind Side CHAPTER ONE CHAPTER TWO CHAPTER THREE CHAPTER FOUR CHAPTER FIVE CHAPTER SIX CHAPTER SEVEN CHAPTER EIGHT CHAPTER NINE CHAPTER TEN CHAPTER ELEVEN CHAPTER TWELVE Table of Contents The Blind Side CHAPTER ONE CHAPTER TWO CHAPTER THREE CHAPTER FOUR CHAPTER FIVE CHAPTER SIX CHAPTER SEVEN CHAPTER EIGHT CHAPTER NINE CHAPTER TEN CHAPTER ELEVEN CHAPTER TWELVE