
99.7% of the Data Are Within
3 Standard Deviations of the Mean
95% Within
2 Standard Deviations
68% Within
1 Standard Deviation

μ – 3σ

μ – 2σ

μ–σ

μ

μ+σ

μ + 2σ

μ + 3σ

Figure 6.1 n A standard deviation bell curve
Source: https://www.spcforexcel.com/files/images/nd.gif

Burniske 02.indd 72

9/9/17 1:46 PM

The Importance of Portfolio Management and Alternative Assets

73

For example, take a stock that has an expected return (mean) of 7 percent and
a 5 percent standard deviation of expected returns. There is a 68 percent probability that this stock will yield returns between 2 and 12 percent in the upcoming year. With a less aggressive asset, say a bond that has an expected return of
4 percent and standard deviation of 1 percent, then 68 percent of the time it can
be expected to yield between 3 and 5 percent in the coming year. There is less
potential for both upside and downside with the bond, whereas the stock has
much more potential for some great years, but also the potential risk of seriously
dreary years. Hence, the standard deviation of expected returns informs investors of the amount of risk they’re taking if they were to hold only that asset.
For a more holistic view, compare a portfolio with a standard deviation of
returns of 4 percent to one that has a standard deviation of 8 percent. If both
portfolios have the same expected return of 7 percent, it wouldn’t be a prudent
decision to invest in the portfolio with more volatility, as they both have the
same expected return. Taking on a higher level of risk has no benefit in this
light, and if a portfolio is unwisely constructed, investors can end up taking on
more risk than they’re compensated for.

Sharpe Ratio
Similar to the concepts behind MPT, the Sharpe ratio was also created by a
Nobel Prize winner, William F. Sharpe. The Sharpe ratio differs from the standard deviation of returns in that it calibrates returns per the unit of risk taken.
The ratio divides the average expected return of an asset (minus the risk-free
rate) by its standard deviation of returns. For example, if the expected return
is 8 percent, and the standard deviation of returns is 5 percent, then its Sharpe
ratio is 1.6. The higher the Sharpe ratio, the better an asset is compensating an
investor for the associated risk. An asset with a negative Sharpe ratio is punishing the investor with negative returns and volatility.
Importantly, absolute returns are only half the story for the Sharpe ratio.
An asset with lower absolute returns can have a higher Sharpe ratio than a
high-flying asset that experiences extreme volatility. For example, consider an
equity asset that has an expected return of 12 percent with a volatility of 10
percent, versus a bond with an expected return of 5 percent but volatility of 3
percent. The former has a Sharpe ratio of 1.2 while the latter of 1.67 (assuming a risk-free rate of 0 percent). The ratio provides a mathematical method to
compare how different assets compensate the investor for the risk taken, making bonds and equities, or apples and oranges, more comparable.

Burniske 02.indd 73

9/9/17 1:46 PM

74 CRYPTOASSETS

Correlation of Returns and the Efficient Frontier
One of the key breakthroughs of modern portfolio theory was to show that a
riskier asset can be added to a portfolio, and if its behavior differs significantly
from the preexisting assets in that portfolio, it can actually decrease the overall
risk of the portfolio. How can a risky asset make a portfolio less risky? The key
is correlation of returns.
Correlation simply measures how assets move in relation to one another.
The measurement ranges from a value of +1 to −1. If assets are perfectly
positively correlated, then they move in tandem: if one is up 10 percent, the
other is up 10 percent as well, for a score of +1. Similarly, if they are perfectly
negatively correlated at −1, then when one is up 10 percent the other will be
down 10 percent. If there is zero correlation, then the assets are completely
independent, and how one asset is behaving in the market has no bearing on
the other.
Stocks and bonds are often the major tools advisors and investors use to
reduce risk as they try to build portfolios made up of assets with low correlations. Historically, stocks and bonds have moved differently from each other.
When the economy is strong and stocks are generally rising, money flows out
of bonds as investors fear they’re missing out, causing bond prices to slump
and stocks to go higher. Investors are alive and well, with risk-on attitudes.
When stock prices falter, investors become concerned by the potential losses,
and money flows from stocks into the relative safety of bonds, known as a
flight to safety. Such risk-off markets depress the price of stocks and float the
price of bonds.
The two assets move in different directions based on the same news. They
act almost like two people on a seesaw. This historical balancing of risk between
stocks and bonds should be done as precisely as possible, otherwise wild market swings one way or the other will have a painful impact on the innovative
investor’s portfolio.
Combining assets that have a variety of correlations makes it possible to
create a portfolio that can perform in both bull and bear markets. Just because
a few players are feeling sick doesn’t mean the whole team has to fail. One of
the crown jewels of Markowitz’s MPT was his concept of the efficient frontier,
which indicates where a portfolio can provide the best expectation of return
for its level of risk (see Figure 6.2). The use of this concept is valuable for building portfolios because it helps to visualize how some groups of assets won’t
provide enough return for the risk taken.

Burniske 02.indd 74

9/9/17 1:46 PM

The Importance of Portfolio Management and Alternative Assets

75

Efficient
Frontier

Expected Return

Tangency
Portfolio

Risk-Free
Rate

Individual
Assets

Best
Possible CAL
Standard Deviation

Figure 6.2 n The efficient frontier of modern portfolio theory
Source: https://www.ways2wealth.com/Portals/0/Images/Efficient%20Frontier.jpg?ver=2016-03-14-220603-923

Within the financial services industry, people talk about risk in two ways:
systematic and unsystematic. Systematic risk is the risk inherent to investing
in assets subject to the effects of macroeconomic events—like global gross
domestic product (GDP) growth, trade relations, warfare, and so on. It is also
known as undiversifiable risk because all assets are affected by it. Unsystematic
risk, on the other hand, is the risk specific to each individual investment, such
as market sector, management, product expansion, geographic exposure,
and so on. It is also known as firm-specific risk and can be neutralized with a
smartly constructed portfolio.
Unsystematic risk can be mitigated by constructing a portfolio of assets that
neutralizes different firm-specific risks that could impact a portfolio. Ideally,
the portfolio is crafted so that when one investment is negatively hurt by a
specific event, another asset potentially could benefit by that very same event.
For example, if a carbon tax is put on industry in the United States, then companies that are purely involved in oil and coal procurement may be adversely
hit, while solar companies may jump. This carbon tax is not a systematic risk
if it doesn’t affect the market as a whole. Instead, it is an unsystematic risk that
influences specific companies within the markets. In this case, the stocks of the
oil company and the solar company would be examples of assets that experience negative correlation of returns to this event.

Burniske 02.indd 75

9/9/17 1:46 PM

76 CRYPTOASSETS

What holds true for specific assets within the same asset class also holds
true between the asset classes themselves. If unsystematic risk is fully neutralized by constructing a portfolio of assets and asset classes that have low to
negative correlation of returns, then that portfolio will be exposed only to systematic risk. Modern portfolio theory takes it a step further by saying over the
long term, investors are rewarded only for the systematic risk they take on and
will be adversely affected over the long run if they leave themselves exposed to
unsystematic risk.
With the tools of MPT it’s possible to construct a portfolio that stays within
an investor’s risk profile while still generating returns sufficient to meet longterm financial goals and objectives. The innovative investor recognizes that
the overall risk of his or her portfolio can be reduced by including assets that
are uncorrelated to the traditional capital markets, such as bitcoin and its
digital siblings.

TRADITIONAL ASSET ALLOCATION
For many years, traditional asset allocation models strictly focused on defining percentages of a portfolio in either stocks or bonds. For instance, the
American Association of Individual Investors provides simplified models for
three types of investors:4
•
•
•

Aggressive investors: 90 percent diversified stock and 10 percent fixed
income
Moderate investors: 70 percent diversified stock and 30 percent fixed
income
Conservative investors: 50 percent diversified stock and 50 percent
fixed income

These three simple models can be used by people of different ages who have
different investment time horizons. A whole host of equities can be included
within “diversified stock,” and even more so for the variety of bonds that can be
used for “fixed income.” For example, equities can be considered based on the
size of the company, the growth characteristics, the valuation, the sector type,
geographic exposure, and so on. Similarly, bonds can include government or
corporate issues, with varying durations, credit ratings, and tax advantages.
This traditional approach to asset allocation ran aground in 2008, when
the financial markets collapsed and investors found that even if they had both

Burniske 02.indd 76

9/9/17 1:46 PM

The Importance of Portfolio Management and Alternative Assets

77

stocks and bonds in their portfolio, they all fell together.5 The average investor
felt betrayed by the tried and trusted model of stocks and bonds moving in
a noncorrelated fashion. The crash of 2008 shook these investors from their
“economic lullaby.”6 In an increasingly globalized world where capital market assets are more closely intertwined, it was becoming clear that twentiethcentury diversification models wouldn’t cut it for twenty-first-century
investing.
While the crash of 2008 was felt by most everyone, it soon surfaced that
some people had not only weathered the storm but made significant money by
leveraging the strong winds of fortune.7 Hedge fund managers who had been
operating in relative secrecy were now being named as the new “masters of the
universe” for their ability to avoid much of the damage of the crash and, for
some, to profit greatly from it.

THE RISE OF ALTERNATIVE INVESTMENTS
The financial crisis of 2008 caused many financial advisors and wealth managers to evaluate different approaches to portfolio construction other than
solely stocks and bonds. The returns seen by hedge funds during the crisis
were identified as examples where nontraditional and alternative investment
vehicles had provided positive (in some cases, drastically so) performance
returns.
John Paulson became the face of hedge fund billionaires who benefited
from the crisis when it was revealed that he had personally earned over $1 billion from his fund management, including the Paulson Advantage Plus Fund
(an event-driven fund). This fund alone ranked number one over the period
of 2006 to 2008 with an annualized return of nearly 63 percent. Equally successful was James Simons’s Renaissance Technologies Medallion Fund with a
return of 80 percent in 2008. Becoming a hedge fund manager became all the
rage for business-minded students when it was revealed that the top 25 hedge
fund managers had earned a total of $22.3 billion in 2007 and $11.6 billion
in 2008.8
With numbers like these, the world of hedge funds caught the attention of
the media. Investors questioned if these managers had something to do with
the crash.9 They also wanted to know what they were doing differently and
whether it was something they could do as well.

Burniske 02.indd 77

9/9/17 1:46 PM

78 CRYPTOASSETS

First, let’s understand what we mean by a hedge fund and how they differ
among themselves. It’s difficult to lump hedge funds together in one group, as
they often have different investment objectives and approaches. Historically,
one of the easiest ways to spot hedge funds has been their high fee structure.
For example, many hedge funds operate under a 2 and 20 model, or sometimes 3 and 30, where they charge a 2 percent annual management fee and take
20 percent of the profits from a year. Other common characteristics include
their exclusivity and general secrecy.
Prior to the 2008 financial crisis, investors who took advantage of hedge
fund performance and the alternative investments they utilized were typically of ultra-high net worth with sizeable investable assets, given that often
the minimum investment was $1 million or more to gain entry. Additionally,
investors had to tie up their funds for lengthy periods as part of the agreement
with the hedge fund manager.
While mutual funds provide a prospectus that outlines exactly the approach
and asset classes to be used, hedge funds are often veiled in secrecy. They might
publicly advertise a broad investment strategy, but specifics are often withheld
to preserve the secret sauce of the hedge fund. Hedge fund managers demand
a high amount of flexibility and tolerance from their clients.
For example, hedge fund managers could buy real estate or take ownership in what they believe to be an undervalued company (either publicly or
privately held). If they believe upcoming political changes may favor oil, they
could lease oil tankers or make a sizeable investment in a foreign oil partnership. They can also utilize assets such as timber, short positions in stocks
(meaning they’re betting on the price falling), commodity derivatives, and yes,
germane to this book, bitcoin and other cryptoassets.
Even with this lack of transparency and liquidity, affluent investors rushed
to hedge funds to chase the performance of managers like Paulson, Simons,
and others. An underlying assumption for hedge fund investors was that they
needed to be affluent enough to handle the high risk and volatile nature associated with a hedge fund manager’s approach and fund assets. For the typical
investor, the high asset commitments, illiquidity, and lack of transparency kept
hedge funds beyond their reach. Fortunately, the underlying ability to utilize
alternative investments in any portfolio is not as elusive as many are made
to think.

Burniske 02.indd 78

9/9/17 1:46 PM

The Importance of Portfolio Management and Alternative Assets

79

Alternative Investments Defined
So how does one define an “alternative investment”?
A search online and in dictionaries will present a reader with the perception that accurately defining the term is quite complicated due to the wide
range of investments included, ranging from hedge funds to private equity to
direct investments in natural resources like gold and timber.10
The reality is that classifying alternative investments can be a moving target as investment options and trends change over time. Many investors may
already have alternative investment vehicles in their portfolio without specifically referring to them as such. An investment such as an exchange traded
fund (ETF) that specializes in arbitrage strategies or futures contracts may
look like any other ETF in a portfolio, but it could be considered an alternative investment.11 Physical holdings in gold, silver, real estate, art collections,
or personally-owned businesses are all part of someone’s net worth and could
also be considered as alternative investments.
A more current and concise way to describe an alternative investment is
that it’s an asset with its own unique economic and value-based characteristics
that are separate from those of the primary investments of stocks and bonds.
For an investor, the main concern is to have assets that perform in a noncorrelated fashion to stocks and bonds—which have historically made up most
investors’ portfolio models—and many alternative assets fit that bill.
If done properly, when the overall market has a severe meltdown as happened in 2008, specific alternative investments within portfolios may not
decrease. Equally, in market upturns those same assets may or may not also
increase in value; they may lose value, but such is the cost of overall risk reduction. As a small portion of the innovative investor’s overall portfolio, alternatives are an effective way to balance risk and provide a cushion in the case of a
stock or bond meltdown.

ALTERNATIVE INVESTMENTS
AND THE INNOVATIVE INVESTOR
Today’s innovative investor can build an investment portfolio and asset allocation strategy with a clear understanding of risk and reward, and the inclusion
of alternative investments can help. This has not been lost on wealth manage-

Burniske 02.indd 79

9/9/17 1:46 PM

80 CRYPTOASSETS

ment firms that are now looking more aggressively into how alternative investments can be used to improve client returns.
For example, Morgan Stanley has outlined asset allocation models for its
high net worth investors with under $25 million in investable assets; those
models recommend 56 percent stocks, 19 percent bonds, 3 percent cash, and
22 percent alternatives. For those clients with over $25 million in investable
assets, the recommendation is for 50 percent stocks, 19 percent bonds, 3 percent cash, and 28 percent in alternatives.12 Merrill Lynch has recommended
allocation models for its typical client that include alternatives near or above
20 percent of a portfolio.13
Clearly, the inclusion of alternative investments should not be limited to
only high net worth investors. Historically, one of the biggest reasons alternative investments have not been incorporated into retail portfolios is because
of their illiquid characteristics. Many retail investors can’t guarantee that they
won’t need to access their funds for 10 years, making many alternatives out of
reach. That, however, is changing.
Over the last decade, to address the need for alternative investment options
as a way to provide diversification and noncorrelation from the traditional capital markets, wealth management firms have been creating more investment
options for the typical investor. The proliferation of ETFs has led to the creation
of liquid investments in alternative assets, such as gold, energy resources, and
real estate, as well as ways to play the volatility of the market. Because of the
easy accessibility of these products through the capital markets, these vehicles
and others have found their way into investors’ portfolios and onto the recommended lists of many financial advisors. The impact of this is seen in a 2015
survey among financial advisors that found they had placed 73 percent of their
clients in alternative investments, and that nearly three-quarters of advisors
planned to maintain their current alternative investment allocations.14
The survey also showed that in terms of asset allocation, most advisors were
recommending a range of 6 percent to 15 percent of a client’s portfolio in alternatives. A smaller but not insignificant percentage of advisors recommended
16 percent to 25 percent of their clients’ portfolios in alternatives.
Bitcoin and other cryptoassets are alternative assets that can be safely and
successfully incorporated into well-diversified portfolios to meet these asset
allocation recommendations.15 However, every alternative investment has its
unique set of characteristics, and the innovative investor must understand
these.

Burniske 02.indd 80

9/9/17 1:46 PM

The Importance of Portfolio Management and Alternative Assets

81

The potential of bitcoin and other cryptoassets is so great that we believe
they should be considered an asset class of their own. We can easily see them
more and more commonly used in many innovative portfolios. We explain
why we think cryptoassets will increasingly be incorporated into mainstream
retail portfolios, first starting with an exploration of how bitcoin’s risk, reward,
and risk-reward profiles have evolved over the course of its life.

Burniske 02.indd 81

9/9/17 1:46 PM

This page intentionally left blank

Burniske 02.indd 82

9/9/17 1:46 PM

Chapter 7
The Most Compelling Alternative
Asset of the Twenty-First Century

B

itcoin is the most exciting alternative asset in the twenty-first century,
and it has paved the way for its digital siblings to enjoy similar success. In this chapter, we dive into how bitcoin evolved as an asset in
the context of absolute returns, volatility, and correlations, concluding with
how a small allocation of bitcoin would have affected a portfolio over different
holding periods. Because bitcoin can claim the title of being the oldest crypto­
asset—giving us the most data to investigate its maturation—understanding
its longitudinal market behavior will give us a window into how other crypto­
assets may evolve over time.

BITCOIN’S EARLIEST PRICING
Let’s go back to the first time a price was established for bitcoin, October 5,
2009, when it was priced at 1,309 bitcoin to the dollar, or 7/100 of a cent per
bitcoin. A small website called the New Liberty Standard established the rate
based on the amount of money it needed for electricity and rent to maintain
the computer that mined bitcoin versus the amount of bitcoin that had been
reaped from so doing.
If at that time an investor had tracked down one of the few bitcoin miners
in the world and offered $100 for the 130,900 bitcoin implied by that exchange
rate, by now that investor would have amassed over $100 million. A single
83

Burniske 02.indd 83

9/9/17 1:46 PM

84 CRYPTOASSETS

hundred-dollar bill converted into one million hundred-dollar bills: it would
have been one of the best investments of all time.
However, having such impeccable timing is an elusive dream for investors.
When I (Jack) began investigating bitcoin in August 2013,1 bitcoin was trading
at $135; it had already appreciated significantly from the initial exchange rate
of 1,309 bitcoin to the dollar. Yet I decided it was not too late and ultimately
made the investment.
Similarly, I (Chris) didn’t even consider investing in bitcoin when I first
heard about it in 2012. By the time I began considering bitcoin for my portfolio in late 2014, the price was in the mid $300s, having increased 460,000-fold
from the initial exchange rate. Like Jack, I also didn’t think it was too late and
made the jump. While the innovative investor may interpret the current price
tag on bitcoin as being too high, consider instead what can be done. We believe
it’s still early days for cryptoassets.
