
THE JAPANESE YEN
The Japanese yen (JPY) is the base or quote currency with the following
FOREX major and crossed-rate currency pairs: USD/JPY, EUR/JPY,
GBP/JPY, CHF/JPY, CAD/JPY, AUD/JPY, and NZD/JPY.
The JPY is the official national currency of Japan. Originally pegged to
the USD after World War II, the yen switched to a system of floating
exchange rates after 1971. The volatility of the JPY in the FOREX market
is usually low to medium.
Japan’s economy is predominantly based on its manufacturing industry.
The JPY traditionally has been a weak currency because its circulation is
limited to domestic business, thus hindering Japan’s position with regard to
foreign trade. Additionally, the country depends completely on oil imports
and exclusively on its export of manufactured goods; this renders the JPY
very sensitive to rises in crude oil prices and overall energy costs.

CHAPTER 2

MAJOR CURRENCIES AND PAIRS

15

The weakness of the currency has been maintained over the years as a
protection for the local manufacturing and export industries; however, the
JPY has been experiencing a rising trend that has diverted some foreign
investments to other countries, where much lower costs still can be found.
The most important index of Japan’s economy is the industrial production
index, which is strongly correlated with the export index.

THE NEW ZEALAND DOLLAR
The New Zealand dollar (NZD) is the base or quote currency with the
following FOREX major and crossed-rate currency pairs: NZD/USD,
NZD/JPY, GBP/NZD, EUR/NZD, NZD/CHF, and NZD/CAD.
The NZD is the official currency of New Zealand and some of the
islands on the Pacific Ocean. The currency is informally called the “kiwi”
because of the image of a kiwi bird that appears on its $1 coin, and the term
also designates most particularly the NZD/USD pair. The volatility of the
NZD in the FOREX market is low to medium.
Similar to what happened in Australia, the economy of New Zealand
has been transformed from an agricultural-based market limited to British
concessionaries into a free and industrialized market now competing on
the global scene. This has greatly helped the development of technology;
however, New Zealand’s exports still depend mostly on agricultural
products.

THE DOLLAR INDEX
The U.S. Dollar Index (USDX) measures the global value of the USD
relative to a basket of foreign currencies (e.g., Euro, Japanese yen, Pound
sterling, Canadian dollar, Swedish krona, and Swiss franc) through a geometric progression weighted-average calculation. It was started in March
1973 with a value of 100, when the leading trade nations agreed to freely
quote their currencies one against the other. After reaching a peak of 165,
the USDX has been trading lower over the recent years, dropping almost
to 70 in March 2008. The USDX is listed on the New York Board of Trade,
and its value is updated continuously 365 days a year. Its volatility can be
compared with that of stock index futures because of its amplitude and
variability.

16

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE (DJIA)
DOW THEORY
In 1884, Charles H. Dow, who was editor of the Wall Street Journal, created
two averages or sectorial indices for the New York stock market, one called
the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA, or Index of the Industrial Sector)
and the other called the Dow Jones Transport Average (DJTA, or Index of
the Transportation Sector). In this way, Dow tried to establish an indicator
of economic activity, using for it an average of the evolution of certain
sectors in the stock market.
Dow thought that a rise in economic activity implied greater industrial
production. Thus, when economic activity was increasing, companies
would see increased demand for their stocks, and therefore, the quotations
for these companies on the indices would rise.
As a result, the other sectors would be affected, and their businesses
would benefit and, consequently, the prices of their shares would rise.
Based on these indexes, Charles Dow formulated his theory that is
today the basis of modern technical analysis and therefore of chartism
(analytical study based on graphs of the evolution of price for a particular
company).

DOW JONES INDEX
The Dow Jones Industrial Average (quoted as DJI on the New York Stock
Exchange, also quoted as DJIA and informally named “the Dow”) is the
second-oldest market index in the United States, after the Dow Jones
Transportation Average (DJTA) from the same creator. This index shows
how certain stocks have been trading. It was developed to evaluate performance within the most important sectors of the American stock market. It
is calculated by computing the stock prices of 30 public American companies that represent the wider range of shares held in the market.
It is possible to invest in the DJI through a series of exchange-traded
funds (ETFs) and options tied to those ETFs (see Appendix table “Dow
Jones Industrial Average”).

GOLD CFDS
Metals, and most particularly gold, are usually traded through the futures
market or gold exploration stocks. More recently, introduction into the
markets of contracts for difference (CFDs) has allowed traders to have

CHAPTER 2

MAJOR CURRENCIES AND PAIRS

17

easier access to market transactions involving metals. The market quoted
by the CFD provider is a two-way market, as with FOREX currency pairs,
and thus the provider obtains a profit by means of the spread, charging no
commissions on transactions.
A gold CFD is a financial derivative that represents a theoretical order
to buy or sell at least 10 ounces of gold, which is the minimum required to
open a gold transaction. The margin required is quite low on gold CFDs,
usually representing 2 to 3 percent of the value of the transaction. You can
take the contract on the spot price or the futures price, with standard contracts providing the equivalent of US $100 per $1 movement in the gold
price and mini contracts providing one-tenth that size.
There is also another type of CFD used for gold, called the binary
CFD, that is based solely on the daily rise or fall in the price of gold, with
value taken at the daily close. If gold rises, the binary CFD will close at
100, and if gold falls, it will close at 0 at the end of the day. The investor’s
profit or loss is determined by the difference between the effective opening
and closing prices.

CRUDE OIL
The price of crude oil is influenced directly by OPEC (Organization of the
Petroleum Exporting Countries), which is made up of 12 nations whose
economies depend on oil export revenues. The fluctuation in prices is
related to production quotas that are imposed by this organization. The
final prices that consumers pay for oil products are determined by several
components: supply and demand, effective production, refinery costs, and
taxes on oil, which can vary greatly depending on country.
Crude oil is traded on the market as a commodity through futures and
spot markets as well as CFDs.

CROSS-RATE CURRENCY PAIRS
The currency pairs that derive their respective rates from their individual
relationships with a third FOREX currency rate are called crosses or
cross-rate pairs. All currency pairs that do not include the U.S. dollar fall
into this group: EUR/GBP, EUR/CHF, EUR/AUD, GBP/CHF, CHF/JPY,
CAD/JPY, EUR/JPY, and GBP/JPY. They are usually very volatile owing
to a lesser liquidity, and this causes the spread between bid and ask prices

18

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

to be much wider than on most majors, for example, the most liquid pairs,
such as EUR/USD and USD/JPY. This can be a disadvantage because it
increases the trading risks, but some of them can represent a very interesting option, such as the GBP/JPY pair, precisely because of its high
volatility.

EXOTIC CURRENCY PAIRS
Some of the secondary foreign currencies that are yet somehow traded
heavily in the FOREX market are the exotic currency pairs and a few European but non-euro-based denominations. They are usually traded as quote
currency and paired with some of the most prominent majors (e.g., USD,
EUR, GBP, and AUD), but they also can become the base currency between
each other.

CHINESE YUAN OR RENMINBI
The Chinese yuan (CNY) is the official currency of China. CNY is the official International Organization for Standardizations (ISO) code for the renminbi (RMB), issued by the People’s Bank of China. The currency displays
a low to medium volatility in the FOREX market. In July 2005, China
revalued the yuan (which was pegged to the USD) to allow it to fluctuate
versus a basket of currencies and protect it from large swings owing to its
ties with the American currency. China’s economy has become increasingly
market-oriented and open to foreign trade and investments since 1978,
which represent a strong element in its overall growth.

SWEDISH KRONA
The Swedish krona (SEK) is the official currency of Sweden. Its volatility is evaluated as medium to high mostly owing to the wide extent of foreign trade, where it constantly depends on the economic status of other
currencies. Sweden is a member of the European Union, but it didn’t
adopt the euro and instead maintains its local currency as official. The
country shows a low and stable inflation rate, and its economy is mostly
based on exports, especially in the areas of information technology and
telecommunications.

CHAPTER 2

MAJOR CURRENCIES AND PAIRS

19

NORWEGIAN KRONE
The Norwegian krone (NOK) is the official currency of Norway. The country is one of the largest exporters of oil, and increases in the demand for oil
have injected a great deal of money into its economy, making it very dependent on fluctuations in oil prices, however. The volatility of the currency
itself is low.
The economy of Norway is more service-oriented, and the country is
involved in a great number of offshore activities. It is a small country with
a small population, but it is one of the wealthiest countries in Europe.
Other exotic currencies you can find are the Danish krone (DKK) and
The Singapore dollar (SGD) with low volatility, the Mexican peso (MXN)
and the Brazilian real (BRL) with low to medium volatility, and the South
African rand (ZAR) with medium volatility.

THE IRAQI DINAR
Although not yet traded on the FOREX, the Iraqi dinar has been highly promoted as a good investment in recent years since Central Bank of Iraq
started issuing a new and stable currency that experienced a great revaluation, rising approximately four times its original value (from about 4000
dinars per dollar as its lower low to 980 dinars per dollar as its highest high,
actually trading at around 1200 dinars per dollar). This boom had started a
series of wild speculations and the spread of a huge promotion, especially
on the Internet, as well as scams associated with that promotion, where
unusually higher rates of exchange and thus extraordinary returns were
promised in the hope that enough speculators would be attracted, thus making the exchange rate explode much higher as soon as the currency enters
the market.
However, the rates for the currency vary over a wide range, and there is
a huge difference between the official fixed rate of 1449 dinars for $1 set
up by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for the Central Bank of Iraq
and retail quotes from dealers and trading companies, which offer quotes
between 1050 and 1350 dinars per $1. Additionally, this is a currency with
practically no liquidity, mostly because of the discrepancies in price and the
fact that the banks do not trade the dinar openly with the public. In addition,
dealers will sell dinars to the market but not always buy back the dinars, so
there are few counterparts for transactions, making it difficult for the
investors to cash out of the currency.

20

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Finally, the overextended negotiations on the Internet, with inexperienced investors trapped and blinded by the fabulous promotion, allow dealers to mix old dinars, bought at a much cheaper price, and new dinars, thus
lowering the value of the original amount purchased, which puts the
investor immediately at a loss. Some other dealers offer just a blatant scam,
taking the money of the investor and disappearing, never delivering the currency. It is extremely important to be well informed before risking funds
into any currency investment, especially when the offers are “too good to
be true.”

C

H

3

A

P

T

E

R

ANYONE CAN LEARN
THE FOREX
FOREX 101
You’ve probably heard or read about bid and ask or bid and offer. What are
those? Price quotes for a currency pair are double, one for buying and the
other for selling. The difference between the two prices is called the spread,
which will be discussed later on.
As a side note, the opposite is meant when using the same word in a
news release. For example, when there is a considerable number of pending orders awaiting for the price to reach a lower value to buy, it is said
that there are many bids on the market, but when sellers have pending
orders at a certain price higher, it is said that there are many offers sitting
at that price.
This happens because the bid price is actually the end-value price of a
long position, which is purchased at the ask price to allow for the spread to
be paid. The same occurs in the inverse situation; the end-value price of a
short position is the actual offer price, and it is purchased at the bid price,
so the spread is paid at the moment the particular position is closed.

OPENING A POSITION
The reason for trading the FOREX market is to make money and to diversify your current portfolio. You do this through the positions you take by
21

22

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

means of buying and selling a different set of currencies. When a currency
rises in value after you have bought it at a lower price, you realize a profit
when you close the position at a higher price. At the moment you close the
working order, you are selling back the base currency and buying its counterpart currency. This operation implies a relationship of relative worth
because the value of one of the components of the currency pair will be
compared with the value of the other one; thus any currency will only have
value as a result of its comparison with another currency of a different
country.
The position, or order, represents the net amount of exposure in a particular currency and in its counterpart currency because they always work
in pairs. The position is said to be flat when there is no exposure, long if
more currency has been bought than sold, and short if more currency has
been sold than bought. When you perform currency trading, you are in fact
exchanging one currency for another, expecting that the currency that you
buy will see its value rise in comparison with the currency you sell in the
operation. In the FOREX market, currencies always trade in pairs. We are
constantly and simultaneously buying one currency (the base currency,
mentioned first in the pair quote) and selling the other (the quote currency,
mentioned second in the pair quote). If we decide to realize the profit, then
we need to sell back the currency that we bought earlier at the higher current price. If we decide to hold and do not realize the profit for a while, the
amount of a particular currency bought or sold is not being sold to or
bought back from the market and thus is said to be an open position.
Purchasing a particular currency pair, where you are also acquiring a
certain amount of the base currency and selling the same amount of the
quote currency, is also called going long or longing the market. If we go long
10,000 units, for example, in the EUR/USD pair, we are purchasing 10,000
units of the euro, which is the base currency, and selling the equivalent sum
in U.S. dollars, which is the quote currency, which at a rate of 1.40 for
EUR/USD would represent 14,000 units of U.S. dollars. The selling of USD
units guarantees the buying of the EUR counterpart.
The same rules apply in the inverse position, where we are then
shorting the market or going short in a particular base currency, when
you see that its value is decreasing with respect to the quote currency.
Now we would be selling, for example, the 10,000 euro units and buying
back the 14,000 units of U.S. dollars because we expect the euro value to
decrease, and we would buy it back at a lower dollar price thereafter to
realize the profit.

CHAPTER 3

ANYONE CAN LEARN THE FOREX

23

One is said to be long in one currency when we buy it and short in that
currency when we sell it. Long, or buy, positions use the offer or ask price
of the quotes. For example, if you acquire one lot of GBP/USD at a rate of
1.4722 bid/1.4727 ask, this means that you’ll be buying 100,000 GBP units
at 1.4727 USD. Short, or sell, positions use the bid price of the quotes.
Thus, in the preceding situation, we would be selling 100,000 GBP units at
1.4722 USD.
Trading currency pairs is simultaneous and symmetrical; this implies
that we will always be long in one currency and short in another at the same
time. In the previous example, if we exchange those 100,000 GBP units at
1.47220 USD, we will be short in pounds sterling and long in U.S. dollars.
A position that is running and active will be called an open position. Its
value will change depending on fluctuations in market rates. Profits and
losses will be influence the margin account but will not be official until the
position has been closed.

TRADING ON MARGIN
Trading on margin is equivalent to borrowing money from a bank or a broker to purchase a particular security or currency pair. The margin needed
depends on the leverage offered by the financial institution and represents
the guarantee needed to control a certain quantity of units.
For example, when using a 100:1 leverage, the trader controls a $100,000
lot with only $1000 on margin in the account. Smaller lot sizes of $10,000
may be controlled with only $100 on margin.
Higher-leveraged accounts may allow control of greater amounts of
money in the market with less margin, but this also can be dangerous when
losses are experienced. A lower margin requirement can induce the trader
to risk more than is wise. I will discuss leverage and true leverage in detail
in Chapter 6.

MANAGING A POSITION
The position can be set up from the start of the trade, with its individual
stop-loss and target-profit levels, or it can be managed as it develops. Setting and trailing the stops, balancing partial profits, and shifting entry prices
in pending stop or limit orders are other ways of managing your trades.

24

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

CLOSING A POSITION
A position will be closed automatically when it reaches either the targetprofit or stop-loss set price resulting in a loss. Positions also can be closed
manually through specific controls on the platform or by calling the broker
directly. When you close a position manually, you are subject to the same
conditions as when opening at market price, such as requotes if the prices
have changed.
Positions also can be closed by opening a matching and opposite trade
in the same currency pair (a limit order, a stop-loss order, or simply a market order can be used). For example, if you have gone long in one lot of
GBP/USD at the offer price, you may close out that position by going short
in one GBP/USD lot at the actual bid price. However, this is not possible
with brokers that permit hedging through opening long and short positions
on the same currency pair. Hedging has been halted in the United States in
the FOREX by recent rule changes enacted with the farm bill in October
2008. You still can use hedging strategies via different accounts and different futures commission merchants (FCMs), although not quite with the
same affect. You also can open an offshore account, which some FCMs in
the United States will allow you to do so that you can still hedge your
FOREX trades.

PIPS AND LOTS
The pip or point (percentage in point) is the minimum unit of movement of
a currency. It symbolizes a 0.0001 variation in four-decimal-based currency
pairs, and a 0.01 increase or a decrease in two-decimal-based pairs. In this
way, assuming that the previous price is, for example, 1.2750 on the EUR/
USD and it rises to 1.2799, you will have a difference of 49 pips.
Each pair can have a different pip value, which is based on the relationship between the varying currency rates. It would not be calculated by
the same method for pairs where USD is the base currency as for pairs
where USD is the quote currency. This is also true in the case of crossedrate currency pairs.
A currency’s price moves are usually measured by the number of pips.
Every pip a currency moves will equal a specific amount of profit or loss in
real USD on every trade. Often the value of a pip changes based on which
currency pair is being traded. Only if currency pair includes USD as the
quote currency, listed second in the pair, will the value of a pip consistently

CHAPTER 3

ANYONE CAN LEARN THE FOREX

25

stay the same. This happens because it is how much of the base currency you
can buy or sell for the USD that fluctuates.
To determine the amount of loss or gain on a particular trade, you first
should set up the value of a pip and then multiply it by the number of pips
the currency has changed for or against your position since the trade began.
If the base currency is increasing in relation to the quote currency, each pip
above the price at which you purchased it will be counted as profit. And
vice versa, every pip that is lower than the price at which you purchased it
would increase your loss.
It’s extremely important to remember that if the countercurrency is USD
(e.g., the pair is EUR/USD), the value always remains 1 pip ⫽ $0.0001 USD
(1/100 of a cent) for every dollar traded. This is a value of US $10 per pip
for every usual lot amount of US $100,000 traded and is US $1 for mini lots
of US $10,000. Most other currency pairs will have a pip value that changes
constantly between US $0.00006 and US $0.00009 per pip depending on
the current rate of exchange. This is US $6 to US $9 per pip for every US
$100,000 lot traded or US $0.60 to US $0.90 per pip for every US $10,000
lot traded.
Here are some more examples of the calculations to be made depending on which are the base and quote currencies:
Currency Pairs with USD as the Base Currency
USD/CHF, USD/JPY, USD/CAD
Examples:
USD/CHF
Currency value ⫽ 1.1718
Pip value ⫽ 0.0001/1.1718 ⫽ 0.0000853388
On one standard lot, the pip value would be
0.0000853388 ⫻ 100,000 ⫽ $8.53
USD/JPY
Currency value ⫽ 92.29
Pip value ⫽ 0.01/92.29 ⫽ 0.000108354
With one standard lot, the pip value would be
0.000108354 ⫻ 100,000 ⫽ $10.83
