
MONEY MANAGEMENT FORMULAS

221

of $50,000 is $1,000, the maximum risk you may accept. Buying at
$20 and putting a stop at $18 means you’ll risk $2 per share. Divide
the maximum acceptable risk by the risk per share to find how many
shares you may buy. Dividing $1,000 by $2 gives you 500 shares. This
is the maximum number, in theory. In practice, it has to be lower
because you must pay commissions and be prepared to be hit by slippage, all of which must fit under the 2% limit. So, 400 rather than 500
shares is the upper limit for this trade.
I’ve noticed a curious difference in how people react to the 2% Rule.
Poor beginners think this number is too low. Someone asked me at a
recent conference whether the 2% Rule could be increased for small
accounts. I answered that when he goes bungee jumping, it doesn’t
pay to extend the cord.
Professionals, on the other hand, often say 2% is too high and they
try to risk less. A very successful hedge fund manager recently told me
that his project for the next six months was to increase his trading size.
He never risked more than 0.5% of equity on a trade—and was going
to teach himself to risk 1%! Good traders tend to stay well below the
2% limit. Whenever amateurs and professionals are on the opposite
sides of an argument, you know which side to choose. Try to risk less
than 2%—it is simply the maximum level.
Whenever you look at a potential trade, check whether a logical
stop on a round lot or a single contract would keep you on the
right side of the 2% Rule. If it would put more money at risk, pass
that trade.
Measure your account equity on the first of each month. If you start
the month with $100,000 in your account, the 2% Rule allows you to
risk a maximum of $2,000 per trade. If you have a good month and
your equity rises to $105,000, then your 2% limit for the next month
is—how much? Quick! Remember, a good trader can count! If you have
$105,000 in your account, the 2% Rule allows you to risk $2,100 and
trade a slightly bigger size. If, on the other hand, you have a bad
month and your equity falls to $95,000, the 2% Rule sets your maximum permitted risk at $1,900 per trade for the following month. The
2% Rule lets you expand when you are ahead and forces you to pull
in your horns when you do poorly; it links your trading size to your
performance. What if you have several trading accounts, for example,
one for stocks and another for futures? In that case, apply the 2% Rule
to each account separately.

222

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Futures—OK to Trade Spreadsheet
Imagine two traders, Mr. Hare and Mr. Turtle, both with $50,000
accounts, who are looking at two futures markets—S&P 500 and corn.
The agile Mr. Hare notices that the average daily range in the S&P is
about 5 points, worth $250 each. The daily range in corn is about 5
cents, worth $50 each. He quickly figures that if he catches just a half
of a day’s range, he’ll make over $500 per contract in the S&P, whereas
the same level of skill will bring him just a little over $100 in corn. Mr.
Hare calls his broker and buys two contracts of the S&P.
The cautious Mr. Turtle has a different arithmetic. He begins by setting the maximum risk in his account at 2% or $1,000. Trading the S&P,
moving over $1,000 a day with such a small account, is like grabbing a
very large tiger by a very short tail. If, on the other hand, he trades corn,
he’ll have a lot more staying power. That tiger is smaller and has a longer
tail, which he can wrap around his wrist. Mr. Turtle buys a contract of
corn. Who is more likely to win in the long run, Mr. Hare or Mr. Turtle?
To find out which futures markets you may or may not trade, measure your equity against the recent level of market noise. Begin by calculating 2% of your account. Measure the level of noise with the
SafeZone indicator, calculate its 22-day EMA, and translate that into dollars. Do not trade any market whose average noise level is more than
1% of your equity. If you follow this rule, you’ll trade relatively sedate
markets where you can safely place your stops. Why 1% and not 2%?
Because your 2% stop will have to be more than the average noise
level away from the market.
The first column in the spreadsheet in Table 7.1 lists the market, the
second the value of one contract, the third the current SafeZone indicator, and the fourth multiplies SafeZone by two. The fifth column lists
2% of the account value, in this case $30,000. The last column compares the value of SafeZone multiplied by two to 2% of the account. If
the latter is greater than the former, that market is OK to trade.
The values in Table 7.1 are current as this is being written, but have
to be updated monthly because volatility changes and SafeZone with it.
The exchanges occasionally modify contracts and change unit values.
Use this table only as an example and a starting point. Do your homework, plug in the current numbers, and find out which contracts you
may or may not trade.
If you cannot afford to trade a certain market, you can still download
it, do your homework, and paper trade it as if you were doing it with

MONEY MANAGEMENT FORMULAS

223

Table 7.1 OK to Trade Spreadsheet
Future

Unit
value

SafeZone

SafeZone•2

2% of
$30,000

OK to
trade?

Bonds
Euro$
S&P

$1,000
$2,500
$250

0.33
0.09
10.00

$660
$450
$5,000

$600
$600
$600

No
Yes
No

SF
JY
DM
C$

$1,250
$1,250
$1,250
$1,000

0.40
0.38
0.26
0.21

$1,000
$950
$650
$420

$600
$600
$600
$600

No
No
No
Yes

Sugar
Cotton
Coffee
Cocoa

$1,120
$500
$375
$10

0.11
0.63
1.70
24.00

$246
$630
$1,275
$480

$600
$600
$600
$600

Yes
No
No
Yes

Unleaded
Heating
Crude Oil

$420
$420
$420

1.84
2.11
0.76

$1,546
$1,772
$638

$600
$600
$600

No
No
No

Silver
Gold
Copper

$5,000
$100
$250

0.09
1.80
1.05

$900
$360
$525

$600
$600
$600

No
Yes
Yes

Wheat
Corn
Beans
Beanoil
Beanmeal

$50
$50
$50
$600
$100

2.60
2.50
6.50
0.30
2.60

$260
$250
$650
$360
$520

$600
$600
$600
$600
$600

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

real money. This will prepare you for the day when your account grows
big enough or the market grows quiet enough for you to jump in.

THE 6% RULE—PROTECTION FROM PIRANHAS
It used to puzzle me why institutional traders as a group performed
so much better than private traders. An average private trader is a 50year-old married, college-educated man, often a business owner or a
professional. You would think this thoughtful, computer-literate, bookreading individual would run circles around some loud 25-year-old
with minimal training who used to play ball in college and hasn’t read
a book since his junior year. In fact, the lifetime of most private traders

224

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

is measured in months, while institutional traders continue to make
money for their firms year after year. Is it because of their fast reflexes?
Not really, because young private traders wash out just as fast as older
ones. Nor do institutional traders win because of training, which is
skimpy in most firms.
Institutional traders who make a lot of money sometimes decide to
go out on their own. They quit the firm, lease the same gear, trade
the same system, stay in touch with their contacts—and fail. A few
months later, most cowboys are back in head-hunters’ offices, looking
for a trading job. How come they make money for the firms but not for
themselves?
When an institutional trader quits his firm, he leaves behind his manager, the person in charge of discipline and risk control. That manager
sets the maximum risk per trade for each trader. That is similar to what
a private trader can do with the 2% Rule. Firms operate from huge capital bases, and the risk limit is much higher in dollar terms but tiny in
percentage terms. A trader who violates that limit is fired. A private
trader can break the 2% Rule and hide it, but a manager watches his
traders like a hawk. A private trader can throw confirmation slips in a
shoebox, but a trading manager quickly gets rid of impulsive people.
He saves institutional traders from disastrous losses, which destroy
many private accounts.
In addition, a trading manager sets the maximum allowed monthly
drawdown for each trader. When an employee sinks to that level, his
trading privileges are suspended for the rest of the month. We all go
through cycles. Sometimes we’re in gear with the markets, and everything we touch turns to gold. At other times we are out of sync, and
everything we touch turns into a completely different substance. You
may think you’re hot, but when you keep losing, it is the market’s way
of saying you’re cold.
Most private traders on a losing streak keep trying to trade their
way out of a hole. A loser thinks a successful trade is just around
the corner, and that his luck is about to turn. He keeps putting on more
trades and increases his size, all the while digging himself a deeper
hole in the ice. The sensible thing to do would be to reduce your trading size and then stop and review your system. A trading manager
breaks his traders’ losing streaks by forcing them to stop after they
reach their monthly loss limit. Imagine being in a room with co-workers
who are actively trading, while you sharpen pencils and run out for

MONEY MANAGEMENT FORMULAS

225

sandwiches. Traders do all in their power to avoid being in that spot.
This social pressure creates a serious incentive not to lose.
A friend who used to manage a trading department in London had a
woman on his team who was a very good trader. Once, she hit a losing
streak and by the middle of the month was nearing her loss limit. My
friend knew he would have to suspend her trading privileges, but she
was very high-strung and he did not want to hurt her feelings. He found
a course on treasury management in Washington, DC, and sent her there
for the rest of the month. Most managers are not so gentle. Gentle or
rough, the monthly loss limit saves traders from death by piranha bites—
a nasty series of small losses that can add up to a disaster.
The piranha is a tropical river fish, not much bigger than a man’s hand,
but with a mean set of teeth. It doesn’t look very dangerous, but if a
dog, a person, or a donkey stumbles into a tropical stream, a pack of
piranhas can attack him with such a mass of bites that the victim collapses. A bull can walk into a river, get attacked by piranhas, and a few
minutes later only its skeleton will be bobbing in the water. A trader
keeps sharks at bay with the 2% Rule, but he still needs protection from
the piranhas. The 6% Rule will save you from being nibbled to death.
Whenever the value of your account dips 6% below its closing value
at the end of last month, stop trading for the rest of this month.
Calculate your equity each day, including cash, cash equivalents, and
current market value of all open positions in your account. Stop trading as soon as your equity dips 6% below where it stood on the last
day of the previous month. Close all positions that may still be open
and spend the rest of that month on the sidelines. Continue to monitor the markets, keep track of your favorite stocks and indicators, and
paper trade if you wish. Review your trading system. Was this losing
streak just a fluke or did it expose a flaw in your system?
People who leave institutions know how to trade, but their discipline is external, not internal. They quickly lose money without their
managers. Private traders have no managers. This is why you need
your own system of discipline. The 2% Rule will save you from a disastrous loss, while the 6% Rule will save you from a series of losses.
The 6% Rule forces you to do something most people cannot do on
their own—stop losing streaks.
Using the 6% Rule, along with the 2% Rule, is like having your own
trading manager. Let us review an example of trading using these rules.

226

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

For simplicity’s sake, let us assume we’ll risk 2% of equity on any given
trade, even though in reality we try to risk less.
At the end of the month, a trader calculates his equity and finds that he
has $100,000 and no open positions. He writes down his maximum
risk levels for the month ahead: 2% or $2,000 per trade and 6% or
$6,000 for the account as a whole.
Several days later the trader sees a very attractive stock, A, figures out
where to put his stop, and buys a position that puts $2,000, or 2% of
his equity, at risk.
A few days later he sees stock B and puts on a similar trade, risking
another $2,000.
By the end of the week he sees stock C and buys it, risking another $2,000.
The next week he sees stock D, which is more attractive than any of the
three above. Should he buy it? No, because his account is already
exposed to 6% risk. He has three open trades, risking 2% on each, and
he may lose 6% if the market goes against him. The 6% Rule prohibits
him from risking any more at this time.
A few days later, stock A rallies and the trader moves his stop above
breakeven. Stock D, which he was not allowed to trade just a few days
ago, still looks very attractive. May he buy it now? Yes, he may, because
his current risk is only 4% of his account. He is risking 2% in stock B and
another 2% in stock C, but nothing in stock A, because its stop is above
breakeven. The trader buys stock D, risking another $2,000, or 2%.
Later in the week, the trader sees stock E, and it looks very bullish. May
he buy it? Not according to the 6% Rule, because his account is already
exposed to a 6% risk in stocks B, C, and D (he is no longer risking any
equity in stock A). He must pass up stock E.
A few days later stock B falls and hits its stop. Stock E still looks attractive. May he buy it? No, since he already lost 2% on stock B and has a
4% exposure to risk in stocks C and D. Adding another position at this
time would expose him to more than 6% risk per month.

The 6% Rule protects you from the piranhas. When they start biting
you, get out of the water, and do not let the nasty fish nibble you to
death. You may have more than three positions at once if you risk less
than 2% per trade. If you risk only 1% of your account equity, you may
open six positions before maxing out at the 6% limit. The 6% Rule protects your equity, based on last month’s closing value and not taking
into account any additional profits you may have made this month.

MONEY MANAGEMENT FORMULAS

227

If you come into a new month with a big open profit, you have to recalibrate your stops and sizes so that no more than 2% of your new total
equity level is exposed to risk on any given trade and no more than 6%
on all open trades combined. Whenever you do well and the value of
your account rises by the end of the month, the 6% Rule will allow you
to trade a bigger size the following month. If you do poorly and the size
of your account shrinks, it will reduce your trading size the next month.
The 6% Rule encourages you to increase your size when you’re on
a winning streak and stop trading early in a losing streak. If the markets move in your favor, you will move your stops beyond breakeven
and put on more positions. If your stocks or futures start going against
you and hitting stops, you will lose your maximum permitted amount
for the month and stop, saving the bulk of your account to trade the
next month.
The 2% Rule and the 6% Rule provide guidelines for pyramiding—
adding to winning positions. If you buy a stock, it rises, and you move
the stop above breakeven, then you may buy more of the same stock,
as long as the risk on the new position is no more than 2% of your
account equity and your total account risk is less than 6%. Handle each
addition as a separate trade.
Most traders go through emotional swings, feeling elated at the highs
and gloomy at the lows. If you want to be a disciplined trader, the 2%
and the 6% Rules will convert your good intentions into the reality of
safer trading.

POSITION SIZING
A few years ago the owner of a local stock trading firm asked me to run
a psychological training group for his traders. They were shocked to
hear a psychiatrist was coming and loudly insisted they “weren’t crazy.”
The group got off the ground only after the manager told his worst performers that they had to join—or else. Once we began to meet and
focus on psychology and money management, the results were such
that six weeks later we had a waiting list for the second group.
The firm used a proprietary day-trading system. It worked so well that
its two top traders took in more than a million dollars each month. Others
who used the same system made less, and quite a few lost money.
In one of our first meetings a trader complained that he had lost
money each day for the past 13 days. His manager, who sat in on the

228

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

meeting, confirmed that the fellow was following the firm’s system but
could not make any money. I began by saying that I would take my
hat off for anyone who could lose for 13 days in a row and have the
intestinal fortitude to come in and trade the next morning. I then asked
how many shares he traded, since the firm set a maximum for each
trader. He was permitted to buy or sell 700 shares at a clip, but voluntarily reduced it to 500 while on his losing streak.
I told him to drop down to 100 shares until he had two weeks during which he had more winning days than losing and was profitable
overall. Once he cleared that hurdle, he could go up to 200 shares.
Then, after another two-week profitable period, he could go up to 300
shares, and so on. He was allowed a 100-share increment after two
weeks of profitable trading. If he had a single losing week, he’d have to
drop back to the previous level until he had a new profitable two-week
period. In other words, he had to start small, go up in size slowly, and
drop down fast in case of trouble.
The trader loudly objected that 100 shares weren’t enough, and he
wouldn’t be able to make any money. I told him to stop kidding himself since trading a bigger size made him no money either, and he
reluctantly agreed to my plan. When we met a week later he reported
that he had four profitable days out of five and was profitable overall.
He made very little money because his trading size was so small, but
he was ahead of the game. He continued to make money during the
next week and then stepped up to 200 shares. In our next meeting he
asked, “Do you think it could be psychological?” The group roared.
Why would a man lose while trading 500 shares, but make money trading 100 or 200?
I took a $10 bill out of my pocket and asked whether anyone in that
group would like to earn it by climbing on top of our long narrow conference table and walking from one end to the other. Several hands
went up. Wait, I said, I have a better offer. I’ll give $1,000 cash to anyone who comes up with me up to the roof of our 10-story office building and uses a board as wide as the table to walk to the roof of another
10-story building across the boulevard. No volunteers.
I started egging on the group. “The board will be as wide and sturdy
as our conference table, we’ll do it on a windless day, and I’ll pay
$1,000 cash on the spot. The technical challenge is no harder than
walking on the conference table, but the reward is much greater.” Still
no takers. Why? Because if you lose your balance on the conference

MONEY MANAGEMENT FORMULAS

229

table, you jump down a couple of feet and land on the carpet. If you
lose your balance between two rooftops, you would be splattered on
the asphalt.
When the level of risk goes up, our ability to perform goes down.
Beginners often make money on small trades. They gain a little
experience and confidence, increase their trading size—and start losing. Their system hasn’t changed, but bigger size makes them a little
stiffer and less nimble. Most beginners are in a hurry to make a killing,
and guess who gets killed.
Overtrading means, among other things, trading a size that is too
large for you. Poor futures traders look for brokers with the lowest
margin requirements. If the minimum margin in gold is $2,000, an
eager beaver with $10,000 may buy five contracts. Each includes 100 oz.
of gold, making his account swing $500 for every $1 move in gold. If
gold goes against him, he is cooked. If it goes his way, that beginner
will be convinced he has discovered a great new way of making
money, continue to trade recklessly, and bust out on the next trade.
Unscrupulous brokers promote overtrading because it generates big
commissions. Some stockbrokers outside the United States offer a “shoulder” of 10:1, allowing you to buy $10 worth of stock for every $1 you
deposit with the firm. Some currency houses offer a shoulder of 100:1.
When a scuba diver jumps off a boat, he has a device called an
octopus attached to his air tank. It consists of several tubes, one leading to his mouthpiece, another to his flotation vest, and yet another to
an instrument that shows how much air he has left in his tank. If it falls
too low, he may not have enough to get back to the surface, which is
why scuba is such a deadly sport for illiterates and hotheads.
Putting on a trade is like diving for treasure. There is gold below the
rocks on the ocean floor. As you scoop it up, remember to glance at
your air gauge. How much gold can you take without endangering
your survival? The ocean floor is littered with the remains of divers
who saw great opportunities.
A professional diver thinks about his air supply first. If he doesn’t
get any gold today, he’ll go for it tomorrow. All he needs to do is survive and dive again. Beginners kill themselves by running out of air.
The lure of free gold is too strong. Free gold! It reminds me of a
Russian saying—the only free thing is the cheese in a mousetrap.
There are tribes in Africa that catch monkeys by putting tidbits
of food into jars with narrow necks, tied to stakes in the ground.

230

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

A monkey wiggles its hand into a jar, grabs a tidbit, but cannot pull
it out because only an open hand can go through the narrow neck.
The monkey still tugs at the bait when the hunters come to pick
it up. Monkeys lose because of greed, grabbing and refusing to let
go. Think of this when you feel tempted to put on a large trade with
no stop.
A professional trader needs strong money management skills. All
successful traders survive and prosper thanks to their discipline. The
2% Rule will keep you safe from the sharks, the 6% Rule from the piranhas. Then, if you have a half-way decent trading system, you’ll be far
ahead of the game.

MONEY MANAGEMENT STEPS
Overtrading—putting on trades that are too large for your account—is
a deadly mistake. Beginners are in a hurry to make money, whereas
serious traders begin by measuring risks. If you start small and concentrate on quality, you’ll become a better trader. Once you’ve learned
to trade—find trades, enter, set stops and profit targets, and exit—you
can start increasing your trading size to the point where your account
starts generating a meaningful income.
A new trader came to see me recently, a 42-year-old businessman
tired of the rat race. His wife continued to run their business, while he
put all his time and energy into the market. He kept bobbing around
breakeven, trading anywhere from 100 to 1,000 shares at a clip. Often,
he’d make money on several trades in a row trading small lots and
then give back everything on a single large trade.
I told him he was ahead of the game because, unlike most beginners, he hadn’t lost money. I then gave him the standard prescription—
begin by trading 100 shares, the smallest round lot, until you have a
profitable period during which you have more winners than losers and
are profitable overall. That period should be two weeks for a daytrader or two months for a longer-term swing trader. Once you have
had a profitable period, bump up your size by 100 shares and start
trading 200. After another profitable period, go up another 100 shares
and start trading 300. If you have a losing half-period (a week for a
day-trader, a month for a swing trader), go back down to your previous trade size and start counting again. If you trade futures, substitute
one contract for 100 shares. Advance slowly, retreat fast.
