
www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 18

Ten Secrets of the Top
Technical Traders
In This Chapter
▶ Putting your faith in the chart rather than the “experts”
▶ Getting to know the virtues and drawbacks of technical indicators

A

n old saying has it that “money is how we keep score,” but trading is
about more than making money. We trade for many other reasons —
to keep busy or to get the adrenaline rush of trading. If you trade for a living,
keeping your sanity isn’t a bad goal, either. In this chapter, I point out ten
issues that you must confront to succeed in technical trading.
You can trade technically in any number of equally valid ways. In fact, technical traders come in all stripes (and some are plaid). At any technical analysis
conference or online chat room, you meet people ranging from the geeky
math whiz to the benchmark-oriented fund manager to the retired schoolteacher. You can’t tell from appearance or vocation what technical methods
they use. Some are quick-trade artists who make rapid-fire trades lasting
less than an hour every day. Other technical traders immerse themselves
in charts for hours every day but hardly ever make a trade. Another kind of
technical trader is always in the market, long and short, and willing to take
big losses for the chance to make spectacular gains. They’re all genuine technical traders.
Whatever their styles, successful technical traders all have one thing in
common — they’ve each built a trading plan that uses the technical tools
that suit their personality and appetite for risk, and they follow it.

Trust the Chart
The essence of technical analysis is to analyze the price action on a chart to
arrive at buy/sell decisions. You determine whether the security offers a positive expectancy of making a profit by looking at indicators on the chart, not

www.pdfdummies.com

298 Part VI: The Part of Tens
on the fundamental characteristics of the security itself. This approach does
not mean selecting securities without judgment. With thousands of securities
to choose from, you are free to pick the ones you deem to be fundamentally
sound, and time your trades from there.
After you select your personal universe of securities, nearly every decision to
initiate a trade is based on chart events and not on news developments, fundamental factors, or what some “expert” says. The chart contains all the information you need to make trading decisions. If information is truly important, the
chart reflects it. Don’t forget to look at charts of the same security in different
time frames. The best of all possible worlds is when the price is moving in the
same direction in multiple time frames.
I say nearly every decision because some wildly exceptional news shocks take
time to be reflected on the chart, like September 11, 2001 (after which the U.S.
stock market closed for several days). Giant rare or unprecedented events like
this one will always trump the chart in the first few days or weeks. The best
way to handle monumental historic events like these is to exit and wait.

Befriend the Trend
The single-best way to know what’s happening and likely to happen to your
security’s price is to follow its trends. If you buy when an uptrend is forming and sell when the uptrend peaks, you make money over the long run.
Remember, your job is to define trend for yourself. A trend can be as small as
six bars on a ten-minute chart or hundreds of bars on a weekly chart.
Sometimes you can’t see a trend in the security you have selected. Patience
is a virtue. If the security is usually trended, sit back and wait for the trend to
appear. Staying out of the market when the security is not trending is okay —
as is getting out of the trade temporarily when a pullback occurs. A security
purchase isn’t a life-long commitment. You’re not being disloyal to your security if you sell it during a pullback.

Understand That You Make Real Cash
Money Only When You Sell
On many occasions, securities rise and fall according to overall market sentiment and through no credit or fault of their own. Selling a falling security to
lock in a profit or to stop a loss is common sense, even if you intend to buy
the very same security again when it starts moving up.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 18: Ten Secrets of the Top Technical Traders
A policy of buy and hold is hardly ever the optimum long-term strategy. Many
people rode the bull market in the 1990s to great fortunes — on paper. Then
when the crash came, they saw their net worth go down the drain. They were
afraid to sell because they were holding onto the idea that to buy and hold is
the best rule, always and under every circumstance. Obviously, it’s not.

Take Responsibility
You should have a reason for making every trade — the expectation of a positive gain at a level of risk you can live with. If your broker, trust fund manager, or Uncle Fred proposes that you sink some money into a security but
the chart shows that the price is on a downward trajectory, just say no. You
may be astonished at how many otherwise intelligent and sensible people
yield to the supposed superior expertise of their money managers when even
a 12-year-old kid can see that the security is tanking. “It’ll come back,” they
say. The only sane reply is, “Okay, let’s wait for it to prove it’s coming back.”
Never take a tip without first consulting the chart. No excuses! You can get
free charts at a dozen Web sites. You don’t need to become a full-fledged
market technician to observe whether a price is rising or falling. And you
should never buy into a falling price. What if your broker or Uncle Fred was
right, and the falling price abruptly turns up? Well, too bad. You have an
opportunity loss. Missing a trade is okay. You had a good reason to miss the
trade — it didn’t qualify under your trading plan.
If you do succumb to the broker or Uncle Fred, acknowledge that taking the
trade is gambling and doesn’t belong in the same mental box as trades made
under your carefully thought-out risk-reward trading plan. Good trading is
not gambling. In good trading, you don’t have unknown outcomes and therefore you have no such thing as “luck.”

Avoid Euphoria and Despair
You should make the trading decision on the empirical evidence on the chart
and not on some emotional impulse. It’s human nature to bet a larger sum
of money when you’ve just had a win, perhaps on less evidence than you
normally require to take a trade in the first place. Likewise, you may become
timid after taking a loss and pass on trades that offer a fabulous profit opportunity by your own technical standards.
A good technical trader follows his trading plan and disregards the emotions
created by the last trade. This basic rule is why technical traders use indicators as systematically as possible, even the ones who modestly shy away from
claiming to have a “trading system.” A good trading regime employs trading

www.pdfdummies.com

299

300 Part VI: The Part of Tens
rules that impart discipline to every trading decision in a conscious effort to
overcome the emotions that accompany trading. Trading is a business, and
business should be conducted in a nonemotional manner.

Focus on Making Money,
Not Being Right
When you ask brokers and advisors for the single biggest character flaw of
their customers, they all say the same thing, “The customer would rather be
right than make money.” One case stands out: Refusing to take a loss. Either
the trader didn’t have a stop-loss rule in the first place (a situation you can
avoid by checking out Chapter 5), or he refused to obey it. To take a loss says
to him that he’s wrong about the direction of the security, and he takes it as a
personal affront.
Some people have an unusually hard time facing losses, and because they
can’t take a small loss, they end up taking big ones, which only reinforces the
fear and loathing of loss. Soon you’re not trading systematically, but on emotion — and worse, the single emotion of fearing losses. If you start falling into
this morass, stop trading. Develop a different trading plan that is designed to
takes fewer losses.

Don’t Let a Winning Trade
Turn into a Losing Trade
You can have a fine trading system with excellent indicators properly backtested for the securities you’re trading but still be a lousy trader if you don’t
have sensible trading rules. A good trader differentiates between indicators
(which only indicate; see Chapter 4) and trading and money-management
rules (which manage the risk; see Chapter 5).
How can a winning trade turn into a losing trade? Many ways, including
✓ Failure to use a stop-loss.
✓ Adjusting perception of risk while the trade is in progress by looking at a new indicator that’s not backtested and not part of the trading plan. It’s okay to use a new indicator in mid-trade if you’re sure of
what the new indicator really means, but not if it’s only a wild guess, or
worse, the advice of some guru.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 18: Ten Secrets of the Top Technical Traders
✓ Tricking yourself into thinking that the market “owes” you the highest price it already attained. Your indicators tell you that the price is
not likely to go back to the old high but that’s the amount of money you
want to make. You’re trying to tell the market what to do, which never
works. This is how you start to see what you want to see on the chart
rather than what’s there — in other words, wishful thinking.
Following your trading plan takes guts. Quantify the amount of loss before
placing the trade and accept the losses that do occur (and they will!). Eat
your spinach — take the darn loss and move on. This principle is trader
discipline, and if you don’t have it, you will not be a successful trader.

Sidestep the Temptation to Curve Fit
Just because an indicator “fits” your chart of historical data doesn’t make
it a workable indicator for the future. Curve-fitting refers to backtesting your
indicators on historical data to see which parameters would have worked
the best (see Chapter 4). A good technical trader doesn’t curve fit but rather
backtests indicators by using realistic assumptions. If you overanalyze indicators so that they’re a perfect fit for the past, they almost certainly fail to
work in the future.
Acknowledge that it’s okay to have numerically more losing trades than winning trades as long as the gain-loss ratio is more than 1:1. In the same vein, if
you’re buying someone else’s trading system, be sure that it’s not just some
bright idea that would’ve worked in the past but is so complex and detailed
that it won’t work on a broader range of conditions.

Know When to Hold ‘Em
and When to Fold ‘Em
Position sizing is a thorny subject on which statistics experts disagree. Is
there a single best portion of your capital stake to bet on any one round of
trading? Yes, depending on which theory you accept. You may not want to
get into the theoretical discussion of position sizing, but even so, you know
that in poker, if you have four aces, you bet more than if you have a pair of
sevens.
Likewise, in securities trading, you need to rely on your indicators to tell you
whether you have a good hand and can scale up the amount at risk, or have
a dud and may need to tighten stops or even fold. The more confirmation of

www.pdfdummies.com

301

302 Part VI: The Part of Tens
a buy/sell signal you can get, the safer it is to place the trade. For example, if
you have only one indication that the trend is turning your way, you can bet
small, and add to the trade as confirmation comes in from other indicators.
Or you can just wait for all the confirmations. Either method is “right,” but
only one method is right for you and your risk appetite.

Diversify
Diversification reduces risk. The proof of the concept in financial math won its
proponents the Nobel prize, but the old adage has been around for centuries:
“Don’t put all your eggs in one basket.” In technical trading, diversification
applies in two places:
✓ Your choice of indicators: You improve the probability of a buy/sell
signal being correct when you use a second, noncorrelated indicator
to confirm it. You don’t get confirmation of a buy/sell signal when you
consult a second indicator that works on the same principle as the first
indicator. Momentum (see Chapter 13) doesn’t confirm relative strength
because it adds no new information. Widen your horizon beyond a few
indicators, and seek different concept indicators instead of torturing
old indicators to come up with better parameters.
✓ Your choice of securities: You reduce risk when you trade two securities whose prices move independently from one another. If you trade a
technology stock, you achieve no diversification at all by adding another
technology stock. Instead, you may get a better balance of risk by adding
a stock from a different sector. If you trade metals futures, add something from agriculture or finance to get diversification. You can estimate
degree of correlation scientifically with a spreadsheet or informally by
eye (charting both securities in the same space).

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 19

Ten Rules for Working
with Indicators
In This Chapter
▶ Identifying market sentiment
▶ Using indicators as a guide — not as a crystal ball

I

ndicators measure changes in market sentiment — bullish, bearish, and
blah. Indicators are only patterns on a chart or arithmetic calculations
whose value depends entirely on how you use them. You use indicators for
many trading-related decisions, including identifying a trend, knowing when
to stay out of a security that isn’t trending, and knowing where to place a
stop-loss, to name just a few. This chapter is all about a few tips and tools
you need to know to maximize your use of technical analysis indicators.

Listen to the Price Bars
Price bars contain a ton of useful information, but bar-reading takes patience.
Indicators take less time, but indicators are only the result of manipulating
the price bar data into a different format. Think of the bar as a miniature indicator. For example, when you have a series of higher highs and suddenly the
next bar closes far down and at the low of the day, the crowd is sending you
a message with a foghorn — this move is over.
Every bar tells a story about crowd behavior. Exceptional bars tell you more
than ordinary bars, but try to listen to all bars. Floor traders complain that
electronic trading lacks something valuable that being on the exchange floor
offers — the noise of the crowd. As an individual trader, you can’t hear the
crowd, either, so you have to rely on your imagination. (See Chapter 6 for
more on bar basics.)

www.pdfdummies.com

304 Part VI: The Part of Tens
Understand Your Indicator
Use indicators that make sense to you in terms of crowd behavior. You need
to use an indicator that you trust, and you can’t trust an indicator if you don’t
understand how it reflects crowd behavior. Don’t use an indicator mechanically because some self-styled expert says that it has magical properties. The
world is full of great indicators. Get your own.
If math isn’t your strong suit, don’t let it hold you back from using mathbased indicators. You don’t need to know the math behind an indicator if you
understand how it works. Think of technical analysis as a giant department
store full of indicators. One department or another has an indicator that can
work for you. If you can’t find it, keep looking.

Trade What You See
Patterns are indicators, too. Prices never move in a straight line, at least not
for long, and patterns can help you identify the next price move. When you
see a double bottom, you can feel confident that the right trade is to buy —
and this principle is true well over half the time and normally returns a gain
of 40 percent. Some patterns are easy to identify and exploit, while others
may elude you. If you can’t see it, don’t trade it. Patterns also aid you in
seeing a big picture when you change your chart’s time frame (from daily to
weekly, for example). Finally, you don’t have to believe in elaborate theories
about cycles or Fibonacci numbers to use a Fibonacci retracement pattern.
Many experienced traders eschew math-based indicators and use only patterns, and for this reason alone, it pays to find out how to see patterns.

Use Support and Resistance
Support and resistance (see Chapter 10) are valid concepts that all technical traders respect. You can pinpoint support and resistance by using
any number of techniques, including hand-drawn straight lines or bands
and channels created out of statistical measures. Momentum and relative
strength indicators can help estimate support and resistance, too. To preserve capital, always know the support level of your security and get out of
Dodge when it’s broken.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 19: Ten Rules for Working with Indicators

Follow the Breakout Principle
The breakout concept (which I cover in Chapters 10 through 12) is universally recognized and respected. A breakout tells you that the crowd is feeling
a burst of energy. Whether you’re entering a new trade or exiting an existing
one, trading in the direction of the breakout usually pays. Studying the conditions under which real breakouts occur is also beneficial so that you don’t
get zapped by false breakouts.

Watch for Convergence and Divergence
When your indicator diverges from the price, look out. Something’s happening. You may or may not be able to find out why, but divergence often spells
trouble. Convergence is usually, but not always, comforting. (This rule refers
to convergence and divergence of indicators versus price, not the internal
dynamics of indicators like the MACD.) For more on convergence and divergence, check out Chapter 4 and 12.
If your security is trending upward and the momentum indicator is pointing
downward, you have a discrepancy. The uptrend is at risk of pausing, retracing, or even reversing. If you’re risk averse, exit. Look for divergence between
price and volume, too. Logically, a rising price needs rising volume to be
sustained. The most useful divergence is a paradoxical one, where the price
is falling but by less than abnormally high volume would suggest. This divergence may mark the end of a major downtrend and is more reliable than the
percentage retracement or round numbers touted by market “experts.”

Backtest Your Indicators Properly
You’re free to use the standard indicator parameters in software packages
and on Web sites. Experience shows that the standard parameters are useful
over large amounts of data and large numbers of securities — that’s why
their inventors chose them. For this reason, some traders never feel the need
to perform their own backtests. They accept the standard parameters and
put their effort into something else, like bar or pattern reading.
But if you are going to backtest indicators to refine the parameters, do it
right. Use a large amount of price history when testing an indicator — and
don’t make the indicator fit history so perfectly that the minute you add
fresh data, the indicator becomes worthless (a waste of time called curvefitting). Observing price behavior and estimating the range of sensible and
reasonable parameters is better than finding the perfect number. The perfect
number for the future doesn’t exist.

www.pdfdummies.com

305

306 Part VI: The Part of Tens
Acknowledge That Your
Indicator Will Fail
Indicators are often wrong. Support lines break for only a day or two instead of
signaling a new trend as a breakout is supposed to. Textbook-perfect confirmed
double bottoms fail the very next day instead of delivering that delicious 40
percent profit. And moving averages generate whipsaw losses even after you’ve
added every clever and refined filter known to man.
It’s a fact of life — your indicator will fail and you will take losses in technical
trading. Don’t take it personally. Indicators are only arithmetic, not magic.
You will take losses in winging-it trading, too. Console yourself with knowing that using indicators reduces losses over winging it, but indicators never
eliminate all losses.

Accept That No Secret Indicators Exist
Technical traders have devised thousands of patterns and math-based indicators. They can be combined in an infinite variety of ways over an infinite
number of time frames with an infinite number of qualifying conditions. So
the idea that somebody has discovered a superior combination of indicators
is possible. But none of the indicators is a secret, and no indicator combo is
going to be right all the time.
The secret of successful trading doesn’t lie in indicators. Shut your ears to
the guy trying to sell you an indicator that “never fails!” Of course it fails. If
it never fails, why would he sell it to you? And why should you have to pay
for an indicator in the first place? You don’t. Every indicator ever invented is
easily available in books, magazines, and on the Internet.

Play Favorites
Indicators are addictive. You read about a new indicator that seems so logical and appropriate that it becomes your new darling. Suddenly you can
apply it everywhere. It’s good to be adaptive and flexible, but remember
that the purpose of using indicators is to make money trading, not to get a
new vision of how the world works. Always check that your new indicator
plays well with your old indicators. You picked your favorite indicators for a
good reason — they help you make good (profitable) trading decisions. Keep
discovering new indicators, but don’t fall in love unless the new indicator
meshes well with the old ones.

www.pdfdummies.com

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 20

Ten Ways the Market
Has Changed
In This Chapter
▶ Realizing that human nature doesn’t change — but markets do
▶ Overcoming fear of the math monsters

N

early all the basic observations about technical analysis in this book
could as easily have been made a hundred years ago as today, except
for references to personal computers and software. Pioneers such as W. D.
Gann, Richard Wyckoff, Richard Schabacker, and Charles Dow, all from the
early 1900s, would have recognized just about everything I mention here.
And yet . . . the markets have changed in the last five to ten years. They
changed in ways that traders could pretty much foresee, but still struggle to
understand and adapt to them. Much of the change arises from technological
advances and from the new prominence of math whizzes who are able to harness technology in ways mere mortals like myself can barely grasp. But fear
not — these changes do not wipe out the opportunity for regular folks who
are not math whizzes to trade profitably by using technical analysis. In this
chapter, I not only point out what changes are occurring, but also give some
advice for navigating these advances in the market.
