
38

Currency Strategy

1.4.4 REER and FEER
In line with the external balance approach, the Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER) is the
trade-weighted exchange rate (NEER) adjusted for inﬂation. As with PPP, the purpose of using
REER is to try to gauge an exchange rate’s over- or undervaluation relative to a given norm. As
with PPP, using REER is far from an exact science and in fact PPP and REER run into similar
problems. For instance, a major problem with PPP is which base year to choose. REER has
the same problem and for similar reasons. Using a particular base year with which to begin
one’s analysis can signiﬁcantly distort the results. On the face of it, it would seem logical to
start both PPP and REER analyses in the 1971–1973 period when the Bretton Woods exchange
rate system broke up, yet this was a highly inﬂationary and therefore distorting period as far
as such analyses are concerned.
The transmission mechanism is again the current account balance. Signiﬁcant REER overvaluation relative to a given norm of 100 tends to produce a widening current account deﬁcit
or “external imbalance” in the jargon of economists. In order to restore balance or equilibrium,
there has logically to be a REER depreciation. This can be achieved either by a depreciation of
the trade-weighted exchange rate — that is to say by a depreciation of the nominal exchange
rate — or by a sharp decline in inﬂation.
So far, this seems relatively logical and deceptively predictable. However, signiﬁcant REER
overvaluations can last for substantial periods of time. In some cases it can take several years
before an adjustment process takes place to eliminate such overvaluation. A good example
again is that of the Russian rouble, whose REER value was overvalued by around 60% for
three years — depending on the base year used — before it ﬁnally succumbed to gravity. The
REER values of both the Mexican peso and the Venezuelan bolivar have indicated signiﬁcant
overvaluation for several years now, and in the case of the Mexican peso to a greater degree
than before the 1994–1995 “Tequila” crisis. The lesson of REER is that it can be a useful tool
for diagnosing over- or undervaluation and a consequent need for an adjustment to restore
equilibrium — but what it cannot do is tell you when that will happen.
Another way to estimate a real exchange rate’s equilibrium is FEER, or Fundamental Equilibrium Exchange Rate, pioneered by the writer and economic scholar John Williamson in
1985. Recognizing the imperfections of the PPP concept, FEER reﬂects the exchange rate
value that is the result of a current account surplus or deﬁcit that is in turn appropriate to
the long-term structural capital inﬂow or outﬂow in the economy, assuming that the country
does not have barriers to free trade and is also trying to pursue internal balance. Assessing
the appropriate level of long-term structural capital inﬂow or outﬂow requires a considerable
degree of value judgement. Even if it did not, it assumes that such capital inﬂows or outﬂows
should persist simply because they have occurred in the past. Given this construction, it is
not surprising that estimates of an exchange rate’s FEER value vary widely. This is not to say
that it is not a useful model. Indeed, models based on the FEER concept have been widely
used within the private sector for some time. However, it is to say that using such a type of
exchange rate model puts a considerable degree of emphasis on the value judgement of the
analyst concerned, thereby undermining the point of using a model in the ﬁrst place.
Looking at exchange rate models in general that use some variation of the external balance
approach, we see that considerable “misalignments” in the external balance — and therefore
presumably in the exchange rate — can persist over signiﬁcant periods of time. The fact that
this can happen suggests equally that for substantial periods of time the importance of the
external balance to the exchange rate can be more than offset by capital ﬂows. Eventually, it

Fundamental Analysis

39

appears that the misalignment in the external balance reaches a level which produces a loss
of market conﬁdence and capital outﬂows. As capital outﬂows occur, this by necessity must
reduce the current account deﬁcit. The problem of course is that this level, this trigger point
which causes a loss of market conﬁdence, is not static but changes. Thus, as with all exchange
rate models, those which focus on the external balance should be used for long-term exchange
rate considerations rather than for the short term.
1.4.5 Terms of Trade
Another important aspect of the external balance approach to exchange rate determination
is the so-called “terms of trade”, which is the relationship between a country’s export and
import prices. A country’s terms of trade can be an important determinant of its long-term
equilibrium real exchange rate. We ﬁnd this particularly the case for countries that are major
commodity exporters and therefore whose economies are particularly sensitive to swings in
commodity prices. An improvement in a country’s terms of trade, that is a rise in its export
prices relative to import prices, should lead to a rise in the real exchange rate equilibrium value.
Rising export prices should be reﬂective of rising global demand for that country’s exports,
both on an absolute basis and relative to domestic demand levels. Consequently, one should
assume that an improvement in the terms of trade should lead to an improvement in the current
account balance, which in turn requires a real exchange rate appreciation to restore equilibrium.
Equally, a deterioration in the terms of trade leads to a current account deterioration, which
requires a real exchange rate depreciation to restore equilibrium. For the sake of clarity, we
can express this transmission mechanism using the following simple diagram:
Change in terms of trade → Change in current account balance →
Real exchange rate change to restore equilibrium
Taking oil as an example, the terms of trade concept is an important determinant of the longterm real exchange rate equilibrium value for the countries of the Gulf, Mexico, Venezuela,
Colombia, Nigeria, Indonesia, Russia, the UK and Norway. Note that these are just the exporters. The terms of trade concept also works for the importers as well, which is why when
the international price of oil experiences a signiﬁcant uptrend, this causes a terms of trade
deterioration for the major oil importers, leading to current account balance deterioration. All
else being equal, this should require a real exchange rate depreciation to restore equilibrium.
1.4.6 Productivity
Last but not least, we look at how productivity growth can affect the equilibrium real exchange
rate. What is productivity? We have a vague concept of this in our work place, but it has a
precise deﬁnition — output per man hour. Rising productivity growth causes increased supply
of a good. Supply/demand dynamics require that increased supply relative to demand leads to
a fall in price. The principle of Purchasing Power Parity requires however that falling prices in
one country relative to another lead to an offsetting exchange rate appreciation under the law
of one price. Thus higher productivity growth in tradable goods should lead to exchange rate
appreciation to restore equilibrium to the current account.

40

Currency Strategy

The issue of productivity growth was much in debate in 2001 as economists sought to
explain the US dollar’s inexorable rise against the Euro. Indeed, both the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York and the Bank of England produced reports on the issue of whether higher
US productivity growth explained the US dollar’s strength and indeed whether or not the
US did in fact produce higher productivity growth. Despite the presence of such eminent
scholarship, the jury is still out. There does however seem to be greater clarity at least as
regards the broader issue of whether or not productivity growth should produce exchange rate
appreciation. Just as PPP is not a good short-term predictor of exchange rates, so productivity
growth should not be used as a short-term trading model. However, both are profoundly useful
in predicting medium- to long-term exchange rate trends. Here, the fact that the US has had
consistently higher productivity growth in the wake of the “re-engineering” drive within the
US economy in 1994–1995, and the fact that the US dollar has been on a long-term uptrend
ever since, should not be seen as coincidence. Similarly, Japan during the 1970s and 1980s had
consistently higher productivity levels than either the US or Europe, and this should be seen as
at least one of the major reasons why we saw trend appreciation of the Japanese yen during that
period.
Yet, at some point productivity growth becomes unsustainable. After all, it deals with the
issue of increased supply, presuming that there is always demand for that increased supply. At
some point, the levels of supply will exceed demand. When that happens a hitherto unforeseen
“inventory overhang”, as per the economists’ jargon, appears. The natural dynamics of supply
and demand suggest that the excess supply should instantly be eliminated to restore “equilibrium” supply levels relative to demand. Yet, we know from painful experience that this is not
what happens. If we view productivity as supply and wages as demand, the standard economic
model suggests that higher productivity growth automatically results in higher wages. Yet,
during periods of major technological change, which tend to produce the strongest levels of
productivity growth, the fact that competition is greatly increased produces such downward
pressure to prices to the extent that the only way some can compete is to cut wage growth. At
the very least, wage growth does not keep up with productivity growth. In other words, demand
does not keep up with supply — which brings us back to the idea that this excess supply will
rather quickly have to correct automatically to match the level of demand.
However, this is not what happens in reality because this simple model of productivity
(supply) growth and wage (demand) growth does not take account of the very modern concept
of debt. Inadequate demand growth in the form of wages can be artiﬁcially propped up to
meet ever increasing supply growth in the form of productivity through debt or borrowing.
Eventually, of course, the gap between supply and demand becomes too wide even for debt to
bridge. When that happens, supply crashes. At the microeconomic level, faced with a massive
inventory overhang, companies cut costs and the easiest way of doing that is to cut jobs.
Demand falls as well. This is how ﬁnancial crashes happen, whether we are talking about
Japan in 1990 or the US in 2000. Does this automatically lead to an exchange rate reaction?
Not necessarily so. After all, the yen continued to rise for another ﬁve years after the “bubble
economy” burst. Similarly, the US dollar has continued to rise despite the bursting of the
“internet bubble economy” in 2000. Some explanation for this can be given by the fact that
productivity rates have remained extremely high in the US — as they did in Japan — despite
the ﬁnancial and economic distress that has been seen in the last two years. What we learn from
this however is that productivity growth appears to be in part cyclical in nature, in so far as
it does not go on for ever but instead reaches unsustainably high levels which lead ultimately
to a violent correction. The bursting of a productivity bubble should eventually lead to lower
@Team-FLY

Fundamental Analysis

41
3.50

1.35
3.00
EUR/USD (LHS)
1.25

Productivity Growth Ratio

2.50
2.00

1.15

1.50
1.05
1.00
0.95

0.50
0.00

0.85
1Q94

1Q95

1Q96

1Q97

1Q98

1Q99

1Q00

Euro-zone12 {inc GR}: YoY Productivity/Employee at 1996 Pr/Exch Rates(SA, Thous.US$)
US: YoY Nonfarm Business Sector: Output Per Hour, All Persons (SA,%Chg.Yr.Ago)

1Q01
Sources: FERI, BLS

Figure 1.2 Euro–dollar exchange rate vs. relative productivity growth levels

trend productivity growth for a period of time and higher prices, thus requiring according to
PPP an exchange rate depreciation to offset this price disparity under the law of one price.
This is of course not what we have seen in Japan to date. Instead, debt/GDP has continued
to rise inexorably as the real interest rate has consistently exceeded the real GDP growth rate.
The rising debt burden, along with the rising real interest rate, has acted not only to keep a lid
on price growth but also to cause actual price deﬂation. Under PPP, if anything this should lead
to yen appreciation, which is of course the last thing Japan needs. Turning to the US, corporate
and consumer debt levels are extremely high. For now however, productivity growth remains
extremely high as well, certainly higher than the EU. Both of these factors support the idea
that the US dollar should remain a strong currency near term.
In Figure 1.2, we again use the Euro–dollar exchange rate, this time compared with relative
productivity growth levels. As the ﬁgure shows, there is an important relationship between
the two, though admittedly the degree of correlation has declined sharply for periods of time.
In this regard, relative productivity growth levels are an important indicator of exchange rate
direction, but apparently not capable of providing a more sophisticated analysis in terms of
either the timing or degree of the chosen direction.

1.5 THE PORTFOLIO BALANCE APPROACH
Having dealt so far with the relative price of goods, money, interest and current/capital ﬂows,
the last model we will look at in this chapter deals with the relative price of assets. This is the
Portfolio Balance Approach and it deals speciﬁcally with the relationship between the relative
price of domestic and foreign bonds and the exchange rate. Within this model, it is presumed

42

Currency Strategy

that a change in monetary and/or ﬁscal conditions will in turn lead to changes in the supply
and demand for domestic currency bonds and the demand for foreign currency bonds, which
will in turn trigger a reaction in the exchange rate between the two currencies.
On the monetary side, assume that a cut in interest rates by the central bank causes outﬂows
from domestic interest rate-bearing securities into money/cash, as per the Monetary Approach
we looked at earlier. If one assumes for the sake of this simple model that domestic bond
supply is unchanged, demand for those bonds should be reduced because of the lower interest
rate. This effect should cause increased demand for the foreign currency bonds, which in turn
should cause the domestic currency to depreciate against the foreign one. Equally, if one starts
from the premise that the central bank raises interest rates, this should, according to this simple
model, cause a domestic currency appreciation.
Looking at this question from the ﬁscal side, assume that a government expands ﬁscal policy
in the face of an economic downturn. In terms of the domestic bond market, this should lead
to an increase in domestic bond supply. Holders of existing domestic bonds will only support
such an increase if it leads to a higher interest rate to compensate for the increased supply.
Thus, increased domestic bond supply should eventually result in increased domestic bond
demand, reduced foreign currency bond demand and an appreciation in the domestic currency
against the foreign currency. Similarly, according to this model, decreased bond supply should
eventually lead to depreciation in the domestic currency due to outﬂows by investors in favour
of foreign bonds.
This Portfolio Balance Approach appears overly simplistic and it is. Indeed, it has been a
very poor predictor of exchange rates, not least because it does not deal with the real-world
realities of a ﬁxed income fund manager who has to make asset allocation decisions.
Example
Assume for argument’s sake that our ﬁxed income fund manager invests only in US Treasuries and Japanese government bonds (“JGBs”). The Portfolio Balance Approach assumes
money/cash is not interest-bearing, but this is not in fact true. Thus, the fund manager can also
have a cash allocation, which he/she can put on a modest deposit rate. The fund manager starts
the year with a 60% allocation in US Treasuries, 35% in JGBs and 5% in cash. If the Federal
Reserve cuts interest rates, our fund manager does not immediately reduce his/her allocation
in Treasuries in favour of JGBs as the model assumes. Much depends on the relative policy
mixes in the US and Japan and also the prevailing nominal and real interest rate differentials
between the two countries. There are far too many uncertainties within this situation for us to
be able to assume that JGBs would automatically be favoured over US Treasuries due to a US
interest rate cut. If Japanese interest rates are already substantially below those of the US, one
US interest rate cut might make no difference whatsoever to the asset allocation. Therefore,
one cannot assume that the US dollar would fall against the Japanese yen.
Looking at this from a ﬁscal policy perspective, again let’s suppose that the government
expands ﬁscal policy in order to boost a ﬂagging economy. This implies increased bond supply.
If we assume that this economy is that of the US, then our fund manager has a dilemma.
Increased bond market supply will of necessity push interest rates higher — and bond prices
lower. Depending on where the fund manager is positioned along the US Treasury curve, this
may result in painful losses. Thus, if anything the fund manager may in fact initially reduce
his/her allocation in US Treasuries. In our example the fund manager can only invest in US
Treasuries, JGBs and cash. As this example assumes a change in US ﬁscal policy but not US

Fundamental Analysis

43

monetary policy, the fund manager may reduce his/her allocation initially in US Treasuries in
favour of JGBs. Thus, assuming for the purpose of this example that our ﬁctional fund manager
represents the entire universe of institutional investors, the exchange rate reaction may at least
initially be the complete opposite of what the Portfolio Balance Approach suggests.
Clearly, where theory and practice meet is not in the short-term reaction but in the long-term
trend. A trend of rising domestic interest rates relative to foreign interest rates will attract
rising foreign demand for domestic bonds and therefore in turn cause a domestic currency
appreciation relative to the foreign currency. Equally, rising bond market supply should on a
trend basis have the same exchange rate reaction by causing bond yields to rise, thus attracting
increased foreign investor interest. Both of these exchange rate reactions may occur over the
long term. Thus, we can use this approach, as with the Mundell–Fleming model, to explain
the inexorable strength of the US dollar in the 1980–1985 period.
Over the short term however, what we may see is in fact the complete opposite exchange rate
reaction. Indeed, the very concept of short term is subjective as such “disparities” relative to the
model can go on for years. For instance, between 1996 and 2000 the US dollar rose dramatically
against its major currency counterparts, despite tight ﬁscal policy and varying degrees of loose
monetary policy. This should, according to both the Portfolio Balance Approach and the
Mundell–Fleming model, have produced exchange rate depreciation, yet it did not. Indeed, it
produced the complete opposite. Clearly, the model does not take account of such issues as
existing investor positioning and the degree of policy credibility (which may cause investors
to be more eager to buy a bond than simple yields would otherwise imply).
Thus, to summarize the Portfolio Balance Approach, use it sparingly in trying to determine or
predict exchange rates and only for long-term trends. Furthermore, use it from the perspective
of asset allocation. As ﬁscal policy expands, investors will gradually, after a suitable interval
to allow for the rise in bond yields, increase their asset allocation in the bonds of that country,
assuming that those bonds are already within their benchmark index. Thus, as Japanese ﬁscal
policy has been expanded in the 1990s, so investors have increased their asset allocation of
JGBs. This may be considered a further reason for the yen’s appreciation from 1990 to mid1995, but not thereafter as it fell back. Note however that such asset allocation shifts are
also cyclical in nature as they will be increased within a particular bond market to the extent
that monetary and ﬁscal policies are perceived as credible. When they are no longer seen as
credible, not surprisingly the asset allocation shift goes into reverse. For instance, in 2001 and
early 2002 investors started to perceive Japanese ﬁscal policy as out of control, causing most
to reduce their JGB weightings and some to remove JGBs entirely from their portfolio.

1.6 SUMMARY
To conclude, the traditional exchange rate models, which are based on some form of equilibrium
value, do offer an important and useful long-term guide towards exchange rate prediction.
Indeed, without these long-term signposts, currency strategists might be quite lost in seeking
to predict exchange rates past one year out. As a result, in terms of their usefulness to speciﬁc
types of currency market practitioner, corporations, strategic “real money” investors or “macro”
hedge funds with a multi-month or even multi-year perspective would probably ﬁnd them most
valuable as an analytical tool. On the other hand, these traditional exchange rate models are
unlikely to be of more than passing interest or use to short-term speculators or interbank dealers
whose time frame is far shorter. Lastly, it is a major theme of this book that currency analysis
and strategy should be part of an integrated approach, involving the simultaneous use of several

44

Currency Strategy

analytical disciplines. The apparent weaknesses of traditional exchange rate models, I would
suggest, adds to this case that such an integrated currency strategy framework be adopted.
It has to be said that to date, when faced with the unsatisfying results that the traditional
exchange rate models have produced as far as predicting exchange rates is concerned, the
economic community has for the most part either ignored these inconvenient results or declared
that it is impossible to forecast short-term exchange rate moves as they are determined by the
so-called “random walk” theory. Occasionally, there has been a paper, illuminating in both
its honesty as well as its intellectual acumen, which has “fessed up” to both the failure of
these models as predictive tools and a lack of understanding as to why that may be the case.
The majority of the time, however, the reaction to the obvious question has been denial or
the random walk excuse. According to the latter, since traditional exchange rate models do
not appear able to predict short-term exchange rate moves, it must follow logically that such
short-term exchange rate moves cannot in fact be predicted at all and must therefore follow
a “random walk” path, suggesting an equal probability of appreciating or depreciating over
time. Fortunately, however, recent developments in technical and capital ﬂow analysis have
achieved signiﬁcantly better results in predicting exchange rates than the random walk would
imply. Thus, the correct approach to analysing and predicting exchange rates would seem to be
to use market-based approaches such as technical and ﬂow analysis for short-term exchange
rate moves and the traditional exchange rate models for medium- to long-term predictions.
This is certainly not the whole story in trying to create an integrated framework for analysing
currencies, but it forms a good start in our understanding of how we should approach exchange
rates.
Building on this, going forward, it seems logical to assume that traditional exchange rate
models should be modiﬁed to suit the modern structure of currency market ﬂows. More specifically, trade ﬂows, which form the premise behind the PPP, Balance of Payments and External
Balance Approaches, were once seen as the main driver of currency market overall ﬂow. However, nowadays, they make up only around 1–2% of the USD1.2 trillion in daily volume going
through the currency market. Hence, as the overall importance of trade to total market ﬂow
has declined, so to a degree has the relevance of those exchange rate models that rely solely on
shifts in trade ﬂow patterns. Meanwhile, just as the pre-eminence of trade ﬂows has declined,
so the importance of portfolio ﬂows has grown exponentially as barriers to capital have been
lifted over the past two decades. The Portfolio Balance Approach is clearly an attempt to focus
on asset markets and speciﬁcally the bond market as a driver of exchange rates, yet this model
remains unsatisfactory as a predictor of exchange rates for the reasons given.
In order to try to get to a better answer of exchange rate movement over the short term, we
have to deﬁne the main ﬂow drivers of exchange rates:
