
coaching and worked on contemporary love songs and ballads. Susie first debuted as a chanteuse that July,
before a friendly audience at a private party at Emerald Bay. “People seemed to like it pretty well,” she
said.6 And it thrilled her husband to see his friends applauding his wife’s talent.
***
While the Buffetts were in Emerald Bay that summer, Warren invited Graham for a visit in connection with a
trip she was making to speak to an analysts’ meeting in Los Angeles. Sensing that Graham was going to talk
to him about joining the Post board, Buffett had been dancing around his office at Kiewit Plaza for days
ahead of time, happy and excited as a kid on Christmas Eve.7
The Buffetts’ house at Emerald Bay, down a steep driveway set well back from the beach, still had the
feeling of a modest rental house; it lacked most of the personal touches that spoke of a family. Warren had
no sense of what kind of impression the place might make on Graham, who owned several enormous,
impeccably decorated and maintained mansions, including the farm at Glen Welby and a vast, shingle-style
waterfront estate on Martha’s Vineyard.
Apparently, however, he must have impressed upon his wife that they would have to make an unusual effort
for Graham. The first morning after Kay arrived, Susie rose at an unheard-of hour and feigned domesticity:
She cooked a full breakfast for the three of them, which both of the Buffetts pretended to eat. Her husband
spent the rest of the day wrapped up in Graham, talking to her about newspapers, journalism, politics, and
bringing up every opportunity for her to invite him on the board.
At some point, he put down his newspapers, donned a bathing suit purchased specially for the occasion,
picked up a brand-new beach umbrella bought in Graham’s honor, and left the house with Graham to walk
the hundred or so yards down a steep path to the shore to join the family. Previously, his attitude toward the
ocean had been: “I think having the ocean nearby is an attractive feature, and fun to listen to at night, and
all that kind of stuff. But actually getting in it—I feel I’ll save that for my old age.” But now, after sitting on
the sand for a bit, looking at the water, he waded gamely into the Pacific. By all reports, Susie and the Buffett
kids “went into convulsions of laughter” at the odd sight.
What Susie thought about this extraordinary gesture is not known. But Warren’s explanation of it is on
record: “Only for Kay,” he says. “Only for Kay.”
On Sunday morning, they dropped their company manners and Susie sleepwalked through cooking bacon and
eggs for Graham, eating nothing herself, while Warren sat nearby spooning chocolate Ovaltine from a jar.8
After breakfast, he and Graham resumed their tête-à-tête. At some point, Graham told him that she wanted
him to join her board but was waiting for the right time. She knew that some of her board members, such as
André Meyer, would not welcome Buffett. But he asked, “When is the right time?” thus forcing her to make
up her mind. And so in short order it was done; they agreed that Buffett would join the board of the
Washington Post Company. He was elated.
That afternoon, Buffett left his family at Emerald Bay and drove Graham to the Los Angeles airport. “On the
way, all of a sudden, she looked at me like a three-year-old kid. Her voice changed, and her eyes, and she
said, basically pleading, ‘Just be gentle with me, please don’t ever assault me.’ I learned later that Phil and
some people at the paper, to get their own ends or for sheer enjoyment, would push her buttons just to
watch her fall apart. It was cruel on the part of Phil; it was manipulative on the part of the rest. It was very
easy to do; the button still worked.”
At summer’s end, on September 11, 1974, Buffett officially joined the board, which catapulted him from a
star investment manager from Omaha to official adviser at one of the most important media companies in the
world. Even at that first meeting he could see that Graham had a habit of pleading with the board for help.
Buffett thought, This won’t do. You can’t put yourself in that position as a CEO. But he didn’t yet know her
well enough to say anything. Instead, he educated himself about the Post board, which was full of many

prominent and influential people, and began to tiptoe his way through the powerful, jockeying men who were
used to dominating Graham. He was a quiet board member, however, and used his skills behind the scenes.
Buffett at the time was preoccupied with far more than just Kay Graham and the Washington Post. The
market, which investors had expected to rally in 1974, instead was in the full throes of collapse. Pension-fund
managers had cut back their stock purchases by more than eighty percent. Berkshire’s own portfolio looked
as though someone had given it a severe hedge trimming, shearing off nearly one-third in the second Great
Crash, the kind that comes along only a few times in a century.
Munger had kept his partnership open after Buffett had shuttered his. Now its value was plunging. His
performance had always been more volatile—in both directions—than the market’s. For the past couple of
years he had managed decent though unspectacular returns. But by 1974 Munger found himself in trouble,
his partners losing nearly half of their money.9 Like Ben Graham half a century earlier, he felt obliged to
make their money back.
“If you’re put together properly, you have a fiduciary gene like Warren and me,” he says, “and if you’ve told
people, ‘I think I can get you extraordinary results,’ then you really hate the idea of not delivering for them.”
As for himself, “Certainly the quoted value of my capital went down. I didn’t like it, but just think about how
many years could go by—what difference does it make at the end whether I have X dollars, or X minus Y?
The only thing that bothered me was that I knew how hard it was on the partners. That was what killed
me—the fiduciary aspect of my position.”10
Munger still had about twenty-eight limited partners, including some family trusts. To earn back losses of half
his capital, he would have to more than double the remaining stake. The value of Blue Chip Stamps would
have a significant bearing on whether he could accomplish that.
Bill Ruane’s Sequoia Fund was also in trouble. It had started with $50 million from Buffett’s former partners
and invested its money well by taking large positions in undervalued stocks like Tom Murphy’s Capital Cities
Communications. This was not the kind of stock that money managers who had piled into glamour television
and electronics stocks a few years earlier were buying now. They had galloped all at the same time straight
the other way, into the arms of the “Nifty Fifty,” a small group of the largest, best-known companies.11
“In this business,” Ruane said, “you have the innovators, the imitators, and the swarming incompetents.” The
imitators and the swarming incompetents were now at the wheel, and the stocks that Ruane and his partner
Rick Cunniff had bought in 1970 had been cut in half. Compounding their problems, they had bought a seat
on the New York Stock Exchange just before prices for seats fell over a cliff.12 The timing of Sequoia’s
opening was obviously inauspicious—Ruane had agreed to start up just as Buffett was shutting down due to
lack of opportunities. Sequoia had underperformed the market every year—cumulatively by a dramatic
amount.13 The Sequoia Fund’s worst year yet was 1973; it had lost twenty-five percent, compared to the
market’s loss of fifteen percent. It was on its way to another terrible year in 1974. Ruane’s largest backer,
Bob Malott, was incensed. He was already known as a “ballbuster” around the halls of Ruane, Cunniff for his
habit of calling to complain about minor discrepancies in his family’s accounts. Now, he berated Ruane for
buying a seat on the exchange and for his poor performance with such persistence that Ruane feared he
would pull his capital out of the firm.14 Buffett, however, remained serene in the knowledge that Mr.
Market’s opinion of a stock’s price at any time had no bearing on its intrinsic value. He knew which stocks
Ruane and his partners had bought and was confident that they had made good decisions.
If not exactly an ego booster, because of the snooty staff, Buffett’s 1969 meeting of the Grahamites at the
Colony Club had at least provided mutual support in a challenging market. Since then Buffett had named
them the Graham Group; Ed Anderson had planned the third outing in Williamsburg; Charlie Munger the
fourth in Carmel, California. In 1971, Buffett made the meetings biennial. Out of loyalty, he let Ruane invite
Malott—a favor normally verboten—and Malott and his wife, Ibby, became members for the next meeting in
Sun Valley in 1973, planned by Rick Guerin.

Malott, mightily impressed by the whole affair, stayed in Ruane’s fold, even though his complaints continued
at a frequency and volume that still made Ruane fear his defection. By the end of 1974, however, while the
market was down by more than twenty-five percent, the Sequoia Fund had at least managed to produce a
smaller loss than the market’s.
Nonetheless, the market’s cumulative toll on the Sequoia Fund was such that Henry Brandt and John Loomis,
Carol’s husband, both of whom had gone to work there, feared the worst and cast off from what seemed a
sinking ship.15
Forbes captured Buffett’s attitude in an interview that November, which opened with a juicy quote: Asked
how he felt about the market, “Like an over-sexed man in a harem,” Buffett replied. “This is the time to start
investing.”16 He went on to say, “This is the first time I can remember that you could buy Phil Fisher
[growth] stocks at Ben Graham [cigar butt] prices.” He felt this was the most significant statement that he
could make, but Forbes didn’t include it; a general audience wouldn’t understand the references to Fisher
and Graham.17 When Forbes asked for specific stock ideas, instead of mentioning what he was buying or had
bought, Buffett turned impish and did one of his little experiments to see how well the reporter had
researched him via other Forbes articles. “A water company is pretty simple,” he said, adding that Blue Chip
owned five percent of…San Jose Water Works. The reporter took the bait; San Jose Water Works went in
the story with no reference to the earlier piece insinuating he’d bought it using insider information.
But despite his enthusiasm for the market so far in 1974, he had invested at a trickle, and mostly moved
money around into Studebaker-Worthington, Handy & Harman, Harte-Hanks Newspapers, and Multimedia,
Inc., and added to his Coldwell Banker position. He bumped up a few of his other shareholdings by ten or
twenty percent. He had also bought 100,000 shares of Blue Chip from Rick Guerin. “He sold me at five
bucks because he was getting squeezed,” Buffett says. “That was a brutal period.”
The “harem” comment had a double meaning: While it was, indeed, the time to start investing, Buffett, for
the most part, could look but not touch. One of National Indemnity’s business partners, an aviation broker,
had run amok, selling money-losing aviation-insurance policies. The company had tried to stop the agent by
revoking its authority but for several months was unable to shut it down.18 The accounting records were a
shambles and the losses were unclear. National Indemnity had no idea how high the bill for the “Omni affair”
would run, but worst-case estimates ran as high as tens of millions of dollars. The hope was that they were
much less, because National Indemnity did not have tens of millions. Buffett was sweating.19
Within a couple of months—by early 1975—his problems compounded monumentally. Chuck Rickershauser,
a partner from Munger’s law firm, now renamed Munger, Tolles & Rickershauser, called him and Munger to
say that the Securities and Exchange Commission was considering pressing charges against them for violating
securities laws. What had seemed like a brewing but manageable problem had now exploded into a full-scale
emergency.
Rickershauser had first started doing legal work for Buffett and Munger during the See’s transaction. More
recently he had been fighting a rear-guard action, ever since an SEC staff lawyer had called him and said he
had some questions. Under the assumption that the matter was routine, Rickershauser had directed the man
to Verne McKenzie, Berkshire’s controller.
When McKenzie’s phone rang in Nebraska, he picked it up to find the head of the SEC’s Enforcement
Division, Stanley Sporkin, the much-feared “tough cop” of the business world, on the other end of the line.
Sporkin looked as though he spent his evenings hunched droopy-eyed under a desk lamp, personally drafting
the charges against large corporations that for the first time in American history had frightened a remarkable
number of them into settling with the SEC without ever setting foot in court.20 On the phone, he interrogated
McKenzie on a wide range of subjects, from Wesco to Blue Chip to Berkshire and beyond. His tone was not
friendly, but this, McKenzie had assumed, was simply his modus operandi. On the other hand, McKenzie did
get the impression that Sporkin thought if you were rich, you must have done something wrong.21

When Rickershauser heard that Sporkin, rather than a staff lawyer, had personally called and grilled
McKenzie at length, he nearly had a heart attack. Sporkin’s batting average had made his jowly profile
among the most recognizable in American business. In a practical sense he had more power than his boss, the
chairman of the SEC.
What seemed to have drawn the SEC’s attention was a project of nearly two years in which Buffett and
Munger were trying to delicately untangle the many strands of spaghetti that connected the several
companies they owned. Their first step had been to try to merge Diversified, the least essential piece, into
Berkshire Hathaway. By 1973, Diversified had become little more than a vehicle for buying Berkshire and
Blue Chip stock. But the Securities and Exchange Commission—whose approval was required—had delayed
the Diversified deal. Munger had told Buffett that this was not anything serious. He directed Rickershauser to
“invite anyone in the SEC” who had questions to call him directly, “if this will expedite his work and
clearance of our papers.”22
Instead, over the next eighteen months, the SEC staff seemed to have nosed around looking at Blue Chip
Stamps and other investments; it concluded that Buffett and Munger had smashed up the Wesco–Santa
Barbara deal deliberately by offering a high price for a quarter of the stock for the purpose of taking over the
rest. At least, that must have been how it looked to Santa Barbara, for it had apparently turned in Blue Chip
to the SEC.23
For the first time they all realized that Blue Chip was in trouble.24 No sooner had Buffett achieved the glory
of joining the Post board than his and Munger’s need for legal services was about to grow with stunning
rapidity. Rickershauser, who already knew what it was like to work with Buffett, had once explained to a
colleague that “The sun is nice and warm, but you don’t want to get too close to it.”25 He would spend the
next couple of years testing what could be called Rickershauser’s Law of Thermodynamics.
In February 1975, the SEC issued subpoenas and launched a full-blown investigation of Blue Chip’s purchase
of Wesco: “In the Matter of Blue Chip Stamps, Berkshire Hathaway Incorporated, Warren Buffet [sic],
HO-784.” The commission staff speculated that Buffett and Munger had committed fraud: “Blue Chip,
Berkshire, Buffet [sic], singly or in concert with others…may have engaged in acts which have, directly or
indirectly, operated as a device, scheme, or artifice to defraud; or included an untrue statement of a
material fact or omitted…”
The commission’s lawyers zeroed in on a theory that Blue Chip had planned from the beginning to take over
Wesco Financial but had not disclosed that fact; that Blue Chip’s purchases of stock after the Santa Barbara
deal dissolved must have been “tender offers” that were never registered with the SEC.26 This latter charge
was most serious and carried with it the risk that the SEC would file, with great fanfare and publicity, civil
fraud charges not only against Blue Chip but also against Buffett and Munger personally.
In considering action against a target, Sporkin had a choice. He could prosecute or settle. A settlement was a
way of allowing the target to say sorry without having to officially admit guilt; it neither consented to nor
denied the charge of fraud but agreed to accept a penalty. And in agreeing to a settlement, the SEC could
also choose whether to name the individuals involved or simply to make a deal with the company itself
without naming anybody. Being named in a settlement might not be the literal end of someone’s career, but
there would be no elephant-bumping afterward. Having so recently been elevated into the high and mighty
through Supermoney and Forbes and the board of the Washington Post, Buffett began to fight desperately to
save his reputation.
Instead, the investigation widened. Under subpoena, Buffett had to open his files—which, naturally,
represented a huge and comprehensive collection of documents, just as huge and comprehensive as
everything he had ever collected. In violation of his cherished privacy, lawyers from Munger, Tolles sifted
out trade tickets, information about recent stock purchases, memos to bankers, letters to See’s Candies, notes
to Verne McKenzie at the textile mill, and the like and shipped them off to investigators in Washington, D.C.
Buffett felt persecuted. He and Munger were being chased in a nightmare by a huge, lumbering giant. To
survive, they would have to outrun it.

Letters flew back and forth like shuttlecocks between Munger, Tolles and the SEC. Buffett maintained a
veneer of calm, but his back problems were plaguing him. Munger did not hide his agitation.
By March 1975, the investigation had wound its way to a command performance at the SEC. Betty Peters
was hauled in. “Is your lawyer here?” they asked. “No. Do I need a lawyer?” she replied. “Well, everybody
comes with a lawyer,” they told her. “Don’t you just want to know what happened?” she asked. They
interviewed Peters without a lawyer.
Munger was summoned. For two days—also unaccompanied, for what additional legal counsel could Charles
T. Munger possibly need?—he tried to defend Blue Chip against the charge that it was trying to bust up the
Santa Barbara merger and to explain why Blue Chip had paid more than was strictly necessary for Wesco’s
stock. Yes, Blue Chip had thought about getting control, he said, but those plans were only “remote and
contingent” until the Santa Barbara merger blew up. This discussion became somewhat circular given his and
Buffett’s role in talking to Vincenti and their admitted “wooing” of Betty Peters and the Casper family’s
votes. Munger had a regrettable tendency to interrupt and lecture the SEC staff lawyer, Larry Seidman. “We
wanted to look very fair and equitable to Lou Vincenti and Betty Peters,” he said.27 But the SEC lawyers had
never met the intractable Lou Vincenti. They could not possibly understand. What about your Blue Chip
shareholders? Seidman asked. Seidman saw no reason for Blue Chip to be so generous to Wesco
shareholders; Wesco’s stock by then was largely in the hands of arbitrageurs.
These were people who had bought Wesco’s stock knowing it would rise to the price that Santa Barbara had
offered once the deal closed. They partly hedged their bets by shorting Santa Barbara’s stock, much as
Graham-Newman had once bought Rockwood stock in exchange for cocoa-bean warehouse receipts. But
when the Wesco deal blew up, it was as if the price of cocoa beans had collapsed.28 Why do the arbs a favor
by propping up the price?
Munger reached for his ultimate weapon—Benjamin Franklin. “We didn’t feel our obligation to the
shareholders was inconsistent with leaning over backward to be fair. We have that Ben Franklin idea that the
honest policy is the best policy. It had a sort of shoddy mental image to us to try to reduce the price.”29
Seidman seemed a little baffled by this argument, and even Munger admitted that the details of what had
been done did not look good. He begged Seidman to look at the big picture. “As you look at the overall
records, we go way beyond any legal requirement in trying to be fair with people to observe the niceties of
fair-dealing; I simply hope that you will reach the conclusion that this averages out as not an appropriate case
for any sort of prosecution…. If there’s any defect at all, it’s not intentional.”
When Buffett appeared, they asked him why he and Munger hadn’t let Wesco go into the tank so they could
buy it cheap. “I think the general business reputation of Blue Chip would not have been as good,” Buffett
said. “I think someone might have been sore about it.” But why should he care? Because, said Buffett, it was
“important how Wesco management feels about us. You can say, well, we own the controlling interest, so it
doesn’t make any difference. But Lou Vincenti doesn’t really need to work for us…. If he felt that we were,
you know, slobs or something, it just wouldn’t work.”
Now Buffett—who, like Munger, startled the enforcement lawyers by showing up alone—made himself
helpful, venturing back to Washington several times, patiently explaining how Blue Chip worked, expounding
on his investment philosophies, and talking about his childhood years in Washington. He made a favorable
impression on Seidman, but not on the senior SEC staff lawyer who was in charge of the investigation, and
who was known as a “tiger” whose motto was “They shall not pass.” He found these arguments
unconvincing.30 The senior investigator’s attitude was that nobody who did anything close to the line would
ever get by him.31
The SEC staff kept delving. It seemed fascinated by the intricacies and complications of Buffett’s empire. It
even started looking into whether he had traded on inside information about San Jose Water Works.32 The
staff started kicking around Source Capital, the closed-end investment fund that Munger had bought a twenty
