
139

91.9

15.0

127

165

116

116

107

107

98

98

89

89

82

82

75

75

69

69

63

63

58

58

53

53

48

48

44

44

M J S D M J S D M J
1998
1999
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
QAV1582]

S D M J S D M J S D M J S D M J S D M J S D M J S D M J S D M J S D M J S D M J S D M J
2004
2009
2010
2000
2001
2002
2003
2005
2006
2007
2008
7/19/2010 = 9.2%

Extreme Optimism

Source: Hulbert Financial Digest
To subscribe to daily data updates
Contact john.kimble@dowjones.com

Extreme Pessimism

85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30

Hulbert Newsletter Gold Sentiment Index
Copyright 2010 Med Davis Research, Inc. Further distribution prohibited without prior permission. All Rights Reserved.
C

See MDR Disclaimer alt

www.mdr.comcopyright.com

- For data vendor disclaimers refer to

www.mdr.com/vendorinfo/

FIGURE 7.26 Hulbert Newsletter Gold Sentiment Index (January 1997–July 2010)

CONCLUSION
In this chapter, we have focused on the idea of market sentiment—the overall psychology of the
market players. Emotions play an important role in determining the actions of market participants. Market participants demonstrate periods of both extreme optimism, when bubbles occur,

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 7 Sentiment

129

and periods of extreme pessimism, when crashes or panics occur. The uninformed market players tend to be most optimistic as the market reaches a peak. These same individuals tend to be
most pessimistic when the market is at its lowest point in a downturn. In other words, most
investors are fully invested just at the time they should liquidate their holdings and out of the
market just at the point when they could be buying stocks at a low price. Sentiment indicators
help the technical analyst pick these market extremes. By following a contrarian strategy, the
technical analyst hopes to act opposite of the uninformed, majority of market players.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. How would you define the term sentiment as it relates to the financial markets?
2. Warren is searching for a good trading rule to follow. He says, “I would be just as happy to
get information from someone who always makes the wrong investment decision as someone who always makes the right investment decision to use in devising my trading strategy.” Explain why Warren would find it helpful to have information about someone’s bad
trading decisions.
3. Explain why extremely high investor optimism is associated with market peaks.
4. Sandra thinks Microsoft (MSFT) is currently overpriced, while Tony thinks MSFT is
underpriced. Which of these two investors would be more likely to buy a put, and which
one would be more likely to buy a call? Explain your answer.
5. You hear a report that the ratio of put-to-call volume is extremely high. How would you
interpret this high put/call ratio? What would you conclude about investor sentiment given
this high ratio? What investment strategy would you want to follow given this high ratio?
6. Explain what is meant by a contrarian investment strategy. What are some market signs
that the contrarian investor might watch for?
7. What information might polls give you about sentiment? What are some sources of poll
data, and what general conclusions can you make about how to use poll data?
8. What type of relationship is generally seen between news reporting and market sentiment?

Download at www.wowebook.com

This page intentionally left blank

Download at www.wowebook.com

C H A P T E R

8

MEASURING MARKET STRENGTH

CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
By the end of this chapter, you should

• Understand the importance of measuring internal market strength
• Understand what is meant by market breadth
• Be familiar with how the advance-decline line measures market breadth
• Be familiar with how up and down volumes relate to market strength
• Be familiar with how new high and new low statistics measure market strength
• Be familiar with the relationship between the number of stocks above their historical
moving average and market strength
In the previous chapter, we looked at the importance of market player sentiment in determining
potential market trends. In addition to measuring the attitudes of market players, the technical
analyst needs to look at the internal strength of a market. By looking at data specific to each market, the analyst determines whether the internal strength of the respective market is improving or
deteriorating. In this chapter, we examine how the analyst looks at market data such as the number of stocks advancing and declining, the volume of the winners and losers, the new 52-week
highs and lows, and the position of the averages relative to moving averages. These measures
help to gauge the stock market’s underpinnings. The data needed to calculate the indicators studied in this chapter is publicly available in most financial newspapers.

131

Download at www.wowebook.com

132

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

BOX 8.1 WHAT IS DIVERGENCE?
The most important technical concept for confirmation of a trend is called a divergence. As long as an indicator—especially one that measures the rate of change of
price or other data (called momentum)—corresponds with the price trend, the indicator is said to “confirm” the price trend. When an indicator or oscillator fails to confirm the trend, it is called a negative divergence or positive divergence, depending
on whether peaks or bottoms, respectively, fail to confirm price peaks or bottoms. A
divergence is an early warning of a potential trend change. It means the analyst must
watch the price data more closely than when the indicators and oscillators are confirming new highs and lows. Divergence analysis is used between almost all indicators and prices; a divergence can occur more than one time before a price reversal.
Divergence

Confirmation

As an example, one of the tenets used in analyzing trading volume is that in a rising
trend, volume should expand with the price rise. If at a new short-term peak in prices
the trading volume fails to expand above its earlier, time-equivalent high, a negative
divergence has occurred that should warn the analyst that the new price high is
occurring on less enthusiasm, as measured by volume, and that the uptrend may
soon be ending.

It should be noted that knowledge of a wide array of technical indicators does not make an
analyst valuable or cause him or her to profit, but knowing when to apply which indicator does.
Because it is almost impossible to understand all indicators, the technical analyst often selects
just a few and studies them intently.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 8 Measuring Market Strength

133

When looking at indicators, the analyst is generally looking for confirmation or divergence. Confirmation occurs when prices are rising and these indicators rise, signaling strong
market internals. Confirmation also occurs when falling prices are accompanied by an indication
of weak market internals. In other words, confirmation occurs when price movement and market
internals appear to agree.
When a market indicator does not support the direction of price movement, the analyst has
a strong warning that the trend may be in the process of reversing. This lack of confirmation is
referred to as a divergence.
One quick example is an indicator called the rate of change indicator (ROC). It is merely a
plot of the ratio or difference between today’s closing price and the closing price at some specified time in the past, such as 20 days. When the market or stock is hitting a new high and the 20day ROC is hitting a new high, we have a confirmation of the price action. Should the ROC not
be hitting a new high at the same time as the market or stock, we have a negative divergence, a
warning that the upward momentum in price is slowing down.
There is another type of divergence called a reversal suggested by Constance Brown
(1999). This occurs when the oscillator or indicator, in a positive reversal, reaches a second low
that is not confirmed by another new low in prices. The opposite, the negative reversal, occurs
when the oscillator reaches a new high but prices do not. Both cases are just variations of a divergence, and as in a normal divergence, each occurrence signals a potential change in market direction.

MARKET BREADTH
On any given day, a stock price can do one of three things—close higher, lower, or unchanged
from the previous day’s close. If a closing price is above its previous close, it is considered to be
advancing, or an advance. Similarly, a stock that closes below the previous day’s close is a
declining stock, or a decline. A stock that closes at the exact price it closed the day before is
called unchanged.
Prior to July 2000, all less than one dollar (or point) changes in common stock prices were
in fractions based on the pre-Revolutionary practice of cutting Spanish Doubloons into eighths to
make change. By February 2001, the old system of quarters, eighths, and sixteenths was replaced
with the decimal system. The use of decimals may have affected some historic relationships. The
resulting smaller bid-ask spreads may have reduced the number of stocks that are unchanged at
the day’s end.
Advance/decline data is called the breadth of the stock market. The indicators we focus on
in this section measure the internal strength of the market by considering whether stocks are
gaining or losing in price. In this section, we consider the cumulative breadth line, the advancedecline ratio, breadth differences, and the breadth thrust.
Before we begin looking more closely at these particular indicators, we must, however,
mention a change that has recently occurred. Since 2000, the parameters of many breadth indicators thought to provide accurate signals have changed significantly. Applying standards that had
excellent records for identifying stock market reversals now proves to be less than satisfactory.
There is likely more than one reason for this sudden change, and some reasons are unknown.

Download at www.wowebook.com

134

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

One factor that has caused the old parameters to change is the proliferation on the New
York Stock Exchange of ETFs, bond funds, Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs), preferred
shares, and American Depository Receipts (ADRs) of foreign stocks. These do not represent
domestic operating companies and, therefore, are not directly subject to the level of corporate
economic activity. They are subject to a wide variety of influences not necessarily connected
with the stock market, which means they are not reflecting the market’s traditional discounting
mechanism.
Another possible factor is the implementation of the aforementioned decimalization. Many
of the indicators using advances and declines are calculated as they were before decimalization,
even though their optimal parameters may have changed. Another possibility, one more likely, is
that the aberrant indicators were tested mostly during the long bull market from 1982 through
2000. The important lesson for the technical analyst, however, is that indicators do not remain
the same. Parameters for known indicators change over time and with structural changes in the
markets. The analyst must frequently test indicators and make appropriate adjustments in the
types and parameters used.

The Breadth Line or Advance-Decline Line
The breadth line, also known as the advance-decline line, is one of the most common and best
ways of measuring breadth and internal market strength. This line is the cumulative sum of
advances minus declines. The standard formula for the breadth line is as follows:
Breadth Line Value Day T = (# of Advancing Stocks Day T – # of Declining Stocks Day T) +
Breadth Line Value Day T–1
On days when the number of advancing stocks exceeds the number of declining stocks, the
breadth line will rise. On days when more stocks are declining than advancing, the line will fall.
A breadth line can be constructed for any index, industry group, exchange, or basket of
stocks. In addition to being calculated using daily data, it can be calculated weekly or for any
other period for which breadth data is available. It is not often applicable to the commodity markets where baskets or indices of commodities rarely are traded, though this is changing with the
advent of the Commodities Research Bureau (CRB), Goldman Sachs, and Dow Jones futures
index markets.
Ordinarily, the plot of the breadth line should roughly replicate the stock market averages.
In other words, when the stock market averages are rising, the breadth line should rise. This indicates that a market rally is associated with the majority of the stocks rising.
The importance to technical analysts of the breadth line is the time when it fails to replicate
the averages and, thus, diverges. For example, if the stock market average is rising but the
advance-decline line is falling, only a few stocks are fueling the rally, but the majority of stocks
are either not participating or declining in value.
Analysts point to several reasons why breadth divergence might not be as powerful of an
indicator in the future as it has been in the past. The first reason is the previously discussed proliferation of nonoperating company listings. To deal with the issue of the bias from including
stocks that do not represent ownership in operating companies, technical analysts often use only

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 8 Measuring Market Strength

135

those breadth figures from common stocks that represent companies that actually produce a
product or a service. For example, the New York Stock Exchange also reports breadth statistics
for only common stocks, disregarding the numerous mutual funds, preferred stocks, and so on.
This additional breadth information is available daily in most financial newspapers. The breadth
line derived from this list of common stocks generally has been more reliable than the one
including all stocks.
However, a major change recently occurred in how the NYSE reports breadth statistics for
common stocks. Beginning in February 2005, the NYSE decided to include only those stocks
with three or less letters in their stock symbols and those that are included in the NYSE Composite Index, its common stock list. Because of this change, figures since that decision will be
incompatible with the prior figures.
Instead of relying on the publicly available statistics, proprietary breadth statistics also are
available on a subscription basis. For example, Lowry’s Reports, Inc., (www.lowrysreports.com)
calculates proprietary breadth statistics that eliminate all the preferred stocks, ADRs, closed-end
mutual funds, REITs, and others representing nonproductive companies.
Another difficulty with the breadth has arisen since the year 2000 according to Colby
(2003) and others using data up through 2000. Trading rules used with the publicly available
breadth statistics before then, despite the known problems with the types of stocks listed, showed
relatively attractive results. However, using those same rules since the year 2000, we find much
less attractive results in many of these indicators. Indeed, the difference is so large and consistent
throughout the trading methods mentioned by Colby that it could not be attributed to the trading
rules themselves or to problems connected with optimizing. The difference between then and
more recently must have to do with a change in background, character, leadership, or historic
relationships.
Why this change? The most obvious economic change is that of the decoupling of the
stock market from long-term interest rates. From the Great Depression of the 1930s to the last
decade of the last century, the business cycle was characterized by the bond market and the stock
market reaching bottoms at roughly the same time, and the bond market reaching peaks earlier
than the stock market reached peaks. In the late 1990s, this business-cycle relationship broke
down, switching to almost the exact opposite relationship, whereby the bond market tended to
trend oppositely from the stock market. Because the breadth statistics include a large number of
interest-related stocks that are not included in the popular averages, this change in relationship
may be the cause for the difference in trading rules using breadth, giving the breadth line more
strength at tops and more weakness at bottoms.
In the NASDAQ, a cumulative breadth line constructed of only NASDAQ stocks advances,
declines, and unchanged has been declining at least since 1983 (earlier figures are difficult to
obtain), and even when looked at over shorter periods seems to have a very strong negative bias.
This negative bias is likely due to the “survivor effect,” whereby from 1996 to 2005, stocks listed
on the NASDAQ declined from 6,136 to 3,440. The loss of issues from the list suggests that a
large number of listings went broke during that time and were trending downward even when the
larger survivors were advancing and were unavailable during the rebound in stock prices from
2002 through 2005. The NASDAQ index is a capitalization-weighted index where the survivors
have considerable influence on price but little influence on breadth. This weighting bias implies

Download at www.wowebook.com

136

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

that a NASDAQ breadth line is useless as a divergence indicator in its absolute form and must be
analyzed instead for changes in acceleration rather than direction.
Several indicators using the advance-decline line concept appear in the classic technical
analysis literature. Although these indicators have not performed well in recent market conditions, it is important for the student of technical analysis to be aware of these traditional indicators because they may become productive sometime in the future.

Double Negative Divergence
When the averages are reaching new price highs and the breadth line is not, a negative divergence is occurring (see Figure 8.1). This signals weak market internals and that the market
uptrend is in a late phase and may soon end. In 1926, Colonel Leonard P. Ayres (1940) of the
Cleveland Trust Company was one of the first to calculate a breadth line and the first to notice the
importance of a negative breadth divergence from the averages. His theory was that very highly
capitalized stocks influence the averages, while the breadth line includes all stocks regardless of
capitalization. Sometimes at the end of a bull market, the large stocks continue to rise, and the
smaller stocks begin to falter.
Negative
Divergence

Price

Indicator or
Oscillator

FIGURE 8.1 What does negative divergence look like?

Other market analysts, such as James F. Hughes (Merrill, Stocks and Commodities Magazine V6: 9, p 354–5), argued that the rise in interest rates accompanying an economic expansion
reflected in the stock market causes the interest-related stocks—such as utilities, which have
large capital borrowing costs and of which there are many—to falter and, thus, causes the
breadth line to lose momentum. Regardless of the cause, since May 1928, when a negative
breadth divergence warned of the 1929 crash more than a year later, the observance of a negative
divergence has invariably signaled an impending stock market top.
Although a negative divergence signals a market top, a primary stock market top can occur
without a divergence. In other words, a breadth divergence is not necessary for a market peak.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 8 Measuring Market Strength

137

The peaks in 1937 and 1980, for example, occurred without a breadth divergence. After a sizable,
lengthy advance, participants should be on guard and use a breadth divergence to help spot a
potential market reversal. However, an analyst should not be adamant about requiring a breadth
divergence to occur prior to a market peak.
At market bottoms, especially those that are characterized by climactic price action, a positive divergence in the cumulative breadth line rarely has been reliable in signaling a major reversal upward. However, there have been positive breadth divergences on either tests of major lows
or so-called secondary lows that were useful signals of increasing market strength.
A characteristic of the breadth line that the analyst needs to recognize is that there is a
downward bias to the line. Therefore, a new cumulative breadth line, one that has no relationship
to the previous breadth line, begins once the market reaches a major low. For example, calculating a historical cumulative breadth line for the NYSE data resulted in an all-time peak in 1959.
Although the cumulative breadth line has never reached the same 1959 level, there was a considerable rise in the market averages through 2000. This does not indicate a very large negative
divergence over a 40-year time span. The cumulative breadth line, for divergence analysis, starts
again once a major decline has occurred. When the market declines into a major low, one of the
four-year varieties (see Chapter 9, “Temporal Patterns and Cycles”), analysis of the cumulative
breadth line begins anew, and the line has no relationship to the peak of the previous major market cycle. It is as if a major decline wipes out the history of past declines, and the market then
begins a new breadth cycle and new history.
A negative divergence, while not being required, has been the most successful method over
the past 50 or more years for warning of a major market top. As with most indicators, different
technicians use the breadth indicators in slightly different ways. For example, James F. Hughes,
who published a market letter in the 1930s, learned of the breadth divergence concept from Col.
Ayres (Harlow, 1968; Hughes, 1951). He used the negative breadth divergences as a major input
to his stock market forecasting. Hughes required that at least two consecutive negative breadth
divergences, called double divergences (see Figure 8.2), must occur before a major top was signaled. This requirement prevented mistakes in forecasting from the appearance of a single minor
divergence that could later be nullified by a new high in both the averages and the breadth line.
Often, more than two divergences occur at major market tops.
When the double breadth divergence warning occurs, it traditionally signals an actual market price peak within a year. Beginning with 1987, for example, a double breadth divergence correctly anticipated the 1987 crash when the breadth line peaked in April 1987, and five months
later, in September, the market peaked and then collapsed. The breadth line peaked in the fall of
1989 followed by a peak in the average in July 1990. The most recent breadth peak signaled by a
