
 Figure 6.4 PowerShares S&P 500 Low Volatility and SPDR Consumer Staples Select Sector 
 HOW TO REPLICATE SMART BETA 
 Here is a way you can replicate a smart beta ETF with a lower-cost, factor-based ETF. Go to the Morningstar online home page, input the symbol of your smart beta ETF in the Quote box, click on the word Quote , then look down the page and click on the Portfolio tab in the menu row that begins with the word Quote . You will then see the most appropriate benchmark portfolio for that ETF. 3 You can then search online for an appropriate ETF representing that benchmark. For comparison purposes, you can also find annual portfolio turnover ratios and annual expense ratios by clicking on the Morningstar Fees & Expenses tab. 
 Here is an example using PDP, which is the PowerShares DWA Momentum Portfolio managed by Dorsey, Wright & Associates. This fund uses relative strength momentum applied to individual stocks. The appropriate benchmark for it, according to Morningstar, is the Russell Midcap Growth Index. 
 Figure 6.5 shows how the PowerShares DWA Momentum Portfolio (PDP) matches up with iShares Russell Mid-Cap Growth (IWP). IWP has a lower annual expense ratio of 0.25% versus 0.67% for PDP, and a lower annual portfolio turnover of 25% versus 66%. 

 Figure 6.5 PowerShares DWA Momentum Portfolio and iShares Russell Mid-Cap Growth 
 SMARTER WAYS TO USE SMART BETA 
 William Sharpe and Eugene Fama have called smart beta (or fundamental indexing) a marketing ploy. 4 George “Gus” Sauter, former chief investment officer at Vanguard Group, said, “These so-called smart betas are not by definition adding alpha; they’re merely delivering factor exposures in more costly ways.” 
 Is there any reason then to use smart beta when you can often replicate it at a lower cost? The answer is an unqualified … maybe. There are some strategies, such as dividend appreciation, insider sentiment, spin-offs, buybacks, and high quality that may offer more than just factor tilts and sector concentration. While smart beta strategies are more expensive than passive strategies, they are also less expensive than active strategies since there is less day-to-day decision making involved. Another reason to consider smart beta strategies is that passive, capitalization-weighted indexes are not completely efficient. 5 Nor are they optimal, given that prices are noisy (having unpredictable and nonrepeatable patterns) and do not fully reflect all available information. 
 However, when looking at smart beta strategies, one needs to keep in mind that some of them have only around 15 years of backtest history and are still unproven. Investors with Wayback Machines, who can go back in time to invest, may find these useful. The rest of us, however, will want to see more data than that. Extrapolating results based on only 15 years of data can be very dangerous. 
 Constructing new, smart beta indexes based on past data can be a futile endeavor. Dickson, Padmawar, and Hammer (2012) of The Vanguard Group issued a research report called “Joined at the Hip: ETF and Index Development,” in which they report that the average new index fund outperformed the broad U.S. stock market by 10.3% annually in the five years before its launch but underperformed by 1.0% in the five years after its launch. The authors conclude that “back tested performance does not appear, on average, past the live index date … possibly because benchmarks are often chosen for new products based on their attractive past history.” 
 I use the following criteria when I construct dual momentum portfolios to determine if a nontraditional smart beta strategy might be worth considering as a substitute for a capitalization-weighted index and is more than just a high-cost, factor-based closet index fund: 
          1    Does the approach make logical sense? Are there concepts underlying the strategy that have proven themselves? How likely is it that the strategy will continue to give better than market risk-adjusted returns? 
          2    Does the approach hold up under rigorous backtesting? Does it show robustness by being consistent across multiple markets and/or different periods? 
          3    Anomalies often show a decrease in profitability over time due to increases in trading activity. 6 Are strategy transaction costs and fund expense ratios low enough so the approach can hold up to possible declining gross profits? 
          4    Is volatility of the strategy within a reasonable range? The marketplace may not compensate high volatility. High volatility may also contribute to greater tracking error. 
          5    Is there decent liquidity in whatever investment vehicles are available for this strategy? 
 Once an appropriate strategy is found, one needs to review it on a regular basis. What makes sense now may no longer make sense a year or two from now. Rather than deal with all this complexity and uncertainty, for most investors, simply using traditional capitalization-weighted indexes is most likely a better approach. In support of this, West and Larson (2014) of Research Affiliates wrote that smart beta earns around 2% more than market-cap indexes, and it is not the weighting method but rebalancing that creates most of that excess return. Booth and Fama (1992) showed in general that mean reversion rebalancing profits lead to annual profits of 2% over benchmark portfolios. Smart beta investors may therefore be able to capture the same incremental returns from just a rebalanced stock/bond or sector portfolio. 
 DOES SIZE REALLY MATTER? 
 Because many smart beta strategies attempt to pick up size and/or value premia, it might be useful to see how strong the size and value premia themselves really are. A number of researchers have shown that the small-size premium has largely disappeared since at least the 1980s. 7 Shumway and Warther (1997) concluded the small-cap anomaly was likely driven by a mistake in how researchers treated missing data for delisted stocks, which were mostly small caps. Highly illiquid, difficult-to-trade microcaps drive whatever size effect that might still exist. This suggests that the small-size premium may actually be compensation for liquidity risk. 
 Small-size stocks have more liquidity than they used to, however, because of the proliferation of funds that jumped on the small-cap bandwagon. In 1981, Dimensional Fund Advisors (DFA) dedicated its first stock fund to small-cap equities. It did this shortly after Rolf Banz published a paper based on his University of Chicago PhD dissertation that identified a small-cap premium from 1936 through 1975. DFA soon had several small-cap funds to take advantage of this perceived anomaly. Many other small-cap funds followed soon thereafter. 
 Increased participation in small caps may explain why the small-size premium has become statistically insignificant since the early 1980s. For example, from December 1978 through 2013, the Russell 2000 Index generated an annualized return (12.1%) almost identical to the larger-cap Russell 1000 and S&P 500 Indexes (12.0%). Small-cap stocks actually underperformed their large-cap counterparts in Europe and Asia from July 1990 through 2013. 
 Small caps often are inconsistent performers, having underperformed large caps for decades at a time, such as during the 1950s and 1980s. Israel and Moskowitz (2013) recently completed the most current analysis of the size premium. Using 86 years of U.S. stock data from July 1926 through December 2011, they found no evidence of a significant small-size premium over the entire sample, or over any of the four 20-year subperiods. Small size no longer offers abnormal risk-adjusted profits except in illiquid microcaps. Since microcap stocks are more costly and difficult to trade, most investors, particularly institutional ones, avoid this area of the market. Small-cap stocks may add some diversity to a large-cap portfolio, but they also add considerable volatility and nothing in the way of abnormal returns. 
 DOES VALUE REALLY MATTER? 
 Since the 1992 Fama and French seminal paper “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns,” investors have believed that a significant value premium exists and that it can give value-oriented investors an edge. There are now hundreds, if not thousands, of investment programs and funds incorporating a tilt toward value stocks. 
 The Israel and Moskowitz (2013) paper thoroughly addressed the value premium issue as well as the size premium issue. They based their findings on the standard book-to-market equity ratio and similar simple indicators of the value premium. More sophisticated value-oriented approaches, such as the one by Gray and Carlisle (2013), may give different results. 
 Working with the most common indicator of value, the book-to-market ratio, Israel and Moskowitz find the value premium to be insignificant in the two largest quintiles of stocks. These represent the largest 40% of NYSE stocks and are the stocks that are large enough for institutional investor portfolios to include in their portfolios. 
 Only the smallest-size stocks show a significant value premium. The two smallest quintiles contain stocks that are much smaller than the small-cap Russell 2000 Index. There is no reliable value premium among large-cap stocks in three out of four subperiods from 1927 through 2011. The two largest-size quintiles exhibit a significant value premium only from 1970 through 1989. 
 The 1992 and 1993 Fama and French studies that started all the excitement about value investing and were the impetus for so many value-oriented funds and portfolios covered a similar 1963–1991 period. This may have just been a unique 28-year period where value stocks produced much higher returns. Dual momentum investors can take comfort in the fact that momentum has worked well across nearly all types of equities and all the way back to the year 1801! 
 Not long after publication of the Fama and French papers, Kothari, Shanken, and Sloan (1995) did their own study showing that the Fama and French findings were subject to possible sample selection bias. Using a different data source, Kothari et al. found no evidence of a significant positive relationship between the book-to-market equity ratio and average returns. Going up against the highly respected Fama and French, the Kothari et al. study attracted little attention then or now. 
 John Maynard Keynes reportedly once said, “When the facts change, I change my mind. What do you do?” Unfortunately, not many of us are so impervious to confirmation, conservatism, and anchoring biases. Like the falling from grace of the efficient market hypothesis, it may take many years before the academic and professional investment communities fully reevaluate the existence of a value premium. Fama and French (2014) have now updated their earlier work by issuing a new working paper called, “A Five-Factor Asset Pricing Model,” in which the combination of profitability (profits divided by book value) and investment intensity (yearly growth in total assets) can replace value as a risk factor. 8 
 Value may or may not be a robust driver of abnormal returns, but there is little doubt that momentum is the king of all market anomalies. Meanwhile, followers of smart beta would do well to look for more than just small-cap and value biases in choosing their investment strategies. 
 DOES MOMENTUM REALLY MATTER? 
 Israel and Moskowitz (2013) also included cross-sectional stock momentum in their analysis using a 12-month look-back period while skipping the last month. They found that the momentum premium is present and stable across all size groups. The momentum effect is also positive and statistically significant in every 20-year subperiod. There has been no diminution in its effect during the most current 20-year period. Reliable alphas have ranged from 8.9% to 10.3% per year over the four subperiods before transaction costs. 
 According to Israel and Moskowitz, across all 86 years, cumulative long-only momentum excess returns averaged 13.6% annually, with a standard deviation of 21.8 and a Sharpe ratio of 0.62. Value excess returns averaged 12.4%, with a standard deviation of 26.5 and a Sharpe ratio of 0.47. Small-size excess returns averaged 11.5%, with a standard deviation of 26.3 and a Sharpe ratio of 0.44. 9 Momentum may not only be the “premier anomaly,” as per Fama and French (2008). It may be the only true and lasting anomaly.

Dual Momentum Investing: An Innovative Strategy for Higher Returns with Lower Risk 

 CHAPTER 7 
 MEASURING AND MANAGING RISK 
          This is worse than divorce. I have lost half my money and still have a wife. 
 — Anonymous (obviously ) 
 O VER THE PAST 30 YEARS ending in 2013, the S&P 500 had an annual total return of 11.1%, while the average stock mutual fund investor earned only 3.69%. 1 Around 1.4% of this underperformance was due to mutual fund expenses. Investors making poor timing decisions accounted for much of the remaining 6% of annual underperformance. This is a remarkable amount of underperformance. Bond fund investors also suffered substantially from poor timing decisions. Investors in passively managed index funds have also been subject to behavioral performance gaps. The Vanguard S&P 500 Index Fund had a 15-year average annual return of 4.58%, while the average investor in that fund earned only 2.68% annually. 
 There is a strong propensity for investors to buy near market highs and sell near market bottoms due to what John Maynard Keynes called “animal spirits.” Others have called it fear and greed. The greater the volatility, the more pronounced the effect. 
 CGM Focus (CGMFX) was the highest-return stock fund from 2000 through 2010. It had an average annual return of 18.2%, according to Morningstar, beating its closest rival by 3.4%. During the same time, the fund’s typical shareholder lost 10%! Investors, motivated by greed and fear, added heavily to the fund near the top and bailed out as the fund neared its bottom. They poured $2.6 billion into the fund in 2007 when it was up over 80%. In 2008, when the fund was down 48%, investors redeemed over $750 million. This is an example of what investors are up against due to their behavioral biases. Remember what Pogo said: “We have met the enemy, and he is us.” We need an approach with a modest level of volatility that that will not induce emotional responses that take us out of our investments at the most inopportune times. 
 Daniel Kahneman (2011) pointed out, “Many individual investors lose consistently by trading, an achievement that a dart-throwing monkey could not match.” A disciplined, quantitative approach to investing can reduce the influence of “animal spirits” and help provide consistent results. 
 We should have a good understanding of relative strength momentum from what we learned in Chapter 2 . We saw how relative strength momentum gives investors a disciplined framework to work with. Large market losses, however, can still cause investors to overreact and do foolish things. This can be a problem when using relative momentum, since relative strength does little to reduce downside exposure. Relative momentum may even increase downside volatility. Absolute momentum can help overcome this obstacle, so it is important that we understand it well before moving forward. 
 UNDERSTANDING ABSOLUTE MOMENTUM 
 Relative strength compares an asset to its peers in order to predict future performance. In academic research, relative momentum is often the same as cross-sectional momentum, which involves sectioning a universe of individual assets into equal segments and comparing the performance of the strongest segments (“winners”) to the performance of the weakest (“losers”). Often testing is done on a market-neutral basis by simultaneously buying “winners” and selling short “losers.” 
 Momentum, however, also works well on an absolute or longitudinal basis, in which an asset’s own past predicts its future. Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen (2012) decided to call this time-series momentum. In statistics, longitudinal is usually the counterpart to cross-sectional data analysis and would be a more suitable name than time-series momentum, since time series (prices) are the underlying basis for all momentum, not just this particular kind of momentum. 
 I prefer to call what we have here absolute momentum because practitioners are used to hearing about relative and absolute returns. They measure relative returns against other assets or a benchmark, while absolute returns are those returns with respect to just an asset itself. Relative and absolute momentum follows the same logic. 
 In absolute momentum, we look at an asset’s excess return (its return less the return on Treasury bills) over a given look-back period. If the excess return is above zero, then the asset has positive absolute momentum. If the excess return is below zero, then the asset has negative absolute momentum. Absolute momentum is roughly the same as relative momentum applied to an asset paired up with Treasury bills. In simpler terms, absolute momentum asks if an asset has been going up or going down over the look-back period. If it has been going up, then its absolute momentum is positive. If the asset has been going down, then it has negative absolute momentum. Absolute momentum is a bet on the continuing serial correlation of returns, or, in cowboy terms, absolute momentum says, “A horse is easiest to ride in the direction it’s already going.” 
 It is possible for an asset to have positive relative momentum if it is strong relative to its peers and to have negative absolute momentum if its own trend has been down. It can also have positive absolute momentum if its trend has been positive and negative relative momentum if another asset has been going up more. 
 CHARACTERISTICS OF ABSOLUTE MOMENTUM 
 According to the renowned trend-following trader Ed Seykota: 
           Life itself is based on trends. Birds start south for the winter and keep going. Companies track trends and alter their products accordingly. Tiny protozoa move in trends along chemical and luminescent gradients. 2 
 Absolute momentum is quintessential trend following. 3 The goal of trend following is to adhere to Warren Buffett’s first rule of investing—do not lose money. His second rule is never to forget the first rule. Some well-known discretionary momentum investors of the past, such as Gerald Tsai, quickly went from hero to zero when they were unable to determine a change in market direction. In today’s environment of high investment volatility (HIV), those who are investment active should use some form of protection and always practice safe investing. 
 Trend-following methods, in general, have slowly achieved some recognition and acceptance in the academic community. It is for many (but not all), no longer considered “voodoo finance.” 4 A number of researchers have found evidence of profitability and modest predictive power when using trend-following methods and technical analysis signals to forecast future returns. 5 A recent paper by Lemperiere et al. (2014) called “Two Centuries of Trend Following,” identified highly significant anomalous excess returns based on an exponentially weighted moving average strategy applied to four asset classes (stock indexes, commodities, currencies, and bonds) across seven countries. Results were stable across both time and asset class, extending all the way back to 1800 for stock indexes and commodities. 
 In a sense, all momentum is trend following. Relative strength momentum looks at the trend of one asset compared to another, while absolute momentum looks at the trend of an asset with respect to its own past. Both forms of momentum do essentially the same thing: identify price strength that it likely to persist. 
 While researchers have thoroughly scrutinized relative momentum over the past 20 years, they have ignored trend-following absolute momentum, for the most part, until just recently. This is unfortunate, since absolute momentum often provides better results and has more flexibility than relative momentum. You can apply absolute momentum to a single asset, whereas you need two or more assets to use relative momentum. With relative momentum, you are always eliminating assets from your portfolio in order to use the strongest ones. Absolute momentum lets you hold on to all your assets, as long as their trends remain positive. Absolute momentum therefore gives greater diversification than relative momentum, which can in turn lower a portfolio’s short-run volatility. The biggest advantage of absolute momentum over relative momentum, however, is its ability to reduce dramatically portfolio downside vulnerability by exiting positions early during bear markets. Absolute momentum helps one to follow the maxim of the great trader Paul Tudor Jones: “The most important rule in trading is: play great defense, not great offense.” 6 
 In 2010, I began to explore absolute momentum by comparing risky asset returns to the returns from short- and intermediate-term bonds. 7 Shorter-term bonds are usually stronger than stocks when stocks are trending down. Selecting bonds over stocks during such times is a way of using absolute momentum. 
 Absolute momentum got a big boost in 2012 from Moskowitz et al. According to their published research, absolute momentum profits were “remarkably consistent across different asset classes and markets.” The authors found that a 12-month look-back period had the highest statistical significance from among a range of 1 to 48 months when used with a one-month holding period. Absolute momentum profits were positive for every one of the 58 assets that they examined. Across all markets, the authors found that absolute momentum gave an annual Sharpe ratio greater than 1, which was roughly 2.5 times the nonmomentum Sharpe ratio of these same markets. There was little correlation with passive benchmarks in each asset class or to the standard asset pricing factors. Returns were largest when stock market returns were the most extreme, which means absolute momentum can function as a hedge to extreme events. This also means absolute momentum can serve as a low-cost alternative to expensive hedging programs that try to reduce downside portfolio exposure. 
 According to Hurst, Ooi, and Pedersen (2012), absolute momentum is just as robust and universal as relative momentum. In their research, absolute momentum performed well in extreme market environments and across 59 markets covering four asset classes (commodities, equity indexes, bond markets, and currency pairs). The authors showed that absolute momentum has been consistently profitable all the way back to the year 1903. After simulated transaction costs and pro-forma hedge fund fees (2% of annual assets plus 20% of profits), absolute momentum achieved a Sharpe ratio of 1, just like the Moskowitz et al. (2012) study. Absolute momentum monthly correlations to both the S&P 500 and U.S. 10-year Treasuries were only –0.05 over the entire period from 1903 to 2011. 
 In 2012, I was first-place winner of the Wagner Awards given annually by the National Association of Active Investment Managers (NAAIM) for Advances in Active Investment Management. The paper I submitted was “Risk Premia Harvesting Through Dual Momentum.” Half of dual momentum is absolute momentum. In that paper, I demonstrated how absolute momentum gave better long-run results than relative momentum. Not only did absolute momentum offer higher expected returns but, unlike relative momentum, it also substantially reduced downside exposure during bear markets. 
 In 2013, I wrote “Absolute Momentum: A Universal Trend-Following Overlay.” This paper demonstrated the usefulness of absolute momentum as a trend-following overlay, as well as a stand-alone strategy, under different scenarios. I also explored look-back periods and confirmed the value of using a 12-month period with absolute momentum. I demonstrated how absolute momentum can improve risk parity portfolios by reducing their exposure to bonds and their need for leverage. I have included that paper as Appendix B of this book. 
 Low volatility portfolios have recently become popular owing to their somewhat favorable past performance relative to the broad market indices. The reason for their attractive relative performance primarily is due to their lower volatility in down markets. Absolute momentum can provide greater downside protection than low volatility portfolios while preserving more upside market potential. It can also do this without the tracking error, sector concentration, and high turnover issues associated with low volatility portfolios, as identified in Chapter 6 . 
 DUAL MOMENTUM—THE BEST OF BOTH WORLDS 
 Even though absolute momentum often gives better risk-adjusted results than relative momentum, most practitioners use only relative momentum. Absolute momentum is still relatively unknown and has not yet attracted much attention. 
 The best approach is to use absolute and relative together in order to gain the advantages of both. The way we do that is by first using relative momentum to select the best-performing asset over the preceding 12 months. We then apply absolute momentum as a trend-following filter by seeing if the excess return of our selected asset has been positive or negative over the preceding year. If it has been positive, that means its trend is up and we proceed to use that asset. If our asset’s excess return over the past year has been negative, then its trend is down and we invest instead in short- to intermediate-term fixed-income instruments until the trend turns positive. This way, we are always in harmony with the trend of the market. Go market! 
 ALPHA AND SHARPE RATIO 
