
example to illustrate this energy loop between the inside and outside that we
call perception. Traders act as a force on the market to move prices. Since
most traders don't plan their trades or want to take responsibility for their
outcomes they are highly susceptible to acting out of any number of fears.
Traders who are motivated to act out of fear generally aren't aware that their
fear drastically reduces the choices they perceive as available, making their
behavior very predictable to an objective observer (someone not caught in
the same cycles of fear). So under certain market conditions large groups of
traders will all be trying to do the same thing—because of what they fear
will or won't happen—upsetting the equilibrium, forcing prices to move in
one direction. If you haven't yet learned to identify these conditions, you
naturally won't perceive them when they exist because there has to be an
energy loop between the inner and outer environments for perception to
occur.
I am sure everyone has had the experience of reading unfamiliar material
a second, third, or fourth time and perceiving something new with each
subsequent reading. What is happening here? With each reading you are
building a mental framework that enables you to recognize what was
available but unperceivable to you when it was read previously. That is, all
the new insight that you garner with each reading was available from the
book the moment you picked it up the first time. However, you weren't able
to perceive what it had to offer in the way of insights or understandings until
you created an energy loop that enabled you to perceive it; otherwise, the words
get read but the insight goes by completely unnoticed even though you are
looking right at it.
In any given moment there is a vast difference between what each of us
perceives and what is actually available in the way of possible distinctions from
the environment's perspective. Take, for example, a salesperson who has learned
to recognize the exact, most appropriate moment to ask for the order and close a
sale. Or an auto mechanic who knows exactly what is wrong with a car by the
kind of sounds that it makes. To the inexperienced salesperson or auto
mechanic, these abilities will seem like magic because they will assume that they
are hearing or seeing the same things as their experienced counterparts.
However, that is not the case. They are not hearing or seeing the same
information even though they are in the same sales interview or listening to the
same car at the exact same moment. They are actually perceiving different
environmental information because of the differences in the structure of their
respective mental environments. The information that indicates the exact moment to ask for the order to close the sale is indistinguishable from everything
else to the inexperienced salesperson. The same is true for the inexperienced
auto mechanic. Consequently, neither one will perceive the existence of this
information until they learn to make the appropriate distinctions. If someone
wasn't there to teach them how to make these more refined distinctions that
indicate the most appropriate moment to ask, they may never know about the
existence of such information. By learning to make more distinctions, we
94

increase the depth of our level of understanding of the cause-and-effect
relationship between everything that exists.

How Our Perceptions Shape Our Experiences
We experience the environment through our senses. At the most fundamental
level the world gets transformed into electrical impulses of energy, energy that
carries information, as well as feelings and emotions ranging from extreme
happiness to rage, elation to despair, love to hate, and all the degrees of feelings
and emotions in between. Each first-time encounter with the environment
creates a memory, distinction, or association that didn't exist previously. A firsttime encounter is any experience that is completely unique, like learning the
meaning of a word that we have never heard before, and there is nothing in our
mental environment to relate it to. These new memories, distinctions, and
associations build into a mental framework that constitute what we have learned
about the nature of the outside environment.
Once we learn something, mental energy will then act as a force on our senses
to recognize in the environment what we have learned about it. So there is a twoway flow of energy; first, we learn something through some unique experience;
then, we perceive what we have learned in the environment. Fear is a perfect
example for illustrating this concept. We feel fear when we recognize in the
environment anything that we have learned can cause us pain. We will feel this
fear and consequently have a fearful experience because the negatively charged
energy in our memories, distinctions, and associations will act as a force on our
eyes, ears, nose, and sense of touch to recognize in the environment anything that
is similar to what we have already learned can cause pain.
So when we perceive something (recognizing what we have already learned) in
the environment, mental energy is acting as a force on our senses, instead of the
environment acting as a force on our senses. In other words, the conditions are
similar or identical to what we already know, and we can therefore attach some
meaning to the information. The environment isn't creating the meaning as in a
first-time encounter; the meaning is already inside of us, and in essence we
create the experience by the way in which we perceive it, through our memories,
distinctions, and associations.
This is why a group of people can all be in the same location, be exposed to
the same environmental information, and then afterward describe the event in a
different way. The event was different for each individual because everyone
experienced it differently. Their experience was a function of the structure of
their mental environment. Each individual will make different associations with
the same information and then experience the varying degrees of positive or
negative energy connected with those associations. Each individual will make
different distinctions with the same information, in effect placing a different
meaning on it. Each meaning will be composed of varying degrees of positive or
negative energy, thereby creating a different experience relative to everyone
else's. Each person will experience the amount of time the event took
95

differently, depending on whether they are perceiving the experience with
predominately positively charged energy (time speeds up) or negatively charged
energy (time slows down). Without taking all these mental variables into
consideration, it is little wonder why people get so frustrated with one another
when they can't agree on what happened. Everybody's version of what
happened was unique, because the way each of us experience the outside
environment is determined by how we perceive it, and how we perceive it is a
function of what is already inside of us unless we are in the process learning
something new.
The implications are that much of what we experience of the outside
environment is shaped from the inside, not from the outside as most people
would assume. In other words, our first-time experiences shape the meaning, as
well as determine the quality of energy connected with that meaning, and then
once the meaning exists inside of us, it shapes our experience of the outside by the
way we pick and choose information and how we feel about that information.
This is a very important concept, so I will give you another example to illustrate
how our perceptions shape the way we experience the environment. Let's say that
I am approaching a statue of a man. At first, I look at the statue face to face, and
I experience indifference; that is, what I am seeing does not evoke any particular
emotion. Then, I walk around the statue, and change my viewing angle until I
look at it in profile. As I look at the profile, the face reminds me of a someone
(an association) whom I like very much and whom I haven't seen for years. From
this new perspective the statue would take on a new meaning changing my
experience from emotionally neutral to some strong feelings of nostalgia as I
think about how much I miss this person.
The energy for how I experienced that statue and that particular moment in
the environment was inside of me before I even looked at it. The energy that
changed the feelings I was experiencing did not come from the statue or really
have anything to do with that statue. My unique mental structure caused me to
experience that statue the way in which I did. It took on a new meaning as I
changed my perspective because of the way the energy that was already inside of
me acted on my perception. If I hadn't had the positive experiences with the
person the statue reminded me of, then I would have continued to experience
indifference as I looked at it.

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
PERCEPTIONS AND EMOTIONS
The energy that determines how we feel (love/hate, happiness/ anger,
confidence/fear, etc.) in many circumstances and situations does not come
from the environment. These feelings and emotions are already part of us,
and we will automatically feel them when there is a matchup (perception)
between what is outside in the now moment with what is already inside of
us as a result of our past experiences. For example, imagine a father holding
his five-year-old son with one hand, screaming "you stupid idiot" while
96

spanking him with the other hand. And let's assume that this is the first
time the child has heard the words stupid or idiot. Now he may not know
what the words mean in an adult context, but he will most certainly connect
the words with pain he is feeling through both his body as well as his ears.
From that point forward these words will have a strong negative charge
attached to them in his mental environment. Now, when he encounters these
words in the environment again in some future moment he will be able to
recognize them because he has experienced these words—they exist as a
distinction in his mental environment. As a result of the way in which he
learned the meaning of these words, how will his perception of them affect
his experience of them? Whenever he hears the words "stupid" or "idiot" he
will feel the negatively charged energy connected to these words in his mental
environment and consequently experience the physical environment in a
painful way. Does the environment need to physically assault him, as in the
first experience, for him to feel this pain? No. All he has to do is hear the
words and he will experience pain. After his first encounter with these
words, the pain doesn't have to come directly from the environment because
it is already inside of him. Would it make any difference if from the
environment's perspective that the words were spoken with absolutely no
intent to cause him any pain or without any awareness that they could, in
fact, cause him to feel pain. Again, no. He would not be able to perceive
the intent of the environment as anything but wanting to cause him pain
because that is exactly what he experiences when he hears those words.
How could he know that other alternative meanings exist for these words or
that they can also be used within a context of good-natured fun? He
couldn't, because he has never experienced those words in any kind of fun
context, he hasn't learned to make that distinction yet. From the
perspective of his mental environment, there are no other alternative
possibilities for the meaning of these words. Furthermore, he may never
learn to make any alternative distinctions, because every time he hears the
words "stupid" or "idiot," he will perceive them in a painful way, thereby
creating an experience of pain, which will in turn reinforce the negative
energy already connected to the meaning for those words. From the first
experience forward into the future, he will be locked into only one version
of the way he can experience those words.
In any given moment, there are a whole range of experiences available
from the environment. What we experience as individuals will be a function
of what we perceive, unless we are in a learning mode. In other words,
what we are experiencing in any given moment is being shaped by what is
already inside of us (memories, distinctions, associations, and beliefs), and
what is already inside of us may not be remotely close to what the
environment is offering in the way of experience. When we are in a
learning mode we open ourselves up to learn new distinctions and
alternative meanings to expand what we know about the nature of the
environment.
97

Our experiences shape our meanings and then the meanings shape our
experiences of the future. Let me illustrate this concept for you. I was
watching a local television program in spring 1987 called "Gotcha
Chicago." It was about some local celebrities who played practical jokes on
other Chicago notables. In one segment of the program the TV station hired
a man to stand on the sidewalk along Michigan Avenue holding a sign that
read "FREE MONEY— TODAY ONLY." (For those of you who are not
familiar with Chicago, Michigan Avenue is home to many of the most
expensive and fashionable department stores and boutiques in the city.)
The man's pockets were stuffed with cash, and he had been instructed to
give money to anyone who asked for it. Considering that Michigan Avenue
is one of the busiest areas of the city, how many people do you think took
him up on his offer and asked for some money?
Out of all the people who walked by and read the sign, only one person
stopped and said, "Great! May I have a quarter to buy a bus transfer?"
Otherwise, no one would even go near him. Eventually he grew frustrated
and started crying out, "Do you want any money? Please take my money. I
can't give it away fast enough." Everybody just walked around him as
though he didn't exist. He approached one businessman asking, "Would
you like some money?" And the man responded, "Not today." The "plant"
said, "How many days does this happen?" as he tried to give him a handful
of cash, while continuing to say "Would you please take this?" The
businessman responded with a terse "no" and walked on.
Now here is a situation where the environment was expressing itself in
a way that only one person had the mental structure to perceive. For the
rest of the people, there was no meaning inside of them that they could
directly correlate with the actual environmental conditions. Other than
the one person who asked for a quarter, nobody looked at the sign and
said to themselves "Great! Somebody is giving away free money, I wonder
how much he will give me."
People's responses to the conditions shouldn't be too surprising because
we generally don't believe that money is ever free. And we can know what
people believed about the situation by just observing their behavior. If they
thought that it was possible to get free money, we can assume that they
would not have walked by, ignoring the opportunity to get some. So the
meaning they attached and what they experienced corresponded to their
belief that "free money" isn't possible or nobody gives away money on the
street—no strings attached. In fact, most people probably thought he was
crazy, which would explain why people went out of their way to walk
around him to avoid contact.
However, the environment was expressing itself in exactly the way in
which it was representing itself. The sign reading "free money" was the
truth, but the information "free money" did not connect with anything in
anyone's mental environment so that it could be perceived as the truth.
There was a direct one-to-one relationship between what any given
98

individual believed, what he perceived, and what he experienced Except for
one man, everyone else obviously did not believe in the possibility of free
money; they probably perceived a crazy man and thus had an erroneous
experience relative to the conditions. Now, the environment did not
choose the meaning any of these people placed on the information it was
offering. And if the environment did not choose, then each individual
created his own experience out of the situation that was presented to him.
There were a number of alternate experiences available and each alternate
experience would correspond to the type of belief someone would have
about the possibilities.
BELIEFS
Beliefs create definitions, make distinctions, and shape our perception of
environmental information by programming our senses to hear, see, and
select information that corresponds with what we believe. Our experience
of the environment will correspond to the choices we make, and these
choices will correspond to the information that is perceivable. What is
perceivable to each individual, however, may not have much of a
relationship to what is available or possible from the environment's
perspective. Each person in the illustration of free money would claim that
what he experienced was, in fact, the true reality of the situation. What
would cause them to believe anything different? People think of their beliefs
and subsequent experiences as a fact of reality instead of a belief about
reality. This is natural because beliefs create a relationship with the environment that is best described as circular or a closed loop.
What I mean by a closed loop is that every component part in the process
of how we experience the environment supports every other component,
making everything seem self-evident or beyond question. These closedloop systems that beliefs create are extremely difficult to open up. The
belief controls the information coming into the mental system, the
information that is actually perceived will be consistent with the belief, the
course of action taken will be consistent with the information perceived,
and the subsequent experience will support and reinforce the validity of the
belief. This is a closed system that will not allow for the possibility of other
alternatives because the experiences keep on reinforcing the beliefs,
making the beliefs seem increasingly more self-evident and beyond
question. Unless we are open or even know how to be open to new
information that could lead to new experiences, we will experience the
closed-loop nature of our beliefs every moment, assuming the whole time
that what we experienced in each situation was the only possibility available.
The people who walked by the man giving away free money didn't know
they were completely oblivious to the possibility of the environment
expressing itself in such a manner, even though the sign said "Free
Money." And if confronted with the same set of environmental conditions
99

again, they would behave the same way as the first time, not knowing that
other distinctions are possible, even if they are remote. The perception and
the experience have to match up because we can't experience something
that we don't know about yet, unless we are open to the possibility that what
we believe might be very limiting in relationship to what the environment is
offering. Remember the man who refused to take the money even when it
was being handed to him? He was being offered an experience that would
have increased the number of distinctions he could make about the nature
of the environment (free money does exist), and he would have grown
mentally as a result. Being given free money was obviously a distinction he
didn't know about yet. And even though it would seem that free money
would be a powerful incentive to question one's belief that it doesn't exist,
it wasn't enough for this man. His beliefs obviously did not allow him to
even remotely consider the possibility, again creating this closed loop,
leading him to believe that what he ended up with or experienced out of
this situation was the true nature of his existence, when all it really was was
a reflection of the true nature of his beliefs and how they manage
environmental information.
Beliefs define the parameters in which we perceive environmental
information. All definitions by definition create boundaries. Beliefs will
manage information in various ways to maintain a balance between the
inner and outer environment. Any perceived imbalance will result in some
degree of either stress or illusion. In maintaining a balance, many of our
responses to environmental conditions are automatic because our beliefs
make the response seem self-evident, when, in fact, under any given set of
environmental conditions alternate experiences exist along side of the
experiences our beliefs locked us into.
By inhibiting the flow of information into the mental system, beliefs do
exactly what they are supposed to do. They limit our awareness of data so
that we can learn in stages. If we believe that things exist in only one
particular way, then our beliefs will act as a natural mechanism to block the
acceptance of any conflicting information.
Considering or accepting any new or conflicting information would open up
choices that we ordinarily would not have to consider. Too many choices too soon
can cause confusion and mental overload. If it were not for the limiting nature of
beliefs, what would happen to our minds would probably be similar to what it
would be like if a television set picked up all the information being broadcast
from all the TV stations and projected that information on to the screen simultaneously on the same channel. Beliefs allow us to tune into one channel of
environmental information at a time so that we can learn about the nature of the
environment through that one channel. Then we can expand our awareness to
pick up another channel as we learn how to deal with the additional choices we
are confronted with as we become aware of the additional possibilities.

100

HOW OUR FEARS FUNCTION TO
CREATE THE EXPERIENCE
WE ARE TRYING TO AVOID
What we perceive is a function of the distinctions that we have learned to
make. What we focus our attention on—out of all the distinctions we have
learned to perceive—is a function of the intensity of the energy in the perception
loop. We only have so much of our conscious attention to give to whatever
information happens to be available in any given moment. Fear (high degree of
negatively charged energy) has a profoundly limiting effect on the range of
information that we can pay attention to. It causes us to narrow our range of
perception to focus our attention on to the object of our fears. How else could
we avoid what we perceive as threatening?
Learning to drive is an excellent example that illustrates how fear narrows our
focus of attention. The dangers of driving are obvious even to someone who has
never driven before. It isn't too difficult to imagine the harmful effects of a headon collision. Without having developed the necessary skills to control the car, the
new driver would lack the confidence to know that he can respond appropriately
to any given situation. That is, he doesn't trust himself. As a result, he will feel
some degree of uncomfortableness or fear when he drives. The fear will, in turn,
cause him to focus his attention on the oncoming traffic or concentrate on the
eye/hand coordination necessary to keep the car in the appropriate lane.
Because he is so focused on what he can't do and what may happen as a
result, he has little if any of his attention available to do anything else, like
carry on a conversation with a passenger, notice the scenery in his peripheral
vision, or even read road signs. All this other environmental information is
available and perceivable, but in his case it is either blocked or unnoticed
because he has to devote so much of his attention to the object of his fear
(the lack of control he has over the car). At the point where he becomes
comfortable with his ability to drive safely, his field of awareness will open
up allowing him to perceive all this other information.
The purpose of fear is to help us avoid those things in the environment
we have learned to perceive as threatening. However, when we couple our
painful memories with our natural propensity to associate and group
environmental components together— instead of avoiding the object of
our fears—we will actually create the very experiences we are trying to
avoid. For example, a child severely bitten by a dog will quite naturally
associate all dogs with the threat of pain and consequently generate an
intense fear or even terror whenever he encounters any dog in the future.
The child's fear of all other dogs other than the one that bit him is real. He
has no way of making a distinction between a friendly and a dangerous dog
because his personal experience has taught him that all dogs are dangerous.
Because of this natural propensity to associate, all we need is one first-time
experience to believe that all dogs are dangerous. That is his truth about the
nature of the environment. However, his truth is not all the environment
101
