serving you a banana daiquiri. You know that the two states are
mutually exclusive (you can only be in one place at one time), but
exhaustive (there is a 100% probability that you will -be in one of
them). They are equiprobable, with, in your opinion, 50% probability
assigned to each.
You derive great pleasure thinking about your vacation; it motivates
you and makes your daily commute more bearable. But the adequate
way to visualize yourself, according to rational behavior under
uncertainty, is 50% in one of the vacation spots and 50% in the other
- what is mathematically called a linear combination of the two states.
Can your brain handle that? How desirable would it be to have your
feet in the Caribbean waters and your head exposed to the Parisian rain?
Our brain can properly handle one and only one state at once - unless
you have personality troubles of a deeply pathological nature. Now try
to imagine an 85%/15% combination. Any luck?
Consider a bet you make with a colleague for the amount of $1,000,
which, in your opinion, is exactly fair. Tomorrow night you will have
zero or $2,000 in your pocket, each with a 50% probability. In purely
mathematical terms, the fair value of a bet is the linear combination of
the states, here called the mathematical
expectation,
i.e., the
probabilities of each payoff multiplied by the dollar values at stake
(50% multiplied by 0 and 50% multiplied by $2,000 = $1,000). Can
you imagine (that is visualize, not compute mathematically) the value
being $1,000? We can conjure up one and only one state at a given time.
Left to our own devices, we are likely to bet in an irrational way, as one
of the states would dominate the picture.

Some Architectural

Considerations

Time to reveal Nero's secret. It was a black swan. He was then 35.
Although pre-war buildings in New York can have a pleasant front,
their architecture seen from the back offers a stark contrast by being
completely bland. The doctor's examination room had a window
overlooking the backyard of one such Upper East side street, and Nero

RANDOMNESS

AND OUR BRAIN: W E ARE P R O B A B I L I T Y BLIND

151

will always remember how bland that backyard was in comparison with
the front, even if he were to live another half century. He will always
remember the view of the ugly pink backyard from the leaden window
panes, and the medical diploma on the wall that he read a dozen times
as he was waiting for the doctor to come into the room (half an eternity,
for Nero suspected that something was wrong). The news was then
delivered (grave voice), "I have some . . . I got the pathology report . . .
It's . . . It is not as bad as it sounds . . . It's . . . It's cancer". The
declaration caused his body to be hit by an electric discharge, running
through his back down to his knees. Nero tried to yell "what?" but no
sound came out of his mouth. What scared him was not so much the
news as the sight of the doctor. Somehow the news reached his body
before his mind. There was too much fear in the doctor's eyes and Nero
immediately suspected that the news was even worse than what he was
being told (it was).
The night of the diagnosis, at the medical library where he sat,
drenched wet from walking for hours in the rain without noticing it and
making a puddle of water around him (he was yelled at by an attendant
but could not concentrate on what she was saying so she shrugged her
shoulders and walked away); later he read the sentence "72% 5-year
actuarially adjusted survival rate". It meant that 72 people out of a
hundred make it. It takes between three and five years for the body
without clinical manifestations of the disease for the patient to be
pronounced cured (closer to three at his age). He then felt in his guts
quite certain that he was going to make it.
Now the reader might wonder about the mathematical difference
between a 28% chance of death and a 72% chance of survival over the
next five years. Clearly, there is none, but we are not made for
mathematics. In Nero' mind a 28% chance of death meant the image of
himself dead, and thoughts of the cumbersome details of his funeral. A
72% chance of survival put him in a cheerful mood; his mind was
planning the result of a cured Nero skiing in the Alps. At no point
during his ordeal did Nero think of himself as 72% alive and 28%
dead.

152

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

From Psychology to Neurobiology
For reasons we just saw, the laws of probability are said to be
counterintuitive by the researchers in the cognitive and behavioral
sciences. We are probability blind, these scientists say. This chapter will
rapidly illustrate some manifestations of such blindness, with a cursory
exposition of the research in that area.
The idea of probability blindness gave rise to an entire discipline
dedicated to the study of the effect these biases carry on our behavior. It
is filling out library shelves and causing the creation of numerous
investment funds dedicated to the sister idea that people do not behave
in a rational way in the markets. Some funds have been built around the
idea that people overreact to news, while others have been devoted to
the notion that, to the contrary, people underreact (I was told early in
my career that the more diversity the better for the market). These
beliefs give rise to two categories of trading strategies. On one side we
find the contrarians who subscribe to the following rationale: Hey, since
people systematically overreact, let us take the other side, sell the
winners and buy the losers. On the other side stand the momentum
players who do the exact opposite: Since markets do not adjust fast
enough, let us buy the winners and sell the losers. Because of
randomness, both categories will show periodic victories, which cannot
prove directly that either theory is right or wrong.
Even psychiatrists and clinical psychologists are joining the fray by
becoming "experts" - after all they know more about the human mind
that those financial economists with their unrealistic, unscientific
equations, and it is, after all, human behavior that ultimately influences
the markets. A yearly conference in Boston gathers medical doctors and
psychology researchers musing over market strategies. The idea may
seem simple, perhaps even boring until we encounter professionals,
whom we expect would deal with the matter with maximal expertise,
falling right into the trap like the man on the street.

RANDOMNESS

AND OUR BRAIN: W E ARE P R O B A B I L I T Y B L I N D

our natural

153

habitat

I will not delve too deeply into amateur evolutionary theory to probe at
the reasons (besides, in spite of having spent some time in libraries I feel
that I am truly an amateur in the subject matter). Clearly, the
environment for which we have built our genetic endowment is not the
one that prevails today. I have not told too many of my colleagues that
their decision-making contains some lingering habits of cavemen - but
when markets experience an abrupt move, I experience the same rush of
adrenaline as if a leopard was seen prowling near my trading desk. Some
of my colleagues who break telephone handles upon losing money might
be even closer in their psychological makeup to our common origin.
This might be a platitude to those who frequent the Greek and Latin
classics, but we never fail to be surprised when noticing that people a
couple of dozen centuries removed from us can exhibit similar
sensibility and feelings. What used to strike me as a child upon visiting
museums is that ancient Greek statues exhibit men with traits
indistinguishable from ours (only more harmonious and aristocratic). I
was so wrong to believe that 2,200 years was a long time. Proust wrote
frequently about the surprise people have while coming across emotions
in Homeric heroes that are similar to those we experience today. By
genetic standards, these Homeric heroes of 30 centuries ago in all
likelihood have the exact identical genetic makeup as the pudgy middleaged man you see schlepping groceries in the parking lot. More than
that. In fact we are truly identical to the man who perhaps 80 centuries
ago started being called "civilized", in that strip of land stretching from
Southeastern Syria to Southwestern Mesopotamia.
What is our natural habitat? By natural habitat, I mean the
environment in which we reproduced the most, the one in which we
spent the highest number of generations. The consensus among
anthropologists is that we have been around as a separate species for
130,000 years, most of which were spent in the African savannah. But we
do not have to go back that far in history to get the point. Imagine life in
an early urban settlement, in Middle-Town, Fertile Crescent, only about
3,000 years ago - surely modern times from a genetic standpoint.
Information is limited by the physical means of its transmission; one
cannot travel fast, hence information will come from faraway places in

154

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

concise batches. Traveling is a nuisance fraught with all manner of
physical danger; you will settle within a narrow radius of where you were
born unless famine or some invading uncivilized tribe dislodges you and
your relatives from your happy settlement. The number of people you
would get to know in a lifetime will be small. Should a crime be
committed, it will be easy to gauge the evidence of guilt within the small
number of possible suspects. If you are unjustly convicted of a crime, you
will argue in simple terms, propounding simple evidence like "I was not
there as I was praying in the temple of Baal and was seen at dusk by the
high priest" and add that Obedshemesh son of Sahar was more likely to
be guilty because he had more to gain from the crime. Your life would be
simple, hence your space of probabilities would be narrow.
The real problem is, as I have mentioned, that such a natural habitat
does not include much information. An efficient computation of the
odds was never necessary until very recently. This explains why we had
to wait until the emergence of the gambling literature to see the growth
of the mathematics of probability. Popular belief holds that the religious
backdrop of the first and second millennium blocked the growth of tools
that hint at absence of determinism, and caused the delays in probability
research. The idea is extremely dubious; we simply did not compute
probabilities because we did not dare to? Surely the reason is rather
because we did not need to. Much of our problem comes from the fact
that we have evolved out of such a habitat faster, much faster than our
genes. Even worse; our genes have not changed at all.

k a f k a in a

courtroom

The O.J. Simpson trial provides an example of how our modern society
is ruled by probability (because of the explosion in information), while
important decisions are made without the smallest regard for its basic
laws. We are capable of sending a spacecraft to Mars, but we are
incapable of having criminal trials managed by the basic laws of
probability - yet evidence is clearly a probabilistic notion. I remember
buying a book on probability at a Borders Books chain bookstore only a
short distance from the Los Angeles courthouse where the "trial of the
century" was taking place - another book that crystallized the highly

RANDOMNESS

AND OUR BRAIN: W E ARE P R O B A B I L I T Y BLIND

155

sophisticated quantitative knowledge in the field. How could such a leap
in knowledge elude lawyers and jurors only a few miles away?
People who are as close to being criminal as probability laws can
allow us to infer (that is with a confidence that exceeds the shadow of a
doubt) are walking free because of our misunderstanding of basic
concepts of the odds. You could be convicted for a crime you never
committed owing to a poor reading of probability - for we still cannot
have a court of law properly compute the joint probability of events (the
probability of two events taking place at the same time). I was in a
dealing room with a TV set turned on when I saw one of the lawyers
arguing that there were at least four people in Los Angeles capable of
carrying O.J. Simpson's DNA characteristics (thus ignoring the joint set
of events - we will see how in the next paragraph). I then switched off
the television set in disgust, causing an uproar among the traders. I was
under the impression until then that sophistry had been eliminated from
legal cases thanks to the high standards of republican Rome. Worse, one
Harvard lawyer used the specious argument that only 10% of men who
brutalize their wives go on to murder them, which is a probability
unconditional on the murder (whether the statement was made out of a
warped notion of advocacy, pure malice, or ignorance is immaterial).
Isn't the law devoted to the truth? The correct way to look at it is to
determine the percentage of murder cases where women were killed by
their husband and had previously been battered by him (that is, 50%) for we are dealing with what is called conditional probabilities; the
probability that O.J. killed his wife conditional on the information of
her having been killed, rather than the unconditional probability of O.J.
killing his wife. How can we expect the untrained person to understand
randomness when a Harvard professor who deals and teaches the
concept of probabilistic evidence can make such an incorrect statement?
More particularly, where jurors (and lawyers) tend to make mistakes,
along with the rest of us, is in the notion of joint probability. They do
not realize that evidence compounds. The probability of my being
diagnosed with respiratory tract cancer and being run over by a pink
Cadillac in the same year, assuming each one of them is 1/100,000,
becomes 1/10,000,000,000 - by multiplying the two (obviously
independent) events. Arguing that O.J. Simpson had 1/500,000 chance
of not being the killer from the blood standpoint (the lawyers used the

156

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

sophistry that there were four people with such blood types walking
around Los Angeles) and adding to it the fact that he was the husband of
the person and that there was additional evidence, then (owing to the
compounding effect) the odds against him rise to several trillion trillion.
"Sophisticated" people make worse mistakes. I can surprise people by
saying that the probability of the joint event is lower than either.
Behavioral economists submitted rational and educated people
(graduate students) to tests where they needed to produce the
probability of a young woman with a liberal arts education being a
bank teller or a feminist bank teller. They assigned on average a higher
probability to her being a feminist bank teller than to that of her being a
bank teller. I am glad to be a trader taking advantage of people's biases
but I am scared of living in such a society.

an absurd

w o r l d

Kafka's prophetic book, The Trial, about the plight of a man, Joseph K.,
who is arrested for a mysterious and unexplained reason hit a spot as it
was written before we heard of the methods of the "scientific" totalitarian
regimes. It projected a scary future of mankind wrapped in absurd selffeeding bureaucracies, with spontaneously emerging rules subjected to
the internal logic of the bureaucracy. It spawned an entire literature of the
absurd; the world may be too incongruous for us. I am terrified of certain
lawyers. After listening to statements during the O.J. trial (and their
effect) I was scared, truly scared of the possible outcome; my being
arrested for some reason that made no sense probabilistically, and having
to fight some glib lawyer in front of a randomness illiterate jury.
We said that mere judgment would probably suffice in a primitive
society. It is easy for a society to live without mathematics - or traders to
trade without quantitative methods - when the space of possible outcomes is one dimensional. One dimensional means that we are looking at
one sole variable, not a collection of separate events. The price of one
security is one dimensional, whereas the collection of the prices of several
securities is multidimensional and requires mathematical modeling - we
cannot easily see the collection of possible outcomes of the portfolio with
a naked eye, and cannot even represent it on a graph as our physical

RANDOMNESS AND OUR BRAIN: W E ARE P R O B A B I L I T Y B L I N D

157

world has been limited to visual representation in three dimensions only.
We will argue later why we run the risk of having bad models
(admittedly, we have) or making the error of condoning ignorance swinging between the Carybde of the lawyer who knows no math to the
Scylla of the mathematician who misuses his math because he does not
have the judgment to select the right model. In other words, we will have
to swing between the mistake of listening to the glib nonsense of a lawyer
who refuses science and that of applying the flawed theories of some
economist who takes his science too seriously. The beauty of science is
that it makes an allowance for both error types. Luckily, there is a middle
road - but sadly, it is rarely traveled.

kahneman and

tversky

Who are the most influential economists of the century, in terms of
journal references, their followings, and their influence over the
profession? No, it is not John Maynard Keynes, not Alfred Marshall,
not Paul Samuelson, and certainly not Milton Friedman. They are
Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, psychology researchers whose
specialty was to uncover areas where human beings are not endowed
with rational thinking and optimal economic behavior.
The pair taught us a lot about the way we perceive and handle
uncertainty. Their research, conducted on a population of students and
professors in the early 1970s, showed that we do not correctly
understand contingencies. Furthermore, they showed that in the rare
cases when we understand probability, we do not seem to consider it in
our behavior. Since the Kahneman and Tversky results, an entire
discipline called behavioral finance and economics has flourished. It is in
open contradiction with the orthodox so-called neoclassical
economics
taught in business schools under the normative names of efficient
markets, rational expectations, and other such concepts. It is worth
stopping, at this juncture, and discussing the distinction between
normative and positive sciences. A normative science (clearly a selfcontradictory concept) offers prescriptive teachings; it studies how
things should be. Some economists, for example, (those of the efficient
market religion) believe that humans are rational and act rationally

158

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

because it is the best thing for them to do (it is mathematically
"optimal"). The opposite is a positive science, which is based on how
people actually are observed to behave. In spite of econQmists' envy of
physicists, physics is an inherently positive science while economics,
particularly microeconomics and financial economics, is predominantly
a normative one.

neurobiology

The soft sciences of psychology and economics have cheated us on
occasions in the past. How? Economics has produced laughable ideas,
ideas that evaporate once one changes the assumptions a little bit. It
seems difficult to take sides with bickering economists trading oftenincomprehensible arguments (even to economists). Biology and
medicine, on the other hand, rank higher in scientific firmness; like
true sciences, they can explain things while at the same time being
subjected to falsification. They are both positive and their theories are
better theories, that is, more easily testable. The good news is that
neurologists are starting to confirm these results, with what is called
environment mapping in the brain, by taking a patient whose brain is
damaged in one single spot (say, by a tumor or an injury deemed to be
local) and deducing by elimination the function performed by such part
of the aniatomy. This isolates the parts of the brain that perform the
various functions. The Kahneman and Tversky results thus found a terra
firma with the leaps in our knowledge obtained through behavioral
genetics and, farther, plain medicine. Some of the physiology of our
brain makes us perceive things and behave in a given manner. We are,
whether we like it or not, prisoners of our biology.
Researchers in evolutionary psychology provide convincing reasons
for these biases. We have not had the incentive to develop an ability to
understand probability because we did not have to do so - but the more
profound reason is that we are not designed to understand things. We
are built only to survive and procreate. To survive, we need to overstate
some probabilities, such as those that can affect our survival. For
instance, those whose brain imparted higher odds to dangers of death, in
other words the paranoid, survived and gave us their genes (provided

RANDOMNESS

AND OUR BRAIN: W E A R E P R O B A B I L I T Y B L I N D

159

such paranoia did not come at too high a cost, otherwise it would have
been a drawback). Our brain has been wired with biases that may
hamper us in a more complex environment, one that requires a more
accurate assessment of probabilities.
The story of these biases is thus being corroborated by the various
disciplines; the magnitude of the perceptional distortions makes us less
than rational, in the sense of both having coherent beliefs (i.e. free of
logical contradictions) and acting in a manner compatible with these
beliefs.

e x a m p l e s o f biases in u n d e r s t a n d i n g

probability

I found in the behavioral literature at least 40 damning examples of such
acute biases. Below is the account of a well-known test, and an embarrassing one for the medical profession. The following quiz was given to
medical doctors (which I borrowed from the excellent Deborah
Bennett's Randomness).
A test of a disease presents a rate of 5% false positives. The disease
strikes 1/1,000 of the population. People are tested at random,
regardless of whether they are suspected of having the disease. A
patient's test is positive. What is the probability of the patient being
stricken with the diseasef"10
Most doctors answered 95%, simply taking into account the fact that
the test has a 95% accuracy rate. The answer is the conditional
probability that the patient is sick and the test shows it - close to 2%.
Less than one in five professionals got it right.
I will simplify the answer. Assume no false negatives. Consider that
out of 1,000 patients who are administered the test, one will be expected
to be afflicted with the disease. Out of a population of the remaining
999 healthy patients, the test will identify about 50 with the disease (it is
