
210/396

Lenihan has called a private meeting with
the opposition so that its leaders will be the
first to hear of the draconian new Irish
budget. This meeting is held not inside the
Parliament, where the media can be kept at
arm’s length, but in a nearby building where
the media are allowed to congregate. “We
tried to have it in here but he moved it outside,” says Burton. “He’s taken to bringing us
in to tell us the bad news first, so that when
we walk out we’re the ones announcing it to
the media.” She smiles. “He’s tricky that
way.”
the last remaining Irish
politician anywhere near power whose mere
appearance does not cause people on the
streets of Dublin to explode with either scorn
or laughter. He came to the job just weeks
before the crisis, and so escapes blame for its
origins. He’s a barrister, not a financial or
real estate person, with a proven ability to
earn a good living without being bribed by
BRIAN LENIHAN IS

211/396

property developers. He comes from a family
of political people who are thought to have
served honorably, or at any rate not used
politics to enrich themselves. And, in December 2009, he was diagnosed with pancreatic
cancer. Anyone who has been anywhere near
an Irish Catholic family knows that the
member who has had the most recent run of
bad luck enjoys exalted status—the right to
do pretty much whatever he wants to do
while everyone else squirms in silence. Since
news of Lenihan’s illness broke—just days
after he’d learned of it himself, apparently,
and before he’d told his children—he’s minimized his suffering. Running under the public opinion polls that show the Irish feel a lot
better about the minister of finance than
they do about other politicians in his party is
a common, unspoken understanding of his
bravery.†
Brian Lenihan is also, as Joan Burton pointed out, tricky. It’s racing up on eight in the

212/396

evening when I meet him in a Department of
Finance conference room. He’s spent most of
his day defending the harshest spending cuts
and tax hikes in Irish history to Irish politicians, without offering any details about
who, exactly, will pay for the bank’s losses.
(He’s waiting until after the single by-election that the Dáil authorized is held.) He
smiles. “Why is everyone so interested in Ireland?” he asks, almost innocently. “There’s
really far too much interest in us right now.”
“Because you’re interesting?” I say.
“Oh no,” he’s says, seriously. “We’re not,
really.”
He proceeds to make the collapse of the
Irish economy as uninteresting as possible.
This awkward social responsibility—normalizing a freak show—is now a meaningful part
of the job of being Ireland’s finance minister.
At just the moment the crazy uncle leapt
from the cellar, the drunken aunt lurched
through the front door—and, in front of the

213/396

entire family and many important guests,
they carved each other to bits with hunting
knives. Daddy must now reassure eyewitnesses that they didn’t see what they think
they saw.
But the evidence that something deeply
weird just happened in Ireland is still too
conspicuous. A mile from the conference
table where we take our seats you can still
find a moonscape of vast two-year-old
craters from which office parks were once
meant to rise. Fully finished skyscrapers sit
empty, water pooling on their lobby floors.
There’s a skeleton of a tower, cranes at rest
on either side, like parentheses. It was meant
to house Anglo Irish Bank. There’s an empty
new conference center that cost 75 million
euros to build that has never been hooked up
to the Dublin sewer and water systems.
There’s a city dump for which a developer
paid 412 million euros in 2006—and which is
now, when you include the cleanup costs,

214/396

valued at negative 30 million euros. “Ireland
is very unusual,” says William Newsom, who
has forty years of experience valuing commercial real estate for Savills in London.
“There are whole swaths of either undeveloped land with planning permission or
even partially developed sites which for practical purposes have zero value.” The peak of
the Irish madness is frozen in time for all to
see. There’s even an empty Starbucks, in the
heart of what was meant to be a global financial center to rival London, where a carton of
low-fat milk curdles beside a silver barista
pitcher. The finance minister might as well
be standing in front of Pompeii and saying
that the volcano wasn’t really worth mentioning. Just a little lava!
“THIS ISN’T ICELAND,” is what he actually says.

“We’re not a hedge fund that’s populated by
300,000 farmers and fishermen. Ireland is
not going back to the eighties or the nineties.
This is all in a much narrower band.” And

215/396

then he goes off on a soliloquy, the main
point of which is: Ireland’s problems are
solvable and I am in control of the situation.
Back in September 2008, however, there
was evidence that he wasn’t. On September
17 the financial markets were in turmoil.
Lehman Brothers had failed two days earlier,
and the shares of Irish banks were plummeting and big corporations were withdrawing
their deposits from them. Late that night
Lenihan phoned David McWilliams, a
former research analyst with UBS in Zurich
and London, who had moved back home to
Dublin and turned himself into a writer and
media personality. McWilliams had been
loudly skeptical about the Irish real estate
boom. Two weeks earlier he’d appeared on a
television show with Lenihan: Lenihan had
seemed to him entirely untroubled by the
turmoil in the financial markets. Now he
wanted to drive out and ask McWilliams’s
advice on what to do about the Irish banks.

216/396

The peculiar scene appears in McWilliams’s charmingly indiscreet book Follow the
Money. Lenihan arrives at the McWilliams
residence, a forty-five minute drive outside
of Dublin, marches through to the family kitchen, and pulls a hunk of raw garlic out of
his jacket pocket. “He kicked off by saying if
his officials knew he was here in my house,
there’d be war,” writes McWilliams. The finance minister stayed until two in the morning, peeling cloves of raw garlic and eating
them, and anxiously picking McWilliams’s
brain. McWilliams came away with the feeling that the minister didn’t entirely trust the
advice he was getting from the people
around him—and that he was not merely
worried but confused. McWilliams told me
that he sensed the mental state of the Finance Ministry was “complete chaos.”
A week later the Irish Finance Ministry
hired investment bankers from Merrill
Lynch to advise them. Some might say that if

217/396

you were asking Merrill Lynch for financial
advice in 2008 you were already in trouble,
but that is not entirely fair. The bank analyst
who had been most prescient and interesting
about the Irish banks worked for Merrill
Lynch. His name was Philip Ingram. In his
late twenties, and a bit quirky—at Cambridge
University he’d prepared for a career in zoology—Ingram had done something original
and useful. He’d shined a new light on the
way Irish banks lent against commercial real
estate.
The commercial real estate loan market is
generally less transparent than the market
for home loans. The deals between bankers
and property developers are one-off, on
terms unknown to all but a few insiders. The
parties to any loan always claim it is
prudent: a bank analyst has little choice but
to take them at their word. But Ingram was
skeptical of the Irish banks. He had read
Morgan Kelly’s newspaper articles and even

218/396

paid Kelly a visit in his University College office. To Ingram’s eyes there appeared to be a
vast difference between what the Irish banks
were saying and what they were doing. To
get at it he ignored what they were saying
and went looking for knowledgeable insiders
in the commercial property market. He interviewed them, as a journalist might. On
March 13, 2008, six months before the Irish
real estate Ponzi scheme collapsed, Ingram
published a report in which he simply quoted
verbatim what market insiders had told him
about various banks’ lending to commercial
real estate developers. The Irish banks were
making far riskier loans in Ireland than they
were in Britain, but even in Britain, the report revealed, they were the nuttiest lenders
around: in that category, Anglo Irish, Bank
of Ireland, and AIB came, in that order, first,
second, and third.
FOR A FEW hours the Merrill Lynch report was

the hottest read in the London financial

219/396

markets, until Merrill Lynch retracted it.
Merrill was the lead underwriter of Anglo
Irish’s bonds and the corporate broker to
AIB: they’d earned huge sums of money off
the growth of Irish banking. Moments after
Phil Ingram hit the Send button on his report, the banks called their Merrill Lynch
bankers and threatened to take their business elsewhere. The same executive from Anglo Irish Bank who had called to scream at
Morgan Kelly called a Merrill research analyst to scream some more. (“I thought your
work was fucking shit!”) Ingram’s superiors
at Merrill Lynch hauled him into meetings
with in-house lawyers who rewrote his report, purging it of its pointed language and
its damning quotes from market insiders, including their many references to Irish banks.
Ingram’s immediate boss in the research department, a fellow named Ed Allchin, was
made to apologize to Merrill’s investment
bankers individually for the trouble he’d

220/396

caused them. And from that moment
everything Ingram wrote about Irish banks
was rewritten and bowdlerized by Merrill
Lynch’s lawyers. At the end of 2008 Merrill
fired him.
It would have been difficult for Merrill
Lynch’s investment bankers not to know, on
some level, that, in a reckless market, the
Irish banks acted with a recklessness all their
own. But in the six-page memo to Brian
Lenihan—for which the Irish taxpayer forked
over to Merrill Lynch 7 million euros—they
kept whatever reservations they might have
had to themselves. “All of the Irish banks are
profitable and well-capitalized,” wrote the
Merrill Lynch advisers, and then went on to
suggest that their problem wasn’t at all the
bad loans they had made but the panic in the
market. The Merrill Lynch memo listed a
number of possible responses the Irish government might have to any run on Irish
banks.
It
refrained
from
explicitly

221/396

recommending one course of action over another, but its analysis of the problem implied
that the most sensible thing to do was to
guarantee the banks. After all, the banks
were “fundamentally sound.” Promise to eat
all losses, and markets would quickly settle
down—and the Irish banks would go back to
being in perfectly good shape. As there
would be no losses, the promise would be
free.
What exactly was said in the meeting on
the night of September 29, 2008, remains,
amazingly, something of a secret. The government has refused Freedom of Information Act requests for the notes taken by participants. Apart from the prime minister and
the bank regulators, the only people at the
conference table inside the Ministry of Finance were the heads of the two yet-to-be disgraced big Irish banks: AIB and Bank of Ireland. Evidently they either lied to Brian Lenihan about the extent of their losses or didn’t

222/396

know themselves what those were. Or both.
“At the time they were all saying the same
thing,” an Irish bank analyst tells me. “‘We
don’t have any subprime.’” What they meant
was that they had avoided lending to American subprime borrowers; what they neglected
to mention was that, in the general frenzy, all
of Ireland had become subprime. Otherwise
sound Irish borrowers had been rendered
unsound by the size of the loans they had
taken out to buy inflated Irish property. That
had been the strangest consequence of the
Irish bubble: to throw a nation that had finally clawed its way of out centuries of indentured servitude back into indentured
servitude.
The report from Merrill Lynch asserting
that the banks were “fundamentally sound”
buttressed whatever story the banks told the
finance minister. The Irish government’s
bank regulator, Patrick Neary, had echoed
Merrill’s judgment. Morgan Kelly was still a

223/396

zany egghead; at any rate, no one who took
him seriously was present in the room. Anglo
Irish’s stock had fallen 46 percent that day;
AIB’s had fallen 15 percent; there was a fair
chance that when the stock exchange reopened one or both of them would go out of
business. In the general panic, absent government intervention, the other banks would
have gone down with Anglo Irish. Lenihan
faced a choice: Should he believe the people
immediately around him or the financial
markets? Should he trust the family or the
experts? He stuck with the family. Ireland
gave its promise. And the promise sank
Ireland.
EVEN AT THE time, the decision seemed a bit

odd. The Irish banks, like the big American
banks, managed to persuade a lot of people
that they were so intertwined with their economy that their failure would bring down a
lot of other things, too. But they weren’t, at
least not all of them. Anglo Irish Bank had

224/396

only six branches, no ATMs, and no organic
relationship with Irish business except the
property developers. It lent money to people
to buy land and build: that’s all it did. It did
this with money it had borrowed from foreigners. It was not, by nature, systemic. It
became so only when its losses were made
everyone’s.
In any case, if the Irish wanted to save their
banks, why not guarantee just the deposits?
There’s a big difference between depositors
and bondholders: depositors can flee. The
immediate danger to the banks was that
savers who had put money into them would
take their money out, and the banks would
be without funds. The investors who owned
the roughly 80 billion euros’ worth of Irish
bank bonds, on the other hand, were stuck.
They couldn’t take their money out of the
bank. And their 80 billion euros very nearly
exactly covered the eventual losses inside the
Irish banks. These private bondholders

225/396

didn’t have any right to be made whole by
the Irish government. The bondholders
didn’t even expect to be made whole by the
Irish government. Not long ago I spoke with
a former senior Merrill Lynch bond trader
who, on September 29, 2008, owned a pile of
bonds in one of the Irish banks. He’d already
tried to sell them back to the bank for 50
cents on the dollar—that is, he’d offered to
take a huge loss, just to get out of them. On
the morning of September 30 he awakened
to find his bonds worth 100 cents on the dollar. The Irish government had guaranteed
them! He couldn’t believe his luck.
Across the financial markets this episode
repeated itself. People who had made a
private bet that had gone wrong and didn’t
expect to be repaid in full were handed their
money back—from the Irish taxpayer.
In retrospect, now that the Irish bank
losses are known to be world historically
huge, the decision to cover them appears not

226/396

merely odd but suicidal. A handful of Irish
bankers incurred debts they could never repay, of something like 100 billion euros.
They may have had no idea what they were
doing, but they did it all the same. Their
debts were private—owed by them to investors around the world—and still the Irish
people have undertaken to repay them as if
they were obligations of the state. For two
years they have labored under this impossible burden with scarcely a peep of
protest. What’s more, all of the policy decisions since September 29, 2008, have set
the hook more firmly inside the mouths of
the Irish public. In January 2009 the Irish
government nationalized Anglo Irish and its
losses of 34 billion euros (and mounting). In
late 2009 they created the National Asset
Management Agency, the Irish version of the
Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), but,
unlike the U.S. government, actually

227/396

followed through, and bought 80 billion
euros’ worth of crappy assets from the Irish
banks.
A SINGLE DECISION sank Ireland, but when I

ask Lenihan about it he becomes impatient,
as if it isn’t a fit topic for conversation. It
wasn’t much of a decision, he says, as he had
no choice. Irish financial market rules are
patterned on English law, and under English
law the bondholders enjoy the same status as
the ordinary depositors. That is, it was
against the law to protect the little people
with deposits in the bank without also saving
the big investors who owned Irish bank
bonds.
This rings a bell. When U.S. Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson realized that allowing
Lehman Brothers to fail was viewed not as
brave and principled but catastrophic, he,
too, claimed he’d done what he’d done because the law gave him no other option. In
the heat of the crisis, Paulson neglected to

228/396

mention the law, just as Lenihan didn’t bring
up the law requiring him to pay off the
banks’ private lenders until long after he’d
done it. In both cases the explanation was
legalistic: narrowly true, but generally false.
The Irish government always had the power
to impose losses on even the senior bondholders, if it wanted to. “Senior people have
forgotten that the government has certain
powers,” as Morgan Kelly puts it. “You can
conscript people. You can send them off to
certain death. You can change the law.”
On September 30, 2008, in the heat of the
moment, Lenihan gave the same argument
for guaranteeing the bank’s debts as Merrill
Lynch: to prevent “contagion.” Tell financial
markets that a loan to an Irish bank was a
loan to the Irish government and investors
would calm down. For who would doubt the
credit of the Irish government? A few
months later, when suspicions arose that the
bank losses were so vast that they might

229/396

bankrupt the Irish government, Lenihan
offered a new reason for the government’s
gift to private investors: the bonds were
owned by Irish savings banks. Up until then
the government’s line had been that they did
not have any idea who owned the bank’s
bonds. Now they said that if the Irish government didn’t eat the losses, Irish savers
would pay the price. The Irish, in other
words, were simply saving the Irish. This
wasn’t true: it provoked a cry of outrage from
the Irish savings banks, who said they didn’t
own the bonds, and that they disapproved of
the government’s bestowing a huge gift on
those who did. A political investigative blog
called Guido Fawkes somehow obtained a
list of the foreign bondholders: German
banks, French banks, German investment
funds, Goldman Sachs. (Yes: even the Irish
did their bit for Goldman.)
ACROSS EUROPE JUST now men who thought

their title was “minister of finance” have

230/396

woken up to the idea that their job is actually
government bond salesman. The Irish bank
losses have obviously bankrupted Ireland,
but the Irish finance minister does not want
to talk about that. Instead he mentions to
me, several times, that Ireland is “fully funded” until next summer. That is, the Irish
government has enough cash in the bank to
pay its bills until next July.
It isn’t until I’m on my way out the door
that I realize how trivial this point is. The
blunt truth is that since September 2008 Ireland has been every day more at the mercy of
her creditors. To remain afloat, Ireland’s
banks, which are now owned by the Irish
government, have taken short-term loans
from the European Central Bank of 85 billion euros. Inside of a week Lenihan will be
compelled by the European Union to invite
the IMF into Ireland, relinquish control of
Irish finances, and accept a bailout package.
The Irish public doesn’t yet know it, but,

231/396

even as the minister of finance and I sit together at his conference table, the European
Central Bank has lost interest in lending to
Irish banks. And soon Brian Lenihan will
stand up in the Irish parliament and offer a
fourth explanation for why private investors
in Ireland’s banks cannot be allowed to take
losses. “There is simply no way that this
country, whose banks are so dependent on
international investors, can unilaterally
renege on senior bondholders against the
wishes of the ECB,” he will say.
But there was once a time when the wishes
of the ECB didn’t matter so much to Ireland.
That time was before the Irish government
used ECB money to pay off the foreign bondholders in Irish banks.
ONCE A DECADE I experiment with driving on

the wrong side of the road, and wind up destroying dozens of side-view mirrors on cars
parked on the left. When I went looking for
some Irish person to drive me around, the

232/396

result was a fellow I will call Ian McRory,
who is Irish, and a driver, but pretty clearly a
lot of other things, too. He has what appears
to be a military-grade navigational system,
for instance, and surprising knowledge about
abstruse and secretive matters. “I do some
personal security, and things of that nature,”
he says, when I ask him what else he does
other than drive financial-disaster tourists
back and forth across Ireland, and leaves it
at that. Later, when I mention the name of a
formerly rich Irish property developer, he
says, casually, as if it were all in a day’s work,
that he had “let himself into” the fellow’s vacation house and snapped photographs of
the interior “for a man I know who is thinking of buying it.”
Ian turns out to have a good feel for what
little I, or anyone else, might find interesting
in rural Ireland. He will say, for example,
“Over there, that’s a pretty typical fairy ring,”
and then explain, interestingly, that these

233/396

circles of stones or mushrooms that occur
seemingly naturally in Irish fields are believed by local farmers to house mythical
creatures. “Irish people actually believe in
fairies?” I will ask, straining but failing to
catch a glimpse of the typical fairy ring to
which Ian has just pointed. “I mean if you
walked right up and asked him to his face,
‘Do you believe in fairies?’ most guys will
deny it,” he will reply. “But if you ask him to
dig out the fairy ring on his property, he
won’t do it. To my way of thinking that’s believing.” And it is. It’s a tactical belief, a belief that exists because the upside to disbelief
is too small, like the former Irish belief that
Irish land prices could rise forever.
The highway out of Dublin runs past abandoned building sites and neighborhoods
without people in them. “We can stop at
ghost estates on the way,” says Ian, as we
clear the suburbs of Dublin. “But if we stop
at every one of them, we’ll never get out of

234/396

here.” We pass wet green fields carved by
potato farmers into small plots and, every
now and then, a small village, but even the
inhabited places feel desolate. The Irish
countryside remains a place people flee.
Among its drawbacks, from the outsider’s
point of view, is the weather. “It’s always
either raining or about to rain,” says Ian. “I
drove a black guy from Africa around the
country once. It’s raining the whole time. He
says to me, ‘I don’t know why people live
here. It’s like living under an elephant.’”
The wet hedgerows cultivated along the
highway to hide the wet road from the wet
houses now hide the wet houses from the wet
road. PICTURE OF THE VILLAGE OF THE FUTURE,
reads a dripping billboard with a picture of a
village that will never be built. Randomly selecting a village that appears to be more or
less finished, we pull off the road. It’s an exurb, without a suburb. GLEANN RIADA, reads
the self-important sign in front. It’s a few
