
The curtain fell as early as nine o'clock, when there being loud calls for Mr. Kemble, he
stood forward. He announced that Madame Catalani, against whom so unjustifiable a
prejudice had been excited, had thrown up her engagement rather than stand in the way of
any accommodation of existing differences. This announcement was received with great
applause. Mr. Kemble then went on to vindicate himself and co-proprietors from the
charge of despising public opinion. No assertion, he assured them, could be more unjust.
They were sincerely anxious to bring these unhappy differences to a close, and he
thought he had acted in the most fair and reasonable manner in offering to submit the
accounts to an impartial committee, whose decision, and the grounds for it, should be
fully promulgated. This speech was received with cheering, but interrupted at the close
by some individuals, who objected to any committee of the manager's nomination. This
led to a renewal of the uproar, and it was some time before silence could be obtained.
When, at last, he was able to make himself heard, he gave notice, that until the decision
of the committee had been drawn up, the theatre should remain closed. Immediately
every person in the pit stood up, and a long shout of triumph resounded through the
house, which was heard at the extremity of Bow Street. As if this result had been
anticipated, a placard was at the same moment hoisted, inscribed, "Here lies the body of
NEW PRICE, an ugly brat and base born, who expired on the 23rd of September 1809,
aged six days. -- Requiescat in pace!"
Mr. Kemble then retired, and the pitites flung up their hats in the air, or sprang over the
benches, shouting and hallooing in the exuberance of their joy; and thus ended the first
act of this popular farce.
The committee ultimately chosen differed from that first named, Alderman Sir Charles
Price, Bart. and Mr. Silvester, the Recorder of London, being substituted for Sir Francis
Baring and Sir Vicary Gibbs. In a few days they had examined the multitudinous
documents of the theatre, and agreed to a report which was published in all the
newspapers, and otherwise distributed. They stated the average profits of the six
preceding years at 6 and 3/8 per cent, being only 1 and 3/8 per cent. beyond the legal
interest of money, to recompense the proprietors for all their care and enterprise. Under
the new prices they would receive 3 and 1/2 per cent. profit; but if they returned to the
old prices, they would suffer a loss of fifteen shillings per cent. upon their capital. Under
these circumstances, they could do no other than recommend the proprietors to continue
the new prices.
This report gave no satisfaction. It certainly convinced the reasonable, but they,
unfortunately, were in a minority of one to ten. The managers, disregarding the outcry
that it excited, advertised the recommencement of the performances for Wednesday the
4th of October following. They endeavoured to pack the house with their friends, but the
sturdy O.P. men were on the alert, and congregated in the pit in great numbers. The play
was "The Beggar's Opera," but, as on former occasions, it was wholly inaudible. The
noises were systematically arranged, and the actors, seeing how useless it was to struggle
against the popular feeling, hurried over their parts as quickly as they could, and the
curtain fell shortly after nine o'clock. Once more the manager essayed the difficult task of

convincing madness by appealing to reason. As soon as the din of the rattles and posthorns would permit him to speak, he said, he would throw himself on the fairness of the
most enlightened metropolis in the world. He was sure, however strongly they might feel
upon the subject, they would not be accessory to the ruin of the theatre, by insisting upon
a return to the former prices. Notwithstanding the little sop he had thrown out to feed the
vanity of this roaring Cerberus, the only answer he received was a renewal of the noise,
intermingled with shouts of "Hoax! hoax! imposition!" Mr. O'Reilly, the gallant friend of
Madame Catalani, afterwards addressed the pit, and said no reliance could be placed on
the report of the committee. The profits of the theatre were evidently great: they had
saved the heavy salary of Madame Catalani; and by shutting out the public from all the
boxes but the pigeon-holes, they made large sums. The first and second tiers were let at
high rents to notorious courtesans, several of whom he then saw in the house; and it was
clear that the managers preferred a large revenue from this impure source to the
reasonable profits they would receive from respectable people. Loud cheers greeted this
speech; every eye was turned towards the boxes, and the few ladies in them immediately
withdrew. At the same moment, some inveterate pitite hoisted a large placard, on which
was inscribed,
"We lads of the pit Will never submit."
Several others were introduced. One of them was a caricature likeness of Mr. Kemble,
asking, "What do you want?" with a pitite replying, "The old prices, and no pigeonholes!" Others merely bore the drawing of a large key, in allusion to a notorious house in
the neighbourhood, the denizens of which were said to be great frequenters of the private
boxes. These appeared to give the managers more annoyance than all the rest, and the
prize-fighters made vigorous attacks upon the holders of them. Several persons were, on
this night, and indeed nearly every night, taken into custody, and locked up in the
watchhouse. On their appearance the following morning, they were generally held to bail
in considerable sums to keep the peace. This proceeding greatly augmented the animosity
of the pit.
It would be useless to detail the scenes of confusion which followed night after night. For
about three weeks the war continued with unabated fury. Its characteristics were nearly
always the same. Invention was racked to discover new noises, and it was thought a
happy idea when one fellow got into the gallery with a dustman's bell, and rang it
furiously. Dogs were also brought into the boxes, to add their sweet voices to the general
uproar. The animals seemed to join in it con amore, and one night a large mastiff growled
and barked so loudly, as to draw down upon his exertions three cheers from the gratified
pitites.
So strong did the popular enthusiasm run in favour of the row, that well-dressed ladies
appeared in the boxes with the letters O. P. on their bonnets. O. P. hats for the gentlemen
were still more common, and some were so zealous in the cause, as to sport waistcoats
with an O embroidered upon one flap and a P on the other. O.P. toothpicks were also in
fashion; and gentlemen and ladies carried O.P. handkerchiefs, which they waved
triumphantly whenever the row was unusually deafening. The latter suggested the idea of

O. P. flags, which were occasionally unfurled from the gallery to the length of a dozen
feet. Sometimes the first part of the night's performances were listened to with
comparative patience, a majority of the manager's friends being in possession of the
house. But as soon as the half-price commenced, the row began again in all its pristine
glory. At the fall of the curtain it soon became customary to sing "God save the King,"
the whole of the O.P.'s joining in loyal chorus. Sometimes this was followed by "Rule
Britannia;" and, on two or three occasions, by a parody of the national anthem, which
excited great laughter. A verse may not be uninteresting as a specimen.
"O Johnny Bull, be true, Confound the prices new, And make them fall! Curse Kemble's
politics, Frustrate his knavish tricks, On thee our hopes we fix, T' upset them all !"
This done, they scrambled over the benches, got up sham fights in the pit, or danced the
famous O.P. dance. The latter may as well be described here: half a dozen, or a dozen
fellows formed in a ring, and stamped alternately with the right and left foot, calling out
at regular intervals, O. P. - O. P. with a drawling and monotonous sound. This uniformly
lasted till the lights were put out, when the rioters withdrew, generally in gangs of ten or
twenty, to defend themselves from sudden attacks on the part of the constables.
An idea seemed about this time to break in upon them, that notwithstanding the
annoyance they caused the manager, they were aiding to fill his coffers. This was hinted
at in some of the newspapers, and the consequence was, that many stayed away to punish
him, if possible, under the silent system. But this did not last long. The love of mischief
was as great an incentive to many of them as enmity to the new prices. Accidental
circumstances also contributed to disturb the temporary calm. At the Westminster
quarter-sessions, on the 27th of October, bills of indictment were preferred against fortyone persons for creating a disturbance and interrupting the performances of the theatre.
The grand jury ignored twenty-seven of the bills, left two undecided, and found true bills
against twelve. The latter exercised their right of traverse till the ensuing sessions. The
preferment of these bills had the effect of re-awakening the subsiding excitement.
Another circumstance about the same time gave a still greater impetus to it, and furnished
the rioters with a chief, round whom they were eager to rally. Mr. Clifford, a barrister,
appeared in the pit on the night of the 31st of October, with the letters O. P. on his hat.
Being a man of some note, he was pounced upon by the constables, and led off to Bow
Street police office, where Brandon, the box-keeper, charged him with riotous and
disorderly conduct. This was exactly what Clifford wanted. He told the presiding
magistrate, a Mr. Read, that he had purposely displayed the letters on his hat, in order that
the question of right might be determined before a competent tribunal. He denied that he
had committed any offence, and seemed to manifest so intimate an acquaintance with the
law upon the subject, that the magistrate, convinced by his reasoning, ordered his
immediate dismissal, and stated that he had been taken into custody without the slightest
grounds. The result was made known in the theatre a few minutes afterwards, where Mr.
Clifford, on his appearance victorious, was received with reiterated huzzas. On his
leaving the house, he was greeted by a mob of five or six hundred persons, who had
congregated outside to do him honour as he passed. >From that night the riots may be
said to have recommenced, and "Clifford and O. P." became the rallying cry of the party.

The officious box-keeper became at the same time the object of the popular dislike, and
the contempt with which the genius and fine qualities of Mr. Kemble would not permit
them to regard him, was fastened upon his underling. So much ill-feeling was directed
towards the latter, that at this time a return to the old prices, unaccompanied by his
dismissal, would not have made the manager's peace with the pitites.
In the course of the few succeeding weeks, during which the riots continued with
undiminished fury, O. P. medals were struck, and worn in great numbers in the theatre. A
few of the ultra-zealous even wore them in the streets. A new fashion also came into
favour for hats, waistcoats, and handkerchiefs, on which the mark, instead of the separate
letters O and P, was a large O, with a small P in the middle of it.
The managers, seeing that Mr. Clifford was so identified with the rioters, determined to
make him responsible. An action was accordingly brought against him and other
defendants in the Court of King's Bench. On the 20th of November, the Attorney-general
moved, before Lord Ellenborough, for a rule to show cause why a criminal information
should not be filed against Clifford for unlawfully conspiring with certain others to
intimidate the proprietors of Covent-Garden Theatre, and force them, to their loss and
detriment, to lower their prices of admission. The rule was granted, and an early day
fixed for the trial. In the mean time, these proceedings kept up the acerbity of the O. P.s,
and every night at the fall of the curtain, three groans were given for John Kemble and
three cheers for John Bull.
It was during this year that the national Jubilee was celebrated, in honour of tile fiftieth
year of the reign of George III. When the riots had reached their fiftieth night, the O. P.s
also determined to have a jubilee. All their previous efforts in the way of roaring, great as
they were, were this night outdone, and would have continued long after "the wee short
hour," had not the managers wisely put the extinguisher upon them and the lights about
eleven o'clock.
Pending the criminal prosecution against himself, Mr. Clifford brought an action for false
imprisonment against Brandon. The cause was fixed for trial in the Court of Common
Pleas, on the 5th of December, before Lord Chief-Justice Mansfield. From an early hour
in the morning all the avenues leading to the court were thronged with an eager
multitude; all London was in anxiety for the resuit. So dense was the crowd, that counsel
found the greatest difficulty in making their way into court. Mr. Sergeant Best was
retained on the part of the plaintiff, and Mr. Sergeant Shepherd for the defence. The
defendant put two pleas upon the record; first, that he was not guilty, and secondly, that
he was justified. Sergeant Best, in stating the plaintiff's case, blamed the managers for all
the disturbances that had taken place, and contended that his client, in affixing the letters
O. P. to his hat, was not guilty of any offence. Even if he had joined in the noises, which
he had not, his so doing would not subject him to the penalties for rioting. Several
witnesses were then called to prove the capture of Mr. Clifford, the hearing of the case
before the magistrate at Bow Street, and his ultimate dismissal. Sergeant Shepherd was
heard at great length on the other side, and contended that his client was perfectly

justified in taking into custody a man who was inciting others to commit a breach of the
peace.
The Lord Chief-Justice summed up, with an evident bias in favour of the defendant. He
said an undue apprehension of the rights of an audience had got abroad. Even supposing
the object of the rioters to be fair and legal, they were not authorized to carry it by unfair
means. In order to constitute a riot, it was not necessary that personal violence should be
committed, and it seemed to him that the defendant had not acted in an improper manner
in giving into custody a person who, by the display of a symbol, was encouraging others
to commit a riot.
The jury retired to consider their verdict. The crowd without and within the court awaited
the result in feverish suspense. Half an hour elapsed, when the jury returned with a
verdict for the plaintiff -- Damages, five pounds. The satisfaction of the spectators was
evident upon their countenances, that of the judge expressed the contrary feeling. Turning
to the foreman of the jury, his Lordship asked upon which of the two points referred to
them, namely, the broad question, whether a riot had been committed, and, if committed,
whether the plaintiff had participated in it, they had found their verdict?
The foreman stated, that they were all of opinion generally that the plaintiff had been
illegally arrested. This vague answer did not satisfy his Lordship, and he repeated his
question. He could not, however, obtain a more satisfactory reply. Evidently vexed at
what he deemed the obtuseness or partiality of the jury, he turned to the bar, and said, that
a spirit of a mischievous and destructive nature was abroad, which, if not repressed,
threatened awful consequences. The country would be lost, he said, and the government
overturned, if such a spirit were encouraged; it was impossible it could end in good.
Time, the destroyer and fulfiller of predictions, has proved that his Lordship was a false
prophet. The harmless O. P. war has been productive of no such dire results.
It was to be expected that after this triumph, the war in the pit would rage with redoubled
acrimony. A riot beginning at half-price would not satisfy the excited feelings of the O.
P.s on the night of such a victory. Long before the curtain drew up, the house was filled
with them, and several placards were exhibited, which the constables and friends of the
managers strove, as usual, to tear into shreds. One of them, which met this fate, was
inscribed, "Success to O.P.! A British jury for ever!" It was soon replaced by another of a
similar purport. It is needless to detail the uproar that ensued; the jumping, the fighting,
the roaring, and the howling. For nine nights more the same system was continued; but
the end was at hand.
On the 14th a grand dinner was given at the Crown and Anchor tavern, to celebrate the
victory of Mr. Clifford. "The reprobators of managerial insolence," as they called
themselves, attended in considerable numbers; and Mr. Clifford was voted to the chair.
The cloth had been removed, and a few speeches made, when the company were
surprised by a message that their arch-enemy himself solicited the honour of an audience.
It was some time ere they could believe that Mr. Kemble had ventured to such a place.
After some parley the manager was admitted, and a conference was held. A treaty was

ultimately signed and sealed, which put an end to the long-contested wars of O.P., and
restored peace to the drama.
All this time the disturbance proceeded at the theatre with its usual spirit. It was now the
sixty-sixth night of its continuance, and the rioters were still untired -- still determined to
resist to the last. In the midst of it a gentleman arrived from the Crown and Anchor, and
announced to the pit that Mr. Kemble had attended the dinner, and had yielded at last to
the demand of the public. He stated, that it had been agreed upon between him and the
Committee for defending the persons under prosecution, that the boxes should remain at
the advanced price; that the pit should be reduced to three shillings and sixpence; that the
private boxes should be done away with; and that all prosecutions, on both sides, should
be immediately stayed. This announcement was received with deafening cheers. As soon
as the first burst of enthusiasm was over, the O. P.s became anxious for a confirmation of
the intelligence, and commenced a loud call for Mr. Kemble. He had not then returned
from the Crown and Anchor; but of this the pitites were not aware, and for nearly half an
hour they kept up a most excruciating din. At length the great actor made his appearance,
in his walking dress, with his cane in hand, as he had left the tavern. It was a long time
before he could obtain silence. He. apologized in the most respectful terms for appearing
before them in such unbecoming costume, which was caused solely by his ignorance that
he should have to appear before them that night. After announcing, as well as occasional
interruptions would allow, the terms that had been agreed upon, he added, "In order that
no trace or recollection of the past differences, which had unhappily prevailed so long,
should remain, he was instructed by the proprietors to say, that they most sincerely
lamented the course that had been pursued, and engaged that, on their parts, all legal
proceedings should forthwith be put a stop to." The cheering which greeted this speech
was interrupted at the close by loud cries from the pit of "Dismiss Brandon," while one or
two exclaimed, "We want old prices generally, -- six shillings for the boxes." After an
ineffectual attempt to address them again upon this point, Mr. Kemble made respectful
and repeated obeisances, and withdrew. The noises still continued, until Munden stood
forward, leading by the hand the humbled box-keeper, contrition in his looks, and in his
hands a written apology, which he endeavoured to read. The uproar was increased
threefold by his presence, and, amid cries of "We won't hear him!" "Where's his master?"
he was obliged to retire. Mr. Harris, the son of Kemble's co-manager, afterwards
endeavoured to propitiate the audience in his favour; but it was of no avail; nothing less
than his dismissal would satisfy the offended majesty of the pit. Amid this uproar the
curtain finally fell, and the O. P. dance was danced for the last time within the walls of
Covent Garden.
On the following night it was announced that Brandon had resigned his situation. This
turned the tide of popular ill-will. The performances were "The Wheel of Fortune," and
an afterpiece. The house was crowded to excess; a desire to be pleased was manifest on
every countenance, and when Mr. Kemble, who took his favourite character of
Penruddock, appeared upon the stage, he was greeted with the most vehement applause.
The noises ceased entirely, and the symbols of opposition disappeared. The audience,
hushed into attention, gave vent to no sounds but those of admiration for the genius of the
actor. When, in the course of his part, he repeated the words, "So! I am in London again

!" the aptness of the expression to the circumstances of the night, was felt by all present,
and acknowledged by a round of boisterous and thrice repeated cheering. It was a
triumphant scene for Mr. Kemble after his long annoyances. He had achieved a double
victory. He had, not only as a manager, soothed the obstinate opposition of the playgoers, but as an actor he had forced from one of the largest audiences he had ever beheld,
approbation more cordial and unanimous than he had ever enjoyed before. The popular
favour not only turned towards him; it embraced everybody connected with the theatre,
except the poor victim, Brandon. Most of the favourite actors were called before the
curtain to make their bow, and receive the acclamations of the pit. At the close of the
performances, a few individuals, implacable and stubborn, got up a feeble cry of "Old
prices for the boxes;" but they were quickly silenced by the reiterated cheers of the
majority, or by cries of "Turn them out!" A placard, the last of its race, was at the same
time exhibited in the front of the pit, bearing, in large letters, the words "We are
satisfied."
Thus ended the famous wars of O. P., which, for a period of nearly three months, had
kept the metropolis in an uproar. And after all, what was the grand result? As if the whole
proceeding had been a parody upon the more destructive, but scarcely more sensible wars
recorded in history, it was commenced in injustice, carried on in bitterness of spirit, and
ended, like the labour of the mountain, in a mouse. The abatement of sixpence in the
price of admission to the pit, and the dismissal of an unfortunate servant, whose only
fault was too much zeal in the service of his employers, -- such were the grand victories
of the O. P.'s.
