Lastly, we focus on currency speculators who use technical analysis, either primarily or solely
in order to determine their trading in the currency markets. Again, I have found that it surprises
some economists that such people exist, not least because it ﬂies in the face of the view that
markets are efﬁcient and that pricing is therefore irrelevant. My answer and more importantly
the answer of the technically-based currency speculators themselves is that markets are not
perfectly efﬁcient, though they are predictable to an extent and technical analysis helps with
that. As discussed in Chapter 4, there are a number of schools of thought within technical
analysis, such as Elliott Wave, Gann and Fibonacci. A good technically-based currency speculator would use a number of types of technical analysis, not least to test their core view before
executing the position. As with other types of currency trading, technical traders can be short or
long term in their approach. More generally however, all are looking for trading opportunities
using existing market pricing, either for or against the existing trend.

9.7 CURRENCY SPECULATION — A GUIDE
Readers who are familiar with most serious works on currency markets, which deal with the
issue of currency speculation, will be familiar with the fact that most do so from the perspective

188

Currency Strategy

of economic theory. That is to say, most look at the act of currency speculation in terms of its
role relative to the speciﬁc types of exchange rate regimes, within the context of the overall
economy. For instance, there have been several works that look at currency speculation relative
to “target exchange zones”. Optimal currency areas are in this speciﬁc sense those which are
sufﬁciently strong and balanced to be able to deter most currency speculation and withstand
that which is foolish enough to try.
There is nothing out there — and I have searched — on how to be a better currency speculator.
Again, I realize this may cause a reaction within some. I must only reiterate that I see currency
speculation neither as a benign nor as a malign force. Currency speculation does provide needed
liquidity to those areas seen as productive within the economy. It also acts as a necessary arbiter
of economic policy. Governments are answerable to the voters, but they are also answerable
to ﬁnancial markets, just as a board is answerable to its shareholders. Equally, governments
must ensure against excess within those markets. The balance between the two is a delicate
one, a dynamic one that changes over time. Both sides are cause and effect. There must be
regulation and there must also be free markets, not least because all alternatives have been tried
and have proved miserable failures. Completely unfettered, unregulated markets may prove
chaotic and damaging. Equally, overly regulated markets may stagnate. Currency speculation
plays a useful role as regards the overall health and vitality of the ﬁnancial markets. Granted,
this has been a role which has been little understood. Hopefully, this chapter has helped to
achieve at least some clarity in this regard.
So, how to be a better currency speculator? As we have seen above, there are many techniques
for currency speculation, depending on the framework one uses to analyse the market. I would
suggest however that there are some guiding principles in the art of currency speculation,
which should help speculators generate consistent excess returns. My perspective is that of an
adviser rather than a trader. Having watched the currency markets for over a decade and in
the process beneﬁted from the knowledge and experience of the hundreds of currency market
contacts that I have made or come into contact with, as an emerging market currency strategist
I advise a bank’s traders, sales and clients on what are the best trading and hedging strategies
within emerging market currencies. The recommendations that I have made are compiled in
an EMFX leveraged model portfolio1 which produced annual cumulative simple returns of
46.3%, 25.9% and 47.1% in 1999, 2000 and 2001, respectively. As a result, I feel reasonably
qualiﬁed to make some suggestions, which though they may undoubtedly not prove deﬁnitive
at the very least add to the debate.
(1) An integrated approach — The most powerful, consistent form of currency analysis
and therefore of currency speculation is that which brings together all the main analytical
disciplines to create a combined trading signal. Fundamentals may or may not be enough on
their own. However, currency speculators who want to create consistent outperformance and
high excess returns do not deal with “maybes”. Fundamental, technical, ﬂow and valuation
analysis need to be coordinated and integrated to provide the clearest picture of what is going
on in the market and how one can proﬁt from it. This is the heart of currency economics that I
have tried to impart. A very simple and effective discipline is to create a signal grid for these
four types of analysis and stick to it rigorously (see Table 9.1). Only when at least 3 of 4 readings
are showing “green” or “red” should one put on a major new position. The advantage of this
is that it should greatly reduce the bias created by relying only on one analytical type.
(2) Risk appetite — Use a risk appetite indicator as a gauge of overall market sentiment and
as a benchmark against which to measure your positions. The one I mentioned in Chapter 2
1

These ﬁgures are based on the simple cumulative returns resulting from recommendations and have not been ofﬁcially audited.

Managing Currency Risk III

189

Table 9.1 A currency strategy signal grid

Exchange rate

Currency
economics

Flow analysis

Technical
analysis

Long-term
valuation

Buy/sell

Buy/sell

Buy/sell

Buy/sell

is an excellent one, the Instability Index, but there are others. When your signal grid is showing
no clear signal, but the risk appetite indicator is in risk-neutral or risk-seeking mode, go long
a basket of higher carry currencies, albeit selectively chosen, in order to boost the total return.
When the risk appetite indicator moves from risk-seeking to risk-neutral, take half your proﬁt.
When it moves from risk-neutral to risk-averse, cut your position entirely and go short the
carry basket of currencies you have used. This strategy, used in a disciplined way, can add
signiﬁcantly and consistently to your total return, particularly during periods when the signal
grid is showing mixed signals (which will be most of the time).
(3) Trading discipline is at least as important as having the right view — A currency
speculator can have the right view but bad trading discipline can reduce or even reverse trading
proﬁts. The view should be the unequivocal result of the combined trading signal from the
four analytical disciplines, or as a result of the risk appetite indicator. There is nothing else
to consider. “Gut feel” can earn excess returns for a period of time if you are a good and
experienced currency speculator, but it is not enough on its own. Eventually it will result in
you getting burned. The more overconﬁdent you are, the more badly you are likely to get
burned. As regards positions, the entry, exit and stop levels should be decided by ﬂow and
technical considerations. Run proﬁts, depending on technical and ﬂow developments. Always
cut losses. The ﬁeld of behavioural ﬁnance teaches us what we know intuitively, that it is much
harder to cut a position, whether it is running a proﬁt or a loss, than to initiate it. Hoping or
wishing a position to come back in your favour is a beginner’s mistake. Be disciplined and that
means at times being ruthless. Not cutting losses is the easiest and the most efﬁcient way of
destroying your total return.
(4) Emotion comes before a fall — Currency speculation is about making money pure and
simple. There should be no emotional aspect to it. It is neither moral nor immoral. Furthermore,
try to remain detached from your P&L to the extent that it does not affect your trading approach.
Great danger lies in the making of both proﬁt and loss. The more proﬁt you make, the more your
view of ﬁnancial markets appears to be conﬁrmed and the more overconﬁdent you become.
Many have produced incredible results speculating against market inconsistencies to the point
where they appeared to believe they were the market. That is usually the signal that the good
times are about to end. Losses can also be dangerous because they make you loss averse and
thus reduce the amount of potentially proﬁtable opportunities you can take advantage of.
(5) Less is more — Take fewer trading positions rather than more for two reasons. Firstly,
a small number of trading positions is more easily managed than a larger number of positions,
and that takes us back to point 3. Secondly, currency speculation is the pursuit of inconsistency
in currency market pricing. There are rarely a very large number of inconsistencies at any one
time, not least because if it were that easy we would all be doing it. The aim of creating the
signal grid and using the discipline of the risk appetite indicator is to trade on sure-ﬁre winners
and nothing else. A portfolio that has a very large number of positions suggests a portfolio
that is trading on more than sure-ﬁre winners, a portfolio that is increasingly relying on such
vague concepts as luck, hope, belief and emotion. Currency speculation is not a game, it is

190

Currency Strategy

not betting and there should be no luck involved. If there is, you have the wrong position.
Cut it.
(6) Speculators make predictable mistakes — Everyone makes mistakes and currency
market practitioners are no different. However some mistakes are more predictable than others.
In this regard, there are three key themes of behavioural ﬁnance that should be considered as
a guide to the usual mistakes made, and therefore how to avoid making them in the future.
Readers who have well understood the points above will of course note that the mistakes below
reﬂect straying from the signal grid and the risk appetite indicator:

r Heuristic-driven mistakes2 — Currency speculators frequently rely on “heuristics” or rules
of thumb in relation to their approach to trading. For instance, one such heuristic or rule of
thumb can be that previous trends will continue. If something has gone up for six weeks it
will go up for a seventh and an eighth. Heuristic-driven trading is biased in that the very
act of establishing a rule of thumb approach to one’s trading reﬂects one’s past experience.
Because of their reliance on heuristics, or rules of thumb, currency speculators can hold
biased beliefs that make them vulnerable to committing errors, errors which result in painful
losses.
r Frame dependence — This idea deals with the distinction between form and substance.
Framing is about form. Frame dependence means that the results of one’s currency view are
dependent on the frame or framework within which one focuses one’s view and thoughts.
Frame dependence can deal not only with one’s fundamental view but also one’s approach
to trading generally. One can be loss averse, meaning that one is far more reluctant to make
a certain-sized loss rather than put on the risk necessary to make that level of proﬁt. Losses
result in emotion, which results in regret, which in turn alters the frame one uses to look at
markets.
r Markets are inherently inefﬁcient — The idea of ﬁnancial markets being perfectly efﬁcient
is an elegant nonsense, which clearly deals with a perfect rather than a human being. Market
mispricing happens all the time. Heuristic and frame dependence create consistent errors and
therefore consistent losses. Learning how to distinguish such behavioural patterns means
one can reduce such losses.
Heuristics, frame dependence and any belief in the supposed efﬁciency of ﬁnancial markets
are all aspects that lie outside of the rigorous trading discipline of the four analysis signal grid
and the risk appetite indicator. For those currency speculators who use the rigorous, disciplined
approach, there are no such things as “rules of thumb”. In addition, the very act of using four
types of analysis rather than just one should eliminate the risk of frame dependence.

9.8 SUMMARY
This chapter has sought to delve into the world of the currency speculator in greater detail
than has hitherto been tried, both for the purpose of shedding light on them and their methods
and also to attempt some ideas on how to be better at currency speculation. There can be
no doubt that the issue of currency speculation will remain controversial. The aim here has
been to take out some of the emotional aspects of the issue and try to look at it coolly and
dispassionately. Speculators can accelerate change but they cannot cause it in the ﬁrst place. To
2
For more on the ﬁeld of behavioural ﬁnance, readers should consult the excellent work by Hersh Sheffrin, Beyond Greed and
Fear: Understanding Behavioural Finance and the Psychology of Investing, Harvard Business School Press, 2000.

@Team-FLY

Managing Currency Risk III

191

forbid speculation is to forbid the market’s evaluation of risk and thus to leave the market blind
to policy error. If anything, that would be the real speculation. Having looked at the real world
of corporations, real money investors and currency speculators, we turn in the last chapter to
bringing together the ideas that have been presented in this book into an integrated analytical
framework for the purpose of making corporate executives or investors better currency analysts
and thus boosting their bottom line.

10
Applying the Framework
So far in this book, we have looked at the various key components that go into currency strategy.
The aim in this last chapter is therefore simple — to pull together all these components into a
single, integrated framework of analysis. To this end, it is important ﬁrst to crystallize (rather
than repeat) the main points we have learned to date, both to further clarify their importance
and to make them more easily remembered. Having done that, we then need to apply this
currency strategy framework to the practical world of corporations, investors and speculators,
showing how they may use it to boost their bottom line.
First, brieﬂy we recap and crystallize the main points made to date. Thus, currency strategy
is the analytical discipline that consists of the following:
1. Currency economics
2. Flow analysis
3. Technical analysis
4. Long-term valuation

10.1 CURRENCY ECONOMICS
Classical economics has sought and failed to explain short-term exchange rate moves on a
consistent basis. Currency economics is an attempt to ﬁne tune economic theory to the practical
relevance of the currency market. Broadly speaking, it seeks to analyse those aspects of the
economy that are relevant to the exchange rate value, such as:

r Trends within the balance of payments, including the current and capital accounts;
r The accounting identity for economic adjustment (S − I = X − M);
r The Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER) and the external balance;
r Relative productivity measures.
Naturally, all other aspects of the economy should be considered such as growth, inﬂation
and so forth, but the ones mentioned above are the key indicators relevant for our purpose
of currency analysis and strategy. Growth per se does not make a currency rise or fall on a
consistent basis. Currency market practitioners, while keeping an eye on other parts of the
economy as well, should seek to focus primarily on those speciﬁc aspects of the economy that
affect the exchange rate.

10.2 FLOW ANALYSIS
As barriers to trade and capital have broken down in the last two decades, so capital ﬂows have
become increasingly important, both in terms of their impact on the economy and in turn on the
exchange rate. At USD1.2 trillion in daily volume, the currency markets trade the equivalent of
annual global merchandise trade every day of the year. Like any market, the currency market is
affected by demand and supply, which in this case is reﬂected by order ﬂow. It has been found

194

Currency Strategy

that tracking order ﬂow can provide both a useful explanation of past price activity in currency
markets and — more importantly — can be used as a predictor of future price action. The basic
premise behind this is that changes in order ﬂow, if sufﬁciently large, can have predictable and
sustainable impact in the currency markets in terms of price action. There are several shortand medium-term ﬂow indicators which the reader should be aware of.
Short-term ﬂow data:

r The IMM Commitments of Traders report

Medium-term ﬂow data:

r US Treasury “TIC” capital ﬂow report
r Euro-zone portfolio report
r IMF quarterly report on emerging market ﬁnancing
r IIF capital ﬂows report

In addition to ﬂow data provided by the trading exchanges as in the case of the IMM and by
ofﬁcial sources as with the TIC and Euro-zone reports, there are also proprietary ﬂow models
created by commercial and investment banks to analyse client ﬂows going through the bank’s
currency dealing rooms.

r Order ﬂow/sentiment models

Flow data and models provide direct evidence of the effect of order ﬂow on market pricing.
A more indirect but no less useful to way to do that is to look at market sentiment indicators
such as:

r Option risk reversals

These are a very useful gauge of the market’s “skew” or bias towards an exchange rate.
Analysing risk reversal trends over time relative to the spot rate may allow one to make
predictions as to future spot rates based on the risk reversal.

10.3 TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Crucial to both ﬂow and technical analysis is the idea that ﬁnancial markets are not in fact
inherently efﬁcient and that the past can in fact impact the future. With ﬂow analysis, one
is dealing with trends in order ﬂow. With technical analysis, one is analysing past pricing
to make predictions about the future. At its most basic, technical analysis uses such concepts as “support” and “resistance” to denote points of dynamic market tension between
supply and demand for an exchange rate, equity, bond or commodity. At a more sophisticated level, technical analysis relies on patterns in mathematics to suggest they may be
reproduced in market pricing. Fibonacci, Elliott Wave and Gann analysis are examples of
these.
“Charting” remains a controversial subject for some within the ﬁnancial and academic
communities who appear to regard it as little more than voodoo. In the real world of trading,
hedging and investing however, nothing counts except results. Unlike in the economic world
where the quality of the story is seen as important, almost irrespective of its accuracy, for
traders, investors and corporations the bottom line is the bottom line. To that end, while

Applying the Framework

195

classical economics has failed to explain short-term exchange rate moves on a sustained basis,
ﬂow and technical analysis have stepped into the void. Just as in economics, there are “good”
and “bad” chartists or technical analysts. The profession of technical analysis however has
consistently outperformed the returns generated by random walk theory and frequently also
those by economists. In analysing exchange rates, currency market practitioners who do not
use technical analysis in addition to fundamental analysis are hampering their own ability to
produce consistently high returns.

10.4 LONG-TERM VALUATION
The dividing line between currency economics and long-term valuation analysis is somewhat
blurred. There is a difference however and it concerns the time span involved in one’s analysis.
The aim of currency economics is to look at the parts of the economy that affect and are affected
by the exchange rate, such as the balance of payments and inﬂation differentials, in order to
give an idea about that exchange rate’s current valuation and direction. Long-term valuation
models, such as those that focus on REER or FEER, are trying to give a multi-month or more
likely a multi-year view of exchange rate valuation. In line with this, the main exchange rate
models that focus on long-term valuation are the following:

r Purchasing Power Parity
r The Monetary Approach
r The Interest Rate Approach
r The Balance of Payments Approach
r The Portfolio Balance Approach

Most of these models focus on the relative price of an asset or good which should over time
cause an exchange rate adjustment to restore “equilibrium”.

10.5 THE SIGNAL GRID
The four analytical disciplines of currency economics, ﬂow analysis, technical analysis and
long-term valuation which come together to make a currency strategy decision can be expressed
in the form of a signal grid, as shown in Table 9.1. To be sure, this is a very simple model.
However, what is important here is having the discipline to create it. Only when all four
analytical indicators are reading buy or sell together should one put out an ofﬁcial currency
strategy recommendation. Granted, this is still no guarantee of success. It should however have
a number of positive effects on one’s trading or analytical performance:

r It should eliminate the bias created by relying only on one analytical type
r By nature, four buy signals make up a more powerful buy signal than just one
r The bottom line — it should improve one’s performance and total returns
10.6 RISK APPETITE INDICATORS

When there is no clear, unequivocal signal from the signal grid, that is when not all four
signals are pointing in the same direction, currency traders and investors can still boost their
total return by using a risk appetite indicator to gauge overall market sentiment in terms of

@Team-FLY

196

Currency Strategy

“risky” or “safe” assets, both in terms of putting on new positions and in terms of measuring
their existing positions. Risk sentiment can be divided up into three levels:

r Risk-seeking/stable
r Risk-neutral
r Risk-aversion/unstable
When the indicator is in risk-seeking or risk-neutral mode, be long a basket of higher carry
currencies, either in the developed or emerging markets. Conversely, when it is in risk-aversion
mode, obviously having moved there from risk-neutral, cut and reverse the position, going short
the carry basket of currencies. Risk appetite has become an increasingly important concept not
just because of the need to create more accurate models for forecasting short-term currency
moves, but also because the last few years have shown a marked pick-up in cross-asset market
volatility. There are several risk appetite indicators created by the private sector for this purpose.
Not just currency traders or speculators can use this. A risk appetite indicator can be a crucial
tool for corporate Treasurers and institutional investors, not least in providing them with an
informed context within which their exposure exists.
