
division of a large corporation. The boss was at least partly responsible
for the adolescent nature of his department. He wasn't just one of the
boys; he was the ringleader. Mere winning was not as important to Ranieri
as winning with style. Skewered by the mail spear on Ranieri's trading
desk were an orange pair of stripper's panties. It was enjoyable to make
more money than the rest of the firm, but it was sheer delight to make
more money than the rest of the firm at the same time you spent half
your day playing practical jokes on your employees and smoking big fat
cigars.
A trader recalls Ranieri marching out from his office onto the floor to
talk to one of his young traders, Andrew Friedwald. "He had this big
smile on his face. He was standing real close to Andy and asking him how
a deal was going. Andy was saying how he hoped to sell some bonds in
Japan and London, and Lewie just stood there nodding with this weird
smile. Andy said something else, and all Lewie did was stand there and
smile. Then Andy felt the joke. Lewie was holding a Bic lighter right
under Andy's balls. His pants were about to catch fire. Andy hit the
roof."
Another Andy, Andy Stone, recalls having a bottle of Bailey's Irish
Cream poured into his jacket pockets by Ranieri. When he complained
that it was his favorite suit, Ranieri whipped out four soiled hundreddollar bills and said, "Don't complain, buy a new one."
Ranieri was impulsive in a way that business school case studies seldom
account for when they analyze managerial decision making. In her first
day in the Salomon mortgage finance department, as she was being given
a tour of the firm, Maria Sanchez recalls meeting Ranieri in a hallway. "I
had no idea who he was," she says. "He came waddling down the hall like a
penguin, waving one of his long swords—he kept a collection in his office.
He walked up to my tour guide and pointed to me with the sword and
asked loudly, 'Who's this?'
"We were introduced, and he asked, 'You Italian?' I said no, I was Cuban.
I was wearing a blouse with a long string bow tie. Lewie took out a pair of
scissors and with this big smile on his face cut off my tie.
He said he didn't like ties on women. He pulled a hundred-bill from his
wallet and told me to buy a new shirt. I thought, Jesus, what have I
gotten myself into?"
Eventually Ranieri was pressed to reform—by John Gutfreund. Though

Gutfreund wasn't above having a little fun himself, he was, after all,
running a large corporation. His vice-chairman was beginning to look more
like his chairman of vice. If he was going to promote Lewie, Lewie would
at least have to look the part. "I remember one day Lewie came over and
threw his American Express card at Liz [Abrams, his secretary] and told
her to go to Brooks Brothers and buy him a wardrobe because John said
he had to change his image," says Andy Stone.
Gutfreund's concern went past the clothes, to the man. "Gutfreund was
watching Lewie's weight for him," says another trader. "I remember once
when we ordered pizza, Gutfreund came over. Lewie wouldn't eat any
until Gutfreund went away. Everyone knew which one was Lewie's pizza.
He had this look on his face: Touch that pizza and you're dead."
Ranieri's memory of his metamorphosis is slightly different. He recalls
one day "being euchred" by his wife, Peg, and Liz Abrams into a trip to
Barney's. "I agreed to buy one new suit," he says. "We walk through, and
the guy helping us asks me what I think of these suits. Each time I said I
liked one, this guy pulls it off the rack. Lizzie has told the guy I'm going
to buy every one I like, but she hasn't told me. By the time I'm through
I have picked out nine suits. Now I have to do what I hate most—stand
around and fit all these fucking things. While I'm doing this, Lizzie takes
my credit card and says she's going to pay. But she comes back with
three slips. 'What's this?' I ask her. She'd bought nine suits, fifteen
ties, and twenty-four shirts with monograms and a bunch of these little
things here [he points to the hankie]. I'd been euchred."
Not entirely. He found ways to foil his appearance-conscious advisers.
Most of his new suits were three-piecers, which by some miracle of
justice went out of fashion immediately after he bought them. Anyway,
Ranieri never really wore his new clothes. One trader remembers, "He'd
come in every morning with his vest slung over one shoulder and his tie
slung over the other." And there was no chance whatsoever Ranieri
would permit his new look to interfere with the down-to-earth image he
projected to his clients. The new clothes became a clever foil for his old
self.
Jeff Kronthal recalls being out to dinner with Ranieri and a client of
Salomon Brothers when Ranieri spilled soup on his new thin tie and shirt.
"He was pissed off and cursing. He said that if they let him wear his
wide ties, it would have only ruined the tie and not the shirt." Before a

trip to see another client, the State of Alaska, it was pointed out to
Ranieri, who wore only a suit, that since it was March, he might need an
overcoat in Alaska. He gave his American Express card to Liz Abrams,
who bought him an eight-hundred-dollar Chesterfield at Brooks
Brothers. Off went Ranieri to Alaska, resplendent not only in a relatively
new suit but in a brand-new overcoat. However, between the forty-first
floor and Alaska he lost his shoes. He replaced them, apparently dutyfree. He met with the client in his eight-hundred-dollar overcoat and a
nine-teen-dollar pair of bright orange imitation stack boots with heels
six inches high. It was a great act, perhaps the best on Wall Street.
You couldn't put your finger on why, when two seemingly equal people sat
in the same trading position, one made twenty million dollars, and the
other lost twenty million dollars. John Meriwether, Liar's Poker
champion, was the Salomon trading manager who came nearest to
perfection in spotting future trading talent. Yet even he erred. He once
hired a man who panicked whenever he lost money. One day the man,
finding himself in a hole, broke "They're out to get me, they're out to
get me," he shouted over and over until someone hustled him off the
trading floor.
You couldn't always put your finger on losers, but you knew talent when
you saw it. Howie Rubin had it. Of all the traders, Rubin displayed raw
trading instinct. Lewie Ranieri calls Rubin "the most innately talented
young trader I have ever seen." The other traders say he was the trader
most like Lewie Ranieri. One trader remembers that "Lewie would say he
thought the market was going up, and buy a hundred million [dollars'
worth of] bonds. The market would start to go down. So Lewie would buy
two billion more bonds, and of course, the market would then go up.
After he had driven the market up, Lewie would turn to me and say, 'See,
I told you it was going to go up.' Howie had a little of that in him, too."
Rubin joined Salomon Brothers in the fall of 1982 from the Harvard
Business School. What interested everyone most about Rubin, from
Ranieri on down, were the years he had spent counting cards (memorizing
the cards that had been dealt and calculating how it affected the odds)
at a blackjack table in Las Vegas. A Harvard graduate who counted cards
was a rarity: a synthesis of the old Salomon and the new.
In 1977 Rubin was a chemical engineer fresh out of Lafayette College
working for an Exxon refinery in Linden, New Jersey. He made $17,500 a

year, which at the time he thought was good money. "After six months I
was bored," he says. "After a year and a half I was really bored." What
do you do if you are a bored chemical engineer in Linden, New Jersey?
You watch TV and drink beer. Flipping channels one night, Rubin and a
college friend ran across a "Sixty Minutes" piece about a man who made
his living counting cards in blackjack. "Shit, if he can do it, how tough can
it be?" said Rubin. He read three books on the subject and moved to Las
Vegas. In two years in Las Vegas he parlayed $3,000 into $80,000. "The
tough part wasn't breaking the system; the tough part was not getting
tossed out of the casinos," he says. By the time he left, every casino in
town carried his photograph; he would wear disguises to sneak past the
security guards. When, eventually, he became bored with counting cards,
he enrolled in Harvard. He learned that there was such a job as trading
bonds from his more worldly classmates. He knew immediately, he says,
that it was his calling.
Rubin found the prepayment game he played with discount mortgage
securities similar to counting cards. "Blackjack is the only nonindependent outcome game in the casino. What happens in the past affects
what will happen in the future. There are actually times when you have a
statistical advantage, and that is when you make the big bets," he says.
At Salomon he had the advantage of superior information about the past
behavior of homeowners, and only when he had this edge did he make the
bets. What's more, he says, the trading floor at Salomon Brothers felt
like a Las Vegas casino. You made your bets, handled risk, in the midst of
a thousand distractions. To feign indifference before the blackjack
dealer in the casino while he memorized every card that was dealt, Rubin
engaged a neighbor in conversation and drank gin and tonics. At Salomon
Brothers he traded bonds while being hollered at by six salesmen, eating a morning cheeseburger, and watching Ranieri hold a Bic
lighter under the balls of a fellow trader.
In his first year out of the training program, 1983, Rubin made $25
million. The several-hundred-million-dollar question that has never been
answered by the management of Salomon Brothers was first raised by
Howie Rubin: Who really made that money, Howie Rubin or Salomon
Brothers? In Rubin's view it was Howie Rubin. In John Gutfreund's view
it was Salomon Brothers. Gutfreund felt the firm created the
opportunity for Rubin and therefore deserved the bulk of the rewards.

Gutfreund's view, of course, prevailed. The first two years out of the
training program Howie Rubin, like all trainees, was placed in a
compensation bracket. In his first year he was paid $90,000, the most
permitted a first-year trader. In 1984, his second year, Rubin made $30
million trading. He was then paid $175,000, the most permitted a secondyear trader. He recalls, "The rule of thumb at Harvard had been that if
you are really good, you'll make a hundred thousand dollars three years
out." The rule of thumb no longer mattered. In the beginning of 1985 he
quit Salomon Brothers and moved to Merrill Lynch for a three-year
guarantee: a minimum of $1 million a year, plus a percentage of his
trading profits.
Who could blame him? Certainly not his fellow traders. They understood.
You didn't ask a trader to squeeze every last penny out of a market for
Salomon Brothers, train him to exploit the weakness in others, and then
expect him to roll over and purr at bonus time. At the end of each year
the people on the Salomon Brothers trading floor dropped whatever they
were doing for a period of several weeks and traded their careers. What
are they paying me? What are they saying to me about my prospects?
How much money can I get from another firm? There was even a game—
much like Liar's Poker—played by traders against the firm. Wolf
Nadoolman calls it "How to be paid three hundred and fifty thousand
dollars a year and pretend to be upset about it. (By the way, I was very
good at it. Really fabulous)." The point of the exercise was to inform the
firm that maybe, just maybe $350,000 would suffice this year. But next
year, if it didn't pay your properly, you'd be doing a runner. You might be
bluffing. Then again you might not.
John Gutfreund, although himself a trader by training, did not grasp the
contradictions inherent in his compensation system. The unprecedented
profits in the mortgage market strained the Salomon Brothers
spoils system as it had never been strained before. Gutfreund's
attitudes took their final shape in the days when the firm was a
partnership. Loyalty could then be pretty much taken for granted. In a
partnership a trader was required to keep a substantial portion of his
wealth in the firm. If he left the firm, he lost a fortune.
That system ended when Gutfreund sold the firm to Phillips Brothers,
the commodities trader, in 1981. Now, a peach-fuzzed youth (from
Gutfreund's perspective) would emerge from the firm's training

program, be sent to chase a new opportunity in the mortgage market,
reap tens of millions of dollars in profits, and then demand a cut of what
he had produced. Gutfreund had no intention of paying anyone "a cut." He
entertained a notion that X was enough, and his notion was rooted in an
era when paying a million dollars to a second-year trader was unthinkable.
And, anyway, Salomon Brothers, not Howie Rubin, had made that twentyfive million dollars trading.
Gutfreund openly criticized what he considered the overweening greed
of the younger generation. In 1985 he told a reporter from Business
Week as he waved his hand magisterially over his employees on the
trading floor: "I don't understand what goes on inside these pointy little
heads." His hypocrisy was noted and resented by the mortgage traders.
It was easy for Gutfreund to say money didn't matter. He paid himself
more than any chief executive on Wall Street. And he had already made
his fortune by taking forty million dollars out of the sale of the firm to
Phillips Brothers. His attitude—as well as those of other old partners—
toward the firm changed once he had cashed in his chips. He and others
ceased to view Salomon Brothers as a instrument of wealth creation and
began to treat it as an instrument of power and glory, a vast playground
in which they could be the bullies.
Gutfreund especially seemed to revel in the playground's growth. He
loved to point out that Salomon was the world's most powerful
investment bank, with three billion dollars in capital. He took obvious
pleasure from the concept of being a "global" investment bank. Offices
opened and expanded in London, Tokyo, Frankfurt, and Zurich. The firm,
which had employed two thousand people in 1982, had six thousand
people by 1987.
All this can be attributed, one supposes, to a healthy desire to remain
competitive. However, many of the mortgage traders argue that growth
for growth's sake reflected glory upon John Gutfreund. Often he would
point out that Salomon Brothers carried eighty billion dollars of
securities on its books overnight, every night. He would follow this
observation by saying that, in asset size, Salomon Brothers was "the
largest commercial bank in the world" and "one of the forty largest
countries in the world." As one (Jewish) mortgage trader said in
response, "C'mon, John, you're not talking the Netherlands; you're
talking about a bunch of Jews who are leveraged."

The concept that he presided over no more than Jews with leverage was
as alien to Gutfreund as the Netherlands. Salomon Brothers, where he
was boss, was bigger than that. By the commutative property of
executive grandeur, John Gutfreund was bigger than that. Howie Rubin,
on the other hand, didn't really figure, except as a cog. He could be
replaced by another trainee. The traders thought of Gutfreund's system
as a bad trade. The upside was to stay at Salomon, and if the firm
continued to prosper, the trader could hope to be repaid for past
performance. The downside was that the firm ceased to be profitable
and the trader's best years were wasted.
Therefore, Howie Rubin took the three-million-dollar contract from
Merrill Lynch in March 1985 and became a legend in his own time. Word
of Rubin's coup filtered back into our training program, and he was
spoken of by people who had never met him. "Did you hear what Howie
Rubin got at Merrill?" people asked. Rhetorically, of course, since
everyone knew. The Howie Rubin legend drew into mortgage trading
people who planned to leave just as soon as they got their three-milliondollar contracts elsewhere. A whole new attitude toward working at
Salomon Brothers was born: Hit and run.
And that is how Salomon Brothers, and the mortgage trading desk in
particular, became a nursery for the rest of Wall Street. Corporate,
government, and mortgage traders streamed out of the place in everincreasing numbers, to the point where, one day, a senior corporate bond
salesman said he was thinking about moving to Merrill Lynch because he
knew more people there. The mortgage department was hit the hardest
by the phenomenon. From the point of view of other firms, Salomon
mortgage traders were cheap at any price. They provided entry to an
enormous market from which a firm was otherwise excluded. They were
often paid, therefore, far more than they expected.
The reductio ad absurdum of the phenomenon was Ron Dipasquale. In
1984, Dipasquale was, as one trader says, "a third-string mortgage
trader." He had moved out onto the trading desk from the back office
and hadn't much experience trading when Merrill Lynch called and
offered him a million dollars a year guaranteed over two years. He was to
be its new head of mortgage trading (he in fact preceded Rubin). While
it is true that Dipasquale later distinguished himself as a trader, at the
time he knew next to nothing. Merrill Lynch discovered its mistake about

a week too late. Dipasquale had his contract in hand. He was given a seat
in the back office of Merrill Lynch until his contract expired, whereupon
he returned to a standing ovation at Salomon. Hail the conquering hero!
Precious few traders were invited to return to Salomon after they had
jumped ship, but Dipasquale was made an exception. His move, to his
superiors, was a practical joke played on Merrill Lynch.
Howie Rubin wasn 't a joke. The strangest thing about his departure was
his reluctance. He claims he nearly turned down the Merrill Lynch offer.
But once he had decided to accept, he didn't dare turn up at Salomon
Brothers to reveal his plans, for he knew how easily he could be
persuaded to stay. He wanted to stay. He had hoped to have a career
with Salomon Brothers. "I couldn't have been happier there," he says.
What he loved most about the place, he says, is: "All you had to do was
trade." So instead of making an appearance, he telephoned Mortara, who
suggested they meet for lunch at the South Street Seaport.
Even mortgage traders couldn't chose their moments of self-revelation.
Rubin remembers crying as he spoke with Mortara and Kronthal, while
they sat on the curb outside the seaport. "It was like leaving a family,"
he says. Far from trying to persuade Rubin to remain at Salomon, his
superiors made it clear they understood. Howie Rubin, quite simply, had
been bought. From that fate no trader was immune. It could just as
easily have happened to Mortara or Kronthal (though their price tags
would have been higher). Mortara now says, "Look, I tried to be a good
corporate citizen while I was there, but I think the people who
participated in the development of the mortgage market were victims or
at least severely penalized by the Salomon Brothers compensation
system. Their pay was way out of line with their production."
It was an odd tragedy. All parties suffered, yet it was difficult to
generate a whole lot of pity for any of them. The mortgage department
had made a fortune in 1984, while the firm as a whole had not done well.
The traders, therefore, were not paid according to what they produced.
Considering their feelings about the rest of the firm (fuck
'em!), the idea of having to nurse others inn bad years did not sit well.
After Rubin's departure, Tom Kendall, Ste:ve Baum, and top salesman
Rick Borden took the million dollars offere <d each of them by the
Farmers Savings Bank in Davis, California. Stevre Roth and a new
mortgage trader named Andy Astrachan took the million dollars, and

probably much more, offered by Mike Milken at Drexxel Burnham.
All of a sudden three of the four most profitable mortgage traders were
gone (Roth, Baum, and Rubin). The fVourth was Andy Stone, who in 1984
had made seventy million dollars trading fifteen-year mortgages called,
because of their short maturities, Midgets, Gnomes, and Dwarfs. In the
middle of 1985 Stone received a call from Merrill Lynch, which offered
to double his pay. Stone declined. "I thought I would be at Salomon until
I was fifty years old," he s,ays. Like Rubin, he didn't want to leave the
mortgage department fanuily. "Then Merrill asked me what it would take.
They said everybody has his price," he says. Assuming that Merrill would
balk, Stone said his ptrice was four times his 1984 paycheck. Instead
"they said OK." And :so it was done. Stone had accepted a guarantee
sweeter than Rubin' s,», to join his buddy Howie as co-head of mortgage
trading at Merrill Ly inch. At that point Salomon Brothers panicked.
Ranieri and Mortara as.ked Stone to reconsider his move over the
weekend. Since they were liKce family, he did.
What happened next resembles the fate: of any profitable employee who
dallies before leaving Salomon Brot Ihers for a competitor. The
employee is hauled before a series of bigw iigs. The bigwigs attempt to
persuade him, using a variety of arguments, that he is making the
mistake of his life. The first line of argument is usually that without
Salomon Brothers one would end one's dajys in misery. As one trader put
it, "You were made to think anyone who worked at another firm must be
an idiot or an asshole, so if you we;nt to work for another firm, you must
be an idiot or an asshole." The; members of the executive committee
must have realized that, becau sse the traders who had left were smart.
And they were Stone's pals, SKD he would resist the notion that they
were either idiots or assholes. As t Ihe mortgage trader says, "A friend
leaves for Merrill Lynch, and you saiy, 'Wait a minute, he's not an idiot or
an asshole.' Then another frierud leaves. Then it dawns on you.. . ."
On Monday morning Stone saw the saime three men, in the same order,
as had appeared before our training class: Jim Massey, Dale
Horowitz, and John Gutfreund. Massey came first. Massey, as he had
made clear to our training program, operated on the level of fear and
intimidation. "Massey laid a guilt trip on me," says Stone. "He said, 'You
owe us, we made you, you can't leave.' " Stone already distrusted anyone
outs,ide the mortgage department. He quickly put Massey behind him. He

pointed to the seventy million dollars he had made for the firm and said,
"I think we are at least even." Massey passed Stone to Horowitz.
Dale Horowitz was the member of the executive committee who played
the irole of human being. Uncle Dale. "He started out," says Stone, "by
saying, 'I've watched you closely since you've joined us. I've been
following your career. You may not have realized it, but I've taken a
special interest in your development.' " It was the usual line. But it took
an unusual and pitiful turn when Horowitz said, "I had a hand in the move
you made from junk bonds to corporates and corpo-rates to
mortgages. . . ." Wait a second. Stone had never been in junk bonds or
coirporates. Stone realized that Horowitz was describing Andy
Astrachan, not him. Stone had been in mortgage trading from the start.
"He must have asked his secretary for the file on Andy, and she got the
wrong one. I was so embarrassed for him I almost didn't tell him."
Almost. Horowitz passed Stone to Gutfreund.
"John Gutfreund and I were not exactly good buddies," says Stone. "I
walked into his office, and he says, first thing, T guess you're here to
discuss puny problems. You probably want to talk about you and how much
you are paid, instead of big questions like the direction of the firm."
Exactly what this approach was designed to achieve is not clear. Stone
stiffened. He asked Gutfreund if he would sell the mortgage department
for ten million dollars, to which Gutfreund responded, "Of course not.'"
Stone said, "You might as well, 'cause we're all going to quit. Every one of
us will leave for a total increase of ten million dollars." Gutfreund said,
"You're as difficult as your reputation." But before Stone could leave
the office, Gutfreund asked him how much money he would require to
stay. Stone said, "I'll stay here for less money, but I won't let you rape
me." Gutfreund agreed to pay Stone "eighty percent of what Merrill had
offered."
It was the first and last time that management capitulated in the face
of a departing mortgage trader. When news spread at the end of 1985
that Andy Stone had been paid nine hundred thousand dollars—unheard
of for a fourth-year Salomon trader—the corporate and government
departments expressed extreme displeasure. The other mortgage
traders had to be paid hundreds of thousands of dollars more than they
otherwise would, to bring them into line with Stone. But corporates and
governments had been excluded from the bonanza. Salomon etiquette
