Interviews with America's
Top Stock Traders

Jack D. Schwager

HarperBusiness
An Imprint of HarperCollinsPwWuAm

While the methods of investment described in this book are believed to be effective
there is no guarantee that the methods will be profitable in specific applications, owing
to the risk that is involved in investing of almost any kind. Moreover, readers are
specifically advised that the author may invest in certain of the traders about which he is
writing (or has written) and/or may be affiliated with hedge fund(s) that so invest with
such persons or entities. Neither the publisher nor the author assumes liability for any
losses that may be sustained by the use of the method described in this book, and/or
this potential conflict of interest, and any such liability is hereby expressly disclaimed.
STOCK MARKET WIZARDS. Copyright © 2001 by Jack D. Schwager.
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America.
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever
without written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical
articles and reviews. For information address HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.,
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022.
HarperCollins books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales
promotional use. For information please write: Special Markets Department,
HarperCollins Publishers, Inc., 10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022.
FIRST EDITION

Designed lay Fearn Cutler
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Schwager, Jack D., 1948Stock market wizards : interviews with America's top stock traders / by Jack D.
Schwager.
p.
cm.
ISBN 0-06-662058-9
1. Stockbrokers—United States—Interviews. 2. Investment advisors—United
States—Interviews. 3. Floor traders (Finance)—United States—Interviews.
4. Futures market—United States. 5. Financial futures—United States. I. Title.
HG4621 .S2862001
337. 64'0973—dc21

00-058154

In memory of my mother, Margaret Schwager, loved by all
who knew her for her kindness, empathy, and sincerity.
and

In memory of my brother, Kerwin Farkas, deeply loved by
family and many friends whose support never waned_
a reflection of a life well lived.

CONTENTS

Acknowledgments «
Prologue: An Inauspicious Beginning \i
Stuart Walton:
>" Back from the Abyss

Michael Lauer:
> The Wisdom of Value, the Folly of Fad

30

Steve Watson:
> Dialing for Dollars

54

Dana Galante:
^ Against the Current

75

Mark D. Cook:
>«• Harvesting S&P Profits

95

Alphonse "Buddy" Fletcher Jr.:
>• Win-Win Investing

127

Ahmet Okumus:
* Frow Istanbul to Wall Street Bull

148

Mark Minervini:
> Stock Around the Clock

169

Steve Lescarbeau:
h- The Ultimate Trading System

]89

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Michael Masters:
*• Swimming Through the Markets

207

John Bender:
!*> Questioning the Obvious

22J

Claudio Guazzoni:
t- Eliminating the Downside

239

David Shaw:
]»• The Quantitative Edge

254

Steve Cohen:
DO The Trading Room /~»;<$ t

275

Ari Kiev, M.D.:
^ The Mind of a Winner

288

Wizard Lessons

298

Appendix: Options—Understanding the Basics

327

Index

33J

Although I found most of the traders in this book through personal contacts
in the industry, several money manager databases and texts provided
helpful references. In particular, I would cite the following:
Barclay MAP for Windows. This software program, which is updated
monthly, allows searches of an impressively large database of hedge
fund managers. The program is highly intuitive and permits the investor to extract and rank those trading programs that meet multiple
user-defined criteria. (Barclay Trading Group: [641] 472-3456; www.
barclaygrp.com.)
Van Hedge Fund Advisors International Inc. (VAN). A hedge fund
advisory service that compiles its own hedge fund indexes and maintains one of the largest hedge fund databases. The company provided
me with the results of a computer search of hedge fund managers meeting my extremely restrictive set of criteria. ([615] 661-4748; www.
hedgefund .com.)
The CTA Report. A quarterly comprehensive compendium of CTA
performance results, containing a well-designed two-page layout of tables
and charts for each CTA. There is also an easy-to-use Web site for
monthly updates. As the name implies, this service covers managers who
specialize in futures trading; only a small portion of these managers focus
on equity derivatives. (International Traders Research, Inc.: [858] 4590818; www. managedfutures. com.)
The U.S. Offshore Funds Directory. An annual publication that con-

ACKN01

IM

tains one-page summaries and annual returns for over 700 offshore
hedge funds. There is also a web link for updates. ([212] 371-5935; www.
hedgefundnews .com)
When I began my search for traders worthy of inclusion in this volume, my first call was to Doug Makepeace. He has built a career on finding and investing his own and client funds with exceptional traders. Doug
was most generous in sharing information with me, even though doing so
threatened his ability to invest additional funds with these traders in the
future if they became too well known.

Tom DeMark, a renowned technical analyst whose indicators are featured on many of the country's leading financial data services, was particularly vigorous in his efforts to help me find traders for this book. Tom is
in a good position to provide such assistance, holding the unofficial world
record as the technical analyst who has worked for the most (four) Market Wizards or their organizations.
Marty Schwartz and Linda Raschke were two former Market Wizards
("former" referring to the books in which their interviews appeared, not
their trading talent) who helped me find new Market Wizards for this

book.
Other industry contacts who were particularly helpful in aiding my
search for great trading talent include: Sol Waksman and George Van; Bob
Morris, Andy Good, Tony Cimirusti, Loran Fleckenstein, and Jason Perl.
I find it extremely difficult to evaluate the writing quality of any book
I am working on. I lose all sense of perspective. For this reason, it is
invaluable to have someone to provide objective feedback as the book is
being written. Enter my wife, Jo Ann, who read the final draft of each
chapter as soon as it was completed. Her promptness in performing this
task was not a reflection of her eagerness to read the material—in fact,
few topics interest her less than the financial markets—but rather a resignation to the inevitable in the face of my unrelenting nagging. ("Have
you read it yet?") Jo Ann provided honest comments—sometimes brutally
so—and very helpful suggestions, nearly all of which were accepted.
Whatever the defects of this book in its final form, I can only assure the
reader they would have been that much worse without Jo Ann's input.

PROLOGUE
An Inauspicious Beginning
Men are from Mars because they missed the flight to Venus. When to leave
for the airport has always been a subject that my wife and I have viewed
from different perspectives—my view: late enough to make it exciting;
my wife's view: early enough to allow for a traffic jam, a flat tire, airport
shopping, and a full course meal before the flight.
For years I left for airports without allowing for any spare time and
never missed a flight. About eighteen months ago, I moved to Martha's
Vineyard, where the travel time to the airport can be accurately estimated
because of the limited traffic off-season and because the airport is so
small—sort of like the one in the one in the old TV series Wings, only
smaller. (At least it was when I began this book; a new airport has since
opened.)
One morning, only a few months after we had moved to Martha's
Vineyard, my wife, Jo Ann, and I were scheduled to fly to Boston. I was so
cocky about the predictability of getting to the airport on time that I left
our house—approximately a twenty-minute drive away—only thirty-five
minutes before the scheduled departure time. The drive took a few minutes longer than expected, due to being stuck behind a slow driver on the
no-passing, single-lane road; I realized I had cut it just a little bit too
tight.
"We'll still make it," I assured my wife, "but we won't have much extra
time." She seemed skeptical—irrationally so, I thought. We pulled into
the airport entrance only ten minutes before flight time. Even though the
parking lot was only a stone's throw from the terminal, I dropped Jo Ann
at the entrance, saying, "Let them know we're here."
XI

AN I N A U S P I C I O U S BEGINNING

When I returned about one minute later, I found Jo Ann standing outside waiting for me with a troubled expression. Confused to see her
there, I asked, "What's wrong?"
"The plane left," she said in a voice that was a cross between disappointment and "I told you so."
"What do you mean, the plane left?" I asked, glancing at my watch,
even though I knew the exact time. "It's only eight minutes to ten."
I went into the terminal, angry that the small prop plane had left without us before the scheduled time. "I don't get it," I said to the woman at
the airline counter, all prepared to be the aggrieved customer.
She couldn't have been nicer. "Our planes leave as soon as everyone is
here. Since we hadn't heard from you to tell us you were running late, we
assumed you weren't coming. If you had called, we would have held the
plane." And, you know, they would have, too; that's how Martha's Vineyard works. How could I be angry at anyone other than myself after that
explanation?
Fast-forward about six months—the beginning of the interview
process for this book. I am scheduled to catch the first flight on an intricate itinerary that will take me to four states in four days for six interviews. This schedule has no leeway for missed flights.
Wiser from experience, I make sure to leave early for the airport,
allowing for plenty of extra time. On the drive there, Jo Ann, who is dropping me off, notices that I have lint on my blue blazer. She offers the
helpful hint that I should ask the people at the airport counter for tape to
brush it off. We arrive about thirty minutes early. I pull up to the curb and
say good-bye to Jo Ann. After checking in and sitting for a while, I realize
1 have enough time to take care of my lint-laden jacket. I walk up to the
counter and obtain the necessary tape.
There are about a dozen people in the small waiting room. A few
moments later there is an announcement for my flight: "Now boarding
section one, seats one to eight." I pull out the red, plastic, envelope-size
boarding pass and notice that it is emblazoned with the number 11.
"How quaint," I muse, "that they would board such a small flight in two
sections." I sit down and return to my lint-removal project.
I'm sitting there absentmindedly, picking lint off my jacket. Suddenly

I snap back into reality. I realize that it must be at least five or ten minutes since they called for the boarding of the first group of passengers. I

look around the waiting area and, to my horror, I discover that it is virtually deserted. I jump up, run through the doors to the airstrip, and see a
small plane with propellers whirring. "Wait!" I yell, waving my arms frantically as I rush toward the plane. I see my whole precisely orchestrated
trip—all four days, four states, and six interviews of it—unraveling on
the spot.
The airline attendant intercepts me. I flash my large red boarding
pass. "You're not going anywhere," he says firmly. At first I think he means
that it's too late and I missed the plane. But then he adds, "Your section
will be leaving in five minutes." That's when I learned that at the
Martha's Vineyard airport "sections" refer to different planes!
I slink back to my seat. The moment of panic having passed, my sense
of awareness returns, and I am able to appreciate completely the full
scope of my stupidity. The last time I felt that embarrassed I had just
asked an infrequently seen relative when she was "expecting," only to
learn subsequently that she had given birth two months earlier but had

obviously retained a good portion of the gained weight. Oops.
"Okay, okay," you're saying, "a slightly amusing anecdote—maybe—
but what does this have to do with trading or investing?" Simply this: If
you're too busy picking the lint off your jacket, you're liable to miss the
plane. In other words, don't get so caught up in the details that you miss
the big picture. Here are some examples of market myopia:
> a trader who does exhaustive research trying to identify the most
promising new technology companies but overlooks the fact that a 70
percent price rise in the sector during the past six months implies an
unusually high-risk investment environment
> a trader who scrutinizes a company's financial statements and reports
but fails to realize that the company's soaring profits have been due to
a single product whose future sales are threatened by the imminent
entry of new competitors
K a trader who is engrossed with finding better timing-entry methods
but virtually ignores such critical questions as: When and how will
positions be exited? How will risk be controlled?

All of these examples contain the same basic message: Maintain a
whole-picture perspective. Focus on the entire market and the sector, not
just the individual stock. Be attentive to qualitative factors, not just the
available quantitative information. Develop a trading plan that encompasses all the aspects of trading, not just the entry strategy.

STUART WALTON

Back from the Abyss

In June 1999, at the peak Of his career, after eight years establishing one of the.
most extraordinary stock trading track records of the 1990s, and with
$ 150 million under management, Stuart Walton returned all money to
his investors and walked away from trading completely. The emotional
repercussions of a marital breakup were interfering with his ability to
focus on trading, and he did not feel it was right to manage money until
he could once again devote "100 percent energy and enthusiasm" to the
task. In the preceding eight years, he had achieved an astounding 115
percent average annual compounded return in trading profits (92 percent
for his clients after deducting management fees), with annual returns
ranging from a high of 274 percent to a low of 63 percent (excluding the
1999 partial year).
Stuart Walton's career as a trader is marked by a string of contradictions and paradoxes. He wanted to be an artist or a writer; he became a
trader. Though he valued academics and disdained the financial world,
the markets became his profession. He once hated trading so much that
he awoke feeling that he couldn't do it for another day and quit his job
that morning; several years later, the markets were his endeavor and passion. His initial forays into stock trading were marked by such ineptitude
that he nearly went bankrupt, yet he subsequently became so skilled that
he more than doubled his money annually.
I visited Walton, a Canadian expatriate, at his office in downtown San
Francisco. I discovered that, although managing a nine-digit sum, he had
no trading assistants, no back office staff, no marketing people, no programmers, not even a full-time secretary. His firm, Reindeer Capital,

BACK FROM T H F A B Y S S

consisted of Stuart Walton alone. His isolation was deliberate. After having gone wrong so often by listening to tips and opinions, he had come to
realize the importance of not being influenced by others while trading.
Walton was relaxed and outgoing. We talked for five hours straight
without interruption. The time passed quickly.

Is there some principle you wish to symbolize by the name, or is
it just a matter of honoring your great-grandfather?
I tell people that my great-grandfather added more value to society
than I ever will.
When did you first get involved in the markets?
As soon as I graduated from McGill University with an M.B.A. I originally wanted to be a cartoonist.

Is there some significance to the name of the firm or are you just
partial to reindeer?
The firm is named after my great-grandfather, William Gladstone
Walton, who was given the nickname "Reindeer" for a famous trek he
conceived and led. Much of what I know about him I learned from
my grandfather, who passed away last year at the age of one hundred,
narrowly missing the feat of having lived in three separate centuries.
In 1892, at the age of twenty-three, Reindeer Walton lelt England to
work as a missionary in northern Canada. He typically traveled over
two thousand miles a year by canoe and dogsled, visiting his far-flung
constituency—the Indians and Eskimos that lived around the Arctic
Circle.
One year, vast forest fires swept through northern Quebec,
destroying almost all the region's vegetation and game, and leaving
the native population at the brink of starvation. Reindeer Walton
came up with the idea of herding the Siberian reindeer, which are
also called caribou, from Alaska to northern Quebec. Through sheer
perseverance, he convinced the Canadian government to finance the
trek, which he organized and led. It took him five years, from 1921 to
1925, to herd three thousand reindeer across northern Canada. Reindeer are not like cattle; they move only when they want to move, and
they go in all different directions.
How did he keep them herded together?
Caribou will follow the feeding path. He used a lot of foresight in
choosing the right route. He succeeded in getting three-quarters of
the herd to migrate; the remainder died or dispersed. His trek permanently changed the migration patterns for Siberian reindeer. The portion of the herd that survived flourished in northern Quebec, and he
became a local hero.

A cartoonist with an M.B.A.? Were you planning to be the
world's first business cartoonist?
No, the cartoonist ambitions came earlier. When I graduated from
college, I definitely wanted to be a cartoonist. 1 sat down with the
head of the art department, and he told me, "If you feel you know
how to draw and represent the human body as well as one of the masters of art history and are then prepared to make five dollars per hour
drawing cartoons, then this is definitely the career path for you." His
comments threw some cold water on my plans. I had also done some
writing in college, and a few of my short stories had been published. I
thought that journalism might be a good alternative career path that
allowed some creativity.
Your interests seem to be so strongly artistic. Why did you go for

an M.B.A.?
Because the journalism idea fell through as well, and I decided I
needed to earn a living.
What went wrong with journalism?
I applied to several journalism schools. That summer, while visiting
my parents, who were in Brazil at the time, I received a rejection call
from Carleton University, which was my first choice for a journalism
school. I received the call during a party. Maybe it was because I'd
had too many Brazilian caipirinhas, which is their rum concoction,
but I said to myself, "I guess this is another one of life's crossroads."
So I decided to give up the idea of becoming a journalist. I guess I
didn't want to do it badly enough to pursue it.

In retrospect, do you consider your rejection from journalism
school a lucky event?
I consider it a huge stroke of luck. My father always told me that I
had to differentiate between my hobbies and my career. I think he's

STUART WALTQ*

right. My mother recently asked me if I had any regrets at not having
pursued any of these other interests. At first I said that I didn't,
because I was basking in the success I've had with this business, but
every day that goes by, I regret it more and more. Eventually, I can see
myself veering back.
Veering back to drawing or writing?
Maybe both, maybe neither. I always thought that the best way to
combine my interests in drawing and writing was films, particularly
short films. I have a lot of ideas already. Nothing that would be commercial; stuff that probably would have an end audience of three people in the world.
Have you ever made any films?
No, I would have to take a film course just to learn how to point the
camera.
Are you thinking of giving up trading in lieu of these other
interests?
I really admire people who do what they want to do and don't care
about anything else. I had a friend in college who was determined to
be a rock and roll star. He formed the band The Cowboy Junkies.
When he started college, he couldn't even play a guitar, and now he is
sold out at every concert. But I know myself. I like the comforts of
life, and for me this business is the best way to acquire them.
Although, eventually, I will probably pursue some of these other
interests, it's not something I see happening in the immediate future.
What happened after you were rejected from journalism school?
I decided to go for an M.B.A because I thought it was the best way to
get a job.
Did you give any thought to what you might do with your
M.B.A.?
I intended to go into advertising because it was the one business
career I thought might satisfy my creative side. But the opportunity
never arose. When I graduated, the economy in Canada was terrible.
There were only two jobs offered on campus. One was a management trainee position with Lloyds Bank. The job appealed to me

because of the location: New York or London. I thought it would be
great to work in either of those two cities. I applied and got the job.

BACK FROM THE ABYSS

They sent me to a training program in New York. I spent most of the
training program in the foreign exchange trading room, which was a
fluke because I was supposed to be trained as a loan officer and sent
back to Canada.
So you fell into a trading environment entirely by chance.
That is one reason why I believe anyone can do this job; I don't think
you have to be born to do it.
I don't know about that. I can assure you that among the hundreds of thousands of people who try trading, very few can even
remotely approach your track record. What was your job at the
foreign exchange desk?
I was just a flunky. I took customer orders and did other assorted
tasks. 1 had to be at work at 3:30 A.M.—which was brutal for a single
guy living in New York—to get everything ready for the traders. I
clipped newspaper articles for them and made sure their order tickets
were in place. It was a glorified gofer position.
Did you have any interest in financial markets at the time?
None at all. I was still wrapped up in the idealism of my previous academic life. I looked down on my M.B.A. My thoughts were, "What
happens to all the learning and academics I've done? Does it all just
get shoved away for the rest of my life?"
The job in the foreign exchange department didn't help matters at
all. If anything, it turned me off to trading because of all the day-today friction. The job was my first introduction to Americans; I had
been surrounded by Canadians all my life. Canadians are more laidback; they are more concerned about etiquette than going for the
jugular or getting their point across. There were traders on the desk
who would just scream at me all the time. Most times, I didn't even
know why. Maybe it was because they needed someone to take it out
on when their positions went bad, or maybe it was because I didn't do
things quickly enough for them. I would go home every night upset
because someone had shouted at me.
How long did you stay at this job?
For about six months. I left because I found out through the
grapevine that I was about to be transferred to Toronto. At that point,
I loved living in New York, and I had also just met my wife-to-be and
