
8.4 ABSOLUTE RETURNS — RISK REDUCTION
Just as a corporation has to decide whether to run their Treasury operation as a proﬁt or as a risk
reduction centre, so a portfolio manager has to make the same kind of choice. While one can
theoretically change one’s core approach to managing the portfolio at any time, it is usually
better to make that choice right at the start. In the process, the portfolio manager should decide

160

Currency Strategy

what style of portfolio management is to be adopted as regards the underlying investments, the
desired return proﬁle of the portfolio and also the style of currency management to be used.
In the case of a portfolio manager who is focusing on absolute returns, the currency risk
management style that is synonymous with this focuses on reducing the risk of the overall
portfolio. This in turn usually means adopting a passive style of currency risk management.
8.4.1 Passive Currency Management
Passive currency hedging or currency management involves the creation of a currency hedging
benchmark and sticking to that benchmark come what may, avoiding any slippage. As a result,
it involves the taking of standard currency hedges and then continuing to roll those for the life
of the investment. The two obvious ways of establishing a passive hedging strategy are for
instance:

r Three-month forward (rolled continuously)
r Three-month at-the-money forward call (rolled continuously)
The advantage of passive currency management is that it reduces or eliminates the currency
risk (depending on whether the benchmark is fully or partially hedged). The disadvantage is
that it does not incorporate any ﬂexibility and therefore cannot respond to changes in market
dynamics and conditions. Passive currency management can be done either by the portfolio
manager themselves or by a currency overlay manager, and focuses on reducing the overall
risk proﬁle of the portfolio.
8.4.2 Risk Reduction
The emphasis on risk reduction within a passive currency management style deals with the
basic idea that the portfolio’s return in the base currency is equal to:
The return of foreign assets invested in + the return of the foreign currency
This is a simple, but hopefully effective way of expressing the view that there are two separate
and distinct risks present within the decision to invest outside of the base currency. The motive
of risk reduction is therefore to hedge to whatever extent decided upon the return of the foreign
currency. From this basic premise, we can extrapolate the following:
Return (unhedged) = Return (asset) + Return (currency)
and
Return (hedged) = Return (asset) + Return (hedge currency)
The overall aim remains the same, and that is to reduce the overall risk of the portfolio,
maximizing the total or absolute return in the process. In other words, it is to boost the
portfolio’s Sharpe ratio, which is usually deﬁned as the (annual) excess return as a proportion
of the (annual) standard deviation or risk involved.
It should be noted from this formula however that some investors balk at the idea of hedging
on the simplistic view that the hedge cost automatically reduces not just the hedged return
of the asset but the asset’s total return in base currency terms. This is not necessarily the
case. Actually, the converse can be argued, namely that the hedge reduces or eliminates any
@Team-FLY

Managing Currency Risk II

161

Figure 8.1 USD balanced investor, 1973–1999: EAFE + Canada combined to 60% US equity/40%
US bond portfolio

possible currency loss. Whether or not the investor hedges, there is the foreign currency return
to be considered. That may add or detract from the asset return in foreign currency terms,
and therefore may in turn boost or reduce the asset return in domestic currency terms. The
hedging cost component will clearly depend on a number of variables, including the currency
hedging benchmark and the ﬁnancial instruments that can be used, but has clear parameters.
The potential unhedged currency loss is theoretically limitless.
Example
As an example of risk reduction, we will take an average balanced investor with international
exposure. As Figure 8.1 shows, looking from 1973 to 1999, currency hedging can signiﬁcantly
reduce the overall risk proﬁle of the portfolio.

8.5 SELECTING THE CURRENCY HEDGING BENCHMARK
A crucial decision for portfolio managers who want to manage their currency risk, whether
actively or passively, is the selection of their currency hedging benchmark. After all, when we
are talking about managing currency risk, we are really talking about establishing whether or
not there may be a need to hedge out that currency risk. Using a currency hedging benchmark
is a more disciplined and rigorous way of managing currency risk than either not hedging or
at the other extreme conducting all currency hedging on a discretionary and “gut feel” basis.
There are four main currency hedging benchmarks used by institutional investors, which
can be divided into:

r 100% hedged benchmark
r 100% unhedged benchmark
r Partially hedged benchmark
r Option hedged benchmark

162

Currency Strategy

Being 100% hedged is usually not the optimal strategy, apart from in exceptional cases. Equally,
using a currency hedging benchmark of 100% unhedged would seem to defeat the purpose
of managing currency risk, again apart from in exceptional cases. A further consideration is
that many funds are not allowed to use options as they are viewed as a speculative ﬁnancial
instrument, ironically in the same way that some corporations are also not allowed to use them.
This still leaves them however with the choice of three possible currency hedging benchmarks of
100% hedged, 100% unhedged or partially hedged. The primary instrument for such hedging
would be the forward for passive currency management, though active currency managers
would no doubt have greater ﬂexibility, both in the currencies in which they can operate and
the ﬁnancial instruments they can use.
Currency hedging benchmarks of 0% or 100% are known as asymmetrical or polar benchmarks and have obvious limitations. With a polar benchmark, an active currency manager is
able to take positions only in one direction. As a result, their ability to add value is also limited.
For example, it is extremely difﬁcult for a currency manager to be able to add value operating
under an unhedged currency benchmark when foreign currencies are appreciating because the
manager is generally unable to take on additional foreign currency exposure. The best the
manager can do is to mimic the benchmark by holding the unhedged benchmark exposure and
avoiding hedging. Similarly, when operating under a fully hedged benchmark, it is difﬁcult for
a manager to add value when foreign currencies are falling.
Adoption and use of benchmarks depends critically on the currency risk management style,
for which the type of fund is clearly a key determinant. For instance, a pension fund manager
may use a fully hedged or alternatively unhedged currency benchmark to either reduce risk
on the one hand or minimize transaction costs on the other. Meanwhile, the active currency
manager will seek a partially hedged benchmark, preferably 50%, to give them as much
ﬂexibility and room as possible with which to be able to add value. With such a symmetrical
benchmark, active currency managers can take advantage of both bull and bear markets in their
currencies. In the context of relative returns, it should therefore be of no surprise that there is
good evidence to suggest that symmetrical benchmarks have consistently added more “alpha”
than their asymmetrical counterparts.
Example
A classic example of a group of international investors that typically use one speciﬁc type of
currency hedging benchmark is that of international equity funds, which generally either do
not hedge or adopt unhedged benchmarks. Though the technical details are different between
these two approaches, they amount to the same thing. There may be some debate as to what
should be the optimum currency benchmark for an international equity fund in terms of the
hedging ratio. However, what is clear is that the hedging ratio for these should in theory
be higher than for those funds with only a small portion of international equity risk, on the
simple premise that the higher the currency risk the higher the required hedge ratio. Despite
this, unhedged currency benchmarks remain very popular among this group of investors. In
part, this is because many fund managers still suggest that the long-term expected return
of currencies is zero and in addition that currency hedging generates unnecessary transaction
costs. Furthermore, the idea that investing in a country means investing in the currency remains
prevalent within international equity funds.
For the reasons that we have already outlined earlier in this chapter, we would dispute both
these views. The very idea of long term is subjective for one thing. For another, currency

Managing Currency Risk II

163

weakness in the short term may lead to intolerable mark-to-market and tracking error deterioration. Finally, the trading and analytical dynamics of currency and asset markets are as we
suggested different from one another, ergo the two risks they represent should be treated and
managed separately and independently from one another. Generally speaking therefore, we
would suggest having an unhedged currency benchmark would be inappropriate, even supposing the currency risk management motive was for risk reduction rather than adding alpha.
Using a partially hedged benchmark can undoubtedly reduce the portfolio’s overall risk and
thus boost its Sharpe and information ratios.
A possible exception to this broad disagreement with the general idea of using unhedged
benchmarks is where the fund has only a small portion of its assets in international as opposed
to domestic equities. Indeed, if the international allocation of an equity fund is below 10–15%,
it may not make sense to have a hedging benchmark above that allocation as that might in
fact add to the portfolio’s risk while detracting from the return. In other words, under certain
circumstances it may make sense to use an unhedged benchmark for those equity funds with
only a small international allocation. Generally however, if an international equity fund has
an international allocation that signiﬁcantly exceeds its benchmark weight, this represents
unnecessary currency risk that should be managed.

8.6 RELATIVE RETURNS — ADDING ALPHA
Asset managers who are focused on absolute returns when managing their currency risk tend to
use strategies that are characterized by risk reduction, adopting a passive currency management
approach in order to achieve this. By contrast, funds that are focused on relative returns tend to
manage currency risk more actively. Their aim is after all to outperform an unhedged position,
or in some cases the hedged benchmark, in other words to “add alpha”. In this, there is no
“right” and “wrong”. It depends completely on the risk management style of the fund and what
risk approach it takes towards both the underlying assets and also the embedded currency risk.
8.6.1 Active Currency Management
Active currency management around a currency benchmark means the fund has given either the
asset manager or a professional currency overlay manager the mandate to “trade” the currency
around the currency hedging benchmark for the explicit purpose of adding alpha to the total
return of the portfolio.
With active currency management, the emphasis should be on ﬂexibility, both in terms of the
availability of ﬁnancial instruments one can use to add alpha and also in terms of the currency
hedging benchmark. On the ﬁrst of these, an active currency manager should have access to a
broad spectrum of currency instruments in order to boost their chance of adding value. Similarly,
their ability to add value is signiﬁcantly increased by the adoption of a 50% or symmetrical
currency hedging benchmark rather than by a 100% hedged or 100% unhedged benchmark.
8.6.2 Adding “Alpha”
The motive of risk reduction is primarily defensive, in that it seeks to defend or maintain the
portfolio’s return within a given tolerance of overall risk. That for adding “alpha” on the other
hand is quite different, in so much as “alpha” refers to the excess return generated by an active
currency manager relative to a passive hedging programme.

164

Currency Strategy

Economic theory suggests that the long-term return of a currency is zero, so how can an
active currency manager add value or “alpha”? There appear to be two aspects to this question.
Firstly, currency markets are dominated by short-term movement. Thus, while their long-term
return may be zero, their short-term returns (and losses!) may be signiﬁcant. Secondly, it should
be remembered that the same theory that suggested there were fundamental equilibrium levels
for currencies also suggests that their long-term returns are zero. While not rejecting such a
theory outright, it should surely be treated with some care, put in this context.
Indeed, there is a ﬁne — and increasing — body of academic work that suggests that contrary
to theory, managing currency risk can indeed add “alpha”. Among these, I will draw out several
notable examples. Firstly, while formulating his “Universal Hedging Policy” in 1989, Fisher
Black suggested that currency was, contrary to theory, not a zero sum game and investors could
indeed increase their returns by holding currency inventories. Needless to say, this contradicted
the widely held view that currencies could not provide added value because currency markets
were perfectly efﬁcient. A relatively short time after that, Mark Kritzman put forward the
view that active currency managers could take advantage of the apparent serial correlation
in currency returns. Subsequent research by Taylor (1990) and Silber (1994) targeted market
trends as being behind persistent positive returns from currency managers.
Two further research reports that should be mentioned are those by Strange (1998, updated
2001) and The Frank Russell Company (2000). In the ﬁrst case, the survey by Brian Strange,
as published in Pensions and Investment (15/6/98), entitled “Do Currency Managers Add
Value?” stated that of the 152 individual currency overlay programmes managed by 11 ﬁrms,
these produced an average of 1.9% per year over a 10-year review period from 1988 to 1998,
while simultaneously reducing the risk of the portfolio. In other words, not only did currency
managers consistently add value, but their action of seeking to manage currency risk also helped
lower the overall risk proﬁle of the portfolio, thus boosting the Sharpe ratio from both sides!
The second example is that of the Frank Russell study of May 2000 entitled “Capturing Alpha
through Active Currency Overlay”, which analysed the historical performance of currency
overlay mandates and conﬁrmed the view that managing currency risk does indeed add value
or “alpha”.
As noted above, a host of empirical studies have proven conclusively that active currency
management can indeed boost the portfolio’s return, both on an absolute basis and in this context
relative to not hedging, in contrast to classical exchange rate theory. In line with this, a number
of studies have been published suggesting clear market inefﬁciencies, which might therefore
be taken advantage of by active currency managers. For instance, the 1993 study by Kritzman,
suggesting that the discount/premium of the currency forward contract “systematically and
signiﬁcantly overestimated the subsequent change in the spot rate”. Kritzman also introduced
the concept of so-called “bilateral asymmetry”, referring to a bias by risk-averse investors for
the perceived predictable returns of the interest rate differential as opposed to the unpredictable
returns of the currency. Work by Choie (1993) supported these ﬁndings. Overall, a body of
informed opinion has developed, supportive of the view that active currency management can
add value.
After ﬁnally admitting that currency markets may offer proﬁt potential, whether over the
short or long term, academic theorists have suggested that such proﬁt opportunities may exist
in currency markets because there are some currency market participants that are not solely or
even mainly motivated by proﬁt. Classical theory suggests rational currency market participants
are solely proﬁt-seeking and moreover offset each other, with the result that any outstanding
proﬁt opportunities are instantly arbitraged away. Thus, from this, they seek to explain the

Managing Currency Risk II

165

existence of sustained proﬁt opportunities within currency markets by suggesting that nonproﬁt-seeking currency market participants such as central banks, tourists and national or
corporate Treasuries effectively distort pricing. To me, such a view appears more reﬂective of
the guesswork of someone who does not actually know the answer but is afraid to own up.
Currency markets generate proﬁts because it is the theory that they should not that is wrong
rather than the currency market itself.
Active currency management can add value because there is value to be had in currency
markets, plain and simple. Within this, an active currency manager will clearly favour the most
ﬂexibility possible to add that value, both in terms of the currency benchmark that they have
to operate under and the currencies and ﬁnancial instruments with which they are allowed
to trade. For the active currency manager, the foreign currency return is not just a matter of
currency translation of the underlying asset, but also of the excess return or alpha that the
currency manager is able to add. The alpha an active currency manager generates is usually
measured against an unhedged position. However, probably a truer idea of the alpha the active
currency manager generates would come from comparing their returns to those of a passive
currency management strategy of maintaining the benchmark hedge ratio. Historically, the
typical mandate has allowed managers to vary the hedge ratio between 0 and 100% regardless
of the benchmark.
8.6.3 Tracking Error
Just as corporations have to deal with “forecasting error” in terms of the deviation of forecast
exchange rates relative to the actual future rate, so investors have to deal with “tracking error”
within their portfolios, which is the return of the portfolio relative to the investment benchmark
index being used. Within this, there is “expected” and “realized” tracking error. Expected
tracking error is as the name suggests determined before the fact — ex ante — whereas the
realized tracking error is determined after the fact.
Determining the relevance of tracking error is also a function of comparing the portfolio’s
hedging strategy with a random strategy, which creates hedge/don’t hedge signals with equal
probability on a regular basis. Using polar benchmarks — i.e. 0% or 100% hedged — the equal
probability of the outcome of the random strategy suggests that hedge deviations will be
zero in half the cases and 100% in half the cases. However, with a partially hedged currency
benchmark, the deviations will vary in direct proportion to the ratio of the benchmark. For
instance, for a symmetrical or 50% hedged currency benchmark, the deviations will be 50%
from each side of the benchmark.
From this, we can gather two things, ﬁrstly that the tracking error — or the deviation — is a
function of the hedged ratio used for benchmarking and secondly that the tracking error for a
partially hedged benchmark should be less than that for a polar benchmark. Indeed, generally,
the tracking error for a symmetrical or 50% currency hedging benchmark should be around 70%
of the tracking error using polar benchmarks. Expressed differently, the tracking error of a polar
benchmark should be 1.41 (square root of 2) times higher than that of a 50% hedged benchmark.
The advantage of a symmetrical or 50% currency hedged benchmark for a portfolio manager
is that it reduces the tracking error of the portfolio and also enables them to participate in both
bull and bear markets compared to the polar benchmark where the participation is limited to
either/or.
Tracking error can be further reduced by a technique known as “matched hedging”, which
increases or decreases the hedge ratio relative to the change in asset allocation. Historically,
@Team-FLY

166

Currency Strategy

the act of asset allocation itself within ﬁxed income portfolios has been a major and seemingly
unavoidable factor in increasing a portfolio’s tracking error. Matched hedging can reduce
though clearly not eliminate this.
Tracking error can also occur under passive currency management. This is because in order
to implement a passive currency hedging programme a portfolio manager still has to adjust the
amount of the currency hedge relative to the value of the underlying as it changes on a regular
basis — i.e. once a month. In reality, many portfolio managers don’t bother to do this. As a
result, the residual that is left over- or under-hedged contributes to the tracking error. In this,
the portfolio manager has to balance the transaction costs of re-balancing the currency hedges
against the negative effect on tracking error.

8.7 EXAMPLES OF ACTIVE CURRENCY MANAGEMENT
STRATEGIES
There are a wide variety of active currency management strategies that are used in the market,
varying at one end of the spectrum from entirely discretionary-based trading to strict rule-based
strategies. Three prominent strategies that we will look at in this section are closer to the latter
rather than the former end of this spectrum:

r Differential forward strategy
r Simple trend-following strategy
r Optimization of the carry trade
All three of these strategies have consistently added alpha to a portfolio if followed rigorously
and interestingly have also proven to be risk reducing compared to unhedged benchmarks.
Thus, they also help to boost signiﬁcantly the portfolio’s Sharpe ratio. With what follows, the
contributions and advice of Henrik Pedersen of the CitiFX Risk Advisory Group and Emmanuel
Acar of Bank of America’s Risk Management Advisory Group are gratefully acknowledged.
8.7.1 Differential Forward Strategy
The core idea behind this is that of “forward rate bias”, or the reality that forward rates are
poor predictors of future spot exchange rates, in contrast to the theories of covered interest
rate parity and unbiased forward parity. We have looked at some of the academic backing for
this admission earlier in this chapter, notably by Fama (1984), Kritzman (1993) and ﬁnally
Bansal and Dahlquist (2000), who suggested that the negative correlation presented by Fama
between future exchange rate changes and current interest rate differentials is crucially linked
to changes in macroeconomic variables.
As outlined by Acar and Maitra (2000), the differential forward strategy seeks to take
advantage of the apparent market inefﬁciencies as represented by “forward rate bias” by
hedging the currency risk only when the interest rate differential is in favour of the hedger. That
is to say, only when the forward points are at a discount. Conversely, the currency manager
should not hedge currency risk when the forward points are at a premium and consequently
the interest rate differential would reﬂect a cost. More speciﬁcally, when the interest rate
differential pays the investor to hedge, the currency manager should have a hedge ratio of
100%. Conversely, when the interest rate differential costs the investor to hedge, the hedge
