
outlook.
Geopolitical issues: It seems like a fact of life now, but geopolitical tensions weren’t
always ever-present, as they seem to be today, from North Korean nuclear tests to
political upheaval in the Middle East or trade disputes with China. The USD is the most
vulnerable to geopolitical issues, given the size of it economy, reliance on world trade,
and potential military involvement. After geopolitical tensions subside, the market is
quick to revert to preexisting themes.
Political elections or uncertainty: Changes of government and political uncertainty in the
major-currency countries can certainly dent the market’s sentiment toward the currency
concerned. But shortly after the political situation is resolved, political issues tend to fade
quickly into the background.

Analyzing technical themes
Technical themes are perhaps a little harder to grasp than fundamental themes (see the preceding
section), especially if you’re not familiar with technical analysis (see Chapter 11). But to make a
long story short, sometimes currency prices move simply because currency prices are moving.
The fundamental economic or political themes may not have changed dramatically, but price levels
have, and that is frequently enough to bring major market interest out of the woodwork.
In most cases, breaks of major technical or price levels will be in the direction suggested by the
prevailing fundamental themes, but the timing is often suspect and can leave traders scratching
their heads, asking what just happened. But sizeable price movements have a way of taking on a
life of their own, forcing market participants to take action based on price adjustments alone.
In addition, the prevalence of technical analysis as the basis for many trading decisions can add
weight to existing fundamental-driven moves, generating yet another theme to propel the move —
the technical theme. It may be a trending market movement that attracts trend-following traders
who don’t give a hoot about the underlying fundamentals. As long as the technical trend is in place,
they keep pushing the market in the direction it’s going, perhaps far beyond what the fundamentals
would dictate.
When a currency pair has broken through important technical levels, it’s also going to attract
breakout traders — speculators who focus on jumping in on breaks of key price levels, looking to
get in on the move for an easy trade. (But nothing is ever quite that easy, and breakout traders can
suffer when the breaks are false and the ranges survive.) The additional interest entering the
market in the direction of the move again propels the price farther and faster than it may ordinarily
go.

Having a sense of where a currency pair stands from a technical perspective is always

important, even if you’re not basing your trades on technical analysis.
The technical-theme phenomenon also stems from several real-life considerations that all relate
back to the relative level of currency prices.
Option interest: The currency options market is massive and is one of the reasons that the
spot currency market is as large as it is. Option-related hedging is one of the biggest
sources of spot market activity outside short-term spot speculation. When spot prices have
been trading in well-worn territory (a relatively narrow price range, for example), option
interest tends to accumulate around the recent range. If the ranges are broken, sizeable
option-related interest is frequently forced to come into the market and trade in the
direction of the price breakout, either to unwind hedges or to cover new exposures created
by the price break, and usually some combination of both. The amounts can be staggering,
propelling the directional move in an extreme way.
Systematic models: I look at so-called black box or algorithmic trading in Chapter 3.
Algorithmic trading has dramatically increased in scale in recent years, with some
estimates suggesting 30 to 35 percent of daily volume is from algorithmic systems. In
many cases, systematic models trading decisions are generated based solely on price
movements. They may be short a currency pair until a certain price level on the upside is
traded, for example, which triggers a signal to exit the short and go long, no questions
asked.
Hedgers: Large-scale hedgers may be forced to come into the market if a rapid and
unexpected price movement develops. Many firms identify an internal hedging rate for
corporate and financial management purposes. As long as they’re able to sell above or
buy below that rate, they’re looking good. If the market moves sharply on them, they may
be forced to jump in on the direction of the move for fear of not ever seeing the internal
hedging rate again.

Reality Check: Expectations versus Actual
When it comes to reacting to data reports and market events, the forex market typically
displays two responses. The first reaction is a short-term price response to the data report or
news itself, which is where most of the intraday fireworks in the forex market go off. The
second reaction, usually more important in the bigger picture, comes in later trading, when
the underlying themes (outlined earlier in this chapter) are updated to reflect the latest piece
of news or data.
In one case, the data or news may be in line with the dominant themes of the moment, and the
initial directional price reaction may be extended even further in subsequent trading action. The

market may be anticipating lower U.S. interest rates, for example, and a weak U.S. consumer
confidence report is released, sending the USD initially lower against other currencies. Because
the weaker confidence reading supports the theme that the U.S. economy may be weakening,
additional selling interest may materialize and lead to further price declines in the USD.
In other cases, the data report may fly in the face of the prevailing market themes, leading to an
initial reaction in the opposite direction of the recent theme. The market may be trading on the
theme that Eurozone interest rates are going higher and that the Eurozone economic outlook is
improving. A subsequent Eurozone retail sales report may come in on the weak side, potentially
leading to an initial market reaction that sees the euro weaken. Whether the euro’s move lower
will be sustained depends largely on what the market decides the latest retail sales report means in
terms of the larger theme of stronger European growth and higher Eurozone interest rates.
The data report may have been influenced by bad weather keeping shoppers at home, for example,
and may be interpreted as just a bump in the road on the way to higher Eurozone interest rates. In
such a case, initial euro weakness may be short lived and eventually reverse course higher. On the
other hand, the weak retail sales report may cause the market to reconsider that higher European
Central Bank (ECB) rates are a sure thing and keep on selling euro.

Of course, there’s never a set recipe for how data and news are ultimately going to be acted
on by the market. The potential data and event outcomes and subsequent market reactions are
myriad, to say the least. That’s one reason the market reaction to the data is always more
important than the data itself.

But as currency traders, we still have to understand what the data means to make sense of
what the subsequent market response suggests for the bigger picture. The starting point is to
understand the initial market response to the data/news in terms of what the market was
expecting and what it actually got. We need a baseline from which to interpret subsequent
price movements.

The role of consensus expectations
Data reports and news events don’t happen in a vacuum. Forex markets evaluate incoming data
reports relative to market forecasts, commonly referred to as consensus expectations or simply
the consensus. Consensus expectations are the average of economic forecasts made by economists
from the leading financial institutions, and private firms or academia. News agencies like
Bloomberg and Reuters survey economists for their estimates of upcoming data and collate the
results. The resulting average forecast is what appears on market calendars, indicating what is
expected for any given data report.

The consensus becomes the baseline against which incoming data will be evaluated by the
market. In the case of economic data, the market will compare the actual result — the
economic figure that’s actually reported — with what was expected (the consensus). The
actual data is typically interpreted by the market in the following terms:
As expected or in line with expectations: The actual data report was at or very close to
the consensus forecast.
Better than expected: The report was generally stronger than the consensus forecast. For
inflation reports, a better-than-expected reading means inflation was lower than expected,
or more benign.
Worse than expected: The data is weaker than the consensus forecast. For inflation
reports, a worse-than-expected reading means inflation was higher than forecast, or more
inflationary.
Additionally, the degree to which a data report is better or worse than expected is important. The
farther off the mark the data report is, the greater the likelihood and degree of a subsequent price
shift following the data release.
When evaluating central bank statements and comments from monetary policymakers, the market
evaluates the language used in terms of hawkish (leaning toward raising interest rates) and dovish
(leaning toward steady to lower interest rates). (I look at interpreting central bank rhetoric in
greater detail in Chapter 5.)

Pricing in and pricing out forecasts
But financial markets don’t typically wait for news to actually be released before they start
trading on it, and the currency market is no different. Currency traders begin to price
consensus expectations into the market anywhere from several days to several hours before a
report is scheduled. Pricing in is the practice of trading as though the data were already
released and, usually, as though it has come out as expected. The more significant the report,
the sooner markets are likely to start pricing in expectations.
Unfortunately, there’s no clear way to always tell whether or how much the market has priced in
consensus expectations, so you need to follow market commentaries and price action in the hours
and days before a scheduled report to get a sense of how much the market has priced in any
forecast. And it’s not always a case of the market pricing in an as-expected result. Market
sentiment may have soured (or improved) in the run-up to the release, leading the market to price
in a worse-than-expected (or better-than-expected) report. Stay on top of the market reports to get
a handle on the mood.

Consensus estimates can also sometimes change in the days leading up to the report, based
on other interim reports. For example, Institute for Supply Management (ISM) manufacturing
forecasts may be downgraded (or upgraded) if the regional Chicago purchasing managers’
index, which comes out a few days before the ISM index, is weaker (or stronger) than
expected. This can lead to pricing out of consensus expectations, depending to what degree
the consensus was priced in.

When good expectations go bad
Data miss is the market euphemism for when a data report comes in outside expectations. If the
consensus was for an improvement in a particular indicator, and the actual report is worse than
expected or disappointing, the result may be a sharp reversal in price direction. If core U.S.
durable goods orders are expected to rise, for example, but they end up falling, we may be looking
at a sharp drop in the USD. If the USD has gained prior to the release on the basis of pricing in the
positive consensus, those who went long are going to be dumping their positions alongside traders
selling the USD on the weak result. The same thing can happen in reverse if negative expectations
are met by a surprisingly positive data report.

With as-expected data reports, it’s frequently a case of “buy the rumor, sell the fact”
(meaning, traders have already priced in a strong report, and if it meets expectations and
sometimes even exceeds them, traders who bought in advance will be looking to take profit
and sell on any subsequent gains). This market phenomenon can also happen in the other
direction — as in “sell the rumor, buy the fact” — depending on the currency pair involved
and the nature of the consensus forecast.

Anticipating alternative outcome scenarios
I’ve found that it frequently helps to think through the likely reactions to major data releases
to prepare for how the market may react in the very likely case that the data surprises one
way or the other. It’s a thoroughly academic exercise, and it won’t cost you anything, but it
may just give you a significant leg up on the rest of the market, if you’re inclined to trade
around data reports. Considering various “what if” scenarios helps me focus my attention and
my trading strategies on the major themes currently operative.

Anticipating and trading on market reactions
For major U.S. releases like the nonfarm payrolls (NFP) report, retail sales, or Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC) minutes, for example, I like to construct various concrete outcome

scenarios in terms of pips. Using the NFP report as an example, let’s say the consensus forecast is
for an increase of 100,000 jobs. In the days prior to the release, the market will likely have
gravitated to a level that reflects that consensus. Using that level as a pivot, I will establish my own
expectations. For example, if the NFP number comes in at +125,000 jobs, I may expect EUR/USD
to drop 30 pips. If the NFP registers +150,000 jobs, I may look for EUR/USD to drop 60 pips.
Then I do the same for weaker-than-expected reports. If the number comes in at only +50,000 jobs,
EUR/USD may rally 50 pips, and so on.
When the number actually comes out, and prices start to react, I’ve got a firm sense of where prices
should move based on various data readings. The real trading information comes when prices don’t
react as I expected them to. For example, if the NFP number comes out at +180,000, (say I
expected a 90-pip drop or so), and EUR/USD drops only 40 pips and begins to stabilize, I’m
thinking there’s something wrong with the market’s reaction to the data and something else is going
on. In many cases, I’m not alone — the rest of the market is likely drawing the same conclusion.
The message is clear: Cover EUR/USD shorts, and start thinking about maybe even getting long. If
EUR/USD trades back up through the pre-NFP price level within the next few hours (possibly
minutes), it’s a clear sign the market has other ideas about where EUR/USD should be, and it’s a
stronger signal to get long EUR/USD.
Getting a sense of how markets should react to data comes with experience, which you gain over
time and by using a practice account. But you can also get a sense of how markets should react to
data by studying past data outcomes and subsequent market reactions.

For example, if the market is expecting an increase in the upcoming U.S. ISM manufacturing index,
I like to ask myself what’s the likely reaction if the ISM disappoints those expectations, and also
what happens if it surprises to the upside and is even stronger. This makes me focus on the most
recent price action, and perhaps I note that the USD has declined slightly in advance of the report
based on better Eurozone data overnight.
If the ISM comes in below expectations, I’m now thinking about how many pips lower the USD is
likely to fall. I pinpoint key support levels and use those as my benchmarks to gauge the
subsequent market reaction. If the report should surprise to the upside, I’ve also identified key
resistance levels above that may come into play and where the next resistance levels are after
them.
When the data does come out, I have a fairly rational baseline to judge the subsequent market
reaction. If ISM rises as expected, I’ve identified which USD resistance levels may be tested. If
they’re not being tested, I’m starting to think that maybe the market is more intent on buying EUR
than buying the greenback, and it may not be wise to fight the near-term trend. If the ISM surprises
on the weak side, I’ve also identified downside USD support levels (EUR/USD resistance levels),
breaks of which may see further USD weakness/EUR strength.

Think ahead about what the market is expecting based on consensus expectations and how
much has been priced in. Be prepared to factor various data outcomes in the larger themes
you’ve already identified. Think through how the market is likely to react based on those
scenarios, and you’re likely to be several steps ahead of the crowd. (See the “Anticipating
and trading on market reactions” sidebar for a real-world look at how I prepare for market
reactions to data and events.)

Chapter 7

Getting Down and Dirty with Fundamental
Data
In This Chapter
Building a model to put the data in perspective
Getting to know data-reporting conventions
Understanding the key U.S. data reports
Looking at major international economic reports
Fundamental economic data reports are among the most significant information inputs because
policy makers and market participants alike use them to gauge the state of the economy, set
monetary policy, and make investment decisions. From a trader’s perspective, data reports are the
routine catalysts that stir up markets and get things moving.
I run through a lot of economic information in this chapter, but you don’t need to understand it like
an economist — you’re mainly interested in what it means for the market reaction. (If you are
interested in understanding data like an economist, I recommend reading The Secrets of Economic
Indicators: Hidden Clues to Future Economic Trends and Investment Opportunities, 2nd
Edition, by Bernard Baumohl.)

As I noted in Chapter 6, the significance of individual reports varies depending on the
economic environment, the market’s current focus, and a host of other factors. Always keep in
mind that markets interpret incoming data based on what it means for the big picture outlook.
If a country’s economic outlook is generally viewed as promising, data pointing to stronger
growth will reinforce that view, while data that disappoints may suggest a more negative
reaction. Most important, the market’s reaction to data is more important than the data itself.
In the first half of this chapter, I look at how to absorb the various data reports and factor them into
a broader view of the economic outlook for each particular country, with its attendant implications
for interest rates and currency values. In the second half of this chapter, I run through the major
data reports to give you an idea of what they cover and how the market interprets them.

Finding the Data

Before you can start processing all the economic data, you need to know where to find it. In
Chapter 6, I look in greater detail at where to find data info, but here’s a quick overview.
The starting point is the economic calendars typically provided by online forex brokerages. Be
aware that not all calendars are as comprehensive as others, so be sure to look for calendars that
show events and speakers and not just data. Also, look for a broker that provides data and event
previews, and real-time data and market analysis; this type of commentary will help you get a
sense of what the market is expecting, how it may be positioned for the news, and how it’s likely
to react.
Cable TV business channels such as Bloomberg TV, CNBC, and Fox Business News typically
carry U.S. data releases live on air, and they’re probably your best bet for seeing U.S. data
immediately. In my opinion, Bloomberg TV does the best job of covering non-U.S. data releases,
and CNBC World is another option.
In addition, www.bloomberg.com, www.marketwatch.com, and www.reuters.com provide
excellent data coverage, both before and after it’s released, along with event calendars. Read the
economic data news stories on these sites to get the inside story of the data reports, such as any
subcomponent readings or significant revisions.
Also, many calendars may include some designations of market significance for each data series,
like some are high impact or low impact. Remember it’s the big picture that counts and even a socalled low impact report could have a big impact if it’s big enough of a surprise.
In the next section I sketch out a model for understanding where the types of data fit into the big
picture. It should help you determine which categories of data are most significant, depending on
the particular economic environment at any given time.

Economics 101 for Currency Traders: Making
Sense of Economic Data
If you’re like most people, you probably have a decent idea of what certain economic reports
mean, like the unemployment rate or the consumer price index (CPI). But like lots of people, you
probably don’t have a strong idea of how to put the data together to make sense of it all. Having a
fundamental model to put the data in perspective is critical to understanding what the data means
and how the market is likely to react to the data. The sooner you’re able to make sense of what a
specific report means and factor it into the bigger picture, the sooner you’ll be able to react in the
market.
In the next few sections, I suggest a basic model to interpret the deluge of economic indicators
you’ll encounter in the forex market. By no means is this model the be-all and end-all of economic

theory, but I do think it’s a solid framework on which to hang the economic indicators and see how
they fit together.

The labor market
I place the employment picture first for the simple reason that jobs and job creation are the
keys to the medium- and long-term economic outlook for any country or economic bloc. No
matter what else is going on, always have a picture of the labor market in the back of your
mind.
If jobs are being created, more wages are being paid, consumers are consuming more, and
economic activity expands. If job growth is stagnant or weak, long-run economic growth will
typically be constrained. Signs of broader economic growth will be seen as tentative or suspect
unless job growth is also present. Both scenarios have major implications for interest rates moves
and investment themes, which are key currency drivers.
From the currency-market point of view, labor-market strength is typically seen as a currency
positive, because it indicates positive growth prospects going forward, along with the potential
for higher interest rates based on stronger growth or wage-driven inflation. Needless to say, labormarket weakness is typically viewed as a currency negative.
