
What other books would you recommend to people?
The first book we have our traders read is Edwin Lefevre's account of Jesse Livermore,
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator [Reprinted in 1985 from the original 1923 edition by Trader
Press, Inc., Greenville, SC.] I've read it at least a dozen times.
Anyway, around the time that I started at Thomson McKinnon, the Ginnie Mae market was just
coming into its own. Thomson McKinnon had just hired a trading group to run a Ginnie Mae desk.
I told them I was interested in learning more about the Ginnie Mae market.
Why were you attracted to that market?
It was a new market and seemed more manageable than the conventional commodities. I figured
my business would grow more steadily if I focused on that market. Also, I had made a number of
trades in Ginnie Maes. The first trade was a winner, but the following ones were all losers.
It was magnetic; I felt I could make money there, but I kept losing, and that made me want to learn
more about it.
It sounds like you had a minor compulsion to pursue it.
Yes, because I had failed. Anyway, the traders at the Ginnie Mae desk taught me a few things, and
I went out and opened almost every mortgage banker account in Salt Lake.
Did you understand the Ginnie Mae market at that time?
When I first started opening accounts, I didn't understand anything about it.
How then did you sell people on yourself?
I snowballed them at first, but I listened and I learned from the questions they asked me. Initially, I
was confused by what they were doing, and they were equally confused by what I was trying to sell
them.
At least you understood futures as an instrument.
Right. And with that limited knowledge, I bumbled through my first few meetings. Then I really
got pretty good at it.
Were these hedging accounts?
Yes, all pure hedging accounts. By May 1977,1 was making $2,000 a month in commissions. That
was a tremendous amount of money for me.
Was this all in the Ginnie Mae market?
At that point, yes. Previously, I had done some brokerage in other commodity markets such as
wheat, hogs, and pork bellies.
Who were those trades for?
Just accounts I had opened by cold calling—people who really didn't understand that they could
lose, and when they lost, they were always upset.
Were you giving them trading suggestions?
Pretty much.
Using chart analysis?
Believe it or not, more off the research of Thomson McKinnon analysts, and secondarily off my
charts. Newer brokers definitely tend to rely on their firm's research.
Did your customers lose because the research was wrong?
No. They lost because their time horizon was mostly day to day, while the research was longer
term.
So there was a mismatch?
Exactly. I think that is a basic problem between most brokers and their customers. It is almost
impossible to get market information to your customer quickly enough for the customer to act on it.
What you are saying is that even if a broker can actually beat the market trading short term,
he can't translate that to the customer.
Insurmountable odds, because you have two people who have to pull the trigger, and the
169

information changes so quickly.
So, one of the points of advice you would give to speculators is to trade with a longer-term
perspective?
Yes, you have to.
,
,
Let's talk about floor trading. I know, at one point, you were both a floor broker and trader
in the T-bond futures market. The question I think a lot of people would ask is: If you receive
a large customer sell order at the same time you're thinking of closing out your own long
position, how do you handle it?
I never scalped, so the idea of being long and having a large customer order move the market
against me 2 or 3 ticks never made any difference. Besides, I had so many customers that they were
often going opposite ways.
OK, that's an easy one. But what if some important news was breaking, and all your
customer orders were going one way against your own position? Did you ever end up trapped
in a position because you had to execute all the customer orders first?
Yes, that happened to me about half a dozen times, and it probably cost me a grand total of a half
million dollars over a number of years. But measured against the amount of money I was making, it
didn't kill me.
That was the cost of doing business?
Right.
It must be a gut-wrenching situation though, knowing you want to get out, but not being able
to act because of a conflict with customer orders.
Usually, you are too busy acting as a broker and thinking, "OK, I have to sell 1,000 lots; how can I
do it best?" Then, when you are done with the order, you might say to yourself, "Oh damn, I'm still
long; I have to get out of this thing."
Is there a built-in disadvantage for a floor trader who also handles customer orders?
Absolutely. As I tell the people I hire, "If you are a broker, you are not a trader; if you are a trader,
you are not a broker."
But you were.
It was a wild time. I was the biggest trader and the biggest broker in the same market. I worked
very long hours and was totally exhausted when I went home. Then I would just get up the next day
and do it again. This went on for three years, and while it was a great experience, I really shouldn't
have done it. You can't be a great broker and a great trader. I did a good job, but it probably took
years off my life.
Are most of the significant size traders on the floor just traders, or do some also handle
customers?
They all are either brokers or traders now. That is the only way to go; there is no doubt about it.
Is that true of most floors, or just the T-bond floor?
Primarily, the T-bond floor. In the S&P and in the New York markets, some of the big brokers are
also big traders.
Given today's increased scrutiny, are people who violate the confidence of dual trading
[handling customer orders and trading one's own account] likely to get caught?
It is still very difficult to create a flawless audit trail in an open outcry market.
Say bonds are trading at 95.00 and the market gets hit with some bearish news. The broker
executes a large amount of orders for customers and his own account, and the market goes
straight from 95.00 to 94.00. His Tills are 94.31, 94.30, 94.29 and all his customers get fills at
94.27 or lower. [Bond prices trade in 32nds.] How does he explain his way out of that one?
He could give his order or his customers' orders to another broker. Or he could fill both orders and
put another broker's number on his own order. There are always ways to get around extra scrutiny.
The smart crooks will always be difficult to catch.
170

Is the temptation in dual trading too great?
No. After having been through it, I would say that dual trading is good for efficiency in the
marketplace, but it is too heavy a burden for the individual.
Should the rules be changed to disallow dual trading?
That is a difficult question. What is more important, the efficiency of the market or the integrity of
the individual? There is no doubt in my mind that dual trading adds tremendous liquidity to the
system, and that is probably more important than the fact that a small percentage of dual traders
may cheat. Besides, even if dual trading were banned, the stealers would still find a way to steal.
That is their perception of how to make money in this business.
When did you first get involved in the T-bond market?
hi September 1977,1 moved to Chicago and became a broker on the T-bond floor. I was just
twenty-five and I got lucky. I went to New York in November 1977 and met with eight big-name
companies, seven of whom opened accounts. I was at the right place at the right time.
When did you start trading for your own account on the floor?
In 1979.
Were you tempted to give up your floor brokerage so that you could concentrate on trading?
Actually, it was just the opposite. I had started out as a customer's man, and from 1979 through
1981,1 built a massive customer base. We were a powerful force in the market at that time.
Probably the saddest thing I ever did was to became a trader too. I was a great broker in my
twenties, and if I had parlayed that for ten years, I probably would have ended up where I am now
without enduring all the pains of trading. I consider trading to be an unrewarding, unglamorous
game.
It's odd you say that, because you have been far more successful than most traders.
I guess my point is that as a broker I was at an even higher echelon. I was really good at it, and it
suited my personality.
So, why did you get into trading?
I started trading because some of my customers said, "You know the market so well, why don't you
just trade?" I resisted at first, but after six months of holding out, I started trading. From there it just
evolved.
Do you remember your first trades?
My first trade was a long position, and I made some money. Then I put on a long bond/short Ginnie
Mae spread, which was almost like being long. The market went down, and I lost all the money I
had made, plus $50,000 more. Since I was making about $50,000 per month as a broker, my
attitude was that I basically broke even that month. But I didn't like the feeling at all. So, I cut my
position size down and started trading a little more actively. This happened during the bear market
of 1979. The problem was that I was bullish all the way down.
Why were you bullish?
My customers kept telling me that rates couldn't go much higher.* For example, I was handling the
orders for CitiBank and Citicorp and they were buying all the way down. These were renowned
people saying that they had an opinion and backing it up with deeds.
*Bond prices fall when interest rates rise. This is a basic concept that is sometimes confusing to the
novice. The reason that bond prices decline if rates increase can be explained as follows: If rates
rise, itmeans that all existinglower-yieldinginstruments are less attractive to investors. To induce an
investor to purchase these lower-coupon bonds, their prices must fall sufficiently so that the return
is equivalent to the return on the higher-coupon bond purchased at face value.
What would you do today in the same situation?
Now, I know the characteristics of various institutions. Let's take Citi-Bank. Back then, I was
buying because they were buying. Now, if Citi-Bank was buying, I might conclude that they were
just reallocating their assets or changing the duration of their portfolio. Today, I have little regard
for the views of portfolio managers, because their outlook tends to cover a much longer time
171

perspective than mine. I didn't understand that back then.
So, you don't pay much attention to those types of opinions anymore?
I listen to them in passing. I don't read the Barren's interviews of portfolio managers anymore. It
never did much for me, and I don't think it does much for any trader.
In other words, the problem wasn't the fact that you were listening to other people, but that
you were listening to the wrong people.
I didn't know how to decide which were the right or wrong people. I was a naive kid saying, "Here
is a major account that is buying a lot of stuff; the market should go up."
You really had no strategy, no plan, no system. You were just shooting from the hip.
That's right. Then over time, I started to get a grip on how to make money. As opposed to saying, "I
have an opinion and I want to express it in the market," I started asking, "How do I make money
out of all this?"
What had you learned by that point?
I had learned that an opinion isn't worth that much. It is more important to listen to the market. I
became a reactive trader as opposed to an opinionated trader.
In 1980, one of my customers was Solomon Brothers. At the time, they were bearish on bonds from
65 to 80. If I had listened to my big customers as I had done in 1979,1 would have thrown away
money all over again.
What told you not to listen to your customers then?
The 1979 experience of losing money based on someone else's opinion—a sound opinion by
intelligent people that was just absolutely wrong.
Where were your successes coming from?
I learned how to read the tape and developed good instincts. We were such big players in bonds
back then—we, meaning my customers and myself—that the spots we picked to trade could
virtually stop the market. We were actually creating some of the support and resistance points. It
didn't take that much to do it back then. I think there was a streak of months when I hardly had any
losing days.
Could you have done it without the commercial accounts?
I would hope that I could have done it without them; that it wasn't a self-fulfilling prophecy. But if
it was, fine. I don't know.
When did that streak end?
From a trading standpoint, I never had a losing year until 1986, although I did struggle in 1985
during the mid-stages of the bull market in bonds.
Was your trading success a matter of being able to read the tape?
Yes. I was attentive and had good instincts.
It sounds like you are saying that either you are born to be a good trader or you are not.
Well, to a certain extent, that may be true. My feeling is that you don't have to be, but it helps.
Is it a matter of having a sixth sense about the market?
Yes. Your gut often tells you what to do.
Are people who don't have the natural instincts for trading wasting their time? Or can almost
anybody be successful if he or she works at it hard enough?
Working hard has nothing to do with it. About two weeks ago, a very bright fellow who works
forme said, "This is a very frustrating business. It doesn't matter how hard I work; it has no bearing
on whether I make money or not." You have to know yourself and put that knowledge to work in
the market.
That sounds like a cliche. What do you mean by "know yourself"?
I'll give you an example. I think I'm a good trader, but there is a guy working for me who is better. I
could go out there and beat my head against the desk and try to outdo him, or I can just be myself.
172

Let him make whatever he can, and I'll make whatever I can.
This is my view of a year in the life of a trader: Four out of twelve months you are hot. You are so
excited that you can't sleep at night. You can't wait to get to work the next day; you're just rolling.
Two months out of the year, you are cold. You are so cold, you are miserable. You can't sleep at
night. You can't figure out where the next trade is going to come from. The other six months out of
the year, you make and lose, make and lose. You can't sleep, because you are trying to figure out
how you are going to make money.
The net result is that you never sleep, because you are constantly thinking too much about trading.
It is an all-consuming thing. That is why you need to know yourself—to moderate your emotions.
If you don't, then after a big success, you are high as a kite. You are not prepared when just around
the corner, the market suddenly brings you back to earth. Or, in the opposite situation, when you
are consistently losing, you might end up jumping out of a window. Why did I leave the floor?
Again, because I know myself. I need to interact with people and that doesn't happen there.
Being on the floor sounds like a very intense thing to be doing day in, day out. Does it
physically grind you down?
Absolutely. You can see that in the older fellows. When you are in your twenties and thirties, you
can rebound pretty well from the physical and mental stress. As you get older, you don't rebound as
well, and you have to push harder to maintain your performance.
It sounds like professional sports. You get to a certain age and no matter how good you
were—
That's right. It's exactly like that.
Out of every 100 people who go to the floor to become traders, how many will make at least a
million dollars within five years?
Maybe five or less.
How many will end up losing everything they came in with?
At least half.
You have been more successful than most traders. What do you attribute your success to?
The reason I have been so consistent is that I'm a great listener. I probably talk to about twenty-five
traders each day. Most traders don't listen to your opinion; they only want to tell you their opinion.
I am different because I honestly and truly listen to what they say and how they say it. For example,
if one of the major locals calls me up three days in a row when the market has rallied, and he is
asking me what I think, I know that he has been selling and is not sure of his position.
What does that tell you?
If it is in line with what the other traders I talk to are doing, it tells me the market will probably go
higher.
So if you talk to twenty-five people, and twenty of them are nervous about the market going
higher because implicitly they are short, does that tell you that you should be trading on the
long side?
Yes. I know a large number of people in the industry and that is a big plus. I listen to them. I go
with the people who are hot. Sure, I can form my own opinion, but that is not what makes me do
the things I do in the market. Sometimes, Iknow my opinion is right, and I'll go with it. Sometimes,
I know somebody else is hot, and I'll go with their opinion. I'm not picky about how I make my
money. It doesn't matter if my opinion is right or wrong. All that matters is whether I make money.
Doesn't it get confusing when you talk to twenty-five people and fifteen are bullish and ten
are bearish?
Sometimes, but I've been doing this since 1976. I've always been able to read people very well,
even though no one thinks I listen. For example, I have one trader here who is cold as ice right
now. All I have to do is listen to him. Last night, he told me he wanted to be short. I knew that I
was going to be long.
As long as he is cold?
173

Right, and the one time he gets hot, fine. When the guy is cold, he is cold. You can't say to a trader,
"You're cold, you can't trade." You have to let them run their course.
Is reading other traders a key component of your personal trading right now?
Yes, I'm pliable. I know these people, so I understand how to read them. I don't want to hear what
Jack Schwager says, because I don't know him. I only want to talk to people I know very well.
What other things are important to your trading success?
The realization that when you don't care, you do well, and when you try too hard, you don't do well.
By "trying too hard," do you mean pressing when there is no trade?
Pressing is one of the reasons I'm sitting in here with you for so long during trading hours. The
markets haven't traded well in weeks, and we are proud of ourselves for not having thrown a lot of
money away.
So when the opportunities aren't there, you just lay fairly low?
Don't misunderstand me. I'm not that good at that, but I have gotten better as I've gotten older. I've
learned that lesson over the last couple of years. After Richard Dennis left the floor, he said: "The
first year I left the floor was the most painful experience for me, and I have paid the largest tuition I
ever have." It was the same with me.
What was the motivation for coming off the floor, since you were so successful there?
I felt that the industry had developed to the point where my brokerage skills were no longer needed.
All anyone wanted to know was: "Where's the next tick?" "How can I move size?" The price to be
paid for my particular skills was too low.
You are talking in terms of customer business?
Customer business and trading. The market had gotten so voluminous that my style of swing
trading was worthless. It got to the point where I was just trying to read the next tick instead of the
next 8 ticks.
Why couldn't you play the same game?
The volume was too big; capitalization was too big. I couldn't read the market from the floor.
Because there were too many players?
Exactly. In the early days of T-bond futures trading, the depth was low and you could read when
people were overextended long or short. You couldn't do that anymore.
Did your performance start decreasing; did you see the handwriting on the wall?
In 1985,1 made under a million dollars trading for the first time and I knew something was wrong. I
had always been a very consistent trader, making more money each year. I looked at my results and
found that my profits were smaller, meaning 3 and 4 ticks, and my losses were greater. My first
reaction was to become a much more active pit trader. I found that I was taking on tremendous
positions and the risk/reward was insane. That was when I became convinced that I had to make a
change.
Were you just lucky that you didn't get hit really hard during that period on any particular
trade?
Actually, I did get hit pretty hard a couple of times, but I had some good winners too. The point is
that as I worked harder and harder, I found that all I was doing was running in place. I don't like to
work hard at trading, and here I was just mentally and physically exhausting myself.
If you had been doing as well as in previous years, would you have stayed in the pit?
Yes. The pit is a very stimulating environment. Off the floor, you have to force yourself to be
motivated each day. That was a very difficult transition.
Is it harder to trade off the floor?
Not in the long run. My profitability in 1987 and 1988 has been pretty good.
You mentioned that your first year off the floor was very difficult. Was the main problem
that you were still trying to trade the market as you did on the floor?
174

Yes, that was the number one reason. The second reason was that the transition occurred during the
1986 runaway bull market. I was bound to lose because my style was not based on following
trends.
Is that still true?
No, it has changed. I've gotten better. I can still countertrend trade real well, but I found you can
also make a lot of money trend following.
Do you use trading systems?
No, we are "discretionary traders." We only use technical indicators and systems as trading tools.
One particularly interesting system we have developed is based on quirks related to volatility. Our
belief is that volatility offers clues to trend direction. Although we've found through backtesting
that this system gives you good signals, we do not blindly follow the trades.
For an automated, computerized system, what would you consider good results in terms of
average annual return?
About 40 to 50 percent, with maximum equity drawdowns under 10 percent.
But systems will always have larger maximum drawdowns than that.
That is why we haven't directly traded money on them.
Do you think any system can compete with a good trader?
I haven't seen one yet, although there may be one somewhere.
There are some traders who have the skills, but who don't succeed. What is it that keeps them
from becoming successful?
Most traders who fail have large egos and can't admit that they are wrong. Even those who are
willing to admit that they are wrong early in their career can't admit it later on. Also, some traders
fail because they are too worried about losing.
In other words, successful trading is a matter of trying to avoid losses, but not being afraid of
them.
That is a good way to put it. I'm not afraid to lose. When you start being afraid to lose, you're
finished.
Is the ability to accept losses a characteristic of a winning trader?
Yes. Tom Baldwin is a good example. He only trades the market; he doesn't trade size or equity. By
that I mean, he doesn't say to himself, "I am long 2,000 contracts. Oh my God, that is too many, I
have to sell some." He never looks at it that way. He will sell either when he thinks the market has
gone up too far, or when he thinks that his position is wrong.
In your trading experience, is there one particular trade that stands out as the most
dramatic?
In 1986, when the long bond was being cornered by the Japanese, there was a big, emotional rally
on a Monday morning. I had thought the market was too high at 90.00, and here it was trading over
91.00. So I sold 1,100 contracts scale-up above that level. The market backed down and was
