
P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

114

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

Traders who use more than three are likely using too many, and
too many increases uncertainty. Uncertainty leads to more fear, and it
is our goal to steer clear of fear.
2. Tools must be universally used and simple. In Rule 1 I talked about
the K.I.S.S. principle for success and spoke about proprietary tools.
Traders who create their own proprietary technical tools don’t get the
fact that the market is simple, and as such it focuses on the most obvious, most of the time. If you use a tool that has a cult following, don’t
use it. The market is bigger than the cult. The market does not care
what the small percentage of traders think. The market that controls
the price cares about what the most traders are thinking and doing.
In the hit movie Caddyshack, Ty (played by Chevy Chase) tells
Danny to “be the ball” when describing being in the “golf zone.” But
how could he possibly “be the ball”?
Athletes on many levels put themselves in a zone where they feed
off the game and go into a mental trance. The ball appears bigger, the
speed slows down, the sounds disappear, and all outside influences
are dulled or silenced. When this happens, they are, in effect, “being
the ball.”
As traders, try to think about being the market. As an individual,
you can’t beat the market. So instead be the market. To do that, I use
the tools that the market uses, and if there is a choice between simple
and complex, choose simple. For example, simple moving average or
exponential moving average? Simple. I can teach nearly everyone who
wants to trade how to calculate and understand a simple moving average in five minutes. I could not teach nearly everyone how to calculate
and understand an exponential moving average.
The tools I use will be universally used by many and simple. If I do
this, I stand the best chance to be the market.
Tools of the trade are important in any profession. In that common expression, the word tool typically refers to something that performs a helpful function. It could be a hammer for a carpenter. It could be casebook for
a lawyer. The word trade in the expression is synonymous with a job. In
other words, what things are needed to do your job better?
A currency trader needs tools too. My tools need to define a trend,
define risk, and be unambiguous. If they do that, I can do my job better.
Tools have another meaning to traders in particular. That is, they will be
used to determine buy or sell decisions. The tools I choose will dictate my
trades. So they not only allow me to do my job better, but will also tell me
what to do in my job.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:10

Rules for Attacking the Trend

Printer: Yet to come

115

Are the tools used in trading important? You bet. They help me and
they tell me what to do. That is why I am so picky about the tools I use.

RULE 4: THE “IF . . . SHOULD” RULE
Unambiguous trading tools may have been a mystery when I first introduced them, but hopefully, that mystery is now gone. The next rule, which
I call the “If . . . Should” rule, is likely another mystery for most. However,
I promised to keep it simple, so do not fear.
The “If . . . Should” rule says this: “If the market price does ABC, the
price should do XYZ. If it does not, get out.” Filling in the ABC and XYZ
with a trading example, the “If . . . Should” rule would sound something
like this: “If the market price moves below the 100 hour moving average,
the price should continue to go lower. IF it does not, get out.”
The rule seems simple, doesn’t it? However, by looking at each part
you can better understand the impact it is designed to have on a trader.
Let’s go through the pieces.

If the Market Price Does ABC . . .
“If the market price does ABC” implies that the trader is looking for a condition for the market price to be met. If a condition is met, it also is another
way to say if there is a reason to do a trade. Of course, the rule does not
say to do the trade, which leaves the door open to accept the condition or
not. However, the “If . . . Should” rule is meant to be a guide for traders
who have a position, so don’t get too caught up in the omission.
What the first part does not say is the conditions or reasons for doing
the trade. Those conditions will be set when we go through the tools we
will use to satisfy our game plan and mission statement. The important
thing to note is that the trader is looking for the price to do something
specific.

. . . the Price Should Do XYZ
The second part of the rule says, “the price should do XYZ.” This part outlines what the effect should be from the condition of a trade being met.
Needless to say, should is the key word in this part of the sentence. Using
should implies that there is a chance that the price action after the trade
does what the trader thinks it will do. However, the door remains open for
the price to not do what the trader thinks it will do as well. Of course, the

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

116

January 18, 2011

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

XYZ is what the trader is expecting the price to do, and that is either go up
or go down.
The combined statement makes the trader set a condition or reason for
a trade and then requires the trader to understand that the price may or may
not go in the intended direction. Implied in the reason for executing the
trade is that the bias just turned bullish or conversely the bias just turned
bearish.

If it Doesn’t, Get Out
The final part of the “If . . . Should” rule outlines what to do if the price does
not do what it should do. The rule is to get out or exit the trade.
I have found that retail traders need to remind themselves constantly
to be disciplined in their trading. If conditions change contrary to the intended trade direction, the trader needs to exercise discipline and accept
the loss. This is not easy to do. There is often a lot of time, and mental conviction, spent to enter a trade. Having a positive conviction about a trade
is a good thing, but being married to the trade until “death do you part” is
not a good thing.
A lot of unsuccessful traders become married to their trades and have
a difficult time exiting at a loss—even if it is small. As discussed earlier,
not being used to failure or accepting defeat can be difficult. Traders have
a tendency to be stubborn, until that time when fear overcomes stubbornness. Then things really go bad.
The fact is, if a trade is done for a reason, then the price should move
away from the price that triggered that trade idea. In our rule, if ABC happens and it triggers a buy, the price should go higher. If it does not, guess
what? The price is not doing what it should do. That is not your fault. Your
analyses all pointed toward the price going higher.
When the price does not do what it should do, I personally like to blame
the market. Something I don’t know about—it may be a large corporate
seller, it might be some comment from a central bank figure, it may be a
merger and acquisition money flow that caused the market to move the
price in a different direction from where it should go.
Think of a baseball player. Imagine the batter works his way to a count
at the plate of two balls and no strikes. In this situation, he might expect
that the pitcher is likely to throw the pitch right down the middle. In addition, he might expect the pitcher to be less careful with the location of the
pitch. The batter reasons that the pitcher would not want to walk him but
would prefer to take his chances that even if hit, an out will be made. So
in this situation, the batter might be looking for a fastball, just above knee
high and down the middle of the plate.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:10

Rules for Attacking the Trend

Printer: Yet to come

117

The “If . . . Should” rule for the batter is, “If the count goes to two
balls and zero strikes, the pitcher should throw a fastball that is down the
middle, just above knee high.”
If the pitcher throws a curveball instead, and that pitch is thrown for
a strike, the batter is likely to not hit the pitch. He should resign himself
to having the count go to two balls and one strike. The pitcher wins. It is
not the batter’s fault. He did all he could given the information he had. He
accepts the fate and prepares for the next pitch.
Successful hitters accept that the pitcher is in control. The pitcher
throws the pitch. The batter has to hit it. If the batter is not prepared, the
pitcher will win.
Trading is just like that. A successful trader is able to process what he
knows, like the market price, and uses tools to help give a bullish or bearish
bias. The trader’s count goes to two balls and no strikes when he does the
trade. If the market does what it should do, the trade is a profitable one.
If the market throws a curveball and goes the opposite direction, then the
trader should get out or exit the trade. Strike one. Get another pitch. It is
not your fault. The market is doing something you did not expect. There
are forces beyond your control. Don’t blame yourself. Blame the market.
The market throws the pitches. The market is in control. You as a
trader must be prepared, must develop the skill and the plan to beat the
market. If you don’t, you will fail. If you do, you will get one strike, but you
have another shot. It is because you accept the strike and get out that you
survive as a trader. You follow the “If . . . Should” rule.
Successful traders, like the successful baseball player, process the
“If . . . Should” rule instinctively. They train their brains to think ahead,
to anticipate by using tools they believe in. They practice and hone their
skills. Then when they do a trade, they are confident but are prepared to
blame the market if it doesn’t do what it should do. They accept defeat
without falling apart. They accept limiting their risk. They have conviction
but don’t become married to that conviction.
I like to tell all traders to think about the “If . . . Should” rule whenever
they do a trade, until that time when it becomes instinctive. If it requires
making a note card with the words on it, do it. Tape it to your desk or on
your computer screen. Whatever you do, follow the “If . . . Should” rule.

RULE 5: LOOK AHEAD, BUT NOT TOO
FAR AHEAD
If you want to move ahead, you need to have a destination in mind. This
is true with trading, but most traders don’t have a destination for their

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

118

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

trades—especially the trend trades. The EURUSD is going down or the
EURUSD is going up, but there is no idea to where or how that journey
may unravel—if it does at all.
Equally hurtful is if a trader has a destination but that destination does
not make realistic sense. For example, when in 2010 the EURUSD was trading near the 1.2000 level, I often heard comments about how the pair was
going to 1.1209—the 61.8 percent retracement of the EURUSD move up
from the all-time low to its all-time high.
OK. That is fine, but what roadblocks will the trader run into along that
journey? What about the 200 month moving average at 1.1963? What about
the area between 1.1826 and 1.1873, which contained five monthly lows between July 2005 and March 2006? Won’t that provide some good support?
What about the 1.1640 low from November 2005? What about the 200- to
300-pip corrections along the journey caused by some change in fundamentals or perhaps a shift in focus from the hardships in the Eurozone to
hardships in the United States? Do those traders who see the EURUSD going to 1.1209 just sit and wait for the target level to be reached during the
300-pip corrections?
Traders in currencies need to be more flexible because it is a market
that will trend for a duration, but can then correct, and the corrections can
be significant.
So if not having a destination is not good and having a destination too
far ahead is also not good, what is just right? Successful traders execute
a trade and although they may have an ultimate destination in mind, the
route traveled will take a step-by-step progression.
My friend Scott Barclay gave me the visual by comparing a trade to
traveling along a highway. If you are long and anticipating a trend-type
move, you are on the Bullish Highway. If short and expecting a bearish
move, you would be on the Bearish Highway. Along a highway there are
exits. The exits correspond to the next target levels. The target levels are
key levels of resistance if on a Bullish Highway or support if on the Bearish
Highway.
For example, in order to continue in the direction of the Bullish Highway, the price has to reach the next exit and go past. If the market cannot get past that exit, guess what? Either the driver is stopped on the
highway—the bias is pausing—or the driver has turned around and is now
on the Bearish Highway, going the other way.
How do you determine the exits on the highway? You do this by using trading tools that reinforce the trend or reverse the trend. If an exit
is reached, the trader should have added confidence in the trend, and with
added confidence fear should be eased. Focus is now on the next exit down
the highway. As for the risk, the trader should now be able to move the stop
up and manage the profit rather than the loss.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

Rules for Attacking the Trend

January 18, 2011

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

119

At each successive hurdle or exit reached, the trend rumbles on—the
miles start to rack up on the odometer—the profit starts to accumulate.
Traders should stay on the highway until that point when the bias turns
around and the trader notices that the bias is no longer fully bullish but
showing a bearish bias instead. The car is turned around.
To follow this trading strategy, traders must stay focused on the trend
and where it is going in a step-by-step process and not on some unrealistic
far-off target that can change and turn around, leaving the trader going the
wrong way on a one-way highway.
Following this approach also reminds the trader of the risk. By using
unambiguous trading tools and things like the “If . . . Should” rule, traders
begin to see and understand the rhythm of the market.
For example, assume a trader buys because the price moves above the
100 bar MA. He knows that the “If . . . Should” rule says “If the market price
goes above the 100 bar MA, the price should go higher. If it does not, get
out.” He expects the market to rally.
The trader buys and is now on the Bullish Highway with a stop 10 to 20
pips below the 100 bar MA (the “get out” point plus a buffer).
The next step is to start to map out the next exit. That might be the
200 bar MA. If the price goes above the 200 bar MA, the next target will be
spotted, which may be the upper end of a channel trend line.
The “If . . . Should” rule is also revised to say, “If the price moves above
the 200 bar MA, it confirms the bullish move and the price should go higher.
If it does not, get out.” As a result, the stop might be moved up to the 200
bar MA less a 10-pip buffer. The trader remains on the trend and in the
trade. The stop now guarantees a profit. This step-by-step process continues until that time when the bias turns around from one of the trading tools
monitored.
In Figure 5.6, the AUDUSD is in a trending market to the upside. A
channel is drawn connecting lows and the highs. The top trend line becomes a target on the Bullish Highway. When the price reaches that target
or exit, the market momentum stalls and the price reverses. This is a bearish development. The price is not able to get through the exit, so the car on
the highway has stalled, and it can only turn around and go the other way.
Traders can sell against the level with a defined risk. If the price moves
above the trend line, the long can be reestablished. If the price moves
lower, the bias is bearish and the target for the bearish move becomes the
bottom trend line.
This is exactly what happened. When the market corrected to the lower
trend line target, the bulls returned and bought. Risk for buyers was a
break of the trend line. If the trend line broke, the bias would be confirmed to the downside and another exit on the Bearish Highway would be
targeted.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

120

January 18, 2011

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

FIGURE 5.6 Deﬁning Targets or Exits on the AUDUSD Bullish Highway

Trading a trend requires that you constantly look ahead and target levels to overcome. The purpose of this rule is to increase confidence in the
trend by providing realistic goals, managing risk by providing definable risk
levels, and taking advantage of profit-taking levels. The rule also allows the
trader to stay in synch with the trend’s step-by-step progression. Failure to
follow this rule will lead to increased uncertainty and increased fear, and
will likely lead to traders’ exiting trends before their time.
Follow the road ahead. Reach the exits along the way and attack the
currency trends one realistic and meaningful step at a time.

RULES RULE
The game of trading that we all play is really a free-for-all. You can do what
you want when you want with little restrictions. However, just because
there is freedom does not mean you should shy away from self-imposed
discipline. Successful traders look for discipline in order to keep risk to a
minimum and keep fear down.
In the next chapter, I will formally introduce the tools in the trader’s
toolbox; this will finish the foundation needed for success as a currency
trader looking to trade the trends.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

CHAPTER 6

The Trader’s
Toolbox

ools are designed to make jobs easier and workers more productive.
The ultimate goal is to make the job more profitable. Some tools are
better than others, and then there are those tools that can actually be
counterproductive.
Recently, my youngest son Bobby and I participated in a Boy Scout
service project. The troop was building a three-sided, covered structure
called an Adirondack at a campsite in memory of a father of a scout who
had recently passed away. The only requirement was to bring a hammer
and a desire to help. I found my tools—a hammer for me and a hammer for
Bobby—and headed to the camp.
Upon arriving at the site, the project foreman, who also happened to be
a professional builder, took one look at the hammers in my hand, smirked
and said “You can put your hammers back in your car. I would prefer not
to have to take you or Bobby to the hospital for treatment.”
Apparently, a hammer is not a hammer anymore. My hammers were
wooden handled, which made them susceptible to breaking, especially if
they were old and dried out like the ones I was carrying. The newer models are lighter, have handles made of composite material, and have bigger
heads so that fewer fingers get smashed.
The tools I had were not only inferior, they were potentially dangerous.
It could have been counterproductive if a finger was smashed or a flying
hammer head hit an unsuspecting worker (or me).
Traders need a well-stocked toolbox as well. Like the hammers of today, the trader’s tools should get the job done, make the trader more productive and profitable, and not be counterproductive. This chapter will

T

121

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

122

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

introduce the tools I use to attack the currency trends. I will also outline a
tool that may be counterproductive to your trading. You may be surprised.

RULES FOR THE TOOLS
In Chapter 5, I outlined the rules for the tools that traders should use.
Specifically, one requirement is that the tools should help the trader define trends. If our mission is to make the most money and the game plan
is to trade trends, then tools that do not help define trends are counterproductive toward our mission.
The second requirement was that the tools used should define risk.
Once again, our mission statement is to not only make the most money but
to do it with the least amount of risk. If a trader cannot define risk, then
knowing what the least amount of risk is cannot be done. Using a trading
tool that does not define risk would be counterproductive. Those types of
tools should not be used.
Finally, I outlined that the third requirement for our trading tools is that
they be unambiguous. Unambiguous trading tools give a definitive bullish
or bearish bias. By doing this, they define risk, which keeps fear to a minimum. By being unambiguous, they also do not carry the negative implications of an ambiguous trading tool.
For example, and as outlined in Chapter 5, unambiguous trading tools
do not give oversold or overbought signals like the Relative Strength Index
or Stochastic Indicator. Both of these widely used technical trading indicators I consider to be ambiguous trading tools. Both can contribute to not
staying on trends or even trading against the trend. They also both fail to
define risk or give a stop loss level that traders need to exit losing trades.
This adds uncertainty and fear to trading. Remember, traders need to steer
clear of fear. Trading against the trend without being able to define risk is
totally against our mission statement and game plan.

HOW TO USE FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS
What I did not really address when talking about the ambiguity of some
tools in the last chapter was how fundamental news—that is, all the other
influences other than technical tools—affects the price of a currency pair
over a time period and whether it fits in a trader’s toolbox. A lot of
traders—and especially those who are just starting to trade—use fundamental analysis almost exclusively. But is it a useful tool? Is fundamental
analysis an ambiguous or unambiguous tool?

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

The Trader’s Toolbox

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

123

If you recall in Chapter 1, I commented on how fundamental news may
not move the market in the direction that is always expected. The reason
is the inputs that make up fundamental news and events are vast and can
offset each other.
For example, in recent economic times, the cycles for many countries have been in synch. The United States entered a recession. So did
Europe and Great Britain. When the global economy rebounded, the health
of the major economies also rebounded together. As a result, the market’s
price reaction to individual economic releases was not so cut-and-dried
compared to another time when one country’s economy was weak and another’s was strong. This dynamic would tend to lead the strong economy to
have the strong currency and the weak economy to have a weak currency.
There may also be other fundamental factors that cause the price to
move in directions not necessarily expected by the perceived fundamentals. Multinational businesses may have currency flows that affect the supply and demand balance of a currency pair. If McDonald’s, Coca-Cola, or
IBM wants to remit foreign profits back to the United States, they may look
to sell foreign currency and buy dollars at times when fundamentally the
dollar is perceived to be weak. Merger and acquisition flows can also be a
fundamental influence that can cause a currency pair to move in directions
against what the fundamentals may suggest. Options on currencies may
also have an effect on trading flows. Traders with large option exposure
at a specific strike price will often look to defend that price level and look
to halt a directional bias. Central banks, which are controlling their own
reserve balances, can have a huge influence on the movement of currency
rates that may be counter to the perceived fundamental direction.
I like to tell retail traders to think of the fundamental inputs all going into a brew in a big black cauldron. The ingredients make up a price
for a currency pair. That brew is constantly changing, with new ingredients being added all the time. As a retail trader, you can see and interpret
some ingredients. You see and know that retail sales came out stronger.
You see that the central banker said that it “would keep rates low for
an extended period of time.” You see the change in Nonfarm Payroll and
know that it was weaker than expected. Any one of these influences can
make you bullish or bearish a specific currency pair—from a fundamental
standpoint.
What you do not see is the hedge fund or central bank that executed a
large order through a bank or perhaps on the institutional electronic platform. You do not see the multinational repatriating funds back to the home
country through a global bank. You do not see the option flows. You do
not see the large hedge fund traders who are buying against a key technical level. You may not see the comments from the central banker until the
price has already moved. You do not see the flows into the risk currency
