
professional traders who are like sharks eating each other. The basic principle is that it is better to
trade the Australian dollar than the Deutsche mark, and the small OTC stock than the big Dow
stock.
What are the fundamentals you look for in a stock?
I like to use something I found in Investor's Daily: the earnings per share (EPS). [The EPS ranking
is based on comparing the earnings per share growth of a stock relative to all other stocks. For more
details on the EPS, see the William O'Neil and David Ryan interviews.] I combine the EPS with my
own sense of market share potential. If a company has already saturated their little niche in the
world, a high EPS is not that important. But, in those issues where the EPS is growing, and there is
still plenty of pie out there, the situation is much more attractive.
I also like to look at the price/earnings (P/E) ratio in conjunction with the EPS. hi other words,
while I like to see a company with a strong earnings growth pattern, I also want to know how much
the market is paying for that earnings growth pattern.
So you like seeing a high EPS with a low P/E.
Yes. That's the best combination. I am sure there is a way of combining the two on a computer and
coming up with a very good system.
How about the relative strength [a measure of a stock's price performance relative to all other
stocks], which is another key indicator in Investor's Daily!
I don't think that helps that much. Relative strength tells you what a stock has already done.
Frequently, by the time you get a high relative strength figure, the stock has exhausted itself.
Is there anything else you look for in a stock?
I look at the basic industry. For example, right now [May 1988], I happen to be bullish on tanker
rates and, therefore, the shipping business.
For what reasons?
Supply and demand. Tanker rates are like commodity prices; they follow a classic cyclical pattern.
Prices get high and everyone makes a lot of money, so they build a lot of ships and prices go down.
Eventually the ships are scrapped and prices go back up again. We have had very low rates for
many years and have scrapped a lot of tankers annually. So we are entering that part of the cycle
where prices go back up again.
Does trading become more difficult as the size of the account gets bigger?
Yes, because you are forced to compete in fewer and fewer markets that are being traded by other
big professionals.
How much common behavior is there between different markets? For example, can you trade
bonds in the same way you trade corn?
I really feel that if you can trade one market, you can trade them all. The! principles are the same.
Trading is emotion. It is mass psychology, greed, and fear. It is all the same in every situation.
For most great traders, early failure is more the rule than the exception. Despite an incredible longterm performance record, Michael Marcus began his trading career with an unbroken string of
trading losses. Moreover, he wiped out not just once, but several times. The moral is: Early trading
failure is a sign that you are doing something wrong; it is not necessarily a good predictor of
ultimate potential failure or success.
I found it particularly interesting that, despite a number of painful trading losses, Marcus' most
devastating experience was actually a profitable trade in which he got out prematurely. Taking
advantage of potential major winning trades is not only important to the mental health of the trader,
but is also critical to winning. In the interview, Marcus stressed that letting winners ride is every bit
as important as cutting losses short. In his own words, "If you don't stay with your winners, you are
not going to be able to pay for the losers."
Marcus learned about the dangers of overtrading the hard way. In one instance (the grain trade in
the nonexistent corn blight year), an account he had built up from a very small stake to $30,000 was
wiped out by betting all his money on a single trade. He made the same mistake a second time in
the lumber market, coming to the brink of disaster before narrowly escaping. These experiences
29

had a dramatic impact on Marcus' trading philosophy. It is no accident that the first rule he cites
when asked to give advice to the average trader is: Never commit more than 5 percent of your
money to a single trade idea.
In addition to not overtrading, Marcus stresses the importance of committing to an exit point on
every trade. He feels that protective stops are very important because they force this commitment
on the trader. He also recommends liquidating positions to achieve mental clarity when one is
losing money and is confused regarding market decisions.
Marcus also emphasizes the necessity of following your own mind as a trader. He suggests that
following the advice of others, even when they are good traders, often leads to problems as it
combines the worst elements of both traders.
Finally, despite being an aggressive trader, Marcus strongly believes in being restrictive in
selecting trades. He advises waiting for those trades in which all the key elements line up in one
direction. By doing so you greatly enhance the probability of success on each trade. Making lots of
trades when the conditions appear to be only marginally in favor of the trade idea has more to do
with entertainment than trading success.

30

Bruce Kovner-The World Trader
Today, Bruce Kovner may well be the world's largest trader in the interbank currency and futures
markets. In 1987 alone, he scored profits in excess of $300 million for himself and the fortunate
investors in his funds. During the past ten years, Kovner has realized a remarkable 87 percent
averaged annual compounded return. Two thousand dollars invested with Kovner in early 1978
would have been worth over $1,000,000 ten years later.
Despite his incredible track record and huge trading size, Kovner has managed to keep a
surprisingly low profile. He has assiduously pursued his privacy by steadfastly refusing all
interview requests. "You might be wondering why I consented to this interview," he said. As a
matter of fact, I was, but I did not want to raise the question. I had assumed that his agreement
reflected a vote of confidence and trust. Seven years earlier, our paths had crossed briefly when we
both worked at Commodities Corporation—he as one of the firm's principal traders, I as an analyst.
Kovner continued, "It seems like I can't avoid some publicity, and the stories are usually distorted
and fanciful. I thought that this interview would help establish at least one accurate record."
Kovner hardly fits the intuitive image of a trader who typically holds positions with a total face
value measured in billions of dollars. With his incisive intellect and easygoing manner, he reminds
one more of a professor than a giant-scale trader in the highly leveraged currency and futures
markets. Indeed, Kovner started out as an academic.
After graduating from Harvard, Kovner taught political science courses at Harvard and the
University of Pennsylvania. Although he liked teaching, he was not enthused with the academic
life. "I didn't enjoy the process of always confronting a blank page in the morning and thinking of
something brilliant to write."
In the early 1970s, Kovner managed a number of political campaigns, with the idea of eventually
running for office himself. He abandoned politics because he didn't have the financial resources, or
the desire to work his way up the political ladder from committee jobs. During this time he also
worked as a consultant for various state and federal agencies.
Still searching for a career direction, Kovner shifted his attention to the financial markets in the
mid-1970s. He believed that his economics and political science education provided the right
background, and he found the idea of analyzing the world to make trading judgments tremendously
appealing. For about a year, Kovner immersed himself in studying markets and the related
economic theory. He read everything he could get his hands on.
One subject he studied intensively was interest rate theory. "I fell in love with uieyield curve." [The
yield curve is the relationship between the yield on government securities and their time to
maturity. For example, if each successively longer-term maturity provided a higher yield than a
shorter-term maturity—for example, five-year T-notes at a higher yield than one-year T-bills—the
yield curve would reflect a continually rising slope on a graph.]
Kovner's study of the interest rate markets coincided with the initial years of trading in interest rate
futures. At that time, the interest rate futures market was relatively unsophisticated and price
distortions, which would be quickly eradicated by arbitrageurs today, persisted over time. As
Kovner explains it, "The market hadn't become important enough for CitiBank or Solomon
Brothers, but it was important enough for me."
One of the primary anomalies Kovner discovered was related to the price spread (difference)
between different futures contracts. Futures are traded for specific months (for example, March,
June, September, and December). Given the prevailing phase of the business cycle, interest rate
theory predicted that the nearby contract (for example, March) should trade at a higher price (lower
yield) than the next contract (for example, June). Although the nearest two contracts did indeed
tend to reflect this relationship, Kovner found that the price difference between more forward
contracts often started trading at near-zero levels. His first trade involved buying a forward interest
rate contract and selling a more forward contract, in the expectation that, as the purchased contract
became the nearby contract with the passage of time, the price spread between the two contracts
would widen.
That first trade worked just according to textbook theory and Kovner was hooked as a trader. His
second trade also involved an intra-market spread [the purchase of one contract against the sale of
31

another contract in the same market]. In this case, he bought the nearby copper contract and sold a
more forward contract, in the expectation that supply tightness would cause the nearby copper
contract to gain relative to the forward position. Although his idea eventually proved right, he was
too early and lost money on that trade. At the end of these two trades, Kovner was still ahead, with
his original $3,000 stake having grown to about $4,000.
My third trade is what really put me in the business. In early 1977, an apparent shortage was
developing in the soybean market. It was a demand driven market. Every week the crush was
higher than expected and nobody believed the figures. [The crush is the amount of soybeans
processed for use as soybean meal and soybean oil.] I was watching the July/November spread [the
price difference between the old crop July contract and the new crop November contract]. Since it
looked like we were going to run out of soybeans, I thought that the old crop July contract would
expand its premium to the new crop November contract. This spread had been trading in a narrow
consolidation near 60-cents premium July. I figured I could easily stop myself out just below the
consolidation at around a 45-cents premium. At the time, I didn't realize how volatile the spread
could be. I put on one spread [that is, bought July soybeans and simultaneously sold November
soybeans] near 60 cents and it widened to 70 cents. Then I put on another spread. I kept on
pyramiding.
How big of a position did you build up?
I eventually built up to aposition of about fifteen contracts, but not before I had to switch brokerage
firms. When I started out, I was trading at a small brokerage house. The head of the company, who
was an old floor trader, went over the trades every day and spotted what I was doing. By that time,
I had built my position up to about ten or fifteen contracts. The margin on a single outright contract
was $2,000, while the spread margin was only $400.
He told me, "The spread position you have on trades like an outright long position. I am going to
raise your margins from $400 to $2,000 per contract." [Spread margins are lower than outright
margins, reflecting the assumption that a net long or short position will be considerably more
volatile than a spread position. Reason: In a spread, the long contract portion of the position is
likely to at leas t partially offset price movement in the short contract position. In a shortage
situation, however, an intercrop spread, such as long July soybeans/short November soybeans can
prove to be nearly as volatile as a net long or short position.]
He was obviously quite concerned with the risk in your position.
Yes. He was concerned that I had only put up $400 margin per spread, on a spread which behaved
like a net long position.
Actually, he wasn't that far off.
He was right, but I was furious. So I moved my account to another brokerage firm, which shall
remain nameless, for reasons that will soon become clear.
You were furious because you felt he was being unfair, or—
Well, I am not sure I thought he was being unfair, but I certainly knew he was an obstacle to my
objective. I moved my account to a major brokerage house, and got a broker who was not very
competent. The market kept moving up and I kept adding to my position. I had put on my first
spread on February 25; by April 12, my account was up to $35,000.
Were you just adding to your position as the market went up, or did you have some plan?
I had a plan. I would wait until the market moved up to a certain level and then retraced by a
specified amount before adding another unit. My pyramiding did not turn out to be the problem.
The market had entered a string of limit-up moves. On April 13, the market hit a new record high.
The commotion was tremendous. My broker called me at home and said, "Soybeans are going to
the moon. It looks like July is going limit-up, and November is sure to follow. You are a fool to
stay short the November contracts. Let me lift your November shorts for you, and when the market
goes limit-up for the next few days, you will make more money." I agreed, and we covered my
November short position.
ALL of it?!
32

All of it [he laughs loudly].
Was this a spur of the moment decision?
It was a moment of insanity. Fifteen minutes later, my broker calls me back, and he sounds frantic.
"I don't know how to tell you this, but the market is limit-downl I don't know if I can get you out." I
went into shock. I yelled at him to get me out. The market moved off of limit-down by a little bit
and I got out.
Did you end up getting out at limit-down?
I got out between limit-down and slightly above limit-down. I can tell you the dimensions of the
loss. At the moment I covered my short November position leaving myself net long July, I was up
about $45,000. By the end of the day, I had $22,000 in my account. I went into emotional shock. I
could not believe how stupid I had been—how badly I had failed to understand the market, in spite
of having studied the markets for years. I was sick to my stomach, and I didn't eat for days. I
thought that I had blown my career as a trader.
But you still had $22,000 compared to your original stake of only $3,000. Keeping things in
perspective, you were still in pretty good shape.
Absolutely. I was in good shape, but—
Was it the stupidity of the mistake or was it the money that you had given back that caused
such emotional pain?
No, it wasn't the money at all. I think it was the realization that there really was "fire" there. Until
then, I had ridden $3,000 to $45,000 without a moment of pain.
On the way up, did you think, "This is easy"?
It was easy.
Did you give any thought to the possibility that the market streak could eventually go the
other way?
No, but clearly, my decision to lift the short side of my spread position in the middle of a panic
showed a complete disregard for risk. I think what bothered me so much was the realization that I
had lost a process of rationality that I thought I had. At that moment, I realized that the markets
were truly capable of taking money away every bit as fast as they gave it to you. That made a very
strong impression on me. Actually, I was very lucky to get out with $22,000.
I assume that your quick action that day probably averted a complete disaster.
Absolutely. After that day, the market went straight down as fast as it had gone up. Perhaps, if I
hadn't made my stupid mistake, I might have made the mistake of riding the market down.
What eventually happened to the spread?
The spread collapsed. Eventually, it went below the level that I had first begun buying it at.
Since you liquidated your position on the day the market and the spread topped, you would
have given back a portion of the profits even if it wasn't for the disastrous decision that
forced you out of the market.
That may be true, but for me, that was my "going bust" trade. It was the closest I ever came to
going bust and, psychologically, it felt as if I had.
Was that your most painful trade?
Yes. Far and away.
Even though you actually ended up making a substantial amount of money on the trade?
I multiplied my money by nearly sixfold on that trade. I was, of course, insanely leveraged, and I
didn't understand how risky my position was.
Was getting out of your entire position immediately after your broker called to tell you the
market was limit-down a matter of panic, or do you think you had some instinctive common
sense about controlling risk?
I'm not sure. At that moment, I was confronted with the realization that I had blown a great deal of
what I thought I knew about discipline. To this day, when something happens to disturb my
33

emotional equilibrium and my sense of what the world is like, I close out all positions related to
that event.
Do you have a recent example?
October 19,1987—the week of the stock market crash. I closed out all my positions on October 19
and 20 because I felt there was something happening in the world that I didn't understand. The first
rule of trading—there are probably many first rales—is don't get caught in a situation in which you
can lose a great deal of money for reasons you don't understand.
Let's get back to the period after your soybean trade. When did you start trading again?
About a month later. After a few months I had my account back to about $40,000. Around that
time, I answered an ad for a trading assistant position at Commodities Corporation. I was
interviewed by Michael Marcus in his usual idiosyncratic manner. He had me return to
Commodities Corporation several weeks later. "Well," he said, "I have some good news and some
bad news. The bad news is that we are not hiring you as a trading assistant; the good news is that
we are hiring you as a trader."
How much money did Commodities Corporation give you to trade?
Thirty-five thousand dollars.
Were you trading your own money, as well, at the same time?
Yes, and that is something I am very glad about. Commodities Corporation had a policy that
allowed you to trade your personal account, as well as the company account, and Michael and I
were very aggressive traders.
Were you influenced by Michael?
Oh, yes, very much. Michael taught me one thing that was incredibly important [pause].
That is a great lead-in. What is the punch line?
He taught me that you could make a million dollars. He showed me that if you applied yourself,
great things could happen. It is very easy to miss the point that you really can do it. He showed me
that if you take a position and use discipline, you can actually make it.
It sounds like he gave you confidence.
Right. He also taught me one other thing that is absolutely critical: You have to be willing to make
mistakes regularly; there is nothing wrong with it. Michael taught me about making your best
judgment, being wrong, making your next best judgment, being wrong, making your third best
judgment, and then doubling your money.
You are one of the most successful traders in the world. There are only a small number of
traders of your caliber. What makes you different from the average guy?
I'm not sure one can really define why some traders make it, while others do not. For myself, I can
think of two important elements. First, I have the ability to imagine configurations of the world
different from today and really believe it can happen. I can imagine that soybean prices can double
or that the dollar can fall to 100 yen. Second, I stay rational and disciplined under pressure.
Can trading skills be taught?
Only to a limited extent. Over the years, I have tried to train perhaps thirty people, and only four or
five of those have turned out to be good traders.
What happened to the other twenty-five?
They are out of the business—and it had nothing to do with intelligence.
When you compare the trainees that made it to the majority that did not, do you find any
distinguishing traits?
They are strong, independent, and contrary in the extreme. They are able to take positions others
are unwilling to take. They are disciplined enough to take the right size positions. A greedy trader
always blows out. I know some really inspired traders who never managed to keep the money they
made. One trader at Commodities Corporation—I don't want to mention his name—always struck
me as a brilliant trader. The ideas he came up with were wonderful; the markets he picked were
34

often the right markets. Intellectually, he knew markets much better than I did, yet I was keeping
money, and he was not.
So where was he going wrong?
Position size. He traded much too big. For every one contract I traded, he traded ten. He would
double his money on two different occasions each year, but still end up flat.
Do you always use fundamental analysis in forming your trading decisions?
I almost always trade on a market view; I don't trade simply on technical information. I use
technical analysis a great deal and it is terrific, but I can't hold a position unless I understand why
the market should move.
Is that to say that virtually every position you take has a fundamental reason behind it?
I think that is a fair statement. But I would add that technical analysis can often clarify the
fundamental picture. I will give you an example. During the past six months, I had good arguments
for the Canadian dollar going down, and good arguments for the Canadian dollar going up. It was
unclear to me which interpretation was correct. If you had put a gun to my head and forced me to
choose a market direction, I probably would have said "down."
Then the U.S ./Canadian trade pact was announced, which changed the entire picture, hi fact, the
market had broken out on the upside a few days earlier, as the negotiations were finishing up. At
that inSant, I felt completely comfortable saying that one of the major pieces ii the valuation of the
Canadian dollar had just changed, and the marlet had already voted.
Prior to the agreement, I felt the Canadian dollar was at the top of a hill, and I wasn't sure whether
it was going to roll backwads or forwards. When the market moved, I was prepared to go with tlat
movement because we had a conjunction of two important element!: a major change in
fundamentals (although, I wasn't smart enough tc know in which direction it would impact the
market), and a techncal price breakout on the upside.
What do you mean you weren't smart enough to know in which direction the trade pact
announcement would move the market? Since U.S./Canadian trade is so much a larger
component of Canadian trade than it is of U.S. trade, wouldn't it hive been logical to assume
that the trade pact would be bullish for the Canadian dollar?
It didn't have to happen that way. I could just as easily have aigued that the trade pact was negative
for the Canadian dollar because tie elimination of the trade barriers would allow imports from the
Ш. to submerge Canadian interests. There are still some analysts who tdhere to that argument. My
point is that there are well-informed tralers who know much more than I do. I simply put things
together. Tfey knew which way to go, and they voted in the marketplace by buying Canadian
dollars.
Is the generalization of that example that when an importart fundamental development
occurs, the initial direction of the marlet move is often a good tip-off of the longer-term
trend?
Exactly. The market usually leads because there are people Wio know more than you do. For
example, the Soviet Union is a very gocd trader.
Good trader in which markets?
In currencies, and grains to some degree.
How does one know what the Soviets are doing?
Because the Soviets act through commercial banks and dealers, and you hear about it.
It seems rather contradictory to me that a country that is so poor in running its own economy
should be a good trader.
Yes, but if you ask people in the business, you will find out that they are.
Why, or how?
It is a joke, but perhaps they do read some of our mail. The Soviets (and other governments)
occasionally have advance information. Why shouldn't they? They have the best developed
intelligence service in the world. It is a well known fact in the intelligence community that the
35
