
18

Part I: Getting into the Swing of Things
 Commodities: This security type is perhaps the biggest asset class receiving attention today other than stocks. With the boom in the prices of everything from gold to crude oil, commodities are attracting more money from
swing traders. Commodities — including energy commodities, agricultural
commodities, and precious metals — are traded in the futures markets.
You can profit from commodity price movements through stocks or
exchange traded funds. For example, swing traders wanting to profit
from movements in gold prices can trade streetTRACKS Gold shares,
which tracks the movement of gold bullion prices. But trading commodities involves risks and issues that differ from trading equities. (See
Commodities For Dummies by Amine Bouchentouf, published by Wiley,
for more information on trading commodities.)
 The currency market: Often called the foreign exchange market or forex
market, the currency market is the largest financial market in the world.
According to the Bank of International Settlements, the average daily
turnover in the foreign exchange markets is $3.21 trillion. Like the futures
market, trading in the currency market allows for extreme leverage.
Not all brokers offer trading in foreign exchange, so make sure you check
whether your broker has the capability. Unlike stocks, trading in the
currency market is concentrated in a few currencies: the U.S. dollar, the
euro, the Japanese yen, the British pound sterling, and the Swiss franc.
If you plan on using fundamental analysis to complement your technical
analysis as a swing trader (see the definitions of both terms in the section “Establishing your analysis techniques” later in this chapter), be
prepared to learn about the various factors that affect the value of foreign
currencies: inflation, political stability, government deficits, and economic
growth — to name a few. (See Currency Trading For Dummies by Mark
Galant and Brian Dolan, published by Wiley, for more information on trading currencies.)
 Options: Investment contracts that give the purchaser the option, but
not the obligation, to buy an underlying asset at a specified price up
until the expiration date are known as options. Options are highly risky
and not efficient swing trading vehicles because of their illiquidity.

The “where”: Deciding where you’ll trade
Where you trade depends a great deal on what you trade. Stocks, commodities, currencies, and bonds trade on different markets.
The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), American Stock Exchange (AMEX),
and NASDAQ list stocks based in the United States and abroad (they also
list other investment vehicles, like exchange traded funds, that enable you
to profit from movements in prices of commodities and other asset classes).
The NASDAQ differs from the NYSE and AMEX in that it’s completely electronic and allows for efficient transaction and order routing.

Chapter 1: Swing Trading from A to Z
Not all stocks trade on these markets. Recently, electronic communication
networks (ECNs) have emerged as an efficient way to match buy and sell
orders. ECNs connect individual traders with major brokerage firms. You
sometimes can get a better price by submitting orders to an ECN instead of
a broker. The easiest way to access ECNs is by subscribing to a broker who
provides direct access trading.
But swing traders can buy and sell other securities on other markets. For
example, if you want to trade an actual commodity, the Chicago Board of
Trade (CBOT) lists several commodities: ethanol, gold, silver, corn, oats, rice,
soybeans, and wheat. The New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) also lists
popular commodities like crude oil, coal, natural gas, and gold. But you must
consider the additional risk factors if you venture outside trading stocks. For
example, commodities require different margin requirements than stocks.
Not properly employing a risk management system can lead to losing your
entire capital on a single trade. Commodities also trade on different fundamentals than companies or fixed-income securities.
If you want to trade commodities, currencies, or other investment vehicles,
you need to trade via firms authorized to transact in those markets.

The “when” and the “how”: Choosing
your trading style and strategy
Whether you enter orders during or after market hours affects your entry and
exit strategies.
 Part-time swing traders enter orders when markets are closed and rely
on limit and stop losses to execute this strategy.
 Full-time traders, on the other hand, can execute their entries and exits
during the day and incorporate intraday price action into their timing
of trades. They also find more trading opportunities because they have
more time to devote to swing trading.
How you trade refers to your various trading strategies, which I outline in
this section.

Establishing your analysis techniques
Swing traders rely on two major analysis techniques: technical analysis and
fundamental analysis. Technical analysis, broadly speaking, encompasses
chart pattern analysis and the application of mathematical formulas to security prices and volume. Fundamental analysis covers earnings, sales, and
other fundamentals of a company or a security.

19

20

Part I: Getting into the Swing of Things
In my experience, most swing traders rely solely or in large measure on
technical analysis. However, I explain both analysis techniques in this book
because I strongly believe that understanding and using both improves the
odds of success.
Both analysis techniques have their advantages:
 Technical analysis can be quickly and easily applied to any market or
security. For example, a trained swing trader can use technical analysis
to quickly decide whether to buy or sell a security using chart patterns
of technical indicators. In contrast, a swing trader relying on fundamental analysis needs more time to read about a company, its business, and
its earnings before coming to a conclusion. Whether you’re trading commodities, currencies, stocks, or bonds, you can apply technical analysis
uniformly to these markets. In other words, if you know how to interpret
a chart, then the kind of security being plotted is largely irrelevant. In
my opinion, the ease of application is the biggest advantage technical
analysis has over fundamental analysis.
 Fundamental analysis can answer questions that are beyond the scope
of technical analysis, such as, “Why is this security price moving?”
Swing trading on the long and short side based, in part, on fundamentals
is like having a head start in the 100-meter dash. Rallies and declines that
are driven by fundamentals are more profitable to trade than rallies and
declines that are simply the result of noise in the markets (such as a large
mutual fund liquidating or buying a position). Over the long term, security
movements are driven by the securities’ underlying fundamentals. Crude
oil prices rise when demand exceeds supply or when supply becomes
scarce — not, as technical analysis may superficially indicate, because
the chart developed a bullish formation. (Of course, crude oil — or any
security — can rise or fall due to non-fundamental reasons. But such
rallies and declines are often fleeting and not as strong as fundamentally
driven price moves.)
Some swing traders shy away from learning about a company’s fundamentals. Generally, fundamental analysis is seen as long, laborious, and
not always right. But you can improve your swing trading by getting to
the essence of a company’s fundamentals, even though it does require
extensive reading, researching, and modeling.
Just how much should you care about a company’s fundamentals? The
general rule of thumb is that the longer your investment horizon, the more
important fundamental analysis becomes. The shorter your horizon, the
less important fundamental analysis is in trading securities. This is because
short-term movements are driven by momentum, noise, and other factors.
Over the long term, however, fundamentals always win out.
But just because you understand how to apply fundamentals doesn’t mean
you’ll make money. Markets don’t rise simply because they’re undervalued,
or fall simply because they’re overvalued. Markets can remain under- or

Chapter 1: Swing Trading from A to Z
overvalued for long periods of time. That’s why I don’t recommend swing
trading on fundamentals alone. Fundamental analysis tells you which way
the wind is blowing so you’re prepared, but technical analysis provides the
important timing components.

Choosing candidates to buy
You can find promising securities in two main ways — the top-down approach
and the bottom-up approach. Both are covered in detail in Chapter 8, but
here’s a brief rundown:
 Top-down: Swing traders who prefer the top-down approach identify
opportunities beginning at the market level, drill down to the industry
level, and finally look at individual companies. If you fit this category,
your entry strategy should begin with an examination of the overall markets, then trickle down to the major sectors in the market, and then to
the industries within the strongest or weakest sectors. At this point, you
rank the securities in the industry on some technical or fundamental
measure (more on that in Chapter 8). Then you select the securities that
meet your entry strategy.
 Bottom-up: Swing traders who use the bottom-up approach are grassrootsoriented individuals who look for strong securities and then filter promising ones by their industry groups or sectors. If you fit this category, your
approach begins with a screen of some sort (a screen is a quantitative
filter), sometimes depending on whether growth or value stocks are in
favor at that particular point in time. If that’s the case, you then compare
the relative strength of the growth and value indexes (and possibly also
the market capitalizations of the market). After identifying which securities
rank highest in the screen, you determine which securities meet your entry
rules, and then you trade only those securities that reside in leading or lagging industry groups, depending on whether you favor buying or shorting.

Planning your exit
Most swing traders focus almost entirely on their entry strategy, but it’s the
exit strategy that determines when you take profits, when you take losses,
and when you exit a meandering position so you can put the capital to better
use. So although planning your entry is important, you need to spend equal
(if not more) time on your exit.
Your exit strategy is most likely going to be technically driven, and it’s threefold:
 Determine when you exit for a profit. Don’t take profits based on a gut
feeling — rely on a trigger or catalyst instead. For example, some exit
strategies for profits stipulate that the time for departure arrives when
prices reach the implied target based on a chart pattern, or when shares
close below a moving average.
 Determine when you exit for a loss. Your exit strategy for losses should
be based on the breach of a support level, a resistance level (in the case

21

22

Part I: Getting into the Swing of Things
of shorting), or some type of moving average (for example, the nine-day
moving average). (Support levels are simply price zones where securities
stop falling, and resistance levels are price zones where prices stop rising.)
This keeps your losses limited to some known quantity (barring, of
course, a gap up or down in the security price, which must be addressed
by proper position sizing and other risk management techniques).
 Determine when you exit if a trade generates neither profits nor
losses. That is, it meanders sideways and results in dead weight. Some
swing traders exit a position quickly if it doesn’t perform. I prefer to give
a position a few days to prove itself one way or the other. So I recommend exiting a position after ten days if it hasn’t hit your stop loss level
or triggered a profit-taking signal.
You should outline your exit strategy by making sure your trading plan
addresses when you exit for profit, loss, and capital redeployment.

Settling on when you’ll net long or short
Swing traders sometimes short securities to profit from price declines. If you
choose to incorporate shorting into your trading strategy, you must determine when you’ll be net long or net short.
Net long means that the majority of assets you’ve invested in are on the
long side of the market. Net short means that the majority of assets you’ve
invested in are on the short side of the market. And if your long and short
assets are equal, then you’re market neutral.
Generally, the decision to be net long or net short is driven by the state of the
major market index. When the S&P 500, for example, is in a bull market, then
most swing traders are net long. When the S&P 500 is falling, most swing traders
are net short. And when the market is in a trading range, swing traders may be
market neutral.

Preparing your risk management plan
The most important part of your trading plan is how you manage risk. Risk management, which I cover in detail in Chapter 10, addresses how you manage risk
on an individual security level and on the portfolio level as a whole. A trading
plan with a weak entry strategy and a weak exit strategy can still be profitable if
the risk management strategy limits losses and lets profits run.
In order to effectively manage your risk, you need to account for the following aspects of your trading plan:
 How much you risk on an individual position: Your trading plan must
spell out how much you plan on allocating to a single position.
 How much you risk of your overall portfolio: You determine how much
of your total portfolio is at risk on a single position. Generally, this figure
should be 0.5 to 2 percent (see Chapter 10).

Chapter 1: Swing Trading from A to Z
 How to achieve proper diversification: Diversification means more than
adding several securities. You need to have exposure to different asset
classes, sectors, and market capitalizations.
 How you combine long and short positions: Combining long and short
positions enables your portfolio to benefit in up and down markets.
 How you implement the 7 percent rule: How much you risk on a single
position is different from how much you risk of your total portfolio. The
7 percent rule caps your total risk at 7 percent.
 How you determine your exit points: Your exits should be driven by
support and resistance ranges, technical indicators, and profit targets.
 What triggers an exit: An exit may occur due to a loss, a profit, or a lack
of meaningful market action.
 How you manage your emotions: No matter how effective a risk management system is, it ultimately must be enacted by a human being.
Thus, this last point is paramount, because humans are affected by
emotions, experiences, and hopes. This fact can cause a swing trader to
abandon the stringent rules he or she has fashioned and may have been
following for years.
I’ve found that managing emotions is the most difficult aspect of swing
trading. The better you get at trading, the more likely your emotions
will convince you to cut corners and abandon the rules that got you to
where you are. But emotions can be managed. You can limit their impact
by, for example, implementing stop loss orders that get you out of a
security without your interference.
The preceding bullets all boil down to two categories of action: position
sizing and limiting losses at the portfolio level. So what’s the difference
between the two? Alexander Elder, a trading expert, once differentiated
between losses suffered at the individual stock level and the portfolio level
through an analogy of sharks and fish. Specifically, he said that position
sizing is done to reduce the risk that your portfolio will suffer a “shark bite”
loss from a single position. That is, a single major loss that wipes out your
account value.
On the other hand, portfolio risk management is done to prevent several
small losses from killing you — or as he described it, death by piranha bites.
A single small piranha may not be able to kill a larger mammal, but dozens of
piranha working together can be deadly.
Similarly, a small loss is not life threatening for a portfolio. The risk is that
several small losses may gang up and cause major loss. That’s why you must
limit losses on an individual stock level (and avoid those shark bites) while
also limiting losses on the portfolio level (to prevent death by piranha bites).

23

24

Part I: Getting into the Swing of Things

Building Your Swing Trading Prowess
Staying on top of your game means you can never stop learning or improving
yourself. Sadly, you can’t simply become a swing trading extraordinaire and
implement your trades with nary a single problem. Heck, a master martial
artist doesn’t stop after earning his or her black belt — why would a swing
trader?
The following action items will help you stay strong throughout your swing
trading career:
 Admit to losses when they occur. Markets have a way of humbling even
the most skilled traders if they let their egos get in the way of their trading. Some traders hold onto losing positions in the hopes that they can
eventually break even — a policy that devastates an account in the long
run. A losing position not only may lose more money but it also ties up
capital that could be invested in more promising trading opportunities.
 Be a student of the markets. Successful swing traders never stop
absorbing information. The markets are always changing, with new
investment vehicles appearing and new laws being introduced. As a
swing trader, you must maintain intellectual curiosity. Reading books is
one way to continually stay informed. Take an interest in understanding
your positions and reading the pro and con arguments on them.
 Try to insulate yourself as much as possible from others’ opinions,
whether the person is an Average Joe or a Wall Street analyst.
Remember, Wall Street is a community, and analysts send out their
opinion reports to hundreds, if not thousands, of traders and portfolio
managers. Reading those reports can lead you to think like the analyst
does — and like hundreds of others do. Good performance doesn’t come
by copying what everyone else is doing.
 Don’t frequent message boards. Message boards often foster a group
mentality that a position should behave a certain way. You don’t want
to gather knowledge from just anyone on the Internet. Rather, stick to
trusted sources and form your own opinion on matters.

Chapter 2

Understanding the Swing Trader’s
Two Main Strategies
In This Chapter
 Considering different trading strategies and styles
 Understanding technical analysis: charts, trends, and indicators
 Figuring out fundamental analysis: catalysts, growth stocks, and value stocks

A

s a soon-to-be swing trader, how do you uncover promising opportunities? And after you uncover those opportunities, how do you time your
entries and exits? Very good questions, and I’m glad you asked.
Like all traders, swing traders rely primarily on two main strategies: technical analysis and fundamental analysis. The difference between swing traders
and all the rest of ’em, though, is that most swing traders rely on one form of
analysis at the exclusion of the other; the majority of swing traders use technical analysis either solely or in conjunction with fundamental analysis.
I encourage you to use both strategies. After all, understanding why stocks
move and which ones are likely to move can be just as important as knowing
which stocks are moving. After spending years trading and managing money,
I believe a swing trader should be well rounded in his or her approach.

Strategy and Style: The
Swing Trader’s Bio
Technical analysis deals with charting and technical indicators. Fundamental
analysis is principally concerned with earnings, corporate events (takeovers,
acquisitions, and so on), and valuation. Some swing traders are discretionary —
they use technical and/or fundamental analysis to evaluate each potential trade
and make decisions based on the rules they’ve outlined for themselves. Other

26

Part I: Getting into the Swing of Things
swing traders are mechanical — they use either or both forms of analysis and
make trades using an automated system (they rely on a computer to execute
their strategies).
This chapter introduces you to both strategies (technical and fundamental
analysis) and both styles of trading (discretionary and mechanical). Only you
can determine what kind of trader you want to be based on your interests
and expertise.

Two forms of analysis, head to head
Devoid of calculations, reading, or other time-intensive research, technical
analysis allows a swing trader to examine any security — be it stock, commodity, currency, or something else — and make a decision on its likely
short-term direction. The swing trader relying on technical analysis doesn’t
care about what a company does, how it makes its money, or whether the
CEO is embezzling funds — he or she cares for nothing but the ticker tape.
After all, swing traders earn profits based on a security’s price, not how many
widgets a company sells or the academic pedigree of its board of directors.
Technical analysis is particularly important for swing traders with a very short
time horizon (that is, a couple of days). The shorter your time horizon, the
more prominently technical analysis should figure in your trading plan.
The swing trader who relies on fundamental analysis is a different breed.
This trader wants to know what line of business a company is in, whether
that industry is on the rocks or gaining momentum, when a company reports
its earnings, and what those earnings expectations are. The swing trader
using fundamental analysis isn’t interested in every detail of a company’s balance sheet. After all, if you’re looking at trading stocks of ten companies in
the coming week, you don’t have the time to read those companies’ annual
reports cover to cover. Instead, a high-level overview is enough. Intricate
modeling in Excel, though useful, isn’t practical for a swing trader who buys
and sells stocks over a period of days.
Newcomers to swing trading are typically attracted to technical analysis, for
a couple reasons:
 Technical analysis doesn’t require nearly as much work as fundamental analysis. A fundamental analyst has more variables to deal with and
more calculations to compute. To analyze a firm, a fundamental analyst
must understand the dynamics of the firm’s industry, its competitors, its
cost structure, its management team, and other factors.
 Trading decisions based on fundamental analysis takes more time to
play out than those based on technical analysis. A company may be
deeply undervalued relative to the market and its industry, but being
undervalued doesn’t necessarily mean shares will rise tomorrow or the
