
AU3772_book.fm Page 755 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary

755

HEDGING — To try to lessen risk by making a counterbalancing investment.
In a stock portfolio, an example of a hedge would be to buy 100 shares of
XYZ stock, and to buy one put option of the same stock. The put would help
protect against a decline in the stock, but it would also limit potential gains
on the upside. See Natural Hedge.
HISTORICAL DATA — A series of past daily, weekly, or monthly market prices.
HOOK DAY — A trading day in which the open is above/below prior day’s
high/low and the close is below/above prior day’s close with narrow range.
HORIZONTAL CHANNEL — When the Tops of the rallies and Bottoms of
the reactions form along lines which are horizontal and parallel to one
another, the area in between is called a Horizontal Trend Channel. It may
also be called a Rectangle during the early stages of formation.
HORIZONTAL TRENDLINE — A horizontal line drawn across either the
Tops or Bottoms in a sideways trending market.
HYBRID HEAD-AND-SHOULDERS — A small Head-and-Shoulders Pattern within a larger Head-and-Shoulders Pattern. (See also Head-and-Shoulders Pattern.)
INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE — See Dow–Jones Industrial Average.
INSIDE DAY — A day in which the daily price range is totally within the
prior day’s daily price range.
INSIDERS — Individuals who possess fundamental information likely to
affect the price of a stock, but which is unavailable to the public. An example
would be an individual who knows about a merger before it is announced
to the public. Trading by insiders on this type of information is illegal.
IPO — Initial Public Offering.
INTERMEDIATE TREND — In Edwards and Magee, the term Intermediate
or Secondary refers to a trend (or pattern indicating a trend) against the
Primary (Major) Trend which is likely to last from 3 weeks to 3 months, and
which may retrace one third to two thirds of the previous Primary Advance
or Decline.
INVERTED BOWL — See Rounding Top.
INVERTED TRIANGLE — See Right-Angled Broadening Triangle.
ISLAND REVERSAL — A compact trading range, usually formed after a
fast rally or reaction, which is separated from the previous move by an
Exhaustion Gap, and from the move in the opposite direction which follows
by a Breakaway Gap. The result is an Island of prices detached by a gap
before and after. If the trading range contains only one day, it is called a
One-Day Island Reversal. The two gaps usually occur at approximately the
same level. By itself, the pattern is not of major significance; but it does

AU3772_book.fm Page 756 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

756

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

frequently send prices back for a complete retracement of the Minor Move
which preceded it.
KILROY BOTTOM — The Editor’s contribution to the nomenclature. A more
descriptive term for the undescriptive “Head-and-Shoulders Bottom”.
LADDERING — A practice some Wall Street underwriters used in the tulipomania of the 1990s. Consists of selling IPO shares for the pre-opening
price to insider customers in exchange for their agreement to buy more in
the public offering at higher prices. Caused extreme volatility and big run
ups in early days of IPOs. An unethical form of price manipulation.
LEVERAGE — Using a smaller amount of capital to control an investment
of greater value. For example, exclusive of interest and commission costs, if
you buy a stock on 50% margin, you control $1 of stock for every 50 cents
invested or leverage of 2-to-1.
LIMIT MOVE — A change in price which exceeds the limits set by the
exchange on which the futures contract is traded.
LIMIT ORDER — A buy or sell order which is limited in some way, usually
in price. For example, if you placed a limit order to buy IBM at 100, the
broker would not fill the order unless he could do so at your price or better,
i.e., at 100 or lower.
LIMIT UP, LIMIT DOWN — Commodity exchange restrictions on the maximum upward or downward movements permitted in the price for a commodity during any trading session day.
LINE, DOW THEORY — A Line in the Dow Theory is an Intermediate
Sideways Movement in one or both of the Averages (Industrial and/or
Transportation)in the course of which prices fluctuate within a range of 5%
(of mean price) or less.
LOGARITHMIC SCALE — See Semilogarithmic Scale.
MAJOR TREND — In Edwards and Magee, the term Major (or Primary)
refers to a trend (or pattern leading to such a trend) which lasts at least one
year, and shows a rise or decline of at least 20%.
MARGIN — The minimum amount of capital required to buy or sell a stock.
The rate, 50% of value in 2005, is set by the government. In a commodity,
margin is also the minimum, usually about 10%, needed to buy or sell a
contract. But the rate is set by the individual exchanges. The two differ in
cost as well. In a stock, the broker lends the investor the balance of the money
due and charges interest for the loan. In a commodity, margin is treated as
a good faith payment. The broker does not lend the difference, so no interest
expense is incurred.
MARKET ON CLOSE — An order specification which requires the broker
to get the best price available on the close of trading.

AU3772_book.fm Page 757 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary

757

MARKET ORDER — An instruction to buy or sell at the price prevailing
when the order reaches the floor of the exchange.
MARKET RECIPROCAL — Normal average range of a stock based on the
average range for a number of years, divided by the current average range.
The result is the reciprocal of the market movement for the period. Wide
market activity, for example, would show a small decimal, less than 1. Dull
trading would be a larger number.
MAST — The vertical rally or reaction preceding a Flag or Pennant Formation.
McCLELLAN OSCILLATOR — An Index based on New York Stock
Exchange net advances over declines. It provides a measure of such conditions as overbought/oversold and market direction on a short- to intermediate-term basis. The McClellan Oscillator measures a Bear Market Selling
Climax when registering a very negative reading like –150. A sharp buying
pulse in the market is indicated by a very positive reading, well above 100.
MEASURING FORMULAE — There are certain patterns which do allow the
chartist the opportunity to project at least an interim target level of the
direction of the Primary Trend. The most important of these patterns are
found to be Triangles, Rectangles, Head-and-Shoulders, Pennants and Flags.
Triangles — When a stock breaks out of a Symmetrical Triangle (either
up or down), the ensuing move should carry at least as far as the
height of the Triangle as measured along its first reaction.
Rectangles — The minimum you would expect from a breakout (up or
down) out of a Rectangle Pattern would be the distance equal to the
height of the formation.
Head-and-Shoulders Tops/Bottoms — The Head-and-Shoulders Pattern
has one of the better measuring sticks. In either a Top or Bottom, the
interim target, once the neckline is penetrated, is the distance from
the Top (or Bottom) of the head to the level of the neckline directly
below (above) the head.
Pennants and Flags — The one thing to remember about these Continuation Patterns is that they “fly at half-mast.” In other words, the leg
in equals the leg out.
MEASURING GAP — See Runaway Gap.
MEGAPHONES — Megaphones are Broadening Tops. The Broadening Formation may evolve in any one of the three forms comparable, respectively,
to Inverted Symmetrical, Inverted Ascending, or Descending Triangles. The
symmetrical type, for example, consists of a series of price fluctuations across
a horizontal axis, with each Minor Top higher and each Minor Bottom lower
than its predecessor. The pattern may thus be roughly marked off by two
diverging lines, the upper sloping up from left to right, the lower sloping
down. These Broadening Patterns are characteristically loose and irregular,

AU3772_book.fm Page 758 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

758

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

whereas Symmetrical Triangles are regular and compact. The converging
boundary lines of Symmetrical Triangles are clearly defined, as a rule. Tops
and Bottoms within the formation tend to fall within fair precision on these
boundary lines. In the Broadening Formation, the rallies and declines usually
do not all stop at clearly marked boundary lines and are subject to spikes.
We could call this a Megaphone Spike because the formation keeps on
crowding at the lines to look like a megaphone. It has a tendency to spike
down more than up.
MINOR TREND — In Edwards and Magee, the term Minor refers to brief
fluctuations (usually less than 6 days and rarely longer than 3 weeks) which,
in total, make up the Intermediate Trend.
MOMENTUM INDICATOR — A market indicator which utilizes volume
statistics for predicting the strength or weakness of a current market and
any overbought or oversold conditions, and to distinguish turning points
within the market.
MOVING AVERAGE — A mathematical technique to smooth data. It is
called moving because the number of elements are fixed, but the time interval
advances. Old data must be removed when new data is added, which causes
the average to “move along” with the progression of the stock or commodity.
EN: Simple moving average for n days consists of summing prices for n days and
dividing by n. On n+1, drop the first day and add the new day to the formula, etc.
MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE/DIVERGENCE (MACD) — MACD,
an oscillator derived by dividing one Moving Average by another. Basically,
it combines three Moving Averages into two lines. In today’s computer
programs, the Moving Averages are usually exponentially weighted, thus
giving more weight to the more recent data. It is plotted in a chart with a
horizontal Equilibrium Line.
The Equilibrium Line is important. When the two Moving Averages cross
below the Equilibrium Line, it means that the shorter EMA is at a value less
than the longer EMA. This is a Bearish signal. When the EMAs are above
the Equilibrium Line, it means that the shorter EMA has a value greater than
the longer EMA. This is a Bullish signal.
The first line is the difference between a 12-period Exponential Moving
Average and a 26-period Exponential Moving Average. The second line
(signal line) is an approximate exponential equivalent of a 9-period Moving
Average of the first line. The exponential values being 0.15, 0.075, and 0.20.
An MACD can be displayed as a line oscillator or a histogram.
Buy signals are generated when the faster Moving Average Line crosses
the slower Moving Average Line from below. Sell signals come from the
opposite, when the faster line crosses the slower line from above. Beware of
mechanically trading every MACD crossover; it can lead to whipsaws and
drawdowns with substance. The fact is, narrow trading ranges give many
false signals which can be avoided with additional interpretation. (See also
Appendix C.)

AU3772_book.fm Page 759 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary

759

MOVING AVERAGE CROSSOVERS — The point where the various Moving
Average Lines pass through or over each other.
MULTICOLINCARITY — The incorrect procedure of using the identical data
to supply different types of indicators. The indicators will all confirm each
other since they are based on the same data. Combining RSI, Moving Average
Convergence/Divergence (MACD), and rate of change (where all indicators
use the same closing prices and relative time periods) should provide the
same signals, but they could easily be incorrect. Multicolincarity can be
avoided by using one indicator based on closing prices, another from volume, and a third from price ranges. It can also be avoided by using data
generated indicators compared to chart patterns. (See also Bollinger Bands,
MACD, Wilder RSI.)
MULTIPLE HEAD-AND-SHOULDERS PATTERN — See Complex Head
and-Shoulders.
NARROW RANGE DAY — A trading day with a narrower price range
relative to the previous day’s price range.
NATURAL and UNNATURAL Methods or Systems — Bassetti’s half humorous identification of “natural methods” of analysis, such as chart analysis,
which looks directly at market data, as opposed to “unnatural methods”
which place an algorithm between the data and the analysis, such as moving
averages, oscillators, etc.
NATURAL HEDGE — Bassetti’s formulation of a technique recommended
by Magee whereby a portfolio is always somewhat long and somewhat short.
It is an imperfect hedge intended to cushion downside (or upside) risks. E.g.,
long the DIA and short its members (or their proxies) which are in downtrends.
NECKLINE — In a Head-and-Shoulders Pattern, it is the line drawn across
the two reaction lows (in a Top), or two rally highs (in a Bottom), which
occur before and after the head. This line must be broken by 3% to confirm
the Reversal. In a Diamond Pattern, which is similar to a Head-and-Shoulders Pattern, the neckline is bent in the shape of a V or inverted V. (See also
Diamond and Head-and-Shoulders.)
NEGATIVE DIVERGENCE — When two or more Averages, indexes, or
indicators fail to show confirming trends.
NORMAL RANGE FOR PRICE — EN: An analytical tool invented by Magee
for measuring the volatility of stocks. Cumbersome in the modern context, but
interesting. Cf. Appendix A.
ODD LOT — A block of stock consisting of less than 100 shares.
ON BALANCE VOLUME (OBV) — OBV is a popular Volume Indicator,
developed by Joseph Granville. Constructing an OBV line is very simple:
the total volume for each day is assigned a positive or negative value depending on whether prices closed higher or lower that day. A higher close results

AU3772_book.fm Page 760 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

760

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

in the volume for that day getting a positive value, while a lower close results
in a negative value. A running total is kept by adding or subtracting each
day’s volume based on the direction of the close. The direction of the OBV
line is watched, not the actual volume numbers.
Formula:
• If Today’s Close > Yesterday’s Close,
then OBV = Yesterday’s OBV + Today’s Volume
• If Today’s Close < Yesterday’s Close,
then OBV = Yesterday’s OBV – Today’s Volume
• If Today’s Close = Yesterday’s Close,
then OBV = Yesterday’s OBV
ONE-DAY REVERSAL — See Island Reversal.
OPTION — The right granted to one investor by another to buy (called a
call option) or sell (called a put option) 100 shares of stock, or one contract
of a commodity, at a fixed price for a fixed period of time. The investor
granting the right (the seller of the option) is paid a nonrefundable premium
by the buyer of the option.
ORDER — See Limit Order, Market Order, and Stop Order.
OPTIONS RESEARCH, INC. — Founded by Blair Hull, later of Hull Trading
Co. The first company to computerize the Black–Scholes Model.
OSCILLATOR — A form of momentum or rate-of-change indicator which
is usually valued from +1 to –1 or from 0% to 100%.
OVERBOUGHT — Market prices that have risen too steeply and too quickly.
OVERBOUGHT/OVERSOLD INDICATOR — An indicator that attempts to
define when prices have moved too far and too quickly in either direction,
and thus are liable to a reaction.
OVERSOLD — Market prices that have declined too steeply and too quickly.
PANIC — The second stage of a Bear Market when buyers thin out and
sellers sell at any price. The downward trend of prices suddenly accelerates
into an almost vertical drop while volume rises to climactic proportions. (See
also Bear Market.)
PANIC BOTTOM — See Selling Climax.
PATTERN — See Area Pattern.
PEAK — See Top.
PENETRATION — The breaking of a pattern boundary line, trendline, or
Support and Resistance Level.
PENNANT — A Pennant is a Flag with converging, rather than parallel,
boundary lines. (See also Flag.)

AU3772_book.fm Page 761 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary

761

POINT & FIGURE CHART — A method of charting believed to have been
created by Charles Dow. Each day the price moves by a specific amount (the
arbitrary box size), an X (if up) or O (if down) is placed on a vertical column
of squared paper. As long as prices do not change direction by a specified
amount (the Reversal), the trend is considered to be in force and no new
column is made. If a Reversal takes place, another vertical column is started
immediately to the right of the first, but in the opposite direction. There is
no provision for time on a Point & Figure Chart.
PREMATURE BREAKOUT — A breakout of an Area Pattern, then a retreat
back into the pattern. Eventually, the trend will break out again and proceed
in the same direction. At the time they occur, false breakouts and premature
breakouts are indistinguishable from each other, or a genuine breakout.
PRICE EARNINGS RATIO — Price of stock divided by earnings (which may
or may not be real) to give the p/e ratio. Sometimes an unnatural, or imaginary, number.
PRIMARY TREND — See Major Trend.
PROGRAM TRADING — Trades based on signals from various computer
programs, usually entered directly from the trader’s computer to the market’s computer system. EN: Usually indicates large volume transactions on large
baskets of stocks by professional traders.
PROGRESSIVE STOP — A stop order which follows the market up or down.
(See also Stop.)
PROTECTIVE STOP — A stop order used to protect gains or limit losses in
an existing position. (See also Stop.)
PULLBACK — Return of prices to the boundary line of the pattern after a
breakout to the downside. Return after an upside breakout is called a Throwback.
PUT — An option to sell a specified amount of a stock or commodity at an
agreed time at the stated exercise price.
RAIL AVERAGE — See Dow–Jones Transportation Average.
RALLY — An increase in price which retraces part of the previous price
decline.
RALLY TOPS — A price level that finishes a short-term rally in an ongoing
trend.
RANGE — The difference between the high and low during a specific time
period.
REACTION — A decline in price which retraces part of the previous price
advance.
RECIPROCAL, MARKET — See Market Reciprocal.

AU3772_book.fm Page 762 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

762

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

RECOVERY — See Rally.
RECTANGLE — A trading area which is bounded on the Top and the Bottom
with horizontal, or near horizontal, lines. A Rectangle can be either a Reversal
or Continuation Pattern depending on the direction of the breakout. Minimum Measuring Formula: add the width (difference between Top and Bottom) of the Rectangle to the breakout point.
RED PARALLEL — A line drawn parallel to the trendline (Red Trendline)
which connects at least two Bottoms. The Red Parallel (basically a Return
Line) is started off a high and used to estimate the next high point.
RED TRENDLINE — A straight line connecting two or more Bottoms
together. To avoid confusion, Edwards and Magee use a red line for Bottom
Trendlines and a blue line for Top Trendlines.
RELATIVE STRENGTH (RS or RS INDEX) — A stock’s price movement over
the past year as compared to a market index (most often the Standard &
Poor’s 500 Index). Value below 1 means the stock shows relative weakness
in price movement (underperformed the market); a value above 1 means the
stock shows relative strength over the 1-year period.
Equation for Relative Strength:
Current Stock Price/Year-Ago Stock Price
Current S&P 500/Year-Ago S&P 500
(See also Wilder Relative Strength Index.)
RESISTANCE LEVEL — A price level at which a sufficient supply of stock
is forthcoming to stop, and possibly turn back for a time, an uptrend.
RETRACEMENT — A price movement in the opposite direction of the
previous trend.
RETURN LINE — See Ascending or Descending Trend Channels.
REVERSAL GAP — A chart formation where the low of the last day is above
the previous day’s range, with the close above midrange and above the open.
REVERSAL PATTERN — An Area Pattern which breaks out in a direction
opposite to the previous trend. (See also Ascending Triangle, Broadening
Formation, Broadening Top, Descending Triangle, Diamond, Dormant Bottom, Double Bottom or Top, Triple Bottom or Top, Head-and-Shoulders,
Rectangle, Rounding Bottom or Top, Saucer, Symmetrical Triangle, and Rising or Falling Wedge.)
RIGHT-ANGLED BROADENING TRIANGLE — Area Pattern with one
boundary line horizontal and the other at an angle which, when extended,
will converge with the horizontal line at some point to the left of the pattern.
Similar in shape to Ascending and Descending Triangles, except they are
inverted and look like Flat-Topped or Bottomed Megaphones. Right-Angled
Broadening Formations generally carry Bearish implications regardless of

AU3772_book.fm Page 763 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Glossary

763

which side is flat. But any decisive breakout (3% or more) through the
horizontal boundary line has the same forceful significance as does a breakout in an Ascending or Descending Triangle.
RIGHT-ANGLE TRIANGLES — See Ascending and Descending Triangles.
RISING WEDGE — An Area Pattern with two upward-slanting, converging
trendlines. Normally, it takes more than 3 weeks to complete, and volume
will diminish as prices move toward the apex of the pattern. The anticipated
direction of the breakout in a Rising Wedge is down. Minimum Measuring
Formula: a retracement of all the ground gained within the wedge.
ROUND LOT — A block of stock consisting of 100 shares of stock.
ROUND TRIP — The cost of one complete stock or commodity transaction,
i.e., the entry cost and the offset cost combined.
ROUNDING BOTTOM — An Area Pattern which pictures a gradual, progressive, and fairly symmetrical change in the trend from down to up. Both
the Price Pattern (along its lows) and the Volume Pattern show a concave
shape often called a Bowl or Saucer. There is no minimum measuring formula associated with this Reversal Pattern.
ROUNDING TOP — An Area Pattern which pictures a gradual, progressive,
and fairly symmetrical change in the trend from up to down. The Price
Pattern, along its highs, shows a convex shape sometimes called an Inverted
Bowl. The Volume Pattern is concave shaped (a bowl) as trading activity
declines into the peak of the Price Pattern, and increases when prices begin
to fall. There is no measuring formula associated with this Reversal Pattern.
RUNAWAY GAP — A relatively wide gap in prices which occurs in an
advance or decline gathering momentum. Also called a “Measuring Gap,”
since it frequently occurs at just about the halfway point between the breakout which started the move and the Reversal Day which calls an end to it.
Minimum Measuring Formula: take the distance from the original breakout
point to the start of the gap, and add it to the other side of the gap.
RUNNING MARKET — A market wherein prices are moving rapidly in one
direction with very few or no price changes in the opposite direction.
SAUCER — See Rounding Bottom and Scallop.
SCALLOPS — A series of Rounding Bottom (Saucer) Patterns where the
rising end always carries prices a little higher than the preceding Top at the
beginning of the pattern. Net gains will vary from stock to stock, but there
is a strong tendency for it to amount to 10–15% of the price. The total reaction,
from the left-hand Top of each Saucer to its Bottom, is usually in the 20–30%
area. Individual Saucers in a Scallop series are normally 5 to 7 weeks long,
and rarely less than 3 weeks. The volume will show a convex or Bowl Pattern.
SECONDARY TREND — See Intermediate Trend.
