Reversals in Distribution
In this example, price broke out from a range consolidation phase into a range expansion trend mode,
but we return to the price alternation principle to note that after an expansion phase, price alternates
back into a range contraction phase. While it is difficult to assess correctly whether a range
consolidation phase is a simple pause in the context of a rising uptrend or the beginning of a
distribution phase that will mark the end of a trend, eventually the price trend will reverse, as no
stock or market can rise forever. It is a fact of the market that all markets must reverse eventually, and
price almost always gives clear signals in advance of a trend reversal to those experienced traders
who can pinpoint the reversal evidence.
The easiest objective evidence comes from multi-swing momentum divergences after a lengthy
price move, particularly one which you can identify the accumulation phase and lengthy realization
phase, or if you are proficient with Elliott Wave, a series of five waves on the price chart, where the
expected fifth wave forms on obvious negative momentum or volume divergences. In this sort of
environment, a trader employs a reversal strategy, though if the price forms a distribution trading
range, fade traders may benefit from trading from the extremes of the range just as explained in the
initial accumulation phase.
Use Martin Pring's weight of the evidence model before betting on a trend to reverse. Such chart
signs of evidence that an uptrend is ending include a lengthy or multi-swing negative divergence in
momentum or volume, or in market internals such as breadth if you are analyzing a stock market index
such as the S&P 500. Though divergences never guarantee trend reversals, they are clues that the odds
of a reversal are increasing, particularly to the extent that price continues rising in the context of an
ever-increasing negative divergence.
Next, look for price to break under the 20- and then 50-period exponential moving average. In the
context of an uptrend, price should support on these averages, as that is the logic of retracement

trading strategies. However, if price breaks under the 50-period EMA and remains under it,
eventually these moving averages will cross bearishly, which is your signal from the moving average
method as described in Chapter 1 that a trend is perhaps in the final phases and could be reversing.
Look also for price to break under the 200-day simple moving average on a daily chart. Be on guard
for a Kickoff, which would be a sudden down thrust in the momentum oscillator or breadth (in a stock
market index). If price makes a simple downswing but the momentum oscillator makes a distinct new
momentum low, this is a Kickoff and early signal that the trend is likely reversing.
Finally, watch for price to make a lower low, swing up to a lower high, and then close under the
recent lower low for the official trend reversal, and highest probability to put on a reversal trade to
play for a larger target at the most likely spot that a trend officially has reversed.
Reversal traders enter short at the exact spot of a trend reversal, or aggressively put on a reversal
position at a break of an established rising trendline after observing multi-swing negative momentum
divergences. Either way, they will place a stop-loss order either above the most recent swing high, or
trail a stop above the 50-period moving average. Like break-out trades, reversal trades have a very
large target that usually includes price completing the process of an upside trend reversal after being
in a confirmed downtrend.
Within the context of the Mark-down or down trend in price, traders employ the same type of
retracement strategies they do as in an uptrend. They would sell shares short as price rallies to the
underside of a falling trendline, falling 20- or 50-period moving average, or Fibonacci retracement
price (see Chapter 6). Fade traders also would buy shares on overextended swings beyond the falling
20 period moving average to play a mean-reversion play back to the average.

TRADING CONFIDENTLY
Much of your success as a trader comes from learning the basics of price movement, learning to
recognize the price structure which clues you in to future expectations along with which indicators to
use, and learning what tactics to apply given this knowledge from your analysis. However, knowing
what to do is not enough; you must develop the confidence to implement the decisions you make from
your analysis in real-time. I strongly suggest learning from the insights of trading psychologists, which
will give you the confidence and mental edge, as well as the motivation for peak performance.
You develop confidence through applying the principles you learn and building your experience day
by day. You also develop confidence when you understand exactly what it is you are doing when you
put on a trade, in terms of the larger picture. This is why I hope you took the time to understand the
foundation principles in Chapters 1 through 3 and then understood the methods of candle charts, price
patterns, Fibonacci, and the life cycle move. Once you have this as your foundation, you will be much
more prepared to understand the probabilities of the next likely move in price, the context in which
that move appears, and how exactly to take advantage of it. Not every trade will be a winner, but over
time, the edge will carry you forward.
It is with this background that the next chapter—the final chapter—presents some specific trade
setups. I encourage you to create your own setups using this chapter as a guide and use your creativity
in recognizing opportunities from price behavior in the context of the trend continuity principle,
momentum principle, and price alternation principle. Remember that the most important factor is to
get the main idea correct, and then build specific rules around the main idea (such as “trends are more

likely to continue than reverse”). When you take ownership of the trade setup, you increase your
confidence and enjoyment of the process, and bring it to life. You will find that, as a trader,
motivation is key. Find the unique balance between your skills and talents, the market principles,
trade setups, and the many methods, vehicles, and timeframes available to you as a trader.

CHAPTER 10
Specific Trade Setups for Today's Markets
This chapter describes some of the specific trade setups I have developed for use in my trading. All
traders gravitate toward certain setups over others, so it is useful to build a toolbox of specific trades
from which to pull depending on the market conditions that exist at the time. You might even improve
on these setups or develop your own variations. It is best to use the work and insights of others as a
foundation upon which to build your own personal methods. In so doing, you will progress beyond
simple pattern recognition to full integration, which will make you an even better, more confident
trader. Each specific trade setup will be discussed and then accompanied by rules and examples for
maximizing your trading performance with that particular trade. Let's start with the Cradle Trade.

THE CRADLE TRADE
I have always used moving averages on my price charts, from the first day I viewed a price chart.
Moving averages are so helpful in revealing structure, trend, and potential trading opportunities on
pullbacks to the averages. It is no surprise then that one of the first trade setups I developed for myself
was the Cradle Trade.
Specifically, the Cradle Trade requires the 20- and 50-period exponential moving averages on any
timeframe. The Bullish Cradle forms when the 20-period EMA crosses above the 50 EMA, and I
label the exact spot of the crossover as the “Cradle.” Similarly, the Bearish Cradle forms when the
20-period EMA crosses under the 50 EMA.
Technically, this trade is a retracement style setup, but it incorporates elements from reversal
trades. Specifically, it is the point where it would most likely be safest from a trend reversal
standpoint to play a reversal trade, while giving you a very tight stop in the event that price fails to
complete a true reversal. Most reversal trades require wide stops, while most retracement trades
allow for tight stops. The Cradle Trade combines elements of the weight of the evidence model for
reversal trades with the known moving average support or resistance area of a retracement trade.
Being a reversal-style trade, we want to see a market ideally forming lengthy, multi-swing
momentum divergences ahead of an expected price reversal. Remember that the 20/50 EMA
crossover is an early precursor to a trend reversal, but that does not mean you can put on a trade just
because the moving averages crossed. The Cradle Trade Setup forms when price breaks the moving
averages, the moving averages then cross, and then price moves into the Cradle Crossover and ideally
forms a reversal candle at the crossover of the moving averages. Let us see an ideal setup with
Parker-Hannifin (PH) in Figure 10.1 before we discuss the logic of entry and exit.
FIGURE 10.1 The Cradle Trade Setup in Parker-Hannifin

From the end of 2007 to the beginning of 2008, Parker-Hannifin's stock pushed to new highs at the
$86.00-per-share level after an up-trending move in the stock, but the negative momentum divergence
served as a nonconfirmation for the recent price high. Immediately, price swung lower, breaking
under both the 20- and 50-period EMAs on the daily chart above, as the custom 3, 10 MACD
Momentum Oscillator forged a new chart low when price was not making a new low—creating a
Kickoff signal.
After a quick rally to $82.00, price broke under the rising 20- and 50-day EMAs again, but this time
those averages crossed at the $77.00 level officially on December 24, 2007. Notice also that price
formed a lower low after a lower swing high in the process, casting doubt on the further prospects of
the uptrend continuing. So far, we have discussed changes in structure and conditions such as
momentum divergences and price's relation to the respective moving averages. But how do you profit
from the structural change?
That is where the Cradle Trade comes in, combining the weight of the evidence model for trend
reversals with the precision of a confluence overhead resistance area from retracement trading
strategies. Price rallied immediately up to the 20/50 EMA crossover, the Cradle, on December 26,
forming a hanging man candle after a small doji. The hanging man candle tested the 20/50 EMA
confluence exactly at $77.16, giving aggressive traders an immediate entry, executing their short-sale
position as close to $77.00 as possible.
Traders would place a stop-loss order slightly above $78.00 per share, or even $80.00 to protect
the position, but at least above $78.00, which gives price roughly $1.00 to trade intraday slightly

above the EMA crossover. A conservative trader would wait to see if price proved it was more
likely to reverse lower at the overhead confluence resistance, and would enter short only on a price
break under the lower short-term rising trendline as drawn, or under the hanging man candle intraday
low at $75.75. The conservative trader would still locate a stop above $78.00 to be safe, and it
would be illogical to locate a stop anywhere under the 20/50 EMA Cradle at $77.00 per share.
Both traders would play for a potential trend reversal, or large target move to test either a higher
timeframe prior swing low (such as on the weekly chart), or instead would continue holding a shortsale position until the price formed positive divergences or broke a declining trendline. The Cradle
Trade allows you to play for a theoretically unlimited, large price target if the trend truly reverses,
while combining the benefit of a precise stop which other reversal trades lack. Most reversal trades
require much wider stops than would be granted by a confluence of the 20/50 EMA.
The exit for the Cradle is a countervailing price buy signal, or higher timeframe prior low as you
determine to be a reasonable target. Cradle trades require active trade management by monitoring for
bullish chart evidence to develop. In the absence of any bullish developments, such as positive
divergences, bullish trendline, or EMA breaks, or major reversal candles forming off of a positive
divergence, a trader will remain holding a short position to profit from the expected down-trend
continuation move.
With an entry as close to $77.00 as possible and a stop placed above $78.00 or as high as $80.00 to
ensure safety, where might a trader play for a reasonable target? Though we do not see it in Figure
10.1, Parker-Hannifin had a major price support line at the $60.00-per-share level, which would be
your initial target. As price fell as expected from the Cradle Crossover, we could set a target at
$60.00 per share, and we would monitor what chart formations developed in the event price fell to
that level over time.
On January 24, 2009, one month after entry, price officially tested our potential downside target at
$60.00 per share. A conservative trader might have exited immediately as soon as price tested
$60.00, perhaps from a resting order for a price target at that level. If so, the trader profited roughly
$17.00, with a stop sized from $1.00 to $3.00, depending on entry. An aggressive trader would
examine the price structure closely to see if it was worth holding short and playing for an even larger
downside target yet to come.
As price tested the $60.00 level, which was established as prior price support, we can observe a
clean positive momentum divergence in the 3/10 Oscillator as a powerful marabozu (strong bullish)
candle formed, and on January 23, 2009, a clean bullish hammer candle formed with a long lower
shadow that bounced higher from $60.00 per share. An aggressive trader would see the positive
divergence and bullish candles off of expected support, and would exit the position on a close above
the high of the candle at $62.50, which occurred on January 25 at the gap candle that opened at
$63.75. By waiting to see if price was going to break support at the expected support at $60.00 per
share, the aggressive trader exited late at $63.75, but that is still lower from the initial entry short at
$77.00 per share.

Rules for a Bearish Cradle Trade
The rules for the Bearish Cradle Trade are as follows:
1. Observe a lengthy rising trend in place that shows negative momentum divergences,
preferably multi-swing divergences.

2. Observe price breaking under both the 20- and 50-period EMAs (or similar moving
averages that you use).
3. Observe the 20- and 50-period EMAs crossing bearishly, which is labeled the Cradle.
4. Observe price retracing back into, or as close as possible to, the 20/50 EMA crossover,
and see if any reversal candle forms.
5. Sell short as close as possible to the EMA crossover if aggressive, or wait for price to
break under a candle low under the Cradle to execute a position.
6. Place a stop-loss order above the EMA crossover, but never directly at the EMA
crossover. Allow the price room to run slightly through the Cradle so you are not stopped
out prematurely. Re-enter if you are stopped out but price falls back under the Cradle if you
desire.
7. Play for a large price target in a trend reversal style trade that either continues your
position until price signals a classic buy signal when positive divergences form or price
breaks a falling trendline or 20-period EMA. You may also trail a stop slightly above the
20-period EMA. Look for the higher timeframe to see if there are any obvious downside
support targets and monitor price action closely at these levels.
8. Exit the position either when price tests a higher timeframe support zone, or when price
forms a clear buy signal from positive divergences, a trendline break, or a move above the
20-period EMA.
Figure 10.2 represents an idealized Bearish Cradle Trade setup on any timeframe.
FIGURE 10.2 The Idealized Cradle Trade Setup

In Figure 10.2, we see price in an uptrend ending its move on a negative momentum divergence with
an initial price break under the 20/50-period EMAs. Then, the next swing higher takes price into the
official crossover of the 20- and 50-period moving average, setting up your trade entry with a stop
above the EMA crossover and a reversal-style large downside price target. In this case, price
continued lower to end its move and break back above the falling 20-period EMA on the right side of
the chart after a distinct positive momentum divergence, which was a buy signal that signaled an exit
to the cradle trade and potential new reversal in trend.

Rules for a Bullish Cradle Trade
The logic is the same as a Bearish Cradle trade, only you are trading long after a downward trend in
price breaks in an expected trend reversal to the upside.
1. Observe a lengthy downtrend in place that shows positive momentum divergences,
preferably multi-swing divergences.
2. Observe price breaking above both the 20- and 50-period EMAs (or similar moving
averages that you use).
3. Observe the 20- and 50-period EMAs crossing bullishly.
4. Observe price retracing back into, or as close as possible, to the 20/50 EMA crossover,
and see if any reversal candle forms.
5. Buy as close as possible to the EMA crossover if aggressive, or wait for price to break

above a candle high above the Cradle Crossover to execute a position.
6. Place a stop-loss beneath the EMA crossover, but never directly at the EMA crossover.
Allow the price room to run slightly through the Cradle so you are not stopped out
prematurely. Re-enter if you are stopped out but price rises back above the Cradle if you
desire.
7. Play for a large price target in a trend reversal style trade that either continues your
position until price signals a classic sell or sell-short signal when negative divergences
form or price breaks a rising trendline or 20-period EMA. You may also trail a stop
slightly beneath the 20-period EMA. Look for the higher timeframe to see if there are any
obvious upside resistance targets, and monitor price action closely at these levels.
8. Exit the position either when price tests a higher timeframe resistance zone, or when
price forms a clear sell or sell-short signal from negative divergences, a trendline break, or
a move beneath the 20-period EMA.
Remember that Cradle trades form on all timeframes, from the one-minute chart to the monthly chart
so you can incorporate this setup into your trading arsenal no matter what market or timeframe you
trade.

THE IMPULSE BUY AND IMPULSE SELL TRADE
The impulse buy trade builds specifically on the concept that momentum precedes price, which is the
momentum principle as described in Chapter 2. Specifically, new momentum highs along with new
price highs often precede new price highs likely yet to come after an initial pullback. While this is a
concept, we can build a set of specific rules around the principle in order to generate a labeled trade
setup. This is the Impulse Buy trade not just because of the catchy name, but also because it describes
the concept exactly.
The initial supply/demand imbalance creates an impulse swing in price, and we wish to buy after
the impulse in price retraces to the rising 20-period EMA for a specific setup to capitalize on the
long-standing price momentum principle. In the context of a prevailing trend, the Impulse Buy setup
also builds its edge from the Trend Continuity principle, which states that trends are more likely to
continue than to reverse.
Though it is not required, Impulse Buy trades often produce better results in the context of a
prevailing uptrend, but sometimes price impulses can arise from a trading range environment on the
initial breakout. As such, the impulse buy trade builds upon the momentum principle and can
sometimes build also from the price alternation principle and breakout strategies.
While a pure price breakout requires a trader to enter as soon as price breaks free of a trading
range, the Impulse Buy setup demands that price retrace to a key support level before entering a
position to take advantage of a precise entry into a market that likely will resolve again with a second
impulse or price swing to the upside off of the expected support zone, thus producing a profit.
Impulse buy trades are very similar to bull flag price patterns, and it can be stated that virtually all
bull flags are Impulse Buy trade setups, but not all Impulse Buy setups are bull flags. Impulse buys
that set up from range breakouts are not bull flags, though most Impulse Buys that trigger in the context
of a rising uptrend are bull flag price patterns with similar expectations.
To set up an Impulse Buy trade, you must first observe an initial powerful swing in price, or the

initial impulse. This impulse swing in price must be confirmed by a new corresponding high in the
momentum oscillator, such as the 3/10 MACD oscillator, Rate of Change, or other unbound
momentum oscillator that is not an overbought or oversold oscillator such as the stochastic or RSI.
After the initial impulse occurs, look for price to retrace back to the rising 20-period EMA
specifically.
You can also draw a Fibonacci retracement grid on the most recent impulse in price to expect
support at the 38.2 percent or 50 percent Fibonacci retracement, and can locate your stop under the
61.8 percent Fibonacci retracement or under the rising 20- or 50-period EMA, depending on your risk
tolerance for tight or wide stops.
There are actually two targets for the Impulse Buy, also depending on your tolerance for risk. The
immediate, specific price target from the Impulse Buy is a simple retest of the most recent price high
at the top of the impulse. A trader would exit immediately upon price touching the most recent swing
high regardless of other factors.
While that is the simple exit that conservative traders seek to target, other traders may seek to play
for a larger target situated just beyond the recent swing high. Namely, an aggressive trader might
decide to exit an Impulse Buy trade only after price trades above the upper Bollinger Band, forms a
reversal candle, or breaks a short-term rising trendline. In other words, an aggressive trader would
employ more active trade management and thus play for a larger, less specific target than a
conservative trader who seeks to exit only on a retest of the prior high. Figure 10.3 reveals an ideal
example of the Impulse Buy setup in U.S. Steel (X) in 2003.
FIGURE 10.3 Impulse Buy Setup in U.S. Steel Daily—2003
