
A G A I N S T THE C U R R E N T

Everything was fine for the first two years, but in the third year,
the fund started to experience very large redemptions because of poor
performance. Boyd had to take the money from me because his own
portfolio wasn't very liquid. He had lost the money by buying huge
OEX put positions, which expired worthless only days later. [He
bought options that would make large profits if the market went down
sharply but would expire as worthless otherwise.]
It almost sounds as if he was gambling with the portfolio.
It sure appeared to be gambling. Looking back, it seemed that he
tried to hide these losses by marking up the prices on privately held
stock in his portfolio. He had complete discretion on pricing these
positions.
How was he able to value these positions wherever he wanted to?
Because they were privately held companies; there was no publicly
traded stock.
Is it legal to price privately held stocks with such broad discretion:1
Yes. In respect to private companies, the general partner is given that
discretion in the hedge fund disclosure document. The auditors also
bought off on these numbers every year. He would tell them what he
thought these companies were worth and why, and they would accept
his valuations. They were these twenty-two-year-old auditors just out
of college, and he was the hedge fund manager making $20 million a
year; they weren't about to question him.
Another hedge fund manager I interviewed who also does a lot of
short selling said that the value of audits on a scale of 0 to 100
was zero. Do you agree?

Yes.
Even if it's a leading accounting firm?
Oh yeah.
How could hedge fund investors be aware whether a manager
was mispricing stocks in the portfolio?
The quarterly performance statements are required to show what percent of the portfolio consists of privately held deals. His performance
was so good for so long that people didn't question it.

What percent of his portfolio consisted of private deals?
In the beginning it was about 10 percent, but as he lost more and
more money, the portion of the portfolio in privately held companies
continued to grow. By the end, privately held stocks accounted for a
major portion of the portfolio, and he was largely left with a bunch of
nearly worthless paper.
It sounds as if he was gambling in the options market and hiding
his losses by marking up his private deals. Wouldn't the truth
come out when investors redeemed their money and received
back much less than the reported net asset value?
Although I'm not sure, I believe the first investors to redeem received
the full amount, but as more investors redeemed their funds, the true
magnitude of the losses became apparent.
Did you know what he was doing at the time?
I knew about the option losses, but no one knew about the private
deals. They were off the balance sheet.
It sounds as if you worked with quite a host of characters. You
didn't do too well picking your bosses.
Yes, I know. You think that wouldn't be a good sign, but . . .
How did you start your own firm?
I had one account that I had met through Peter. He hired me to run a
short-only portfolio. That was the account I took with me to get
started.
What year was this?
1997.
Your track record shows your performance back to 1994.
To generate the early years of my track record, I extracted the short
trades for the period until I started trading the short-only portfolio.
Do you use charts at all?
I use them for market timing. I think that is one of the things that has
saved me over the years. If, for example, the stock I am short collapses to support, I will probably get out.
How do you to define support"}
Price areas that have witnessed a lot of buying in the past—points at
which prices consolidated before moving higher. Some dedicated

DANA GALANTE

shorts will still hold on to their positions, but I will usually cover. I'll
figure the market has already gone down 50 percent. Maybe it will go
down another 10 or 20 percent, but that is not my game. I look for
stocks that are high relative to their value.
That is an example of how you use charts for profit taking. Do
you also use charts to limit losses?
When a chart breaks out to a new high, unless I have some really
compelling information, I just get out ot the way.
How long a period do you look back to determine new highs? If a
stock makes a one-year high but is still below its two-year high,
do you get out?
No, I am only concerned about stocks making new all-time highs.
Have you always avoided being short a stock that made new
highs, or have you been caught sometimes?
No, I have been caught sometimes.
Can you give me an example.
One stock I was short this year, Sanchez Computer Associates, went
from $32 to $80 in one day.
In one day?
It's a company that makes back-office and transaction processing
software for banks. Most of their clients are in underdeveloped countries and don't have their own systems. The business was slowing
down, and the Street cut its annual earnings estimate from 75 cents

a share to 50 cents. The stock was still trading at $25 at the time,
and as a short, that news sounded great to me. I thought the stock
would go a lot lower. Shortly afterward, the company announced that
they would start an on-line banking software service. This was at a
time when the on-line banking stocks were going ballistic.
What was the previous high in the stock?
It was in the low thirties. The stock just blew way past it.
Were you still bearish the stock when it went to 80?
Yeah, nothing had changed.
How do you handle that type of situation from a money management standpoint?
I had never been in that type of situation before—not even remotely.
Our portfolio is relatively diversified. The most I had ever lost on a

a G A I N S T T H E CUtl

single stock in one day was one-half of one percent. That day, I lost 4
percent on the stock.
What portion of your portfolio was the stock?
Before it went up, about 2.5 percent. That is a fairly large position for
me, but I had a lot of conviction on the trade.
Did you try to cover part of your position on the day the stock
skyrocketed?
The stock was up almost $10 right from the opening. I started scrambling around, trying to figure out what was going on. Then it was up
$20. Then $30. I tried to cover some of my shorts, but I only wound
up getting filled on about one thousand shares out of a total of forty
thousand that I held.
At the end of the day, you were still short thirty-nine thousand
out of forty thousand shares, the stock had already exploded
from 30 to 80, and you were still bearish on the fundamentals.
What do you do in that type of situation? Do you decide to just
hold the position because the price is so overdone, or do you
cover strictly because of money management reasons?
This was a unique situation. I never had a stock move against me like
that. I've also never been short an Internet stock. Initially, being the
realist that I am, I just tried to get the facts. I checked out all the
companies that did Internet banking to see what kind of software
they used, and Sanchez's name was never mentioned.
The next day the stock dropped $15.1 thought the stock would go
up again, because typically these types of situations last more than
one day. I covered enough of my position to bring it down to 2.5 percent of my portfolio. Because of the price rise, it had gone up to 7
percent of my portfolio, and I can't allow that. Then the stock went
down some more. By the time it went back down to 50, I had reduced
my short position to five thousand shares.
What was your emotional response to this entire experience?
I was almost in shock because I felt a complete lack of control. I had
never experienced anything like it before. Most people are afraid to
go short because they think the risk is unlimited. That never bothered me. I consider myself pretty disciplined. I always thought that I
had a good handle on the risk and that I could get out of any short

A G A I N S T THE CUR

before it caused too much damage, which up to that point I had. But
here, the stock nearly tripled in one day, and I didn't know what to
do. I was numb.
I was struck by a horrifying thought: Could the same thing happen
to any of the other stocks in my portfolio? I began worrying about
which of my shorts would be the next company to announce an online Web page. I started combing my portfolio, looking for any stock
that might become the next Sanchez.
What eventually happened to the stock?
It went back up again. But when Sanchez started to look like it was
ready to roll over, I rebuilt my short position. Ironically, when it subsequently broke, I made more money on my new short position than I
had lost being short when the stock exploded several months earlier.
How large is your organization?
There are just two of us. Zack works with me and is an integral part
of Miramar. There is a lot of money out there, and interested
investors call me almost every day. I tell them that I am closed to new
investment.
Is that because your methodology can't accommodate any more
money?
I don't want to grow. I don't want to manage people; I want to manage
the portfolio.

Could you grow your size by just taking larger positions instead
of expanding the number of shorts?
I have only run shorts in a bull market. It's a constant battle. I have to
find the best way to fight the battle with the lowest amount of risk. I
need to know that I can cover my short positions if I have to. The
larger my short position, the more difficult that would be. I've seen
what happens to people who grow too fast, and I have taken the opposite extreme. I want to be comfortable doing what I do. I don't want to
be scouring for new shorts because I am managing more money. I
have my family, and when I go home, I don't think about work. I don't
read Barren's over the weekend.
I suppose to some extent your attitude reflects a difference
between male and female perspectives. Maybe, as a generaliza-

tion, men want to become empire builders, whereas women
don't.
That's probably it.
How do you select the stocks you short?
I look for growth companies that are overvalued—stocks with high
P/E [price/earnings] ratios—but that by itself is not enough. There
also has to be a catalyst.
Give me an example of a catalyst.
An expectation that the company is going to experience a deterioration in earnings.
How do you anticipate a deterioration in earnings?
One thing I look for is companies with slowing revenue growth who
have kept their earnings looking good by cutting expenses. Usually, it's
only a matter of time before their earnings growth slows as well.
Another thing I look for is a company that is doing great but has a
competitor creeping up that no one is paying attention to. The key is
anticipating what is going to affect future earnings relative to market
expectations.
In essence, you look for a high P/E stock that has a catalyst that
will make the stock go down.
Right, but there is another key condition: I won't short a stock that is
moving straight up. The stock has to show signs of weakening or at
least stalling.
Can you give me an example of a typical short?
Network Associates has been a stock that I have been short on and off
for the past two years. The company was masking higher operating
expenses by taking huge research and development charges related to
acquisition each quarter. They were taking other expenses as onetime charges as well. The SEC eventually made them change their
accounting procedures to take these expenses over time as opposed to
one-time charges. After the SEC stepped in, the chairman came out
and said something like, "It's just an accounting issue. We don't pay
much attention to accounting." He also made statements berating the
shorts, saying they would get buried.
When a company blames the price decline in its stock on short

G A L A N Tl:

sellers, it's a red flag. A company's best revenge against short sellers is
simply reporting good numbers. Decent companies won't spend time
focusing on short sellers. "Our stock was down because of short selling." Give me a break. We represent maybe one billion dollars versus
nine trillion on the long side.
What was Network Associates' product or service?
Their primary product was an antivirus software, a low-margin item
whose price had been coming down over time. They also bought out a
number of companies that were making similar products, usually paying a large premium. The companies they were buying were stocks
that I was short. I was upset because once they bought out these
companies, I couldn't be short them anymore. At one point, they were
virtually giving away their antivirus product. All you had to do was
look at the Comp USA ads. After adjusting for all the rebates, they
were selling their software for only about five dollars. That told you
that their product wasn't moving.
If they were so desperate in their pricing, didn't their sales show
a sharp drop-off?
No, because they were stuffing the channels.
What does that mean?
They were shipping all their inventory to distributors, even though the
demand wasn't there.
Why would a company do that if they know the product is just
going to get shipped back?
To make the revenues look better. Once they shipped the product,
they can book it as sales.
But they can't keep that up forever.
They did it anyway. But it did come back to haunt them; eventually,
the stock collapsed.
You mentioned that it's a red flag when a company blames shorts
for the decline in its stock. What are some other red flags?
A company that goes from its traditional business to whatever is hot
at the time. For example, during the gambling stock craze, there were
companies that went from having pizza restaurants to riverboat gambling. Right now, the same thing is going on with the Internet. One

A G A I N S T THE CURRENT

company we shorted recently went from selling flat panel displays to
offering an Internet fax service, trashing their whole business plan in
the process.
Other red flags?
Lots of management changes, particularly a high turnover in the
firm's chief financial officer. Also, a change in auditors, can be a major
red flag.
Can you give me an example?
One of my shorts was Pegasystems, which was a software company
that caught my attention because of high receivables [large outstanding billings for goods and services]. The company was licensing its
software for a monthly fee, typically in five-year contracts, and recognizing the entire discounted value of the contract immediately.
Is this a valid accounting procedure?
It was certainly contrary to the industry practice. Apparently, the original accountants didn't go along with the figures, because the company fired them and hired a new accounting firm. They said they were
making the change because their previous accounting firm didn't
understand the business and wasn't aggressive enough. But the
incredible thing is that people ignored that red flag.
You mean the stock still went up even after they fired their
auditors?
Yes.
When did you get short?
After they fired their auditors.
Any other examples of questionable accounting?
I've had a few shorts that turned into frauds. One example was a
company that ran a vocational school that purportedly taught people
computer skills. They were getting funding from the government, but
they were providing very poor quality education. I became aware of
this stock as well because of high receivables.
What are receivables for a training company?
Tuition fees. The students weren't paying the tuition they owed.
That's what first drew my attention to the stock. Then I learned the
company was being investigated by the Department of Education in

DANA GALANTE

response to student complaints that they were using old software and
that the instructors were inept. I shorted the stock in the forties, and
got out near 10. The stock eventually went down to 1.
It sounds as if high receivables is a major indicator for you.
Yes, it's one of the screens we look at.
What are some of the other screens?
We also screen for revenue deceleration, earnings deceleration, high
P/Es, high inventories, and some technical indicators, such as stocks
breaking below their fifty-day moving average.
Do you screen for these factors individually, or do you screen for
multiple characteristics?
Usually multiple characteristics, but you can't screen for all these factors at one time, or else you won't get any stock that fits all the search
requirements.
Although you have done fine as a 100 percent short seller, have

you had any second thoughts about your choice since we have
been in such a relentless bull market?
No, I find short selling more rewarding because of the challenge.
You make a lot of money in this business, and I think you need to
work for what you get. To just sit there and buy Internet stocks every
day doesn't seem right. I can't relate to it. In fact, I wonder how I
will do if we ever do get into a bear market because I am so used to
a bull market, watching people ignore bad news and taking advantage of that.
But I would imagine that in a bear market, your job would be
much easier.
In August 1998 when the market went down fast and hard, I was
more stressed out than I am normally.

AGAINST THE C U R R E N T

When a market suddenly breaks a lot, as it did then, do you
reduce your short exposure?
I did in that instance because it happened so quickly. I made 30 percent in one month. That has never happened to me before. I covered
about 40 percent of the portfolio.
What kind of risk control strategies do you use?
If I lose 20 percent on a single stock, I will cover one-third of my position. I limit the allocation to any single stock to a maximum of about
3 percent of the portfolio. If a stock increases to a larger percentage of
the portfolio because of a price rise, I will tend to reduce the position.
I also control risk through diversification: There are typically fifty to
sixty names in the portfolio spread across different industry sectors.
Do you know other short sellers?
Yes. With the exception of a couple of short sellers that have become
my friends, most short sellers tend to be very pessimistic on the world
and life. They tend to be very negative people.
But you're not?
I don't think I am. I think I am just a realist. One thing that differentiates me from other short sellers is my experience on the long side.

But you did very well during that period.
I did great, but I thought it was too easy. I wasn't fighting a battle. I
felt as though I didn't have to work. Any stock I went short would go
down. It was a weird feeling. That's what people do all the time on the
long side; they just buy stocks, and they tend to go up.

Why is that important?
Because it's all about why people buy and sell. My experience in
working with momentum-type managers gives me a sense of their
thought processes, which helps me know when to get out of the way
and when to press my bets. I have some friends who are short sellers
that have never worked on the long side. They would call me up and
ask, "Dana, why are they buying this stock? It has negative cash flow,
high receivables, etcetera." They look at the raw numbers, and they
are realists. They don't understand that a lot of people just buy the
stock because it's going up or because the chart looks good. We've
gone to the stratosphere now. Most of the people I know who were
short sellers have been blown away. They don't even ask me those
questions anymore.
What advice could you give to the ordinary investor who trades

And you didn't like that?
No, it was very uncomfortable. Maybe I am a little sick; I don't know
what's wrong with me.

only on the long side?
A good company could be a bad stock and vice versa. For example,
Disney is a good company—or at least my kids love it. But during the

DANA GALANTE

past few years we were able to make money on the short side because
the company had become very overpriced on overly optimistic expectations that its business would grow robustly forever.

Although Galante is a 100 percent short seller, her ideas are still
relevant to the long-only investor. Galante's methodology can be very
useful as a guideline for which stocks to avoid or liquidate. The combination of factors Galante cites include:
K very high P/E ratio
*• a catalyst that will make the stock vulnerable over the near term
^ an uptrend that has stalled or reversed
All three of these conditions must be met. Investors might consider periodically reviewing their portfolios and replacing any stocks
that meet all three of the above conditions with other stocks. By
doing so, investors could reduce the risk in their portfolios.
In addition, Galante cites a number of red flags that attract her
attention to stocks as potential short candidates. By implication, any
of these conditions would be a good reason for investors who own
the stock to seriously consider liquidating their position. These red
flags include:
^ high receivables
^ change in accountants
!>• high turnover in chief financial officers
*• a company blaming short sellers for their stock's decline
*• a company completely changing their core business to take
advantage of a prevailing hot trend

MARK D. COOK
Harvesting S&P Profits'

Mark D. Cook drives his pickup truck off the road, up the hill overlooking
his father's farm on the outskirts of East Sparta, Ohio. The weather is
unseasonably warm and feels very much like a day in late spring, but it is
still late winter. The rolling fields stretch out before us in various shades
of brown. "I wanted you to see this," Cook says. "When it greens up in
spring, there is no more beautiful sight in the world."
I paint the scene in my mind and visualize easily enough how it could
appear quite pleasant with the renewal of spring. But to see this landscape with the sense of majesty implied by Cook's voice, you have to look
at it through the eyes of someone who has worked the land and sees it as
a provider of sustenance and a link between generations.
"When my dad bought this farm nearly sixty years ago," Cook says,
"the land was so poor you couldn't grow ragweed a foot tall on it. Whenever my trading is going badly and I feel stressed out, I come up here.
When I look out at all that has been accomplished through hard work,
despite the difficulties that were encountered, it gives me a sense of
serenity." Cook is passionate about trading, but his love for his market
career still comes in third place after family and the land.
The first time I saw Mark D. Cook he was a fellow speaker at an
industry conference, and he made an impression before he uttered a single word. He came up to the podium dressed in bib overalls. He did this
to make a point about his roots, but his choice of dress was not merely
*This chapter contains some references to options. Readers completely unfamiliar with
options may find it helpful (although not essential) to first read the four-page primer
in the appendix.
