
Chapter 10: Following Trends for Fun and Profit
Lower highs

Retracement

Figure 10-2:
AIG’s
stock falls
to lower
intermittent highs
and lower
intermittent
lows.

Lower lows

Supporting and Resisting Trends
You may have noticed in Figure 10-2 that a higher intermittent high formed
in the midst of the downtrend exhibited by the chart. That anomaly is
identified as a retracement on the chart (see the “Withstanding
Retracements” section, later in the chapter). It happened again a few months
later. Although the series of lower highs and lower lows appeared to have
been broken, AIG’s downtrend remained intact and continued its fall.
In an uptrend, as long as the pattern of higher highs and higher lows
continues, you can say that the trend persists. The converse (lower highs and
lower lows) is true in a downtrend. Unfortunately, you cannot say that breaks
in these patterns signal the end of any trends.
Sometimes you see an uptrend pattern broken when the stock fails to reach
a new high or when it makes a lower intermittent low. You may actually see
several of these disconcerting lower lows, only to witness the resumption
of a strong uptrend. As such, you need to anticipate these eventual hiccups
as you plan your trading strategy, and you need tools to help you determine
whether a stock is still trending or the trend has reached its end.

151

152 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
Drawing trend lines to show support
Trend lines are drawn underneath a trend, much as support lines are drawn
underneath a trading range as described in Chapter 9. And just like the
support line, trend lines show areas of trading-range support that can be
used to trigger short-term trading signals as you monitor the progress of a
trend.
If you remember your days in geometry class, you’ll recall that only two
points are needed to define any line. Knowing which point to choose is the
trick when drawing a trend line. You may, for example, choose to have the
trend line touching two or more of the intermittent lows as is the case in
Figure 10-3. Or you may choose to draw the trend line based on the lowest
closing prices between those intermittent lows.

Figure 10-3:
Finding a
trend line.

Trend line

Unfortunately, drawing trend lines is not a precise discipline, and no
universal consensus exists for where and how to draw them. In fact, any two
traders drawing trend lines in exactly the same place for the same stock is
not something you’re likely to find. Furthermore, you’ll drive yourself crazy
trying to touch all the important lows with your trend line.
Trend lines are drawn to fit historical data. That the trend rides atop the
trend line is not surprising, given that you drew it that way. However,
whether that trend line represents the actual trend or is able to generate
reliable trading signals is constantly in doubt.

Chapter 10: Following Trends for Fun and Profit
There are so many variables. You might, for example, draw the trend line
on a traditional price scale as we’ve done here, but that trend line will look
very different from one drawn on a log or semi-log scale that shows
percentage price changes. It’s hard to know which is the better choice. Also,
trend lines are often drawn using the oldest historical data, but newer data
may be more relevant for generating trading signals. As such, constantly
questioning your information and continually updating your trend line is a
good habit to follow.
Watching the price bar cross below the trend line can be disturbing, because
doing so can signal the end of the trend, or it may mean that you need to
redraw the trend lines. Unfortunately, when the stock price closes below the
trend line, you can’t know whether the penetration represents the end of the
trend or just another opportunity to redraw the trend line to conform to the
newest price data.
An alternative technique for drawing the trend line reduces the ambiguity just
a bit. Instead of drawing the trend line from left to right, the way most people
instinctively do, draw the trend line backward, or from right to left. Using the
two most recent intermittent lows in the trend, draw the trend line backward
as long as it is meaningful, then project the trend line toward the right. This
approach has a couple of benefits:
✓ The slope of the trend line is more closely aligned with the most recent
trading data, which usually is more relevant to your trading decisions.
✓ You’ll resign yourself to the necessity of continually redrawing your
trend lines based on the newest data.

Surfing channels
A channel is used by traders to identify potential entry and exit points during
a trend. Channel lines are formed when a line is drawn parallel with the trend
line across a trend’s intermittent highs. This top channel line is analogous
to the resistance line in a trading range, which we discuss in Chapter 9. The
original trend line then becomes the bottom channel line. Figure 10-4 shows
an example of a channel.

153

154 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis

Figure 10-4:
A channel.

Channel lines

Trending and channeling strategies
The strategies for using trend lines and channels are similar. When an
uptrending stock approaches the trend line or the bottom channel line,
short-term traders often see an opportunity to take a position in the direction
of the dominant trend. As long as the stock’s price does not fall through this
support level, they will hold the position. Position traders, on the other hand,
may use these same conditions to validate their existing positions as still
viable. If, however, the stock closes below the trend line and remains below
it for longer than a day or two, position traders and short-term traders must
consider the possibility that the trend has reached its end. It’s even possible
that the trend has reversed.
It may seem perverse, but when a upwardly trending stock breaches the top
channel line, it’s not always good news. The stock may be overextended. At
the very least, it’s an indication to traders to pay close attention. In Figure
10-4, PLCM rose outside of its top channel line several times. The trend failed
soon afterwards (but that isn’t shown in Figure 10-4).
Trend lines and channels work better across longer periods of time. A stock
price that violates a long-running, persistent trend or channel line on a weekly
chart provides more meaningful guidance than when it breeches a support
line on a daily chart or an intraday chart. In our experience, short-term trend
lines add little information that isn’t already present in the steady march of
higher highs and higher lows.
When a stock breaks a short-term trend line, we believe it’s best to step back
one time increment to evaluate the situation. For example, if you’re trading

Chapter 10: Following Trends for Fun and Profit
based primarily on daily chart data, display a weekly chart and examine the
trend line and the series of intermittent highs and lows. If the march of higher
highs and higher lows remains intact on the weekly chart, you may want to
give your position a little room to work itself out. However, if a longer time
frame shows a break in the pattern of higher highs and higher lows, you need
to consider exiting your position right away.
We use trend lines for guidance while trading, but rarely do we make decisions
solely on the basis of a trend-line penetration. Although initiating short-term
positions in the direction of the dominant trend is possible by using channels
to enter and exit the position, doing so is very difficult, and few traders are
able to engage in that practice profitably. Some traders take this concept even
one step further by trying to take positions in opposition to the dominant
trend as the stock price approaches the upper channel line. We believe trading
in the direction opposite that of a dominant trend and a stock’s fundamental
picture is foolhardy and an excellent way to lose a substantial portion of your
trading capital.
Bottom line: Trend lines and channels are additional tools that you can use to
monitor the progress of a stock price trend. They can be used to help identify
trading opportunities, but we recommend they not be your primary method
of determining entry and exit points.

Seeing Gaps
A price gap forms on a bar chart when the opening price of the current bar
is above or below the closing price of the previous bar. Gaps occur mostly
on daily charts, sometimes on weekly charts, and rarely on intraday charts.
Depending on the circumstances, gaps can show continuation and reversal
patterns, and they can signal an opportunity to enter or exit a position.
Some gaps are obvious and some are subtle. For example, if the opening
price is above the previous close, but the low of the current bar is below the
previous high, then those bars overlap and the gap is hard to spot. Many
traders simply ignore that type of gap. If, however, the low of the current
bar is obviously higher than the high of the previous bar, that will draw the
attention of most traders. Examples of obvious gaps are shown in the following
sections.
Gaps are divided into several broad categories based on where the gap
occurs. These categories determine your trading strategy and are discussed
in the sections that follow.

155

156 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
Common gap
Gaps that occur within a trading range, as described in Chapter 9, can be
either a common gap or a breakout gap. If the gap occurs in the middle of the
trading range, far from either the support or resistance level, it is a common
gap. Common gaps occur frequently and are, well, rather common. They
rarely provide meaningful trading opportunities. Ignoring them usually is the
best policy. Figure 10-5 shows several common gaps and a breakout gap.

Breakout or breakaway gap
When a stock price exceeds a high of a price range during a specific time
frame or falls below the low during that same period and simultaneously
forms a gap, traders describe that situation as a breakout or breakaway gap. A
breakout gap often provides excellent trading signals to enter a new position,
in the direction of the gap. Figure 10-5 shows an example of a breakout gap
from a long-standing trading range. We discuss trading strategies for trading
range breakouts in Chapter 9.

Breakout Gap

Figure 10-5:
Breakout
gap and
common
gaps.

Common Gap

Chapter 10: Following Trends for Fun and Profit

Continuation gap
A continuation gap is also known as a runaway gap or an acceleration gap.
This type of gap occurs within an uptrend when the open price of the current
bar is higher than the close price of the previous bar. If the low of the current bar is also obviously above the high of the previous bar, this gap usually
indicates that the trend is very strong. Continuation gaps may also occur in
downtrends. The defining characteristics are opposite those of the uptrend.
Figure 10-6 shows several examples of continuation gaps in a downtrend.
Some short-term traders may use a continuation gap as a signal to enter a
position in the direction of the gap. Position traders may use this same signal
to confirm that a current trade remains viable. You sometimes see a series of
runaway gaps occur in close proximity to each other, and these gaps usually
are a strong confirmation of the prevailing trend. However, continuation gaps
also warrant caution, because they can turn into an exhaustion gap.

Continuation Gaps

Figure 10-6:
Continuation
gap.

Exhaustion gap
Exhaustion gaps occur at or near the ends of strong trends. Unfortunately,
the defining characteristics for an exhaustion gap are virtually identical to
those for a continuation gap. Exhaustion gaps are often accompanied by very

157

158 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
large volume, which is one clue that the gap may not be a continuation gap.
Otherwise, distinguishing an exhaustion gap from a continuation gap is
sometimes impossible, until the stock price changes direction. By that time,
it is usually obvious that something is wrong with the trade and you should
exit your position.
In Figure 10-6, we actually assume the final gap is a continuation gap,
because if the stock price continues its trend, it will become one. If, however,
the stock price reverses, the gap may be classified as an exhaustion gap.
Reversal patterns are discussed in Chapter 9. Sometimes, an exhaustion gap
turns into an island gap.

Island gap
An island gap, or an island reversal (Figure 10-7), forms when a trend changes
direction. The pattern is actually two gaps that isolate either a single bar or
a short series of bars from the dominant trend and the new trend. An island
gap usually is a good indicator that the prior trend has been extinguished
and can be used to signal an exit from an existing position. You may also use
an island gap to initiate a new position, but only if the direction of the new
trend aligns with the stock’s underlying fundamental condition. Be sure to
review the “Dealing with Failed Signals” section, later in this chapter, before
initiating any positions based on an island gap.

Figure 10-7:
Island gap.

Island Gap

Chapter 10: Following Trends for Fun and Profit

Waving Flags and Pennants
Flag and pennant patterns represent areas of consolidation on a trend chart.
You’ve already encountered these patterns, just not by name. In a series of
higher highs and higher lows, these patterns form the basis for the higher
lows. In other words, the higher lows are made of flag and pennant patterns.
A pennant pattern looks like, well, a pennant. Support and resistance lines
converge into a point forming what looks like a small pennant shape. A flag
pattern, on the other hand, is bounded by parallel lines. All these patterns
almost always fly counter to the prevailing trend, but the direction in which
they’re flying is not actually a requirement.
Figure 10-8 shows examples of flags and pennants on the chart of a trending
stock.

Pennant

Figure 10-8:
Flags and
pennants.

Flag

159

160 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
The key for each of these patterns is the breakout. If the breakout from the
formation is in the direction of the established trend, then the trend continues. If not, it’s possible that the trend is over.
Flags and pennants typically are associated with a trend, but you may also
see these patterns within the confines of a trading range. A flag or pennant
forming near the top of a trading range hints of an eventual breakout. The
flag or pennant pattern shows the stock consolidating near the top of the
trading range, and that suggests that selling pressure is diminishing and the
stock is preparing to test the zone of resistance.

Withstanding Retracements
A retracement occurs when a trending stock revisits recent prices. You’ve
already seen many examples. When a stock makes a higher intermediate high
and then a higher intermediate low, that is a retracement. A trading range as
discussed in Chapter 9 can also be considered a retracement. You may hear a
retracement called a price consolidation or a pullback, but the concept is the
same.
Flags and pennants are relatively simple forms of retracement patterns. More
complex retracements can occur within the confines of a trend, and like
their simpler counterparts, they don’t actually signal the end of the trend.
Unfortunately, complex retracements cause confusion and consternation
for traders when they occur. Besides being difficult to anticipate, they send
out conflicting signals to traders trying to make sense of which trading-plan
adjustments are needed.

Three-step and five-step retracements
In an uptrend, you sometimes see breaks in the pattern of higher highs and
higher lows when the stock price fails to reach a new high or makes a lower
intermittent low. You may see several occurrences of these worrisome lower
lows and lower highs happen one right after the other followed by a resumption of a strong uptrend.
You will see a couple of these benign multistep patterns frequently occur
in the midst of a strong trend, so it is useful to watch for them. A three-step
retracement makes at least one lower intermittent high and one lower intermittent low. A five-step retracement makes two lower highs and two lower
lows. Multistep retracements also occur when a downtrending stock makes
higher highs and higher lows.

Chapter 10: Following Trends for Fun and Profit
Figure 10-9 shows an example of a five-step retracement that ultimately
resolves in the direction of the prevailing trend. The five steps are identified,
along with the corresponding intermittent highs and lows.

4

2

Figure 10-9:
Five-step
retracement
pattern.

1

3

5

Trust us when we tell you that situations like these are disconcerting whenever you’re holding a position. They’re not, however, absolute signals that
a trend has reached its end. Knowing when a trend has ended, however, is
nearly impossible, so you need a plan for dealing with it when it happens.
Where, within a trend, the multistep retracement occurs has some bearing on
what plan you choose. If the stock price has just broken out of a long trading
range and then falters, you may want to wait for a subsequent attempt to
break out of the trading range, but closing the position is probably best. Look
for trading opportunities elsewhere.
If a stock price starts what may be a three-step or a five-step retracement
after a long period of trending, and your position is profitable, you may want
to see how the retracement plays out. Absent any obvious sell signals, such
as an island reversal or a downside breakout from a flag, pennant, or trading
range formation, you can wait to see how the retracement resolves itself.
Checking out a chart that reflects a longer time frame can be helpful. For
example, you can examine a weekly chart when the retracement occurs on

161

162 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
the daily chart. If the trend shows no signs of faltering on the weekly chart,
hold your position. If the stock recovers and heads higher, so much the
better, but if it establishes another lower high and trades below its next
lower low, it’s time to exit.
Finally, considering fundamental factors before making your decision makes
good sense. If a company’s deteriorating financial situation is an underlying
cause of the retracement, then exiting your position makes sense. You also
need to be aware of the cycle the economy is in when making your decision.
If the economy is approaching a turning point as your stock’s technical
situation deteriorates, getting out of the position usually is a good idea.

Dealing with subsequent trading ranges
A trading range or a cup and handle formation, like the ones described in
Chapter 9, also are complex consolidation patterns. A trend that’s interrupted
by a period of range-bound trading may indicate either a pause before the
trend resumes or the end of the trend. The only way of knowing which way
the trend will go is to watch for the breakout. Unfortunately, you may be in
for a long wait.
In the retracement pattern shown in Figure 10-9, you can make a valid
argument interpreting the five-step retracement as a cup and handle
formation. Technical analysis is an imprecise discipline, so you may
encounter ambiguous situations like this. The results in this case were the
same regardless of your interpretation. The stock broke out of its nine-week
complex consolidation pattern and resumed its trend.
Breakouts that occur in the direction of the prevailing trend may indicate
that the trend has further to run, but they may also be a prelude to a failed
breakout signal. Trading-range breakouts provide the strongest signals when
they result in a change of direction from the previous trend.

Dealing with Failed Signals
All trading signals are subject to failure. Sometimes, things just don’t work
out as planned. However, even a failed signal provides additional information
that you can use to revise your trading plans. In fact, sometimes the best
trading signals are the direct result of a failed signal.

Trapping bulls and bears

Chapter 10: Following Trends for Fun and Profit
Breakouts from trading ranges and cup and handle patterns sometimes fail.
These failures happen to bullish and bearish signals, and when they fail, it is
called a trap. The two kinds of traps are
✓ Bull traps, which occur after an upside breakout. The stock breaks out
of its trading range to the upside but then reverses back into the trading
range and ultimately breaks out to the down side.
✓ Bear traps, which occur after a downside breakout. This opposite scenario
to the bull trap often is very bullish. The stock reverses course and reenters
the trading range. If a bear trap occurs within a trading range that’s preceded by a long period of declining prices, it often represents an excellent
buying opportunity, because it’s a sign that selling pressure has evaporated
in the stock, which thus is likely to attempt an upside breakout.
Whenever you see a potential bear trap taking place and the stock meets all
of your fundamental criteria, you may want to enter a long position as soon
as the stock price reenters the trading range.

Filling the gaps
A gap that’s forming usually is interpreted as a signal that the prevailing
trend will continue. If a stock reverses and retraces prices within the gap, we
say that the gap has been filled. A gap that’s filled negates the trading signal
that it generated.
When dealing with a breakout gap, a stock price that falls back through
the trading range resistance zone and fills the gap is likely to be a bearish
development. Similarly, when a continuation gap is filled, you need to consider
it a failed signal and exit your position. The same is true for an island gap. If
prices trade back into the area of the isolated island, the trading signal has
failed and you need to exit your position.

Deciding whether to reverse directions
A bear trap shows an example of where taking a position based on a failed
signal makes sense. If, however, you already have a position, and the signal
fails, exiting your position is a wise choice, because you’re letting the market
sort out its psychosis without risking your money.
You also need to consider economic and fundamental factors when deciding
how to handle a failed signal. Acting on a contrary signal makes sense only if
economic and fundamental conditions support the decision.
For example, if a bullish signal fails and becomes a bearish signal, selling
a stock short makes sense only if it’s fundamentally weak and the stock’s

163

164 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
