to see if it supports the trade.
5. If I am left with two equally compelling trade ideas. I will choose the one with a
positive interest rate differential.

HAVE A TOOLBOX — USE WHAT WORKS FOR
THE CURRENT MARKET ENVIRONMENT
Once you have created a trading journal, it is time to figure out which indicators
to use on your charts. The reason why a lot of traders fail is because they neglect to
realize that their favorite indicators are not foolproof. Buying when stochastics are in
oversold territory and selling when they are in overbought territory is a strategy that
is used quite often by range traders with a great deal of success, but once the market
stops range trading and begins trending, then relying on stochastics could lead to a
tremendous amount of losses. In order to become consistently profitable, successful
traders need to learn how to be adaptable.
One of the most important practices that every trader must understand is to be
conscious of the environment that they are trading in.
Every trader needs to have some sort of checklist that will help them to classify
their trading environment so that they can determine whether the market is trending
or range-bound. Defining trade parameters is one of the most important disciplines of
trading. Too many traders have tried to pick the top within a trend, only to wind up
with consistently unprofitable trades.
Although defining trade parameters is important to traders in any market
(currencies, futures, equities), it is particularly important in the currency market since
over 80 percent of the volume is speculative in nature. This means that currencies can
spend a very long time in a certain trading environment. Also, the currency market
obeys technical analysis particularly well given its large scale and number of
participants.
There are basically two types of trading environments, which means that at any
point in time an instrument is either range trading or trending. The first step every
trader needs to take, is to define the current trading environment. The shortest time
frame that traders should use in step one is daily charts, even if you are trading on a
five-minute time frame.

STEP ONE – PROFILE TRADING ENVIRONMENT
There are many different ways that traders can determine whether a currency
pair is range trading or trending. Of course, many people do it visually, but having set
rules will help to keep traders out of trends that may be fading or to prevent traders
from getting into a range trade in the midst of a possible breakout. Table 7.2 outlines
some of rules that I look for in order to classify a currency pairs trading environment.

67

Table 7.2 Trend/Range Trading Rules
Trade
Range •
•
•

Rules

Indicators
Bollinger bands, ADX, options

ADX < 20
Decreasing Implied volatility
Risk reversals near choice or
flipping between favoring calls
and puts
Moving averages, ADX, options, momentum
Trend • ADX > 25
• Momentum consistent with trend
direction
• Risk reversals strongly bid for put
or call

Range
Look for:
ADX (Average Directional Index) Less Than 20 The average directional
index is one of the primary technical indicators used to determine the strength of a
trend. When ADX is less than 20, this suggests that the trend is weak, which is
generally characteristic of a range-bound market. An ADX less than 20 and trending
downward provides a further conformation that the trend not only is weak, but will
probably stay in a range trading environment for a while longer.
Decreasing Implied Volatility There are many ways to analyze volatility. What
I like to do is actually track short-term versus long-term volatility. When short-term
volatility is falling, especially alter a burst above long-term volatility, it is usually
indicative of a reversion to range trading scenarios. Volatility usually blows out when
a currency pair experiences sharp, quirk moves. It contracts when ranges are narrow
and the trading is very quiet in the markets. The lazy mans version of the way I track
volatility is Bollinger bands, which provide a fairly decent measure for determining
volatility conditions. A narrow Bollinger band suggests that ranges are small and
there is low volatility in the markets while wide Bollinger bands are reflective of
large ranges and a highly volatile environment. In a range trading environment, we
are looking for fairly narrow Bollinger bands ideally in a horizontal formation similar
to the USD/JPY chart in Figure 7.2.
Risk Reversals Flipping between Calls and Puts A risk reversal consists of a
pair of options, a call and a put, on the same currency. Risk reversals have both the
same expiration (one month) and the same sensitivity to the underlying spot rate.
They are quoted in terms of the difference in volatility between the two options.
While in theory these options should have the same implied volatility, in practice:
these volatilities often differ in the market. Risk reversals can be seen as having a
market polling function. A number strongly in favor of calls or puts indicates that the
market prefers calls over puts. The reverse is true if the number is strongly in favor of
puts versus calls. Thus, risk reversals can be used as a substitute for gauging
positions in the FX market. In an ideal environment, far out-of-the-money calls and
puts should have the same volatility. However, this is rarely the case since there is
generally a sentiment bias in the markets that is reflected in risk reversals. In rangebound environments, risk reversals tend to flip between favoring calls and puts at

68

nearly zero (or equal), indicating that there, is indecision among bulls and bears and
there is no strong bias in the markets.

Figure 7.2 USD/JPY Bollinger Band Chart
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)
What Does a Risk Reversal Table Look Like? Affording to the risk reversals
shown in Table 7.3, we can see that the market is strongly favoring yen calls (JC) and
dollar puts over the long term. EUR/USD short-term risk reversals are near zero,
which is what you are looking for when profiling a range-hound environment. The
most readily available free resource that I know of for up-to-date risk reversals is the
IFR news plug-in which can be found on the FX Trading Station at www.fxcm.com.
TABLE 7.3 Risk Reversals
14:40 GMT April 19th
1 Month to 1 Year Risk Reversal
1 YR R/R
Currency 1M R/R
3M R/R
6M R/R
USD/JPY 0.3/0.6 JC
0.7/1.0 JC
1.1/1.3 JC
1.3/1.6 JC
EUR/USD 0.1/0.3 EC
0.0/0.3 EC
0.0/0.3 EC 0.1/0.4 EC
GBP/USD 0.0/0.3 SP
0.0/0.3 SC
0.0/0.3 SC
0.0/0.3 SC
USD/CHF 0.2/0.2 CC
0.0/0.3 CC
0.0/0.4 CC 0.1/0.5 CC
JC = Japanese Yen Call
EC = Euro Call
SP = Sterling Put
SC = Sterling Call
CC = Swiss Call

69

Trend
Look for
ADX (Average Directional Index) Greater Than 20 As mentioned earlier
when we talked about range trading conditions, the Average Directional Index is one
of the primary technical indicators used to determine the strength of a trend. In a
trending environment, we look for ADX to be greater than 20 and rising. However, if
ADX is greater then 25 but sloping downward, especially off of the extreme 40 level,
you have to be careful of aggressive trend positioning since the downward slope may
indicate that the trend is waning.
Momentum Consistent with Trend Direction In addition to using ADX, I also
recommend looking for a confirmation of a trending environment through
momentum indicators. Traders should look for momentum to be consistent with the
direction of the trend. Most currency traders will look for oscillators to point strongly
in the direction of the trend. For example, in an uptrend, trend traders will look for
the moving averages, RSI, stochastics, and moving average convergence/divergence
(MACD) to all point strongly upward. In a downtrend, they will look for these same
indicators to point downward. Some currency traders use the momentum index, but
only to a lesser extent. One of the strongest momentum indicators is a perfect order in
moving averages. A perfect order is when the moving averages line up perfectly; that
is for an uptrend, the 10-day SMA is greater than the 20-day SMA, which is greater
than the 50-day SMA. The 100-day SMA and the 200-day SMA are below the
shorter-term moving averages. In a downtrend, a perfect order would be when the
shorter-term moving averages stack up below the longer-term moving averages.
Options (Risk Reversals) With a trending environment, we are looking for risk
reversals to strongly favor calls or puts. When one side of the market is laden with
interest, it is usually indicative of a strongly trending environment or that a contratrend move may be brewing if risk reversals are at extreme levels.

STEP TWO – DETERMING TRADE TIME HORIZONE
Once you have determined that a currency pair is either range-bound or trending,
it is time to determine how long you plan on holding the trade. The following is a set
of guidelines and indicators that I use for trading different time frames. Not all of the
guidelines need to be met, but the more guidelines that are met, the more solid the
trading opportunity.
Intraday Range Trade Rules
1. Use hourly charts to determine entry points and daily charts to confirm that a
range trade exists on a longer time frame.
2. Use oscillators to determine entry point within range.
3. Look for short-dated risk reversals to be near choice.
4. Look for reversal in oscillators (RSI or stochastics at extreme point).
5. It is a stronger trade when prices fail at key resistance or hold key support levels
(use Fibonacci retracement points and moving averages).
Indicators Stochastics, MACD, RSI, Bollinger bands, options, Fibonacci
retracement levels.
70

Medium-Term Range Trade
Rules
1. Use daily charts.
2. There are two ways to range trade in the medium term: position for upcoming
range trading opportunities or get involved in existing ranges:
Upcoming range opportunities: Look for high-volatility environments, where
short-term implied volatilities are significantly higher than longer-term volatilities;
seek reversion back to the moan environments.
Existing ranges: Use Bollinger bands to identify existing ranges.
3.
Look for reversals in oscillators such as RSI and stochastics.
4.
Make sure ADX is below 25 and ideally falling.
5. Look for medium-term risk reversals near choice.
6. Confirm with price action—failure at key range resistances and bounces on key
range supports (using traditional technical indicators).
Indicators Options, Bollinger bonds, stochastics, MACD, RSI, Fibonacci
retracement levels.
Medium-Term Trend trade
Rules
1. Look for developing trend on daily charts and use weekly charts for
confirmation.
2. Refer back to the characteristics of a trending environment—look for those
parameters to be met,
3. Buy breakout/retracement scenarios on key Fibonacci levels or moving
averages.
4. Look for no major resistance levels in front of trade.
5. Look for candlestick pattern confirmation.
6. Look for moving average confluence to be on same side of trade.
7. Enter on a break of significant high or low.
8. The ideal is to wait for volatilities to contract before gelling in.
9. Look for fundamentals to also be supportive of trade—growth and interest rates.
You want to see a string of economic surprises or disappointments, depending on
directional bias.
Indicators ADX, parabolic stop and reversal (SAR), RSI, Ichimoku clouds (a
Japanese formation), Elliott waves, Fibonacci.
Medium-Term Breakout Trade Rules
1. Use daily charts.
2. Look for contraction in short-term volatility to a point where it is sharply below
long-term volatility.
3. Use pivot points to determine whether a break is a true break or a false break.
4. Look for moving average confluences to be supportive of trade.
Indicators Bollinger bands, moving averages, Fibonacci.
RISK MANAGEMENT

71

Although risk management is one of the simpler topics to grasp, it seems to be
the hardest to follow for most traders. Too often we have seen traders turn winning
positions into losing positions and solid strategies result in losses instead of profits.
Regardless of how intelligent and knowledgeable traders may be about the markets,
their own psychology-will cause them to lose money. What could be the cause of
this? Are the markets really so enigmatic that few can profit? Or is there simply a
common mistake that many traders are prone to make? The answer is the latter. And
the good news is that the problem, while it can be an emotionally and
psychologically challenging one, is ultimately fairly easy to grasp and solve.
Most traders lose money simply because they have no understanding of or place
no importance on rink management. Risk management involves essentially knowing
how much you are willing to risk and how much you are looking to gain. Without a
sense of risk management, most traders simply hold on to losing positions for an
extremely long amount of time, but take profits on winning positions far too
prematurely. The result is a seemingly paradoxical scenario that in reality is all too
common: the trader ends up having more winning positions than losing ones, but
ends up with a negative profit/loss (P/L). So, what can traders do to ensure they have
solid risk management habits? There are a few key guidelines that all traders,
regardless of their strategy or what they are trading, should keep in mind.
Risk-Reward Ratio
Traders should look to establish a risk-reward ratio for every trade they place. In
other words, they should have an idea of how much they are willing to lose, and how
much they are looking to gain. Generally, the risk-reward ratio should beat least 1:2,
if not more. Having a solid risk-reward ratio can prevent traders from entering
positions that ultimately are not worth the risk.
Stop-Loss Orders
Traders should also employ stop-loss orders as a way of specifying the
maximum loss they are willing to accept. By using stop-loss orders, traders can avoid
the common predicament of being in a scenario where they have many winning
trades but a single loss large enough to eliminate any trace of profitability in the
account. Trailing stops to lock in profits are particularly useful. A good habit of more
successful traders is to employ the rule of moving your stop to break even as soon as
your position has profited by the same amount that you initially risked through the
stop order. At the same time, some traders may also choose to close a portion of their
position.
For those looking to add to a winning position or go with a trend, the best
strategy is to treat the new transaction as if it were a new trade of its own,
independent of the winning position. If you are going to add to a winning position,
perform the same analysis of the chart that you would if you had no position at all. If
a trade continues to go in your favor, you can also close out part of the position while
trailing your stop higher on the remaining lots that you are holding. Try thinking
about your risk and reward on each separate lot that you have bought if they are at
different entry points as well. If you buy a second lot 50 pips above your first entry

72

point, don't use the same stop price on both, but manage the risk on the second lot
independently from the first.
Using Stop-Loss Orders to Manage Risk Given the importance of money
management to successful trading, using the stop-loss order is imperative for any
trader looking to succeed in the currency market. The stop-loss order allows traders
to specify the maximum loss they are willing to accept on any given trade. If the
market reaches the rate the trader specifies in his/her stop-loss order, then the trade
will be closed immediately. As a result, using stop-loss orders allows you to know
how much you are risking at the time you enter the trade.
There are two parts to successfully using a slop-loss order (1) initially placing
the stop at a reasonable level and (2) trailing the stop—meaning moving it forward
toward profitability—as the trade progresses in your favor.
Placing the Stop-Loss There are two recommended ways of placing a stop-loss
order.
Two-Day Low Method These volatility-based slops involve placing your stoploss order approximately 10 pips below the two-day low of the pair. For example, if
the low on the EUR/USD's most recent candle: was 1.1200 and the previous candle's
low was 1.1100, then the stop should be placed around 1.1090—10 pips below the
two-day low—if a trader is looking to get long.
Parabolic Stop and Reversal (SAR) Another form of volatility-based stop is the
parabolic SAR, an indicator that is found on many currency trading charting
applications. The FX Power Charts, for instance, offer this indicator, freely available
to all course subscribers (www.fxcm.com). Parabolic SAR is a volatility-based
indicator that graphically displays a small dot at the point on the chart where the stop
should be placed. Figure 7.3 is an example of a chart with parabolic SAR placed on
it.
There is no magic formula that works best in every situation, but the following is
an example of how these stops could be used. Upon entering a long position,
determine where support is and place a stop 20 pips below support. For example,
let’s say this is 60 pips below the entry point.
If the trade earns a profit of 60 pips, close half of the position in a market order,
then move the stop up to the entry point. At this time, trail the stop 60 pips behind the
moving market price. If the parabolic SAR move's up so that it is above the entry
point, you could switch to using the parabolic SAR as the stop level. Of course,
during the day, there can be other signals that could prompt you to move your stop. If
the price breaks through a new resistance level, that resistance then becomes support.
You can place a stop 20 pips below that support level, even if it is only 30 to 40 pips
away from the current price. The underlying principle you have to use is to find a
point to place your stop where you would no longer want to be in the trade once the
price reaches that level. Usually the stop falls at a point where the price goes below
support.

73

Figure 7.3 Parabolic SAR
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)
PSYCHOLOGICAL OUTLOOK
Aside from employing proper risk management strategies, one of the other most
crucial yet overlooked elements of successful trading is maintaining a healthy
psychological outlook. At the end of the day, traders who are unable to cope with the
stress of market fluctuations will not stand the test of time—no matter how skilled
they may be at the more scientific elements of trading.
Emotional Detachment
Traders must make trading decisions based on strategies independent of fear and
greed. One of the premier attributes good traders have is that of emotional
detachment: while they are dedicated and fully involved in their trades, they are not
emotionally married to them; they accept losing, and make their investment decisions
on an intellectual level. Traders who are emotionally involved in trading often make
substantial errors, as they lend to whimsically change their strategy after a few losing
trades, or become overly carefree after a few winning trades. A good trader must be
emotionally balanced, and must base all trading decisions on strategy— not fear or
greed.
Know When to Take a Break
In the midst of a losing streak, consider taking a break from trading before fear
and greed dominate your strategy.
Not every trade can be a winning one. As a result, traders must be
psychologically capable of coping with losses. Most traders, even successful ones, go
through stretches of losing trades. The key to being a successful trader though, is
being able to come through a losing stretch unfazed and undeterred. If you are going
74

through a bad stretch, it may be time to fake a break from trading. Often, taking a few
days off from watching the market to clear your mind can be the best remedy for a
losing streak. Continuing to trade relentlessly during a tough market condition can
breed greater losses as well as ruin your psychological trading condition. Ultimately,
it’s always better to acknowledge your losses rather than continue to fight through
them and pretend that they don't exist. Make no mistake about it: regardless of how
much you study, practice, or trade, there will be losing trades throughout your entire
career. The key is to make them small enough that you can live to trade another day,
while allowing your winning trades to stay open. You can overcome a lot of bad luck
with proper money management techniques. This is why we stress a 2:1 reward-torisk ratio, as well as why I recommend not risking more than 2 percent of your equity
on any single trade.
Whether you are trading forex, equities, or futures, there are 10 trading rules that
successful traders should live by:
1. Limit your losses.
2. Let your profits run.
3. Keep position sizes within reason.
4. Know your risk-reward ratio.
5. Be adequately capitalized.
6. Don't fight the trend.
7. Never add to losing positions.
8. Know market expectations.
9. Learn from your mistakes—keep a trading journal.
10. Have a maximum loss or retracement in profits.

75

Technical Trading
Strategies
MULTIPLY TIME FRAME ANALYSIS
In order to trade successfully on an intraday basis, it is important to be selective.
Trend trading is one of the most popular strategies employed by global macro hedge
funds. Although there are many traders who prefer to range trade, the big profit
potentials tend to be in trades that capture and participate in big market movements.
It was once said by Mark Boucher, a hedge fund manager of Midas Trust Fund and a
former number one money manager as ranked by Nelson Marketplace's World's Host
Money Managers, that 70 percent of a market's moves occurs 20 percent of the time.
This makes multiple time frame analysis particularly important because no trader
wants to lose sight of the overall big picture. A great comparison is taking a road I rip
from Chicago to Florida. There are certainly going to be a lot of left and right turns
during the road trip, but the driver needs to be aware throughout the whole trip that
he or she is headed south. In trading, looking for opportunities to buy in an uptrend or
sell in a downtrend tends to be much more profitable than trying to pick tops and
bottoms.
The most common form of multiple time frame analysis is to use daily charts to
identify the overall trend and then to use the hourly charts to determine specific entry
levels.

Figure 8.1 AUD/USD Multiple Time Frame Daily Chart
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)
The AUD/USD chart in Figure 8.1 is a daily chart of the Australian dollar
against the U.S. dollar. As you can see, the Australian dollar has been trending higher
since January 2002. Range or contrarian traders who continually looked to pick tops
76
