A : I think the main part of it was two things: In the beginning I
was just scalping because I didn’t have a lot of capital. You know
25K is not a very big stake. So I would pick my spots and try to
arbitrage things or find butterflies. Sometimes I'd lay butterflies
out there for credits, so that’s even better than zero and I’d string
some of them. At one stage, after OJ went up to about $1.60 or
$1.70, I thought that it was overdone. Back in the ‘90s we were in
a deflationary decade, so I thought, well, it’s only a matter of time
before this thing crashes and dies, and I started putting on some
positions basically.

Q. you bought some long-term put positions?

A. Yes.

Q.: Like spreads?

A : I bought puts and sold some calls, creating collars or fences.

Q.-with the underlying or without the underlying?

A : I would hedge the underlying. But the beauty was if the
position blew through the put strikes, it kicked in, and I was long
puts and short the market to a degree. I mean, I hedged everything
but left a little leeway. The reason I liked the trade was that at
the time there were huge volatility skews, calls were trading at
volatility levels 5 or 10 percent above the puts. So I was building
up the positions with a great theoretical advantage and with the
thought that, when this thing crashes, I’m going to underhedge it.
I’m not going to buy back my deltas as quickly as I should because

180


THE TREASURE HUNTER

markets usually drop much faster than they rally, and I knew the
whole world was long now and the whole thing had changed, and
I thought it was just a question of when the market did a cliff dive.
We were in the deflationary ‘90s, and I had seen how the guys in
gold used to get burned every time it rallied too high, and I kind
of thought the same thing would happen here in OJ. There were
some newspaper articles, like Jimmy Rogers was in Barron’s one
weekend saying this OJ market is unsustainable because Brazil was
growing a zillion orange trees or something like that. Which was
eventually true, then destiny kicked in and OJ crashed.

Q: so you took $250,000, and then did you leave or continue to
trade OJ?

A : No, I stayed with them, I traded there until 1997. The thing
that made me leave the market was the best trade that I ever had.
It was in orange juice as well, and it was the freeze that never
happened. This was February 1996. We had gone through freeze
season and if a freeze happens according to what I studied in
the charts, they usually happened in December and usually right
around Christmas Eve. We went through this period, went into
January and there was no cold weather and nothing was going
on, and so the option volatilities were plunging, they went from
like 40 percent down to 20 and I had never seen option vols at
20 in orange juice. So I started doing back spreads while other
guys were crushing out of the money call options for May delivery.
They figured that freeze season was over, volatilities are going to
collapse, orange juice was never going to go back up to $1.30 to
$1.50—let’s nail these guys on these May calls. So I’d buy, and
then I'd back spread them. I would try to do back spreads for zero
cost, so I'd sell at-the-money calls and buy whatever strike I could
get out of the money where I could buy two of them and be zero
cost in terms of option premium. I thought to myself that even if
we had a big down move, it wasn’t a problem and that this position
would work too because if we did get some type of spike, some
type of freeze, my twice-as-many calls would kick in.

181


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q): The only time it wouldn't have worked is if things stayed the
same?

A : Yes, or if we had a slow rally, I would have gotten hurt. But
I would check my risk every day. I'd run scenarios several times
during the day to see what my worst-case scenario was and how big
my problem would be and could I live with it. Then I remember it
was a Sunday, and it started snowing in New York like I had never
seen it. There was three feet of snow or something like that.

Q.- this was what month?

A. February 1996. I woke up that Monday morning and I thought,
oh this is beautiful. There was a freeze that hit Florida during this
whole snowstorm and I felt like this was a Christmas gift come
late and I must have been a good boy last year. I remember the
market being closed that Monday because New York was snowed
in or it was George Washington’s birthday. But when I came in the
following day, the market was called to open 5 percent higher and
it did. It shot 5 percent higher and I was long and, the next day, we
came in and it was called 5 percent higher and it opened 5 percent
higher, which was the limit at the time. By then I started scaling
out of the position. You just naturally want to get out of stuff.
You're ringing the register. You're seeing money that you might
want to spend some day [laughter]. It was hitting the account, and
by the end of that day I was still slightly long futures and slightly
long options, but I was out of probably about 85 percent of the
positions. I rang the register on it. By now it was on the TV. One
friend, whom I hadn't heard from in awhile, phoned me to say,
“Hey Indi, youre trading oranges. I saw the orange on CNBC with
the icicles. Did you catch it?” I said, “Yeah, and I was on the right
side, don’t worry, I caught that move.” By now it was the third day.
The opening call was about 3 percent higher, and I had a problem
with that because, I was thinking, wait a minute, it’s all on CNBC
now, the orange with the icicle is on the TV. I was thinking that all
my friends are calling me up about it and the market only opened

182


THE TREASURE HUNTER

up one-and-half percent. So, I thought, this doesn’t feel right. I
didn’t know if it was trader intuition or my bull alarm. Something
was going off and I just said, I’m getting flat. So I got out of as much
as I could and now the market’s barely higher. I’m standing in the
ring and I’m confused now. I’m very confused because this is not
like it was in the last two days and then all of a sudden a light bulb
went on and I had a dream. But after the dream I began to feel
more conviction now than when I walked in on Monday morning.
I had this vision then, a dream: There are these guys that come
down onto the floor every now and then. They are Florida citrus
guys and they're these old Southern gentlemen who are very smart.
They're very wealthy and they control the orange juice business in
south Florida and I had seen them many times on the floor with
the greatest tailoring jobs, the greatest suits, some of them fly up
in their own private planes, and I had this vision of one of these
guys on the balcony of his mansion overlooking his orange groves
with his cordless phone who knew that the whole freeze was bull
and he was phoning his New York brokers telling them, cap this
thing, sell this thing, short this thing. Basically, what was going on
in my mind was that this is what the smart money is doing. They
are saying, “Sell, damn it.” I figured that guys like him must be
selling, and I have to get in on this especially since I had just had a
nice score in the market. One of the things that I do is, if I’ve just
made some money and if I still feel I’m in sync with the market,
is that I step on the gas. I would be a horrible high school football
coach in America today because, if my team is up 90 to nothing at
half time. I’d be trying to figure out ways to bury these guys 300
to nothing by the fourth quarter. That was how I was thinking on
this day. I was up 90 to nothing at half time, but I want to kill. I
want to make them cry. I want to win, you know, 300 to zero. I
decided that I’m going to do whatever I can in futures and options
to sell the hell out of this market with my fictional smart Southern
friend. This guy was a ghost basically, but I wanted to be with him.
I wanted to trade with my imaginary friend. So I started selling
and I did enough futures and options where, if the market took out
the high for the day and I was going to give a stop order to one my
brokers in the OJ futures to take me out, I would only have lost
about 40 percent of what I made on the up move over the last two

183


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

or three days. I decided that I wasn’t going to do anything until
the market went to unchanged or lower and a few minutes later
the market went to unchanged and I went hog wild and sold as
many futures or options or whatever I could do, Just a gasket went
off to get short where my risk was that if the market took out it’s
highs for the day, I would have lost 40 percent of my equity on the
last three days. So I put the trade on and about 30 or 45 minutes
after that, the market was down 6 percent and about two to three
days later, it was down another 4 or 5, or about 10 percent from
where I sold it. I made another killing, catching it up and down,
and I decided at that stage, a few days later, that I had just made a
killing and I was going to take the rest of the year off. Why should I
become a rat on a treadmill chasing the cheese in front of me until
I croak? I said to myself, go out, hit the clubs in New York City,
relax, enjoy yourself, become a playboy—why make more millions,
why? You don’t need them, so I decided alright, I’m getting off this
treadmill now and I wound down my positions and, in about March

or April of that year, I left the floor and pretty much never went
back.

: Was it an easy decision for you to just leave the markets?
How did you pull yourself away from making more money?

A : No! I never thought that I was leaving for long term. I thought
I was going to leave for about six to nine months, party in New
York City, go out to the clubs with my friends, call up my high
school friends, college friends, go skiing every weekend and come
back the next year. So, to me, it was just like taking a long break.
I thought I was the luckiest guy in the world. I could take a nine-
month vacation. I mean, who could do that? I was 29, 30 years
old, and I was just going to enjoy the nightlife in New York City
and maybe go on cruises and go to the beach and do whatever I
wanted for about a year and then I'd get serious again and work.
Well, after about three months of the so-called playboy lifestyle,
you find out your college buddies are all getting married, they all
have kids, they all can’t go out every night. They have to work

184


THE TREASURE HUNTER

the next day, they wake up at 5 A.M. and commute from wherever
they live in New Jersey into New York City and you find that you
get bored pretty quickly. That was when the idea of the Emerging
Market hit. A few years earlier I was at a good friend’s wedding
there, I took a look at their markets with the thought that I’m going
to come back there and trade their commodity markets some day
and then I forgot about it. I thought to myself, rather than goof off
for nine months, why don’t I start a new business, which will fail
because 90 percent of new businesses fail, and I'll go over to the
emerging market country and just hang out and party there. Look
up my old friend there and start a new business.

Q.: What year was this?

A: 1997.

OQ): 50 what was your new business?

A: Totrade commodity options on the Emerging Market’s futures
exchange. They didn’t even have them yet, but I did persuade them
to list them a few months later and that first year was really tough. I
think I traded from June until December 1997. It was broken up a
bit because I went over there for three months, got semi-homesick,
and came back for a month or two and then went over there again.
I think I made like $24,000 during that time.

Q.. Were you doing this pretty much by yourself?

A : Yes, by myself. I signed up with a brokerage firm over there
and then the exchange was going to list these new commodity
options and nobody knew what to do with them. They said look,
if someone puts up a bid, you put an offer, if someone puts up an
offer, counter with a bid. And I said, are there any restrictions on
me, like how far away I do the options and they said no. We just
want to see two-way markets. We don’t want to see someone put
an order in that never gets answered. I said alright I'll do that.

185


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.- what type of commodities were they trading?

A : Agricultural. They were trading corn. That’s their staple food
product, which they also use for animal feed. Wheat and sunflower
seeds and soybeans also.

Q.:s0 were on you on the floor of the exchange?

A : No, it was electronic and that was bizarre. Here I was—I went
from New York City, the financial capital of the world, the most
sophisticated financial battleground where everything is done by
yelling and screaming and spitting on people and poking them with
pencils and here I go into the third world and it’s all electronically
integrated. It was the weirdest thing.

Q:s0 that must have been different for you, since what you were
doing mostly was reacting to flow. Electronically it must be very
different from hearing people yelling and screaming. How did that
work?

A : Oh man, it was terrible because you're right on the floor. I
could hear people yelling and screaming. Hearing the noise level
would get you up. On a computer screen there’s nothing. I remem-
ber times I'd be reading the newspaper and all of a sudden I'll look
up and I’d see my screen blinking indicating that the market’s limit
down or something and I'd been asleep through about a 30-pip
drop in prices where, as in the old days, if I was on the floor you'd
definitely hear that and you'd react to that. So it was a little bit
different.

Q.- pia you have to change the style of your trading then?

A : Yes, I'd have to set up alerts on the computer to make a noise,
and I would use various indicators—oscillators to determine when

186


THE TREASURE HUNTER

it broke out to a certain level. My computer would start making
noises or something and that would wake me up.

: So you'll stay with the same strategy, but you'll just use
mechanics to make sure that you were awake and alert while you're
following it?

A : Yes, correct.

Q.: Were you trading in an office?

A:No.

Qutt was from a brokerage house?

A : Yes. But remember, this was an electronic exchange. It could
be traded from anywhere. Currently, I am trading from a beach
house in the Caribbean, because after I am done trading I love to
swim, snorkel, jet ski, and soon kite surf.

Q_: were there other traders around you that were doing the
same thing?

A : There were other traders trading for the brokerage house, but
they were trading mainly the stock market and also the stock index
futures.

Q_ ; socially—was it a relatively isolating experience to trade
against a screen rather than a ring, that is, very, very social and
very loud?

A: yes.

187


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: pia that kind of take you back a little bit?

A : It did, but you learn how to market strategies to people. On the
floor, it’s just you reacting to people. You say, “Hey, how are you
doing, what are you looking to do?” It’s much more vocal and in
your face. There you become much more introspective, and what
you have to try and find out is who are the players, what do they
want, and can you come up with some type of product or strategy
that will give them what they want, but will have some type of
option related theoretical advantage for you.

Q:s0 that is how you would try to attract some of the institutional
order flow to you by creating all of these option strategies for
them.

A : Exactly. Then you advertise on the screen, not by yelling and
jumping up and down, but whenever someone puts in a bid that
you're the first guy to offer. That will eventually lead to a phone
call like, “Hey, I notice you're trying to sell here. I’m trying to buy
here. What can we do?”

: Let’s talk about what kind of equipment you used. What was
your setup?

A : My belief is to use the best stuff that you can get. So I travel
around with a Bloomberg terminal with real time data.

Q.:s0 you have a Bloomberg Anywhere?

A : They've even done something better for me, before Bloomberg
Anywhere was invented, they did not want you traveling around
with any of these things, but they did have the facility. That was
only for their salespeople mainly. So they'd give you Bloomberg
Professional on your laptop, which they hated to do. In fact, I tried

188


THE TREASURE HUNTER

to get it through London, and they said they would do it for me for
six months. I had some shares in a energy trading firm in New York
that had several of the Bloomberg Professional stations in their
offices. I said, I travel around—can you give me the Bloomberg
Professional on my laptop? And don’t try to sell me an actual
terminal. I don’t need a desktop terminal. I go through airports.
They eventually did, and they gave me the Bloomberg Professional
as you guys would have with the four screens. But I have four boxes
on my laptop. I have to toggle between what I want to look at. So
they gave me that and I use TradeStation. I also use different
option pricing software pieces that are custom made for me by
programmers. I use different people in financial engineering to
help me model how the option pricing surface should look. What
the advantages are in the current one versus the historical.

Q.:s0, all of these functionalities are on one laptop?

A: No, I travel with three. In fact, it drives people nuts. I literally
run around the world with three different laptops. One has my
Bloomberg, my TradeStation, all of my data and back testing stuff.
Another one has all of my option financial engineering analytics,
and the third one is a dealing screen.

Q.:s0 when you are trading all three are up in front of you?

A : All three are in front of me.

Q.: The dealing screen, how do you deal now? Do you have a
broker?

A : I've got brokers who set me up with direct dealing in the
exchanges overseas, and here in the states I use Interactive Brokers,

189


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

TradeStation securities, the different ones here that give you the
online access. My favorite is Interactive Brokers.

: Let’s talk about Interactive because many readers use them.
When you're trading option exchanges in the U.S., you’re now
able to make bid/ask. Do you use that facility when you're doing
Interactive? Are you sort of trading typically like a Market Maker
these days or more or less a customer?

A : No, ’m trading more as a customer on Interactive. What I’m
really doing there is, I develop strategies where I’m mainly doing
a lot of stuff like buy-writes. A buy-write is a covered call strategy
in the options market where I buy an underlying share and then
sell at-the-money or in-the money calls against the share position.
The most recent ones were in the energy shares. This was in 2004,
2005—Conoco Phillips—I would buy shares, write options against
it and let it get called away.

Q_: Companies with big fat dividends?

A : [would do that, but that doesn’t work anymore. I had a great
time with the Canadian oil trusts about two years ago, where you'd
be able to buy the oil trust, write an option that’s in the money,
giving you like 10 or 20 percent downside protection plus a little
bit of time premium, collect the dividends, and write your way to
prosperity. That no longer works because they've all appreciated a
lot. Also I don’t know if the open interest is thinner or whatever, but
a lot of times recently, maybe about six months ago, I used to get
exercised right before the dividend date. So you would lose your
share at a very critical time. That was another problem and now
there is a change in the tax laws in Canada which is going to put that
whole thing out of business. It’s not going to work anymore, but
that’s how Id use Interactive. In the foreign markets, I’m usually
trying to act as market maker, a facilitator of deals.

190


THE TREASURE HUNTER

Q:can you tell us about how you start your trading day now that
you trade as a customer? Do you read news, do you rely mostly on
your back-tested models?

A : I trade a lot of foreign markets, so on a typical day, I wake
up at weird hours. I wake up about two in the morning and I look
at the market to see what’s been happening, see any news, what
could be changing in the world or in the commodities or shares
that I’m trading. Then I jump in about an hour later and I start
executing stuff in the foreign markets.

Q: Do you read local papers?
A : Oh yeah.

Q.: so your focus is still very commodity driven, this is your core
domain of expertise?

A:yYes.

Q.: when you are talking about foreign markets, are you talking
about foreign commodities markets? Do you look at foreign equity
markets, but sort of find commodity themes within there as well?

A: That’s what I'll do. It will be either foreign commodity markets
or usually domestic or foreign share markets that have a commodity
theme to it.

Q.:s0 you're reading the news and you've been trading an hour
into it. Now are you focused and sitting in front of screen for the
whole time?

A : Yes, without a doubt.

191


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.:s0 you don’t go and do other things?

A. No.

: Do you find that commodity-driven stories are much more
news affected than pure stock stories, pure equity stories? In other
words, if there’s a big piece of news on that day that is commodity
related, it’s going to have a continuous impact on the commodity
markets versus the stock market where we can’t tell if the stock
will have a significant reaction to an economic release?

A : Yeah, I have seen that. What I’ve seen with the news-driven
events in shares and what I’ve seen with the commodity is when
you get a news-driven event like a crop report, it usually has a
sustained impact that could mean you're in an interesting period
for three months, six months or so. With stocks, and I’ve seen it
mainly with earning-related news so there’s a slight difference here
but the earnings-related event to a commodity stock is usually a
one move and that’s it. It moves 20 percent and that’s it. It’s
readjusted.

Q:s0 you are focused, youre sitting in front your screen. At
what point do you start looking?

A : I trade very intensely through the first three hours. Then it’s
usually about six in the morning or so. Then I'll stop.

Q.- Let's go through the first three hours. Very intensely means
how many round turns a day?
