
What Went Up (Down) Usually Came Back Down (Up)
It is impossible to prove the assertion that some speculative excesses were
behind many of these events. One can always argue that the fundamental
reasons offered by investors to justify them were valid in terms of the evidence
that was available when the market was going up, and that “new era” stories
are never completely without merit as theories of what might happen. But one
can also ask whether these price movements have tended to be reversed. If
the price increases are, on average, reversed, then we have some evidence that
the fundamental reasons were not sound.
The data on which these tables are based confirm for countries the result first
discovered by Werner De Bondt and Richard Thaler: that winner stocks—if winner status is measured over long intervals of time such as five years—tend to do
poorly in subsequent intervals of the same length, and that loser stocks—if loser

NEW E R A S A N D B U BBL E S ARO UN D TH E WO RL D

161

status is measured over equally long intervals—tend to do well in subsequent
intervals of the same length.12
From the data used to produce the tables, we find that of the twenty-five
winning countries shown in Table 8.3, seventeen (68%) experienced a decrease
in real stock prices in the five-year periods after large five-year real price
increases, and the average price change for the seventeen countries was a
decrease of 14.7%.13 Similarly, of the twenty-five losing countries shown in
Table 8.4, twenty (80%) experienced an increase in real stock prices in the fiveyear periods after large five-year price decreases, and the average price change
was an increase of 119.7%. We thus see quite a substantial, though imperfect,
tendency for major five-year stock price movement to be reversed in another
five years, both for up movements and down movements.
When we look at one-year real price changes in Tables 8.1 and 8.2, we
find that the tendency toward reversals is less pronounced, as we would
expect from past literature, on prices of individual stocks. We find that of the
twenty-five winning countries shown in Table 8.1, fifteen (60%) experienced
a decrease of real stock prices in the twelve-month period after large twelvemonth price increases, so that the direction of change was more equally split
between up and down, and the average change was a decrease of 4.2%. Of
the twenty-five losing countries shown in Table 8.2, eighteen (72%) experienced an increase in real stock prices in the twelve-month periods after
large twelve-month price decreases, and the average real price change was
an increase of 36.3%. Twelve months does not appear to be long enough to
begin to see as strong a tendency for extreme price movements to reverse
themselves.
Quite possibly, the tendency for individual countries’ stock market valuations to grow dramatically and then to be reversed will diminish in the
future. With freer capital movements than were possible during the periods
covered by the examples in the tables, and with more and more global investors seeking profit opportunities buying undervalued countries or shorting
overvalued countries, markets may become more stable. Even so, it is unlikely
that these forces will soon eliminate the potential for such movements,
particularly infrequent and slow large‑country events or worldwide events,
for which the attendant profit opportunities are slow and hard to diversify.
The possibility of major speculative bubbles, now and in the future, cannot
be ignored.
In this part on cultural factors, we have explored the justifications people
have given, at various points in history, for changing market valuations,
and we have seen evidence of the transitory nature of these cultural factors.
Ultimately, however, the conclusions we draw from such evidence depend
on our view of human nature and the extent of human abilities to produce

162

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

consistent and independent judgments. To consolidate our understanding of
the argument, we turn, in the next part, to a study of fundamental psycho­
logical factors—human tendencies to act independently or to acquiesce, to
believe others or to disbelieve them, to feel confidence or self‑doubt, to be
attentive or inattentive. These tendencies bear on the plausibility of our view
of speculative bubbles.

Part Three

Psychological Factors

Nine

Psychological Anchors for the Market

W

e have seen that the market is not well
anchored by fundamentals. People do
not even know to any degree of accuracy what the “right” level of the market
is: not many of them spend much time thinking about what its level should
be or whether it is over‑ or underpriced today. So what is it that ties down the
market’s level on any given day? What anchors the market? What is it that
determines whether the Dow is at 4,000 or 14,000? What ultimately limits the
feedback from price changes to further price changes that amplifies speculative price movements? Why does the market stay within a certain region for
days at a time, only to break out suddenly? We have already seen some partial
answers to these questions, but to understand the true nature of the anchors
at work here, we must also turn to psychology.
In considering lessons from psychology, it must be noted that many popular
accounts of the psychology of investing are simply not credible. Investors are
said to be euphoric or frenzied during booms or panic‑stricken during market
crashes. In both booms and crashes, investors are described as blindly follow­
ing the herd like so many sheep, with no minds of their own. Belief in the
rationality of markets starts to sound a lot better when the only alternatives
are such pop‑psychological theories.
We all know that most people are more sensible during such financial episodes than these accounts suggest. Financial booms and crashes are, for most
of us, not emotion‑laden events on a par with victories in battle or volcanic
eruptions. In fact, during the most significant financial events, most people
are preoccupied with other personal matters, not with the financial markets
165

166

PSYC HOLOGIC AL FAC TOR S

at all. So it is hard to imagine that the market as a whole reflects the emotions
described by these psychological theories.
However, solid psychological research does show that there are patterns
of human behavior that suggest anchors for the market that would not be
expected if markets worked entirely rationally. These patterns of human
behavior are not the result of extreme human ignorance, but rather of the character of human intelligence, reflecting its limitations as well as its strengths.
Investors are striving to do the right thing, but they have limited abilities
and certain natural modes of behavior that decide their actions when an un­­
ambiguous prescription for action is lacking.1
Two kinds of psychological anchors will be considered here: quantitative
anchors, which themselves give indications for the appropriate levels of the
market that some people use as indications of whether the market is over‑ or
underpriced and whether it is a good time to buy, and moral anchors, which
operate by determining the strength of the reason that compels people to buy
stocks, a reason that they must weigh against their other uses for the wealth they
already have (or could have) invested in the market. With quantitative anchors,
people are weighing numbers against prices when they decide whether stocks
(or other assets) are priced right. With moral anchors, people compare the intuitive or emotional strength of the argument for investing in the market against
their wealth and their perceived need for money to spend now.

Quantitative Anchors for the Market
Designers of questionnaires have learned that the answers people give can be
heavily influenced by suggestions that are given on the questionnaires themselves. For example, when people are asked to state within which of a number
of ranges their income falls, their answers are influenced by the ranges given.
The ranges serve as “anchors” to which they make their answers conform.
Psychologists have shown that people’s decisions in ambiguous situations are
influenced by whatever available anchor is at hand. When you must come up
with an estimate, and you are unsure what to say, you take whatever number is
before you. Psychologists Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman demonstrated
this tendency clearly in an experiment involving a wheel of fortune: a large
wheel with the numbers from 1 to 100 on it, similar to those used in television
game shows, that is designed to stop at a random number when it is spun.
Subjects were asked questions whose answers were numbers between 1 and
100, difficult questions such as the percentage of African nations in the United
Nations. They were asked first to say whether the answer they would give was
above or below the number just produced by the wheel of fortune. Then they
were asked to give their answer. The experimenters found that the answer was
quite substantially influenced by the random number on the wheel. For example,

PSY C H O L O G I C A L AN CH O RS F O R TH E MARKE T

167

if the wheel stopped at 10, the median percentage of African nations according to
their subjects was 25, whereas if the wheel stopped at 65, the median percentage
was 45. This experiment was particularly interesting, because it was designed
so that the subject clearly knew that the number produced by the wheel was
purely random and, moreover, because the number produced by the wheel
should have had no emotional significance for the subject.2
In making judgments about the level of stock prices, the most likely anchor
is the most recently remembered price. The tendency of investors to use this
anchor enforces the similarity of stock prices from one day to the next. Other
possible anchors are remembered past prices, and the tendency of past prices to
serve as anchors may be part of the reason for the observed tendency for trends
in individual stock prices to be reversed. Another anchor may be the nearest
milestone of a prominent index such as the Dow, the nearest round‑number
level, and investors’ use of this anchor may help explain unusual market
behavior surrounding such levels. Past price changes may also provide an
anchor, if attention is suitably drawn to them. Recall from Chapter 6 that
the drop in the market in the October 19, 1987, crash was nearly the same in
percentage terms as that in the October 28–29, 1929, crash that was so much
discussed at the time of the 1987 crash.
For individual stocks, price changes may tend to be anchored to the price
changes of other stocks, and price‑earnings ratios may be anchored to other
firms’ price‑earnings levels. This kind of anchoring may help to explain why
individual stock prices move together as much as they do, and thus, ultimately,
why stock price indices are as volatile as they are—why the averaging across
stocks that is inherent in the construction of the index doesn’t more solidly
dampen its volatility.3 It may also explain why stocks of companies that are in
different industries but are headquartered in the same country tend to have more
similar price movements than stocks of companies that are in the same industry
but are headquartered in different countries, contrary to one’s expectation that
the industry would define the fundamentals of the company better than the
location of its headquarters.4 And it may explain why real estate investment
trusts traded on stock exchanges tend to behave more like stocks than like
the appraised value of their underlying commercial real estate.5 Indeed, all of
these anomalies noted in financial markets have a simple explanation in terms
of quantitative anchoring to convenient numbers.

Moral Anchors for the Market
With moral anchoring, the market is tied down by people’s comparisons of the
intuitive force of stories and reasons to hold their investments against their perceived need to consume the wealth that these investments represent. The market
is not prevented from going up to arbitrarily high levels because people have

168

PSYC HOLOGIC AL FAC TOR S

any idea what its intrinsically “right” level is or what level would be too high.
Rather, if the market were to get too high, the discrepancy between the wealth
many people would then have in the market and their current living standards
would, when compared with their reasons for holding stocks, encourage them
to sell. One can appreciate the nature of this anchor with an extreme example.
Suppose, counterfactually, that the psychology of the market caused the level of
the stock market to rise so as to make most holders of stocks multimillionaires—
on paper. Then, unless the reason these people have to continue holding every
single share is perceived to be extremely strong, they would want to start liv‑
ing a little more like multimillionaires and sell some of their stocks to be able
to spend the money. Such selling would obviously bring stock prices down,
since there would be no buyers, and obviously there just isn’t sufficient current
national income available to sustain anything like this many multimillionaires.
The stock market can reach fantastic levels only if people think that they have
good reasons not to test it by trying to enjoy their newfound wealth.
Underlying this notion of moral anchors is the psychological principle
that much of the human thinking that results in action is not quantitative,
but instead takes the form of storytelling and justification. That is why, in the
case of moral anchors, people are weighing a story, which has no quantitative
dimension, against the observed quantity of financial wealth that they have
available for consumption. Such reasoning is not well described by the usual
kind of economic theory, but there is a large amount of evidence in support
of the assertion that investor reasoning does take this form.
Psychologists Nancy Pennington and Reid Hastie have shown the importance of stories in decision making by studying how jurors reached decisions
in difficult cases. They found that jurors’ approach to reasoning through the
complicated issues of the trial tended to take the form of constructing a story,
filling out the details that were provided to them about the case into a coherent narrative of the chain of events. In describing their verdict, they tended
not to speak of quantities or probabilities, or of summing up the weight of the
evidence, but rather merely to tell a story of the case, typically a chronology
of events, and to remark how well their story fit together and how internally
consistent it was.6
By analogy, those who sell stocks to the general public often tend to tell a
story about the stock, a vivid story describing the history of the company, the
nature of the product, and how the public is using the product. The sales call
does not as often engage in discussions of quantities or probabilities, or of
whether the price is at the right level in terms of quantitative evidence about
future dividends or earnings. These quantitative factors are not as congenial
to the narrative‑based decision making that comes naturally to people.
There is a basic human interest in gambling, seen in one form or another in
all cultures,7 an interest that also expresses itself in speculative markets. Some

PSY C H O L O G I C A L AN CH O RS F O R TH E MARKE T

169

of the attraction to gambling, despite odds that are often openly stacked against
gamblers, apparently has to do with narrative‑based thinking. When gamblers
are heard talking, they are usually telling stories, not evaluating probabilities, and the possibilities suggested by the stories often seem to have more
substantive reality than any quantitative concepts. In these stories, gamblers
use a different vocabulary than do probability theorists, preferring the words
luck or lucky day, and rarely uttering the words probability or likelihood. There
are stories of their winnings and losses, of the chains of events that preceded
their best or worst luck, of the strength of their intuition that yielded good
bets. These stories can convey a sense of meaning and significance to events
that are in fact purely random.8
It has been noted that employees have a tendency to invest in company
stock (that is, stock issued by the firm that employs them), even though it
would appear to be more in their interest to diversify away from the source
of their own livelihood. As of 2003, eleven million participants in U.S. 401(k)
plans invested more than 20% of their assets in company stock, and in some
companies, such as Coca‑Cola, company stock has reached 90% of assets.9 This
tendency to invest in company stock can be interpreted as consistent with
investors’ being influenced by stories: they know many more stories about
their own companies and so invest in those companies’ stocks.
People also appear to want to construct simple reasons for their decisions,
as if they feel the need to justify those decisions in simple terms—if not to
others, then to themselves. The need to have a simple reason to explain a decision is similar to the need to have a story behind a decision; both the stories
and the reasons are simple rationales that can be conveyed verbally to others.
Psychologists Eldar Shafir, Itamar Simonson, and Amos Tversky demonstrated experimentally an effect that appears to represent decision biases
caused by people’s search for simple reasons to justify decisions. They presented their subjects with a simple choice between two options: one option was
“impoverished,” with no striking positive or negative features. The other was
“enriched,” displaying both distinctly positive and distinctly negative features.
In one of their experiments, subjects were asked to choose to which parent
they would award sole custody of a child. Parent A, the impoverished option,
was described with the words “average income, average health, average working hours, reasonable rapport with the child, and relatively stable social life.”
Parent B, the enriched option, was described with the words “above‑average
income, very close relationship with the child, extremely active social life, lots
of work‑related travel, minor health problems.” The experimenters found that
the subjects’ choices depended on how they were asked about the two choices.
When a group of subjects was asked to select the parent to whom they would
award custody, 64% chose Parent B. When a second group was asked to pick
the parent to whom they would deny custody, 55% again chose Parent B. The

170

PSYC HOLOGIC AL FAC TOR S

predominant answers given by the two groups are logically inconsistent, but
they are consistent with a feeling that one must have a solid reason to justify
a decision. The psychologists found that the same tendency occurs even for
purely personal decisions that will never need to be explained to others.10
Reasons to hold stocks or other investments can take on ethical as well as
practical dimensions. Our culture may supply reasons to hold stocks and other
savings vehicles that are related to our sense of identity as responsible people,
as good or levelheaded people. Recall the 1996 book The Millionaire Next Door,
which was a best-seller throughout the stock market boom of the 1990s. It made
the point that most millionaires in the United States are not exceptional income
earners, but merely frugal savers: average folks who are not enticed by a new
car every year, an extravagant house, or other such money pits.11 This book
was not only an interesting study of millionaires; it also projected a subtle
message suggesting the moral superiority of those who hold and gradually
accumulate wealth over a lifetime. It therefore provided an attractive reason
to save and invest. The book offered no analyses of price‑earnings ratios or
anything remotely like specific investment advice, thus subtly reinforcing
the impression that these are irrelevant. Instead, it offered lots of stories of
success­ful, frugal people, many of whom prospered during the 1980s and 1990s
bull market—stories with vivid details and great immediacy for readers. The
book’s enticing story about investing millionaires who do not test the market
by trying to cash out and consume their wealth was just the kind of moral
anchor needed to help sustain an unusual bull market.

Overconfidence and Intuitive Judgment
In judging the significance of these psychological anchors for the market, it
is important to bear in mind that there appears to be a pervasive human tendency toward overconfidence in one’s beliefs. People are ready to act on stories
or reasons that one might think they should have little confidence in.
People think they know more than they do. They like to express opinions
on matters they know little about, and they often act on these opinions. We
have all observed at one time or another that there are a lot of know‑it‑alls out
there. But psychologists have described the tendency toward overconfidence
with some care and indications of its generality.
Psychologists Baruch Fischhof, Paul Slovic, and Sarah Lichtenstein showed
that if people are asked simple factual questions (such as which of two popular magazines has the higher circulation or which of two common causes of
death is the more frequent) and are then asked to give the probability that
their answer is right, they tend to overestimate the probability that they are
right. In fact, when people said they were certain they were right they were
in fact right only about 80% of the time.12

PSY C H O L O G I C A L AN CH O RS F O R TH E MARKE T

171

This result has been the subject of controversy among psychologists, and
the overconfidence phenomenon has not been found to be universal. It has
been shown that people can sometimes be trained out of their overconfidence
in the experimental setting.13 Yet some basic tendency toward overconfidence
appears to be a robust human character trait: the bias is definitely toward overconfidence rather than underconfidence. I find that overconfidence is apparent
when I interview investors; they seem to express overly strong opinions and
rush to summary judgments.
Psychologists have long wondered why it is that people seem to be over­
confident. One theory has been that, in evaluating the soundness of their conclusions, people tend to evaluate the probability that they are right on only the last
step of their reasoning, forgetting how many other elements of their reasoning
could be wrong.14 Another theory is that people make probability judgments by
looking for similarities to other known observations, and they forget that there
are many other possible observations with which they could compare.15 The
reason for overconfidence may also have to do with hindsight bias, a tendency
to think that one would have known actual events were coming before they
happened, had one been present then or had reason to pay attention.16 Hindsight
bias encourages a view of the world as more predictable than it really is.
Another factor in overconfidence as it relates to speculative markets is
magical thinking. When we speak of people’s intuition about the likelihood
that investments will do well or poorly and their own decisions to invest, we
are speaking of their innermost thoughts—thoughts that they do not have to
explain or justify to others. Patterns of thought referred to as “magical thinking” or “quasi‑magical thinking” by psychologists are likely to play a role.
People have occasional feelings that certain actions will make them lucky even
if they know logically that the actions cannot have an effect on their fortunes.
People will make serious decisions based on thinking that they would, if
pressed, admit was illogical. It has been shown that people will place larger
bets on a coin that has not yet been tossed than on a coin that has already been
tossed (and for which the outcome has been concealed). And people will, if
asked how much money they would demand to part with a lottery ticket they
already hold, give a figure over four times greater if they themselves chose the
lottery number on the ticket. Apparently, at some magical level people think
that they can influence a coin that has not yet been tossed and influence the
likelihood of winning the lottery by choosing the number.17
Based on such experimental results, it seems clear that people are capable
of thinking, at least at some intuitive level, “If I buy a stock, then it will go
up afterward” or “If I buy a stock, then others will probably want to buy the
stock, too, because they are like me” or “I have a hot hand lately; my luck is
with me.” Such thinking is likely, in a subtle way, to contribute to the overconfidence that may help the propagation of speculative bubbles.
