normally wait about an hour or half an hour after that period and
only then I would enter my trades. After doing that, I found slowly
but surely, my trading started to improve again.

QO: How long did you demo trade for before you actually went

live?

A : About four months.

Q.: what gave you the confidence to go live, was it a series of
winners?

A : No. I first asked myself the question when I go live, how much
money would I start with? The answer was only, $1,000 because
at that point, that was all that I have saved up and all that I could
afford. I even told myself mentally that if I’m going to start with
$1,000, I need to be able to turn $1,000 into $2,000. Irrespective

116


RAGS TO RICHES

of how long it’s going to take me, whether it’s going to take one
month or two months, or three months, that is what I needed to
do. My line of thinking was that if I could make $2,000, I would
withdraw $1,000, and at that point, I have recouped my entire
capital. Whatever I lose afterwards is not as important because
I’ve got my capital back. So my goal was to double my capital three
times in a row back to back in my demo account. Eventually I
actually managed to do it and, in fact I, doubled it four times in
row.

Quin four months?

A : No, no, not in four months. It was six or seven months and that
was where I got the confidence to go live, but the transition from
going from demo to live was not something that I had prepared for.
Psychologically, there was a massive difference between trading
demo and trading live. The reality is that when it’s your own money
on the line, it has a huge effect on you psychologically whether you
are aware of it or not. I became hesitant. I would see the signals
but I would be too scared to enter the trade, and only later did
I find out that if I entered I would have made a large amount of
profit. When I did get into a trade, I was completely spaced out.
I would be so scared of things going against me. One of the main
things is that my wife was very anxious about taking risks. She is
not a risk taker, not even a calculated one. I never realized just how
much of a role she actually played in my life when I first started
trading.

Q. pia she support or encourage you in the beginning?

A : [wouldn't say she encouraged me because, in the beginning,
she felt it was money that would go down the drain and that I was
basically wasting it. I had to work with her and work with her until
one day she said to me, “Fine, if that’s what you want to do, go
ahead and do it.” My reasoning to her was, “Look, just give me a

117


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

chance. If I blow the $1,000 that’s it. I'll turn around and I'll walk
away and I'll never mention trading ever again.”

Q.: pia you show her your results on your demo?

A : Yes, and I think that is where she probably got the motivation
and started to think that if he’s doing that successful in the demo
trading, maybe he can do the same with live. So, eventually, she
said, “Listen, if that’s what you want to do go for it.” But my
agreement with her was that if I lost the $1,000 that would be it.
I would turn around, walk away, and never look back. My belief
was that I wouldn’t want to turn around in, let’s say, a couple years
and ask myself what if I had tried it? I am the type of person who
would rather give it shot, win or fail.

Q.:s0 did your wife keep a tight noose on you after you started
trading?

A : No, the first couple were small successful trades. But there was
one day that I had entered into a trade at work and, when I came
home, I logged on to my trading station and I was $187 in the profit
and my wife was ecstatic. Honestly, I can tell you. she was jumping
up and down. Now $187 to an American citizen might be peanuts,
but to me, as a South African, that was a small, fortune that I had
just earned. She was ecstatic and from there on, I grew stronger
and more confident in my trading. Her excitement made me more
determined to trade successfully. I mean we’ve had our ups and
downs, but she’s always stood with me. In fact she’s thinking of
becoming a trader herself. The key to my trading strategy is small
but consistent daily wins.

Q.- Lets talk about your trading. First of all, what hours do you
typically trade?

A : In GMT, from about 7 A.M. until, I would say, roughly about
6PM.

118


RAGS TO RICHES

Q.: what is your typical holding period? Are you conservative,

aggressive?

A : I'm fairly short term.

Q: pia you have some sort of daily, weekly, or monthly pip target
or dollar target?

A : Yes, originally when I started out, my target was simply 10
pips a day. If I achieved that, I would not trade again.

Q.:s0 you would be disciplined enough to close your position?

A. Yes, I would take the 10 pips and stop. If 1 made it at 10 A.M. in
morning or whenever, that would be it, I would be finished trading
for the day and I'll wait for next day. The reason I’m mentioning
this is because I reached a point, early on in my trading career,
where I was starting to overtrade.

Q.: Thav’s a problem a lot of people face.

A : Yes, I would make the 10 pips and the trade was over, but
then later on I would see another signal and I end up getting into a
new trade that would become a loser. This went on until I realized
that I was really just a 10-pip trader, so I would take that profit,
stop and wait to trade again the following day.

Q.n ow long did it take you to discover that?

A : It was probably another two months or so into my trading
before I discovered it. I was not looking at the dollar amount, I
was only looking at the pips because I told myself that I needed to

119


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

become consistent and focus on the pips because I could obviously
increase my lot size and make the dollar amount something I would
be satisfied with. Now believe it or not, it’s been three and half years
since I started trading and my pip target is still the same.

: So you aim to make 10 pips a day, but what you would do if
you had a losing trade? Would you try to make 20 pips over that
10 or stick to the 10-per-day goal.

A : No, I would still just go with my 10. The aim is that your total
number of wins exceeds the occasional loss. I would always have a
fixed stop-loss. I used to trade with a stop-loss of 20 pips. If I lost
that 20, then I would stop trading, wait for the next day, and would
follow exactly the same plan that I had before, which is to only go
for 10 pips a day. I wouldn’t try to trade two or three or four times
a day just to make up that money. What I realized nowadays is that
the anger seems to drive you to trade again. You become so angry
with yourself about losing the 20 that all you want to do is get it all
back and you think that you're going to teach the market a lesson
and unfortunately it doesn’t work out that way. It’s more likely that
the market is going to give you a beating instead [laughter].

: Do you like to focus on one currency pair at a time or will
you trade multiple currency pairs?

A: No. Only one.

Q.:s0 then what are your favorite currency pairs to trade?

A: Euro/U.S. dollar and British pound/U.S. dollar.

Q.- which ones would you avoid?
A : Probably U.S. dollar/Japanese yen.

120


RAGS TO RICHES

Quits there a reason for that?

A : Yes, I’ve burnt my hands on it a couple times. I think it is
because the price action can be a bit too wild for me on occasion.

Q.:do you ever trade the crosses?

A. No, not at all. About a month ago, I created a system for trading
the British pound/U.S. dollar currency pair and that system is
working phenomenally well for me. So I’m actually at the moment
only trading the pound. I also have a system that trades silver as
well. So I focus on those two exclusively right now.

Q.: can you describe how you start your typical day? Do you just
survey charts or do you check the calendar first?

A: At around 7 A.M., the first thing I will do is look at the news to
see if there are any major releases to be careful of that day. If it’s a
very quiet day, the first signal normally appears within the first two
hours. I’m trading on a system or model, so I’ve got a little alert
that notifies me when the trade sets up. As soon as the alert rings, I
enter the trade, I set my profit and I set a stop-loss, and after that,
I just forget about it.

Q.:s0 you actually set your target for 10 pips.

A : That’s right, yes. Since I have a system to see how my trades
are progressing. If I am up six or seven pips, then I'll look at
the indicators again. Should I feel that this trade is going to turn
against me, for whatever reason, then I would close it out for the
profit. Once I’ve reached 10 pips profit, I also close the trade even
if the indicators are indicating that the price may still go in my
favor.

121


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.- what kind of equipment do you use for trading?

A : I use a Compaq P3 laptop connected to my cell phone for
Internet access.

Q.: Does your trading platform come with charts?

A : Yes. You can actually trade off of the charts. It was a pro-
gram developed by a Russian company. It uses very, very little
bandwidth, which is one of the reasons why I like so much. Also,
besides currencies, they've offer trading in the metals, gold and
silver. If I ever trade from home, I use a laptop, which I then
connect to my mobile phone to access the Internet.

Q.: Do you end up trading at work or at home more often?
A. Work. Definitely.

Q.: and your company’s perfectly fine with that?

A : They are perfectly fine with it, yes [laughter]. In fact, a lot of
them want me to teach them how to do it.

Qin the beginning you told us that during specific hours, news
flow would affect your trading, and you would avoid it because of
that. So how often would you check the calendar for news flow
then? Every single morning or once a week to figure out the times
of day that you may not want to trade?

A : The habit is every single morning. In fact, sometimes I will
look at those calendars even two or three times a day to see if I
have forgotten anything that may be coming up in the afternoon. I
actually did try to trade the news in the past with a beautiful subtle

122


RAGS TO RICHES

sort of strategy for news, but what I found was a bunch of blocks.
For example, the platform would freeze only during news times
and that actually made it completely impossible to trade efficiently.
The specific news release that I use to trade was nonfarm payrolls.
I had so many problems technologically that I just told myself it
wasn’t worth it to trade the news anymore.

: A lot of people don’t trade news because of the same prob-
lems, and they realize that if they have a solid strategy, money can
be made in any sort of timeframe.

A : Yes, that is right.

Q.: 80, basically, would you say that most of the resources that
you use are free?

A: That’s right, yes. The trading platform and live charts are free.

Q.- Do you feel that it is necessary for someone new to invest
in something that’s expensive? Like one of the premium charting
packages?

A : No, don’t invest in expensive charting packages. Live charts
are available at no cost with equivalent information. I love reading
and I love learning. I think that’s part of the challenge of working
in FX. I spent like $90 here, $150 there, etc. But what I found was a
lot of the books that I purchased were quite honestly not worth the
paper they were written on. They taught the standard issue such as
the moving average crossover or stochastic. I don’t even think these
guys took the effort to actually thoroughly test the strategies that
they were teaching. Admittedly, the strategies would work once or
twice. But more times than not, they would not work.

This actually leads me to my next point, which is that just over a
year ago, I backed off trading for a while and turned to my current

123


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

software provider because they gave me the ability to program my
own indicators. I had met a Russian guy on one of the forums. The
two of us started chatting, and he’s the one that actually made me
aware of the platform. I started learning as much as I could about
indicators and robotic or fully automated trading. I was fascinated
by it and actually got to the point where I can now develop my
own indicators and I have my own robot, which, basically, does
the trading for me. I’ve got one robot which is quite successful as
long as it is shut off during key news releases. It requires a little
management, but nonetheless works well if I turn it on and off
because news can kill the robots. You need to keep him out of the
news, which is something that I learned in forward testing. I’ve
actually got it honed down now. I know exactly when to switch him
on and when to switch him off. I started giving classes in South
Africa where I teach people how to trade using the robot. In the
beginning I had about 4 guys and I’ve now probably have about 16
live traders.

Q.: do you think systematic trading is really necessary, because
you were doing pretty well in terms of a 10-pip target on a discre-
tionary basis. Now that you've created a robot, what difference has
it made?

A : A huge difference. When I was trading manually, I would set
my target at 10 pips, my stop-loss at 20, and then I would walk
away from my computer. When I would come back, I would on
occasion find that the trade had become a loser, not because I was
wrong about price action, but because I let the price go as high
as 8 or 9 pips in my favor. But then I let it reverse and turn what
could have been potentially an $80 or $90 gain into a $200 loss. So
where the robots come in very, very handy is that I’ve inserted a
function into robot such that it will protect my profit. Effectively,
if I set my pip profit at 10, I could leave in a 3-pip profit protection.
This means that if the price goes up by 7 pips, then retraces to
3 pips, the robot would close the trade. So I have created a virtual
trailing stop that would allow me to walk away with $30 in profit
instead of $200 in losses.

124


RAGS TO RICHES

QO: 80 you feel like the robot basically helps you manage the
trade better?

A : Absolutely.

Q. Do you have any sort of alert system that you’ve created to
tell you when a trade has been placed?

A : Yes, I do. Whenever the robot enters a trade, my alert would
beep and that is when I would know that the robot has entered a
trade.

Q_: Do you think that having a trading robot has made your
trading a lot more relaxed in a sense?

A : Yes ithas because a lot of the time, I may not even be aware that
the robot has opened a trade. I will come and check the platform
and find that the robot has entered and closed one or more trades
in most cases successful ones. As you can see, with the robot, I
actually have enough confidence to trade more. I am still going for
the 10-pip profit, but the trades are managed better so that I can
build the profit if need be.

: Does the same go for losses then, in the sense of letting the
robot trade more if you have a loss for the day?

A. No. If I’ve taken a loss then that’s it for the day. I don’t let him
trade again. I'll turn the robot back on the next day.

Q.:s0 pretty much you stick to your original plan?

A : Yes to my original manual trading plan because the discipline
to walk away with profits is the most important. The robot just
makes it such that I don’t need to be in front of my PC anymore to
wait for signals. He is picking up signals as they happen and he’s
entering the trade.

125


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q: Do you feel like your IT background has given you an advan-
tage in creating the robot?

A : Yes, it most definitely has, as well as some programming skills
I developed in my early computing days.

Q: do you think people like you are much more likely to move to
some sort of automatic trading than people that don’t necessarily
have it?

A : Yes, but even people who do not have that background are
interested in robotic trading. In terms of the people whom I train,
some of them are not that computer literate, and when they heard
about what I was doing with the robotic trading, I’ve absolutely
fascinated each and every single student with this concept. What
I’ve found was in the beginning, when they were trading manually,
they would win and lose, but because I was doing so well with
the robot, I thought it’s quite unfair to not give the robot to these
people and hopefully help them turn their trading around and
make them successful as well. Everybody is telling me down here
that I'm absolutely crazy and that I should be charging for the
robot. But at the end of the day, it’s all about helping people. As
my student you will get the robot with your classes and I can tell
you that it has made a phenomenal difference to these people. To
be honest, they are not really trading, they are just switching the
robot on and off, but I have made it a requirement for them to
understand the mechanics behind trading.

Q.- Let's continue to talk more about your trading style. Do
you usually go into the market with your entire position or do you
average up or average down into a trade and stagger your entries?

A : No. Just one entry, one trade and that’s it.

126


RAGS TO RICHES

Q.- what timeframe charts do you look at?

A : Initially, I start with a four-hour, but I take my signals from
the 30-minute chart.

Q.: you said that initially you learned from your friend and then
you read some books afterwards, what has made the difference?
Has it been the initial training with your mentor that really taught
you most of what you’re doing now or did you learn more tricks of
the trade later on in books or forums?

A : Llearned more from the forums and my own research. It is on
the forums where you have guys talking about actual strategies and
things that are going on in the markets at the moment. However
the bottom line was that at the end of the day, I plugged in each
and every single indicator on the charts, one at a time and I would
sit and look at this indicator, understand it, analyze it and critique
it. If it didn’t look easy to me I would take it off and I'd move on
to the next one. Through this tactic, I found a group of indicators
that I was comfortable with. The next stage for me was then to
hone that group down until I had about two or three indicators.
Once I had done that and found the indicators that I wanted
to use, it was then a matter of tweaking the setting until I got
it to point where I was happy that, if X lines up, then Y will
most likely happen. I would use the second and third indicator
merely for confirmation, and that is actually when success finally
came.

: So your charts are fairly simple? It sounds like you have
about three indicators on them, one primary and two for confirma-
tion?

A : Two is confirmatory. Yes.

7


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: Now given that you have developed the robot, do you believe
wholeheartedly in systematic trading, or do you believe that there
needs to be some sort of discretion as well?

A : There should definitely be discretion as well. In fact, the most
important thing about making this robot successful is the fact that
you need to manage the robot. You need to be aware of when news
is coming out, the time of day and if there is news, then by 9 o'clock,
9:30 my time, I should be out of my trades before the numbers are
released. In the beginning, when I tested the robot on the demo
accounts, I let him run 24 hours a day. After about two weeks of
trading I analyzed all the losing trades and the funny thing was that
90 percent of those losing trades were during times when news
is released. That was when I realized that, if I just keep him out
of the news, the robot was an absolute winner. So when I started
applying the discipline of keeping him out of news basically, that
was when I finally became successful.

: You hit on a great point, which is that one of the most im-
portant things for people to do to improve their trading, especially
when they are not doing so well, is to take a time out, go back,
and analyze the trades that were both successful and unsuccessful
because, more often than not, you will find a common theme of
when you tend to lose money and when you don’t. It could be one
currency pair that for just some random reason you can’t trade
well. It could also be like in your case, every time data comes out
you trade poorly. This is a great tip for new traders. What do you
think is more important: indicators or price action?

A : A tricky one but ultimately, speaking for myself, I rely on my
indicators.

Q.. what was your worst trade ever?

128


RAGS TO RICHES

A : My worst trade was when I opened a trade, and just as I
opened it, the telephone rang and I had to attend to something
urgently. I attended to the matter not realizing that I had not set a
take profit or a stop-loss, the trade was wide open. To make a long
story short, I came back and I was down about $380 and I got the
shock of my life when I saw that. In a state of panic, I just closed
the trade and it took me quite a while to recover from that.

Q.- was there any lessons that you learned from this?

A : Yes, I will never, ever trade without a stop-loss and a take profit.
It’s actually a habit now, where the minute that I open the trade,
I will immediately put in my take profits and stop-loss. My trading
robot has been programmed that way as well. This is part of money
management, which is critically important to a trader’s survival.

Q.: What about your best trade ever?

A. My best trade was during nonfarm payrolls and actually it was
when I broke all of the rules that I have now, or more specifically,
before I developed my current discipline. In that trade, I made
over $3,200.

Q.-can you tell us a little bit what was happening during that
time? Did you have large position on and it moved quickly beyond
your 10-pip profit?

A : I could probably have gotten more if I had stayed in the trade
longer. But basically what I did was, at 2:50 our time, I opened a
buy stop and sell stop, and I just waited, and suddenly the price
shot up and my buy was triggered. I was trading I think it was at
three lots, which are $30 to a pip. 1-2-3 boom before I knew it
[laughter] I was $3,000 up, and I just closed it. I didn’t even think.

1229


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

I just clicked on close and that was it. My profit actually went a bit
higher than that. It went up to about $4,000 but by the time I hit the
close button and it went through, I was back down to about $3,200.
