
Government Bonds, Yields, Yield Curves, and Currency Prices

191

As this text progresses, one would notice the uniqueness of a government
that helped to create an economic system that was designed not for its own
beneﬁt but for the beneﬁt of a world that could proﬁt and grow off its kindness, open markets, political stability, and low regulatory structure. The U.S.
system is the complete opposite to other nations, and that is what gives this
economic system its uniqueness, a uniqueness that hasn’t been replicated nor
may ever be replicated again.
The relationship between other nations is not a dependency, rather it
is an opportunity that must be respected and appreciated the world over.
Without a stable United States, the world would literally be a very different
place under rules that would be quite harsh in terms of economic gain. The
United States is chosen as the destination for goods simply because it is one
of the world’s largest consumer markets with a rule of law and stable political
system.
Cross Pairs, Bonds, and Yields

The question of how will British pound/Japanese yen and Australian dollar/
Japanese yen trade in relation to bonds and yields is constructive. The answer
depends on which market.
In each respective market, both pairs will follow bond prices up and
down. The British pound will follow gilts and Australian dollar follows
Commonwealth bonds. This allows for stability of these pairs and allows
carry traders to safely earn their yields over time by the difference of interest rates between their respective nations. In Tokyo trading, British pound
and Australian dollar will seek yields. In Australia and London trading, the
Japanese yen will seek yields. In U.S. markets, the answer is quite different.
In U.S. markets, both pairs seek yield. For the granddaddy of cross pairs,
the British pound/Japanese yen seeks the most yield and ﬁnds it in U.S. markets. The British pound/Japanese yen moves almost six pips to every one-pip
movement in the respective U.S. dollar pairs. This speciﬁcally applies to the
British pound/U.S. dollar, as the U.S. dollar/Japanese yen can be a laggard at
times. The British pound/Japanese yen in U.S. markets is a free ﬂoater, and
all advantage is taken to this free-ﬂoat movement. This movement can only
be explained by the enormous opportunities the United Kingdom and Japan
have for U.S. markets in terms of trade and interests. Issues of ﬁnance can be
conducted in any currency pair at any time. The price of any pair will determine which one to employ. Moreover, because this and other cross pairs like
Australian dollar/Japanese yen seek yield, it is the fast moving U.S. Treasury

192

Inside the Currency Market

market that explains the fast movement of these pairs. Bond prices ﬂuctuate,
therefore yields ﬂuctuate.

Trade Strategies

The currency-pair code of yield-seeker versus bond-price follower says much
for trades and trade strategies. Suppose the euro/U.S. dollar is in a trend in
U.S. markets. Based on the currency-pair code, it doesn’t mean the same pair
will trend in European trading. Yet it may trend.
As currency pairs change markets, new factors of consideration must be
contemplated from market to market. Factors such as economic conditions,
economic announcements, interest-rate decisions, bond issuance, and overall market conditions are just a small part of contemplation of what type of
market will trade.
The same trend in U.S. trading could easily become a range trade during
European market hours. This would require new strategic tactics to trade that
market. Those that expected a trend that never materialized are locked into
the position until trading shifts to the next market. Sometimes it is better to
trade in one market, take proﬁts at closing, and evaluate market conditions
in the next market before employing a trade strategy.
For example, suppose the U.S. dollar/Japanese yen trended during U.S.
trading. Who would want to bank on the fact that this pair would trend in
Japanese trading, knowing the economic conditions of Japan? A range trade
may be the better consideration, or even a no-trade strategy. In this instance,
it may be a better arrangement to wait until European trading to evaluate
a trade in U.S. dollar/Japanese yen. The same applies for markets that shift
from Europe to the United States. A trending European market may result
as a range trade or a down market in U.S. trading that would require new
trade tactics.
So the question is will a trending currency pair trend in all markets, and the
answer is no, absolutely not. A correction of trend must come from a market
somewhere, but it doesn’t have to occur in the same market. Currency pairs must
be viewed within the context of every respective market it trades in, because no
two markets are the same nor will any two markets result in the same effects.
Proﬁts in one market do not mean, nor do they guarantee, proﬁts in another
market. A short in one market may be a long in another or a range trade.
For major currencies, Wellington, New Zealand, and Sydney, Australia,
represent one market. Asia is the second with Tokyo the main, Europe is the
third, and the United States and Canada is the fourth.

Government Bonds, Yields, Yield Curves, and Currency Prices

193

The idea that one can trade based on Fibonacci numbers is a losing proposition. Fibonacci numbers may signal where a pair currently trades at one
moment in time, but don’t guarantee in what market a continued trend, correction, or range may occur.
The proposition by certain central banks to align with the idea to ﬂatten
yield curves purposefully until the next central bank meeting is constructive in many respects. Will their markets be ﬂooded with bond issuance at a
certain maturity? This is economic weakness to ﬂatten a curve. Will central
banks buy bonds from the market at another certain maturity is more economic
weakness to ﬂatten a curve. Control the currency price—more economic weakness to ﬂatten the curve.
Or will these nations whose economic situations are dire regulate the
relationship of a currency pair by the regulation of movements? This is worse
than debasement of a currency because it wrecks the purpose, intent, meaning, and economic relationship a currency has to the world economic order,
an order established and recognized since World War I. To regulate a free
market can only mean a forceful limit of a currency-pair’s movement and
admitted economic weakness to ﬂatten the curve.
Yield Curves and Currency Prices

Yield curves can now be drawn and plotted and a trading strategy planned.
How this is done depends on the trade strategy, which pair to trade, which
market to trade, which side of the yield/ bond strategy traders wish to follow,
and duration of the trade.
Short-term traders should look at the short end of any single nation yield
curve, or two curves if a trade runs into another market under another time
frame. Longer-term trades should be monitored speciﬁcally in terms of each
nation’s yield curves. The question should always be the relationship of the spread
and its narrowing, widening, or ﬂattening in relationship to bond maturities.
Any yield-curve strategy should account for BBA LIBOR, in-nation
LIBOR rates, and CPI within both nations, as all will correlate. For example,
suppose the United States released its CPI number at 2 percent, and 3 percent
was expected when three-month T-Bills traded at a yield of, say, 5 percent.
What would occur to the euro/U.S. dollar if a trader was long the euro/U.S.
dollar at the time of release? The euro/U.S. dollar would crash faster than he
or she could bail out because the three-month T-Bill would reﬂect this new
CPI price and in turn the euro/U.S. dollar would also reﬂect its new price.
LIBOR, CPI, and yields possibly anticipated the event but another scenario
occurred. Markets prices again always normalize and reﬂect the new price.

194

Inside the Currency Market

Yields and bonds have tendencies to trade outside of their respective central bank target ranges. This is not unusual, as markets have tendencies of
anticipation or over-anticipations of events. Uncertain economic times may
be to blame, overanticipation of an economy may be as well. Many reasons
exist as to why.
One major reason is central banks are remiss in regular release of
their overall money supply M1 numbers that outline money stocks. Instead
of weekly releases, central banks release monthly M2 and M3 ﬁgures that
are in ranges to highlight money stock, credit, and lending conditions rather
than speciﬁc currency amounts. If we knew the money supply number
along with the new budget in terms of spending and anticipated bond sales,
we could know almost exactly the central bank target number for their
currency price. Absent the money supply ﬁgure leaves market professionals
to make educated guesses for a currency-price target. So economic events
are best guesses. Instead of best guesses, currencies will price in yield and
bond prices in relation to economic data. Either way, markets will always
normalize to the release and revert to trend. How long that takes is always
questionable. Normalization may take anywhere from minutes to months to
years.
An over anticipation may mean for example the euro/U.S. dollar rises
in price without the backing of yields to rise in price. This scenario is a false
move, so the euro/U.S. dollar will be sold to reﬂect its true market price that
aligns to a yield. It is an opportunity for proﬁt and a market gift.
Suppose a LIBOR curve was plotted against a yield curve for any nation’s
bonds. Speciﬁcally, what if we plotted U.S. dollar LIBOR against a Treasury
yield curve or British pound LIBOR against a gilt yield curve? Exactly what
would we learn? Remember LIBOR and in-nation LIBOR have overnight to
12-month maturities, and bond yield curves extend 30 years for Treasuries
and 50 years for gilts.
The shorter end of each bond yield curve can provide vital answers to
currency direction when compared to the shorter end of a LIBOR curve,
especially in uncertain economic times because cash won’t be committed at
the long end due to economic uncertainty. Yet no two curves will look exactly
alike. Australia and New Zealand LIBOR and bond yield curves will look
very different than, say, U.S. dollar LIBOR and Treasury curves.
Yield curves as a forecast for trading currency pairs is contained within
one nation’s bonds and maturities with the view to look at other markets
for yield curve, yields, and bond direction. Here the focus is on inter-nation
spreads between maturities. Australia’s issuance of comparable bonds as a formally listed trading vehicle is instructive of future events.

Government Bonds, Yields, Yield Curves, and Currency Prices

195

A main factor to measure spot prices in relation to yield curves is the cash
markets and the U.S. example will be employed, yet it may serve for almost
any nation.
The difference between the cash market and the yield curve in the United
States is bond auctions. Bond auctions represent the cash rate, the price investors are willing to pay. The yield curve is the measure that reﬂects this new
price as auctions occur in various maturities, so yield curves will shift with
new bond auction prices. The U.S. Treasury schedules bond-maturity auctions on a routine schedule rather than based on need in terms of economic
conditions. This method allows an economy and the yield curve to hold fairly
steady. The spot-currency price will factor within this matrix. A number of
measures exist with the assumption to measure a Treasury bond price to interest-rate changes in yield curves.

Dollar Value of Basis Point and Modiﬁed Duration

The CME factors DV01, dollar Value of a Basis point, as the average absolute
price changes of Treasury securities to a 1 basis point increase and decrease in
yield to maturity by:
((change in absolute value with 1 bp)
 (change in absolute value with 1 bp))/2
The idea is that it captures the bond/yield inverse within small increments by when interest rates rise, bond price falls and vice versa. The purpose
of DV01 is to hedge, but it may serve for small currency price moves. It locks
one bond price against one small yield. The caveat is DV01 is not ﬁxed, it can
move as bonds and yields move.
Modiﬁed duration is a weighted average maturity of Treasury security
cash ﬂows. As yields fall, modiﬁed duration increases and vice versa. The
formula
D  1/P  change in P/Change in Y
This formula captures small changes in yield to maturity that affect the bond
price. It is a measure of interest-rate sensitivities of a ﬁnancial instrument.
If modiﬁed duration is high, it says an instrument is more interest-rate sensitive and vice versa. The Dow Jones Bond Index incorporates modiﬁed duration

196

Inside the Currency Market

in its index calculation. While modiﬁed duration is a few years old, it is still
widely employed by banks, as new methodologies haven’t been adopted as
standard practice. On the CME web site is an Empirical Duration tool that
calculates inputs for duration and DV01.
An important feature and wide use of modiﬁed duration is to measure a
nation’s bond indices.
Traders in yield-seeking nations such as the United States, Europe, and
Canada must establish a cash rate in relation to the yield curve to determine
currency-pair prices. The iBoxx bond market in Europe is a cash index, and
can be compared to the same maturity in the futures contract.
For the United States, one measure of the cash rate in terms of yield
curves is the Treasury On-the-Run futures contract. It is a one-month contract that changes with each new bond auction. It is the best measure of
cash prices in relation to yield curves, and contracts are offered for all U.S.
government maturities so yield curves can be measured against any maturity.
The recommendation is to focus on the various one- to ﬁve-year contracts for
short-term measures of spot prices. On the Run can also be measured against
the concomitant futures maturity.
For nations whose bonds are tied to performance, such as England,
Switzerland, Australia, and New Zealand, the focus must be on the bond price,
particularly the short term. Yield curves operate as measures of risk rather than
measures of performance, so the bond indices and bond futures will be the
measure for spot prices in these nations. The actual methodology for professional traders is to connect the bond price to cash ﬂows to factor a spot price.
Conclusion

The bond/yield interplay is useful and a vital tool to determine not only the cost
of money, but how money is priced in the markets within each side of a currency pair. Two nations’ yield curves constantly ebb and ﬂow as well as a single
nation’s curve along the various maturities. The vital determination to measure
yield curves is in the slopes, but slopes must be measured in basis-point terms in
order to understand the insight into direction of a curve. Currency pairs move
based on this scenario due to the cost of each currency priced in the markets.
It is a market-driven rate rather than a controlled rate. How each side of a currency pair is priced in terms of an interest rate is found in the yield curve.

Inside the Currency Market: Mechanics, Valuation, and Strategies
by Brian Twomey
Copyright © 2012 Brian Twomey

CHAPTER 7

Swaps and Forwards
Swaps and forwards are priced in the market as an interest rate and as an interestrate differential. How to price swaps and how they are traded in many of
their various forms will be outlined in depth in this chapter. The interest-rate
differential as it relates to forward points is not only discussed but an example
is presented. The chapter begins with a discussion of swaps and forwards and
their many types are detailed as examples. The various types of interest rate
swaps, their types, examples, and how they relate to the markets and currency
pairs in particular will be discussed and explained in detail on a step-by-step
basis. This chapter begins with an explanation of swaps and forwards along
with examples. Swaps comprise many types and all will be highlighted. Next,
the discussion will progress to each nation and their swap rates and/or index.
After internal-nation LIBOR are released and the price is settled for the
respective currency, the next rate for consideration is the swap rate. The swap
rate is constructive for many reasons.
It closely resembles a more truly priced currency on any given day within
the respective nation so the rate is vitally important to any trade strategy.
On a local level, swap rates are employed to price mortgages. For example,
mortgages in Singapore are factored either in terms of the three-month swap
rate or the three-month Singapore Overnight Rate (HSBC Singapore).
England factors ﬁve-year ﬁxed rate mortgages against ﬁve-year swaps. For this
reason, the ﬁve-year credit default swap (CDS) is a priority indicator for the
Bank of England (BOE). These examples serve many nations’ mortgage markets, but all employ these rates in various ways. Swap rate is a market term.
In Europe, view a swap rate as an effective rate as part of the overnight
rate. It is shorter, more sensitive, moves with volatility within small ranges as
it trades, and explains currency and currency-pair movements and volatility

197

198

Inside the Currency Market

better than an overnight rate. This example deviates from standard deﬁnitions but the euro is strictly a yield seeking currency and it will ﬁnd its best
movement when swap and internal LIBOR align properly. Does a swap rate
move bond prices and yields or do bond prices and yields move swap rates is a
debatable question, because different markets hold different answers. Market
events, economic events and projections, and risk versus non-risk are a few
factors for consideration. Swap rates can move quickly with events and cause
market volatility for currency pairs, so it is imperative to understand movements in order to understand the relationship between the two investment
vehicles.
Secondly, the swap-rate spread can distill vital importance to future-priced
currencies because it closely resembles the direction and price of future
internal-nation LIBOR rates as well as Government bond prices and yields.
This is the Overnight Index Swap (OIS)-LIBOR connection. Finally, swap
rates provide a check, a further conﬁrmation of in-nation LIBOR, bonds,
and yields, and in turn provide afﬁrmation of the direction of a currency and
currency pair.
The swap-rate curve extends 30 years into the future because it represents the long, short, and middle of any government-bond yield curve. For
the United States, it is 30 years, for the United Kingdom it is 50 years, and
it is 40 years in Japan. For our purpose, it is the zero-to-three-month target
range that is of interest because it closely aligns to central bank interest in its
own three-month target period and because it aligns with government-bond
yield curves. Look at the swap curve as the guide between the interplay of
government bonds and yields and overall nation rates. It provides answers to
government-bond yield direction and in turn spot-currency prices because of
its risk nature. Government-bond yield curves are considered the risk-free rate
due to government backing, while swap curves represent risk because borrowing and trading in swap rates occur at higher rates than bond-yield curves.
It is a measure of the health of banks since banks are the main traders of swaps.
So swap curves will always be higher than bond-yield curves. Normally this
represents a positive development when measured against each other. Yet if
bond-yield curves were ever higher than swap curves, that represents a negative curve and an economy in trouble.
For spot trades, it is the Interest Rate Swap, Currency Swap, and Cross
Currency Basis Swap that are of prime importance because they lend credence to direction of currency prices. A few examples follow.
An interest-rate swap. “Suppose Firm A invests in a bond that pays a
coupon of 5 percent yearly while Firm B invests in a ﬂoating-rate bond. The
two ﬁrms enter into a swap to exchange interest payments. An interest-rate

199

Swaps and Forwards

swap is deﬁned as a ﬁxed versus ﬂoating arrangement. The purpose is to hedge
and/or manage funding risks” (Haubrich 2001).
A foreign-exchange (FX) swap. “A borrows X minus the spot rate U.S.
dollars from and lends X euros to B. At contract expiration, A returns X U.S.
dollars minus the forward rate to B and B returns X euros to A. FX swaps are
employed as a hedge against speculative trading and used by importers and
exporters” (Baba 2008). Yet central banks are heavily involved in the FX-swap
market, as will be seen in the New Zealand example.
An FX cross-currency basis swap. “A borrows X minus the spot U.S.
dollars from B and lends X euros to B. During the contract term, A receives
the euro three-month LIBOR and pays the U.S. dollar three-month LIBOR
to B every three months. At expiration, A returns X minus spot U.S. dollars
to B and B returns X euros to A” (Baba 2008). More speciﬁcally, what if, for
example, British pound/U.S. dollar basis swap spreads fall, then U.S. dollar
funding in terms of the cross-currency swaps would also fall. This is negative
for cross pairs and the British pound/U.S. dollar, and says sell both.
The Overnight Indexed Swap Rate on a derivative contract measures the
overnight rate for a particular nation (Sengupta 2008). This rate has a different reference point from nation to nation. The swap spread is the difference
between the swap rate and government bond yield at any point along the yield
curve. Swap spreads in basis points measures the spread between 3 month FX
implied dollar rates and 3 month LIBOR. It’s a measure to determine if risk
exists in the market. The swap curve is deﬁned as swap rates across maturities.
Swap rates can be deﬁned as forward expectations of LIBOR. So a forward
LIBOR curve represents future LIBOR that determines future benchmark
interest rates as well as future inﬂation and Consumer Price Index (CPI). Yet
currency forward implied rates can gauge an expectation of future spot prices.
Interest rates are the gauge.
Simple interest equals Interest  principal  rate  time. Future value of
simple interest  p (I  rt), Compound interest FV  P (1  r/n) nt, continuous compound p  amount ert where r equals interest rate expressed as a fraction,
n equals the number of compound periods, t  time in days, months or years,
e  natural logarithm. Simple forward interest Fv1 (1  rt)  fv2, compound
fv1 (1  r/n) n  fv2 and continuous interest  fv1 ert  fv2.
Interest rates are arranged to imply forward expectations. For example,
Forward interest  FI1(1 rt)  F12
Future spot price curves and future interest rate priced in interest rate instruments are then constructed.
