
P1: OTA
JWBT634-bgloss

JWBT634-Grimes

Glossary

May 10, 2012

11:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

433

A type of order to buy or sell with a price limit attached. The order will be
executed only at the limit or at a more favorable price (i.e., limit buy orders will be filled
at or under the limit price, and limit sell orders at or above the limit).
linear regression A mathematical technique for modeling the relationship between a set
of variables.
linearly scaled charts Price charts in which the y-axis (vertical axis) is scaled so that
equidistant ticks are equal-sized price movements.
limit orders

log scale chart Price chart with the y-axis scaled so that equidistant tick marks on that
axis are the same percentage distance apart.

Typically, individuals or firms that buy assets intending to hold
them for multiple quarters or years. As a general rule (and one that is not entirely correct), these players tend to be more focused on fundamental analysis than on technical
factors.
lower time frame (LTF) In the standard three time frames scheme, the lowest time frame,
below the trading time frame. Most traders use the LTF to time entries and to manage
risk rather than for idea generation and analysis.
markdown The classic Wyckoff market stage following distribution, corresponding to a
downtrend in modern terminology.
marketable limit orders Limit orders placed on the wrong side of the market. In other
words, marketable buy limit orders will be placed above the offer. These orders will
immediately execute at the offer, as would a market order. However, if they remove
sufficient liquidity from the book to drive prices higher, they will not be filled higher
than the limit price. This order offers a compromise between urgency of execution and
protection from adverse fills. See market orders.
market makers A set of market participants who, generally, are mandated to always be
willing to buy and sell an asset in order to maintain an orderly market. Historically, many
of these were floor traders, but this function is now generally fulfilled by computers and
algorithms. Note that market makers have discretion to set the distance between their
bids and offers, and they adjust this in response to market conditions.
market orders A type of order that will be executed immediately, theoretically at the
best possible price. In most markets, customers have no recourse in the event of a bad
fill on a market order, so these should be used with caution. Nearly all traders will find
marketable limit orders to be preferable.
market structure The patterns of prices as revealed by swings connecting important
pivot highs and lows. Skilled analysts and traders can use market structure to understand
the balance of buying and selling pressure, and sometimes to derive an edge for the future
direction and/or volatility conditions.
markup In Wyckoff’s terminology, the market stage following accumulation, corresponding to an uptrend in modern terminology.
long-term investors

mean A measure of central tendency. In practice, this is what most people mean when
they say “average”: the sum of the values in a data set divided by the number of elements
in that set.
mean reversion The tendency for markets to reverse large movements and to come
back to a middle or average value. This does not necessarily mean that markets will pull

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bgloss

JWBT634-Grimes

434

May 10, 2012

11:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

GLOSSARY

back to moving averages. Different markets display different degrees of mean reversion
at different points in the market cycle.
See mean reversion.
measured move objective (MMO) A technique used to set an approximate price target for
a swing out of consolidation, based on the assumption that future volatility will resemble
past volatility. This, and all other ratio-based measures, is better used as a guide than a
precise target.
measures of dispersion Measures such as standard deviation, variance, range, and IQR
that describe how data points spread out from a central value or set of values in a probability distribution.
median A measure of central tendency. If a data set is ordered from smallest to
largest, the median is the middle value in the set. If there is an even number of data
points, the median is between the middle two points, and is the mean of those two
points.
Micro Trendlines A term used by Al Brooks to describe very small, short-term trend
lines usually drawn between two to five bars.
Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT) A mathematical concept that deals with diversification
and risk in a portfolio context, seeking to maximize portfolio return for a given unit of
risk. The term modern in the name is a misnomer, because MPT comes from work Harry
Markowitz did in the 1950s.
modified MACD indicator The moving average convergence/divergence (MACD) is a
standard technical indicator. This book advocates the use of a simplified, modified MACD
based on 3/10/16-period moving averages.
momentum divergence There are several variations of this technical tool, but most of
them look for a new high or low in price (relative to its recent history) that is not accompanied by a new high or low on a momentum indicator, such as the MACD. The
assumption is that there was less conviction behind the move, so it is more likely to fail
to continue.
momentum move See impulse move.
Monte Carlo modeling or simulation A mathematical technique, particularly useful in
situations with many uncertain inputs that have many degrees of freedom or that are
highly path-dependent. Monte Carlo methods essentially run multiple simulations and
evaluate the results. A working understanding of these tools can help traders to bridge
the gap to thinking in probabilities.
motive force A term used to describe the tendency of price to move from one level to
another. This appears to be offset by the resistive force. Though there are no easy applications of these forces, they provide the theoretical backdrop for all technical analysis
and technically motivated trading. In some sense, these two forces are the purest expression of buyers’ and sellers’ intentions in the market.
moving averages Tools used in technical analysis and signal processing that average
values over a look-back window, called moving averages because the window moves
forward with each new data point. There are many variations of moving averages used
in technical analysis.
mean-reverting

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bgloss

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

Glossary

11:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

435

The probability of two independent events occurring
is the product of their individual probabilities. This can also be adapted for dependent
events, but in this case the relevant math is: Prob(A ∩ B) = Prob(A) × Prob(B|A).
next trend leg The trend leg following a consolidation.
multiplicative rule of probability

Traders who have no reason or motivation for trading, and whose interactions with the market are irrational and erratic, known informally as the “idiot
traders.” In reality, the actions of many small traders essentially resolve into noise on
most time frames, and cause slight deviations between price and value, even in efficient
markets.
normal distribution A probability distribution that describes many events and conditions in the natural world. Unfortunately, it is also frequently applied to market situations, with potentially disastrous results. Normal distributions rarely hold in asset prices
or returns.
null hypothesis In statistical hypothesis testing, the null hypothesis is the default assumption, usually that there is no effect or relationship in the data being examined. Note
that this hypothesis can never be proven. Rather, the technique is to look for information
that would contradict this hypothesis and cause it to be rejected in favor of the alternative hypothesis.
O%Rng A measure of where the open lies within the trading session’s range, expressed
as a percentage of that range. For instance, O%Rng of 100 percent means the open is
at the high of the day’s range, while 0 percent indicates the open is the low tick of that
session.
offer See ask.
noise traders

open In intraday data, the first tick of the bar. In daily data, opens are usually set by
an auction process and may not be the first trade of the day. Also, most markets have
electronic sessions that precede their official opens, so the instrument may have traded
for many hours before the opening print.
opening range A term used to describe the range price trades within a specific time
following the open. Traders may use opening ranges from a few minutes to an hour.
opening skew The tendency of the opening print to cluster near the high or low of
the session, rather than to be somewhere in the middle. This is commonly assumed by
traders to be evidence of a market inefficiency when in fact, it is completely explainable
by the properties of random walks.
optimal f An alternative to the Kelly criterion. Optimal f is another answer to the
position-sizing problem. Developed by Ralph Vince, it may be more robust in some trading applications than the Kelly criterion.
out-of-sample testing In system development or backtesting, part of the data set is usually held back for an out-of-sample test once development is complete. For instance, if
you have 10 years of price data, perhaps you would do development on eight of those
years and hold the last two for an out-of-sample test. Note that out-of-sample testing can
be done only once; after that, the data set is contaminated and should be considered part
of the sample.
outliers Events that fall far outside the range of normal events.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bgloss

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

436

11:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

GLOSSARY

A class of technical indicators that try to identify markets that have moved too far in one direction and are poised for reversal. These indicators could provide entries for mean-reversion trades, but careful testing is needed.
pairs strategies A term usually reserved for spread trades between different stocks. See
spread trading.
paper trading A tool sometimes used by developing traders that involves placing trades
in a simulated environment. (The term does not imply literal use of pencil and paper.)
Paper trading has limited utility because it cannot replicate the psychological challenges
of having money at risk.
Parabolic SAR A trading system originally developed by Welles Wilder that was designed
to always be in the market, reversing long or short according to signals generated from
price movements. (SAR stands for stop and reverse.)
path-dependent Refers to a scenario that can have different values or outcomes depending on decisions or outcomes at different steps in the process.
pay the offer A term that means to buy an asset directly at the offered price, without
attempting to bid for a lower (better) price. Market orders should equivalently pay the
offer, but there is the danger of large and uncontrolled slippage.
per-unit risk The difference between the entry and exit price on a trade, or the risk to
be taken on one unit (share, contract, etc.) of the instrument.
pivot high or pivot low See first-order pivot.
overbought/oversold indicators

See first-order pivot.
point and figure charts A charting technique, mostly obsolete, that charts reversals from
pivot points. The x-axis is not scaled for any fixed unit; rather, it moves forward when
the specified reversal from the pivot has occurred. This was a technique historically used
by floor traders that still finds some applications in computerized trading.
population In statistical testing, usually considered to be the set of all possible events
or items with the characteristic being studied. The population is usually unseen and unknowable, so the central problem of inferential statistics is to try to understand the characteristics of the population based on samples taken from that population.
positive expectancy See expectancy or expected value. A positive expected value suggests that a trader is likely to make a profit over a large enough sample size of trades,
provided there is good execution and the expected value is larger than transaction
costs.
post hoc From the Latin term meaning “after this.” Refers to events usually defined after
the analysis or experiment is concluded.
preceding trend leg In the impulse/consolidation/impulse framework, this is the initial
trend leg that sets up the consolidation.
price action A term that refers to a formalized understanding of how prices move. Price
action is usually most visible on lower time frames, and price action creates market structure. In the terminology of a certain subset of retail traders, “price action trading” refers
to trading without any indicators or moving averages, but this is mostly a meaningless
distinction.
pivot points

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bgloss

JWBT634-Grimes

Glossary

May 10, 2012

11:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

437

The characteristic pattern of support and resistance holding: price
makes an immediate (in the context of the time frame) and sharp move away from the
level. The absence of price rejection suggests a higher probability of the level breaking.
profit target Some technical systems set profit targets for part or all of the position. In
general, traders using systems like this should develop the discipline of entering their
profit-taking orders as soon as the trade is initiated.
proper pyramids Pyramids that start with the largest number of units they will ever have
at a level. These strategies can usually endure volatility at the end of a trend much better
than reverse pyramids.
pullback A general term for a consolidation pattern in a trend. Many of the traditional
distinctions of technical analysis (flag, pennant, box, etc.) are not meaningful, as all pullback patterns can be traded according to similar rules.
pyramiding plans Plans for adding additional units to a trade once the trade has moved
a specific distance into profit.
random walk hypothesis (RWH) A theory that says that asset prices can be described
by random walks. Various forms and dimensions of random walks exist. In practice, the
RWH seems to hold reasonably well for some assets and some time frames.
range The high-low of a bar or trading session.
range expansion A term to indicate more directional movement in markets. A market
undergoing a range expansion phase will probably trend in one direction, the range of
bars will probably expand, and measures of volatility will increase on some time frames.
real trend line (RTL) A technique for drawing a trend line that marks the important
inflections in trends, usually best-suited to application on longer time frames.
price rejection

relative strength A term used to describe relative price movements between markets.
Skilled traders and analysts can find clues to institutional conviction and large-scale
money flows in relative strength.
Relative Strength Index (RSI) A technical indicator that seeks to identify overbought or
oversold markets by measuring the relative distribution of up and down closes. Note that
it does not measure relative strength, nor is it an index.
resistance A term attached to price areas that may provide a barrier to advancing
prices, or areas where sufficient supply may exist to stop prices.
resistive force See motive force.
retracement Another general term for consolidation, pullback, or a pause in an established trend.
return series Most financial markets generate data as a series of price changes. It can
be difficult to compare price changes across different price levels (e.g., a $5 change in
a $10 asset is very different from a $5 change in a $1,000 asset). The first task of any
market analysis is usually to convert the price changes into a return series. This can
be either a percent return (Ptoday /Pyesterday − 1) or a continuously compounded return:
log(Ptoday /Pyesterday ).
reverse pyramid A type of pyramid plan common in marketing literature for trading
systems, but unacceptable for practical application. In these plans, the trader starts with

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bgloss

438

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

11:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

GLOSSARY

a small position and then adds more units as profits from the trend allow the trader
to pay for new units. For instance, a trader might start with one contract, adding two,
four, and then eight at successive steps. These plans incur unmanageable volatility and
drawdowns.
reward/risk ratio This ratio has many uses and applications, but a few points must be
kept in mind. First, much of the literature uses “risk/reward ratio” when authors actually
mean reward/risk ratio in nearly all cases. This book’s terminology, while perhaps slightly
awkward, is precise. Second, there is no innate bias to high reward/risk trades; this ratio
must be understood in the context of expected value. Last, it is meaningful only over a
large set of trades.
risk-adjusted returns It is possible to increase returns in a portfolio or trading system
by increasing leverage, but true outperformance must come on a risk-adjusted basis,
meaning that returns increase more than risk. Simplistic measures like the Sharpe ratio
can help to build intuition about this concept.
risk-free rate In finance, the rate an investor could have realized in a theoretically
risk-free investment. In practice, a U.S. Treasury bond, bill, or note with a maturity approximately equal to the intended holding period of the investment is usually used as
a proxy for the risk-free rate. An investor must achieve higher returns than what she
could have attained in a risk-free investment, so this is used as a hurdle rate in many
applications.
R multiple If the risk (R) for every trade is known before the trade is entered, the profit
and loss (P&L) can be expressed as an R multiple. For instance, 1× (one times R) would
mean that the profit was exactly equal to the initial risk taken on the trade.
R-squared or R2 In a regression or correlation analysis, a measure of goodness of fit
that shows how well the line fits the data. Often understood to be the percentage of the
dependent variable’s changes that are explained by the model.
rule of alternation In Elliott wave theory, the idea that retracements in trends tend to
alternate between simple and complex consolidations.
sample In inferential statistics, samples are smaller sets taken from populations.
scaling in Refers to a style of trade entry where the trader builds a position, usually as
it moves against the intended trade direction. For instance, a trader scaling into a long
trade will usually be buying small pieces (perhaps 20 percent to 33 percent at a time) of
the total position size into declines. This can be an effective entry technique for some
styles of trading, but firm risk management rules are essential.
scalping A style of trading that takes very small but consistent profits. Scalpers need to
focus on low transaction costs and on avoiding sizable losses, as a single large loss can
wipe out many profitable trades. This term is also sometimes generalized to other time
frames and styles of trading if the profits and losses are a small percentage of the average
range on that time frame.
scatterplots A tool used to visualize the relationship between data sets.
seasonal Many markets exhibit somewhat predictable tendencies at certain times. Traditionally, this term applies to, for instance, grains at harvest time or natural gas spreads
at certain times of the year. However, it can be generalized to time of month (are some

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bgloss

JWBT634-Grimes

Glossary

May 10, 2012

11:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

439

markets strong or weak near the beginning or end of the month?) or even time of day for
some markets.
second-order pivot A pivot point that is preceded and followed by lower first-order
pivots for a second-order pivot high (reversed for pivot lows).

A variant of the efficient markets hypothesis that postulates that
all publicly available information is incorporated in price. If this is true, it would not
be possible to achieve superior risk-adjusted returns based on any publicly available
information.
setup leg Another term for the preceding trend leg, or the leg that sets up a retracement.
semistrong form EMH

A simplistic measure of risk-adjusted performance.
short To short or sell short is to sell an asset with the idea of buying it back later at a
lower price. For most new traders, buying and selling higher is intuitive, but most professional traders are as comfortable shorting and buying back lower. (In this case, the
sequence is “sell high, buy lower,” which is still profitable.)
significance testing A statistical testing technique that attempts to evaluate the probability that the results could be due to chance and not to the presence of an actual signal
in the market. (Note: This is a complex topic. This explanation is market-specific.)
simple moving average (SMA) A tool commonly used in technical analysis that averages
prices over a lookback window, moving this window forward with each trading bar. For
example, a 20-period SMA would average the past 20 bars’ prices.
size effect Smaller stocks (in terms of market cap) tend to outperform larger stocks,
but there may be offsetting risks.
Sharpe ratio

slippage The difference between the intended and achieved execution prices. A cost of
trading or an element of transaction costs.
spread This term is used in two different contexts: First, it is the distance between the
bid and the ask in markets; wider spreads usually indicate less liquidity and higher costs
of trading. Second, see spread trading.
spread trading A type of trading strategy that seeks to profit from changes in the relative
value of a set of markets by being long and short different assets. This technique is an
important part of most professional traders’ tool kits.
springs The opposite of upthrusts: Price trades below support and immediately fails to
carry lower. The quick recovery shows underlying buying pressure and potential accumulation.
standard deviation A measure of dispersion, also used as a (potentially poor) proxy for
risk in many financial analyses.
Standard Deviation Control Chart A tool to visualize the variation in a trader’s returns
over time. Can be used to highlight potential problems and issues with changing performance.
standard deviation spike An indicator that standardizes each bar’s price change for current volatility conditions.

In a stationary time series, the properties of the distribution do not change
over time. Note that this is not the same as saying prices do not move or trend;
