
When Susie returned to San Francisco, she immediately gave a place of honor to the picture, making room
for it among all the other art and masks and decorative items on her walls. Then she made up her mind to go
to France. The Africa vacation had been canceled once again, for she was far too weak to make that trip. But
she thought she could go to France. She and Susie Jr. started by spending four days at the Ritz in Paris, where
Susie recovered from the trip across six time zones by following the get-up-at-one-p.m.-pills-in-ice-cream
routine while going out once a day to do something simple. Then they took the TGV bullet train to Nice, to
Bono’s salmon-colored stucco mansion in Eze Bord de Mer.
This house, where Gandhi was said to have once prayed, sat on a point overlooking the Mediterranean.
Susie’s high-ceilinged bedroom was warmed by a fireplace and lit by expansive windows framed in gauzy
white curtains that opened onto the sea. She spent most of her days sleeping, but one afternoon Susie Jr.
called her upstairs to a terrace overlooking the water while Bono played music from How to Dismantle an
Atomic Bomb, U2’s unreleased album. He was singing a song he had written for his father’s funeral:
“Sometimes You Can’t Make It on Your Own.” That evening they spent four hours talking over dinner, and
Bono stood up and toasted her, saying, “I’ve met my soul mate!”
Her reverence for the charismatic rock star had grown so during the course of getting to know him in person
that the next day, on the plane home, Susie stayed awake and played U2 music on her iPod the entire way. “I
can’t explain the rest I got there,” she would later say about Bono’s house.12
Roughly a week after the two Susies returned from France, most of the family went to Sun Valley, while
Peter and Jennifer stayed in Omaha, setting up for the premiere of his show, Spirit—The Seventh Fire. After
the long year of pain and isolation, Susie was making up for lost time by trying to see everyone and go
everywhere. At Sun Valley she spent time with various people, including Barry Diller and Diane von
Furstenberg, an oral-cancer survivor whose faxes and advice had helped to keep up Susie’s morale over the
past months. But the feeling of liberation was not unqualified. She was so tired that she had to skip the first
morning lecture. At lunch later that day, when she ventured across the restaurant to get some skim milk, she
was suddenly mobbed by people who wanted to wish her well. Susie Jr. sent Howie to rescue their mother,
saying, “She can’t do this. She’s going to keep trying, and she can’t. Go make her sit down.”
On the second day, Susie Jr. got a golf cart to take her mother around. When Susie Jr. walked into the condo
to pick her mother up, she was shriveled in a little ball on the couch crying, saying, “I can’t do it.”13 Even
though she spent much of the trip resting, it drained her tiny store of energy.
When the family returned to Omaha, with everybody on hand for the upcoming premiere of Peter’s show,
Susie took the opportunity to visit her daughter’s new knitting shop. Susie Jr. had gotten together with a
partner to open String of Purls in a suburban shopping center. Buffett was genuinely excited at his daughter’s
entrepreneurialism. He could relate to a knitting shop. He had analyzed its prospects and thought it might
gross as much as half a million dollars a year. Once again he could bond with his daughter in a special way.
He was as enthused over the knitting business as any other business: It attracted him for the same reason he
pored over GEICO’s reports and tracked the growth of their Internet sales week by week; monitored the
See’s Candies sales at every single retail store every single day during the holiday season; read the daily sales
figures by fax from Shaw Carpets; reviewed the daily reports from Borsheim’s before Christmas; memorized
real estate listing statistics from Home Services of America (the real-estate company that MidAmerican
Energy owned); recited jet-fuel costs and ownership statistics for NetJets; and knew ad lineage from the
Buffalo News by heart.
Peter’s multimedia event was nothing like the knitting shop; it was harder for Buffett to comprehend. Based
on the PBS special Peter had done earlier, it had consumed four years of effort, during which he focused on
improving the execution and experience of the live performances while refining the music and story line. And
all of this work would have no certain result—except the satisfaction of the creative act.
Buffett had seen the earlier live performances and knew the show involved Peter on keyboards with a band;
a special theater shaped like a tent; lasers, drums, video, and Native American singers and dancers. Warren
always gave students advice to pursue their passion, but the examples of passion he used, like becoming
backgammon champion of the world, were competitive at their core. Someone driven by an inner fire of

artistry, irrespective of the world’s rewards, was simply off the map of his reality. That was Susie’s territory,
the realm of spirit and soul and heart, of the poet in her lonely room, of the painter striving for self-expression
on canvas for years with no public recognition of his work. Nonetheless, his own passion and patience and
creativity as he worked with capital resembled Peter’s passion and patience and artistic vision with music.
Thus, Buffett’s genuine wish for Peter’s success found its expression in the best and only way he knew—in
the marriage between art and commerce. The show’s potential for commercial success preoccupied him.
“I’ve seen it several times, and I’ve seen different iterations of it almost every time. It gets enthusiastic
responses, but what I don’t know is just how big the market is. It’s not like a Broadway musical, in terms of
the depth of the market, so we will find out.”
The Buffett name had worked heavily against Peter when it came to raising money, because people assumed
that he had easy access to unlimited funds. People did not take him seriously about not having money until he
actually mortgaged his house to fund the show. Warren, typically, offered to pay the last ten percent of the
cost if Peter could raise the rest. When he had raised two million of the total, his father went ahead and gave
him $200,000 of the $300,000 he had promised. Peter then raised the rest of the money himself, much of it
through a grant from the Rudolph Steiner Foundation. From start to finish he struggled against heavy odds to
raise funds while trying to stage and produce the show at the same time. His parents, during the same months,
waived their “no donations” rule and wrote a $10 million check to Tom Murphy’s Save the Children as a
gesture of friendship and support.
It seemed a little chilly—even in the name of cultivating self-reliance—to support their son’s cause with only
two percent of what they gave a family friend. With hindsight, however, Peter was grateful that his show did
not become a vanity project funded by his father—which no one would have taken seriously. He felt that the
way his father handled it was one of his typically brilliant solutions to complex problems. It gave Peter his
family’s endorsement, for which he was grateful, while still allowing him the struggle and pride of raising
most of the three million needed by himself—although he could have used that last hundred thousand dollars.
Warren did not quite understand his son’s fascination with Native Americans. He (and much of the rest of the
family) thought of it as “the Indian show.” Warren had never been self-reflective, and the show’s symbolic
exploration of stolen identity, and the triumph of man’s will in reclaiming what was lost, escaped him.
Spirit—The Seventh Fire was a dazzling story acted by a Native American who told the story of his return
from the modern world to reclaim his cultural heritage. The self-enclosed stage resembled a tent, spacious
and intimate, contemporary yet historic. Peter’s music, exotic yet familiar, flowed and pulsed around the
audience while Native American performers in wildly feathered costumes danced and sang against a
background of epic film.
Susie had been angry at Peter all spring over his obsession with the show. Peter had a much different
personality from his father, but Susie felt that he risked turning into a musical version of Warren, of
jeopardizing his marriage to Jennifer. She could take in all of the effects and feelings in the show, however,
and let the music intensify her other senses. She appreciated Peter’s artistic accomplishment. Warren loved
music and was proud of his son, but, sitting at the premiere, the show’s multilayered kaleidoscope of visual
impressions overwhelmed him, leaving him uncertain what to make of it. He looked at others in the audience
and saw people clapping and cheering, which told him that the show was good. And when the Omaha WorldHerald called it “poignant, sad, uplifting, thrilling, and powerful,” he was delighted. He had been internally
holding his breath in anticipation of this moment for more than a year, and his relief that Peter had succeeded
on such a large scale was obvious. But he also feared, with reason, a hometown bias and waited to see if the
show would be well-received elsewhere.
As Spirit continued to play in Omaha, Susie went to Laguna with a group of her grandchildren. They were
used to Susie indulging their wishes and giving herself to their needs, going here and there with them, the
perfect grandmother; she didn’t disappoint them now. She took them shopping at the mall, like old times,
sitting in a chair and pointing at things around the store, saying, “I’ll take one of those, and two of these, and
one of those.”14 After this visit, she was exhausted, but began to prepare herself for the annual trip to
Herbert Allen’s post–Sun Valley gathering.

The wisdom of spending another long weekend with a crowd of people at the high altitude of Cody,
Wyoming, so soon after Sun Valley, seemed questionable. Some in the family were strongly against her
making this trip. But Susie was doing cartwheels at the sheer joy of living, and Warren wanted to feel that
everything was back to normal. Thus, the last week of July, Warren and Susie reunited for a long weekend at
Herbert Allen’s J—9 ranch.
Susie struck people as exuberant, elated to be there.15 At dinner in the great room, where an oversize
fireplace took the chill off the high mountain air, she was chatty and outspoken, proposing that the guests
take a straw poll about the upcoming election.16 Afterward, when the table had been cleared and everyone
was thinking about dessert and coffee, she stood in the kitchen, telling people how much closer her illness
had brought her to her daughter.17 Suddenly, she blinked and said there was something funny going on inside
her head.18 For a split second, Herbert Allen thought she was doing a silly dance step. Then he realized she
was going down. As her legs buckled, he and Barbara Oehrle caught her before she hit the floor.19
They carried her to a nearby couch, where the yoga teacher Herbert Allen had brought in for the weekend
held her. They sent Warren off to their cabin to get her pills. Susie’s health had always been so uncertain, and
she had pulled through so many other crises, that nobody thought it was that serious. Still, they put through a
call for paramedics. Warren called Susie Jr., who was at the Democratic Convention in Boston with Bobby
Shriver and Bill Clinton, watching John Edwards speak. He said something about a headache and asked for
Dr. Isley’s phone number. She gave it to him and he hung up. She wondered briefly if something was wrong,
then thought, My mother could have broken her toe and he would be calling for Dr. Isley’s number.20
Lying on the sofa, Susie was having trouble lifting her arm. She vomited a couple of times and said she was
very cold and her head hurt terribly. They wrapped her in blankets. She began drifting in and out of
consciousness, at times struggling to speak. Warren had managed to get the information about her
prescriptions that the paramedics would need. As he observed Susie’s condition, he grew more and more
distressed; it was becoming apparent that she had probably had a stroke. The other guests waited, helpless,
for the ambulance to arrive. The time passed slowly. After a while they all grew more hopeful when Susie
commented that her head felt better and started responding when asked to move her arms and feet. Then the
paramedics arrived and did a few tests. They placed her onto the ambulance cot and wheeled her outside, as
Warren followed. After lifting her into the back of the ambulance, they climbed inside and shut the door.
Warren got into the front seat and the driver began the thirty-four-mile journey through the winding mountain
roads to West Park Hospital in Cody.21
As soon as they were in the ambulance, Warren called Susie Jr. “You need to come here,” he said.
“Something has happened to Mom. I think she’s had a stroke.” A few minutes later he called again and said,
“You need to find your brothers and bring them with you.”
Susie Jr. reached Peter in Omaha, where he was in his hotel room preparing for the show. She found Devon
in a Wal-Mart in Indiana. “Where’s Howie?” she asked. “In Africa,” said Devon. “He’s landing in about half
an hour.” Susie Jr. tried to hurry the NetJets plane that was coming first to Boston to pick her up and then to
collect Peter in Omaha before continuing on to Cody.22 By then, Howie had landed in Africa and gotten
word to call his sister right away. His first thought was, Something’s happened to my dad. His second thought
was, Something’s happened to Peter. “I absolutely did not think it was my mom,” he says. He was horrified
to be stranded with no way to get a return flight until the next day.23
While Susie Jr. worked on logistics, Herbert Allen and a friend, Western sculptor T. D. Kelsey, followed the
ambulance in Allen’s car. They grew frustrated at how slowly the ambulance was proceeding; it upset them
that Buffett was trapped inside and subjected to the interminable ride. At one point they pulled up alongside
the ambulance and Allen shouted at the driver, asking what on earth was going on, but no one answered.
When they finally reached the hospital, the CAT scan revealed that Susie had had a massive cerebral
hemorrhage. Warren paced back and forth in the emergency room, and eventually the doctor came out and
told him that Susie had little chance of lasting through the night. Tearful and distraught, he went out to the

lobby and told this to Kelsey and Allen.24 Then he walked back upstairs and sat in the room with Susie,
waiting. They were alone.
At around four-thirty a.m., the plane carrying Susie Jr. and Peter arrived. After their car pulled into the
hospital parking lot, its mountain backdrop much like that at Sun Valley, the first person they saw inside the
lobby was Herbert Allen. Susie Jr.’s first thought was “Oh, my God, this feels just like Mrs. Graham.”
Upstairs, they found their father sitting next to their mother, holding her hand. A Cherry Coke sat untouched
on the table nearby. “I’ve been here for five hours,” he said. Susie was so quiet, you couldn’t see her
breathing underneath the little oxygen mask.
Warren went to lie down on the bed in the adjoining room. Peter lay down on the floor, and both fell asleep.
Susie Jr. sat down in a chair next to her mother on the bed, touching her.
A little while later, she realized that Susie wasn’t breathing. She went and found a nurse. Then she braced
herself and woke her father up to tell him.25
Warren wept while his children spent the next few hours doing what had to be done. They worked with
Herbert Allen to draft a press release, signed off on the papers required for the release of the body and the
organ-donation procedures, took care of the arrangements for their arrival in Omaha, and made calls to
Astrid, Kathleen, and others who were close to Susie and Warren so they wouldn’t get the news on the CNN
crawl. By noon all of them were on the G-IV for the worst flight any of them had ever taken.
After some time in the air, Warren took a deep breath and asked, “Is there a bathroom in the front?” There
wasn’t. “Walk with your back to the couch,” Susie Jr. told him. He inched his way to the back of the plane,
his eyes averted from the plane’s sofa, where the zippered bag that contained Susie’s body lay.26
When they landed in Omaha, the family had another surreal experience as the plane taxied straight into the
hangar, where a hearse was waiting, rather than stopping on the tarmac, so that they could deboard without
having their grief invaded by a band of paparazzi. Warren went straight home, walked upstairs into his
bedroom, shut the door, turned off the lights, and got under the covers.
Astrid knew what to do, which was nothing. She made sure he had his sleeping pills and left him alone. Now
and then she went over to Susie Jr.’s and cried herself. The rest of the time she stayed at home to take care of
Warren.
The next day, Friday, he was still under the covers. Ron Olson, who had some legal obligations under Susie’s
will and was a close friend and strong influence within the family, particularly with the children, arrived from
Los Angeles with his wife, Jane. Warren came downstairs, and the Olsons sat with him for a while. Within an
hour, the phone rang. It was Don Graham. “Where are you?” asked Susie Jr. “At the Hilton downtown,” he
said. He had known to come without being told. Then Susie Jr. drafted a couple of her own friends to join
them at the house. Over the next several days, they all sat in the living room to help distract Warren and
make sure that he was never alone. At nine-thirty each night, he went up to bed and took his sleeping pill.
A day or two later Warren tried to call a couple of people. When they answered, no words came out; his
throat had closed. He gave up trying to talk and heaved with sobs for a few minutes. Then, when the storm of
tears passed, he choked out, “I’m sorry,” and hung up the phone. They would never have known who it was,
except that the sound of Warren sending out an SOS was so unmistakable.
Susie Jr. had already sent for the people who were needed. The following week, Bill Ruane and Carol Loomis
arrived to visit for a few hours. Sharon Osberg came. Bill Gates arrived. Kathleen Cole flew in. And Howie
finally returned from Africa after “the longest trip home,” one that he never wanted to think about again.27
Bill and Sharon went ahead with a bridge tournament they had been scheduled to play in—with
Warren—that week. He managed to join them for dinner one night at the hotel where the tournament was

being held, and he did watch them play for a while, which helped to distract him. Another night they were
over at the house, where Warren wanted them to sit with him to watch the Charlie Rose video of Susie’s
interview. Astrid didn’t want to see it, which was just as well, and he was afraid to watch it alone. They put it
on the DVD player and it began to play. After a while, Warren was weeping. Bill left the room while Sharon
crawled into his lap and rocked him as he cried.28
The mere mention of Susie’s name sent Warren into tears. As the funeral approached, it became apparent to
Susie Jr., who was planning the event, that something else was bothering her father. It dawned on her what
this must be. “You don’t have to go,” she told him.
Warren was overcome with relief. “I can’t,” he said. To sit there, overwhelmed with thoughts of Susie, in
front of everyone, was too much. “I can’t go.”29
Unlike Warren, hundreds of others did want to grieve for Susan Buffett in person, at some sort of memorial
service. None was ever held. Only the family, a couple of Susie’s closest friends, Bono and his wife, Ali, and
Bobby Shriver were invited to the funeral. Susie’s musician friend Dave Stryker played the guitar, and the
Reverend Cecil Williams from Glide Memorial Church conducted the service. Bono sang “Sometimes You
Can’t Make It on Your Own.” The grandchildren wept.
And for several weeks more, that was all. Warren faced the emptiness. Many people, including Susie herself,
had questioned how well he could survive without her. He had never recovered from the death of his father
and still could not face the unfinished business of Howard’s boxes of papers in the basement. As Sharon put
it, he had a tendency to think in the third person. But he suffered this time in the first person, grieving fully,
living in the now, even though the now terrified him.
Susie’s death carried with it deep intimations of his own mortality. His seventy-fourth birthday was
approaching with its metronomic tick of doom. He wanted cheering up badly and talked to a couple of friends
who then made plans, as he wished, to visit him in Omaha on his birthday. A few days later, Susie Jr. called
them and said, Don’t come.30 Warren wasn’t ready. Indeed, distraction was not the best thing for him. The
process of mourning could not be shortened; it could only be endured.
He could not escape from grief, even in sleep. The nightmares haunted him, every night the same. The
separation from Susie, the split that he had never been able to contemplate during all the years of their living
apart, was happening right before his eyes. He was captive on the endless ride to the hospital in Cody, locked
inside the ambulance, helpless to help her, unable to stop the momentum of the wheels. The silent mountains
stood silhouetted against the July stardrift in the thin evening air. Silently the driver picked his way through
the winding hills. The road unreeled before them, mile after mile, rows of trees passing like pilgrims up to the
foothills above. In the back, Susie lay on the cot, pale and still. The sounds in the ambulance faded as the
miles went by. Strands of juniper hung like dim moss from the mountainsides while the road ahead stretched
thinner in the distance. The stars fell still in the vast black overhead. Time slowed to eternity.
All he had ever asked of her was not to leave him, and she had promised that she never would. No matter
how many other people she had cared for and supported, no matter which way her heart had tugged her,
through all her travels, no matter how many different directions she had run, Susie had always come back to
him. She had never let him down.
Now there was no response. He needed her so much that it was impossible that she would leave him. He
would hold on, he would not let go; therefore she must stay with him.
The ambulance crept onward through the darkened mountains. The quiet hum of the oxygen tank mingled
with his tears. In the back there was only calm, a bare whisper of breath, no obvious sound of pain.
It was Warren’s chest that burned, it was his heart that exploded with each revolution of the wheels. You
can’t leave me, you can’t leave me, please don’t leave me.
