
76

Inside the Currency Market

customers with only the most liquid of government securities. The cost to
lend with uncertain economic conditions and uncertain interest rates became
too great a risk.
Questions of default became a huge concern for lenders. Central banks
then established special lending facilities to accommodate the shortage of
liquidity. Central banks swapped less-liquid securities for government securities for a fee that was marked to market daily. Assets that fell below the
threshold loan value were charged a margin fee to bring the asset price back to
market value or the position was sold. The United States established the Term
Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) with 28-day terms to lend. Under the
Federal Reserve Act section 13 (3) the Fed can become the lending authority under emergency conditions. This allowed the Fed to further establish
the temporary Primary Dealer Credit Facility so broker dealers could obtain
loans from the Fed. Other nations followed.
The Bank of England (BOE) established the Special Liquidity Scheme,
the Swiss established the Liquidity Shortage Financing Facility, New Zealand
established the Overnight Reserve Repo Facility, the European Central Bank
(ECB) established the Marginal Lending Facility, and the Japanese established the Complement Deposit Facility. All facilities brought the repo and
lending system back to life, however the majority of transactions were conducted for much shorter terms than what was once the norm. What was once
a highly liquid market to fund credit and risk positions with stable repo rates
disintegrated and liquidity dried up, so without central bank intervention,
the banking system around the world was under severe threat.
Many smaller and medium-sized banks failed under this scenario because
either the larger banks refused to lend or smaller and medium-sized banks
didn’t have the necessary collateral and could not meet liquidity needs. The
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) reports approximately 314
banks failed in the United States alone during this period from 2008 to 2010.
Questions of conﬁdence had to be restored to this market with the proposition that default was not an option, a position only central banks could
perform. Since the crisis originated in the United States, the contagion spread
to other nations’ funding operations since the majority of the world relies on
U.S. dollar funding and direction to meet its own bank liquidity needs.
Insurmountable problems arose when requests for funding through central bank facilities had an effect of almost draining the reserves of each central
bank. Central banks then offered special ﬁnancing instruments with various maturities to account for reserves. The Bank of England offered Bank of
England Bills with maturities of one to seven days, the ECB offered Debt
Certiﬁcates for 12 months or less, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) offered Financing

Short-Term Interest Rates and Money Market Instruments

77

Bills with six month or less maturities, and the Swiss offered Swiss National
Bank Bills with seven-, 14- and 28-day maturities.
This section will highlight the repurchase agreement and the reverse
repurchase agreement due to its valuable importance to the spot trade and
interest rates, the prime mover of spot prices. This discussion can’t be limited
to the GC market for repos even though the GC rate is the market in which
central banks, dealers, and broker dealers transact their business and because
it is the rate most scrutinized by the trading public because it represents the
private market. The public market through central bank facilities must also
be highlighted.
Instead, the many types of repos will be highlighted due to their value
and implications for other various transactions such as the prediction of
future interest rates. Repo rates vary from nation to nation due to varying
interest rates in each nation and because each nation performs transactions
for the most part in its own currency. The main reason why various repo rates
are different in each nation is different day-count conventions; the United
States uses 360 days, Australia and New Zealand use 365, and Great Britain
uses 365 days as well.
To fund positions, many banks conducted repo operations in other
nations’ markets, while some central banks transacted deals in only U.S.
Government securities. Of the 19 primary bank dealers registered with the
Federal Reserve, HSBC from England, Nomura Securities and Mizuho from
Japan, UBS from Switzerland, and RBS from Scotland conduct repo operations in the United States. Yet JP Morgan, Nomura Securities, Goldman
Sachs, and Citi Bank are registered to conduct repo operations in Europe,
while Citi Bank also conducts repo operations in New Zealand.
Primary dealers in the United States must comply with Tier-1 and Tier-2
capital requirements outlined by the Basel Capital Accords that seek to standardize banking across borders. Currently $100 million is required as Tier-1
capital for banks and $50 million for broker dealers. All report weekly trading
activities, cash on hand, futures, and Treasury positions, as well as participation in Treasury Auctions, a requirement for dealers to maintain their primary
status (U.S. Treasury 2010).
U.S. Treasury Auctions are conducted through the Treasury’s Bureau of
Public Debt and report on dealer participation. The current proposal by the
Fed is to increase the number of primary dealers. The main problem with
repo rates is the reportability of rates and number of transactions.
From the United States’ and most nations’ central banks and settlement
companies, we ﬁnd one ﬂat U.S. rate reported in the Wall Street Journal
minus the number of transactions, minus dollar amounts, and minus types of

78

Inside the Currency Market

repo transactions and terms of agreement. One must now search each nation’s
ﬁnancial press or search each nation’s central bank to determine an individual
nation’s repo rate.
For the United States, a change will occur as the Depository Trust and
Clearing Corporation (DTCC), the major clearer and settlement company
in the United States, will begin to report a GC rate during the day’s trading as well as an end-of-day rate as part of the increased transparency of this
market recommended by the United States and adopted as policy by other
central banks around the world. The DTCC constructed the DTCC GCF
Repo Index Trade Mark™, to report repo rates. The index is a weighted
average of interest rates paid each day on GCF repurchase agreements based
on U.S. government, federal agency, and mortgaged backed securities. A repo
rate is reported as an end of day rate through the index. Since December
2010, anyone can view a chart on the DTCC site. The index coincides with
the Repurchase Overnight Index Average Index introduced by the London
Wholesale Market Brokers Association April 2010 to gauge overnight secured
funding in sterling.
RONIA is a weighted average rate to four decimal places of all secured
sterling overnight cash transactions transacted between 12:00 midnight and
4:15 a.m. EST, 7:00 a.m., 10:00 a.m. London.
Due to the unforeseen dilemma of frozen markets, many central banks
are currently studying issues of past repo-market failures in order to offer more
transparency so future markets won’t suffer past effects. The European Repo
Council in Europe is one of the most forthright in their openness of rates and
terms of lending. This is because Europe is home to the International Capital
Markets Association (ICMA), which publishes ofﬁcial European repo information through the European Repo Council such as number and types of
transactions, maturities, dollar amounts, and each nation’s currency settled in
all transactions. The European Repo Council was established by ICMA when
the euro was introduced, and extensive repo market information has been
published in their biannual report every six months since 2001. Currently the
19th report is slated for publication.
This report is the only true and reliable source to understand the repo
market. The problem is that the reports cover only the European markets. To
understand the direction of this market overall, however, is to determine what
currency repo transactions are settled. More U.S. dollar settlements may hint to
increased down economic times ahead as conﬁdence wanes in the home nation’s
currency. For other nations, one must consult each nation’s central bank web
site, Thomson Reuters, and Bloomberg market information. For Great Britain,
the Wholesale Markets Brokers Association is the expert in all sterling markets.

Short-Term Interest Rates and Money Market Instruments

79

Repo-Market Deﬁnition

The repo market involves a trade between a purchaser of a security and a seller
of a security. The buyer offers cash to the seller and the seller offers securities
as collateral. The two parties then agree to reverse the trade at an agreedupon day at an agreed-upon rate. This is a contract trade. This transaction
involves a spot sale for the security and forward contract on the repurchase
date to lock in the agreed rate. Rates depend on the type of repo market,
type of repo transaction, length of time for the trade, and whether the trade
involved a third-party clearing agent or a bilateral deal. Tri-party repos are
handled by a settlement company that manages trades for a fee.
The various legs of repo trades offer dealers a chance to proﬁt on each leg
of the transaction by charging a fee, a haircut, to perform the deal. Ownership
transfers to the buyer in case of a default. Many utilize this market because
loan rates or repo rates are always lower than unsecured borrowed Fed funds
or LIBOR and the transactions are more secure due to collateralization.
The real purpose to borrow and lend in the repo market is to borrow
at sub LIBOR rather than the high cost of the Fed funds market when we
consider the U.S. example. Yet this example holds for all other nations. Repo
rates however tend to track Fed funds and LIBOR in the United States. This
example as well holds for other major trading nations including Call rates and
TIBOR in Japan. All factor into a viable trading environment for the spot
currency trade most importantly because it establishes a ﬂoor for rates.
In the United States, a high LIBOR, high Fed funds rate, and high repo
rate will drive the dollar down because funding costs are elevated. Conversely,
the euro/U.S. dollar, British pound/U.S. dollar, Australian dollar/U.S.
dollar, and New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar will rise and head toward weakness, while the U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar, U.S. dollar/Swiss franc, and U.S.
dollar/Japanese yen heads down toward strength.
Repo Rates and Repo Interest

A repo rate is an annualized rate based on a 360-day year in the United States.
This convention is common in European repo markets. To factor, a U.S. repo
rate is equal to dollar interest divided by the Principal × 360 divided by the
repo term in days. Repo rates are calculated and reported throughout the day
in a few nations.
The Swiss report their repo rate every three minutes. Interest is factored as
the difference between the sale and purchase price or the difference between

80

Inside the Currency Market

the forward and the spot price. The settlement date of the forward equals the
maturity date of the loan. To factor interest is equal to the repo rate multiplied by the price on purchase date multiplied by the days divided by 360
[(Purchase date divided by the sale date) divided by 360]. Accrued interest
began in the 1980s as the number of debt issues increased. Cash loaned and
value of collateral is equal to the haircut or margin.
Types of Repo Transactions and Spot-Currency Trades

Many types of repo transactions exist around the world that all have huge
implications for the spot-currency trade. For example, Europe and Great
Britain traditionally traded a ﬂoating-rate repo where the repo rate and maturity of the repo were left open. A rise in these transactions usually signals an
interest-rate change, usually an anticipation of a rate hike. This was an easy
trade for spot-currency traders as a rise in ﬂoating-rate repos was the ﬁrst sign
that central-bank borrowing costs were too low and a rate hike was imminent. Once the hike was announced, traders settled their repo and currency
transactions with a proﬁt. Currency traders could act accordingly based on
ﬂoating-rate repurchase agreements, but these transactions are phasing out in
nations.
Currently, Great Britain just announced a 6-to-12 month phase-out of
the ﬂoating-rate repo in their U.S. dollar repo market. It is being replaced
with an unlimited ﬁxed-rate term.
Europe has adopted the same policy, but Europe’s repo rate will be
indexed to their euro Overnight Index Average (EONIA). It is the overnight
rate for the euro and a weighted average of all overnight unsecured lending
in the interbank market. This ties repo rates to inside nation LIBOR. This
is interesting because the popularity of early repo lending was based on sub
LIBOR rates.
The United States terms ﬂoating rate repos Open Purchases where the
repurchase rate and maturity is left open. Once this trade is settled, it must
be re-rated and factored to its maturity date. It is questionable how long this
type of transaction will continue to exist.
Japan employs a Spot/Next, Tom/Next, then an overnight repo. The
vast majority of repo transactions are ﬁxed term, 88.9 percent according to
the December 2009 European Repo Council Report, but predominately the
same in major nations’ markets.
Forward-start repos reﬂect interest-rate positioning and are employed in
Europe. Suppose an interest-rate announcement is imminent, forward-start

Short-Term Interest Rates and Money Market Instruments

81

repos position the announcement to a higher priced repo rate and represent a
proﬁt. A higher prime rate rebalances shorter-term rates higher.
Buy/sell-back repos in Europe are a spot purchase and a forward sell that
is not tied to the deal based on the repo rate. The commonalities of repo
markets vary slightly from central bank to central bank. All employ the GC
market, all report the rate in the GC market, and all prefer to deploy government securities strictly in down economies. As lending increases, dealers
accept other types of collateral.
U.S. Repo Market

The U.S. repo market began in 1918 when the central bank sold Bankers
Acceptance Certiﬁcates to the private market only to buy them back at a later
date (Treasury 2010). Bankers Acceptances are timed drafts sold at a discount
in the money market and represent one of the oldest money market instruments. The Federal Reserve conducts Open Market operations through the
New York Fed by its System Open Market Operations but reports through
the SOMA account, termed the System Open Market Account. The Fed uses
this account to manage currency in circulation, manage reserves, and provide
liquidity in emergency situations. This is conducted through trade of the Fed
Funds Rate.
The Monetary Control Act of 1980 allowed the Fed to exchange
maturities in open-market operations as needed. As of July 7, 2010, the
SOMA account measured in thousands, held T-Bills 18, 422, 636.7,
Treasury Notes and Bonds 712, 023, 185.2, Treasury Inﬂation Protected
Securities 41,125, 445.7, Fed Agency securities 164,762, 000.0 and settled
mortgaged backed securities 1,118, 290, 404.9. The account holds a total
of 2,054, 623, 672.5 with a weekly change of 163, 506.3. The Federal
Reserve Bank of New York reports weekly changes to the SOMA account
on its web site, newyorkfed.org. The second SOMA account is used for
foreign currency investments denominated in euros and yen. The account
is measured at par value daily.
The most important repo market in the United States is the General
Collateral market that begins at about 7:30 a.m. New York time and ends
at 3:30 p.m. with the close of Fedwire Securities Service. 7:30 is the start
because that time occurs after the BBA releases their LIBOR for the United
States and U.S. banks end their auction rate of U.S. LIBOR, a perfect
methodology to determine the day’s repo rate because repo rates will always
be below LIBOR. This allows dealers who are among the 19 big banks that

82

Inside the Currency Market

are registered by master agreements with the Federal Reserve to begin the
15-minute auction process that includes bids and offers for money to interdealer brokers.
Master agreements in the United States are called BMA agreements and
began in the late 1980s for ability to trade in government securities. After the
bidding process ends with the New York Federal Reserve Bank who manages
the Fed’s Open Market Operations, highest and lowest rates are discarded and
remaining bids are averaged to form the day’s traded repo rate.
The GC market expanded with the rise of clearing and settlement
companies and the sophistication of computers that allow bids and offers
to be viewed by registered banks and broker dealers, termed a Tri-party
repo due to the third leg of the transaction. Today, it is the largest market
because transaction costs were reduced and liquidity enhanced by netting
both legs of the settlement process. Thanks to passage of HR5585, the
Financial Netting Improvement Act in 2006, the GC market was renamed
the General Collateral Finance (GCF) market and expanded beyond
comprehension.
The law allowed banks to reduce their systemic risks by netting, a net
valuation versus a gross valuation so markets won’t be disrupted. This law
applied to repos as well as swap transactions. The Fixed Income Clearing
Corporation, an arm of the Depository Trust and Clearing Corporation, nets
all lended and borrowed transactions at 3:45 p.m. daily.
Dealers trade these markets all day through the Fixed Income Clearing
Corporation based on principal amount of trade, term, rate, and class of
acceptable securities. These dealers many times make markets in securities.
This is why many trades are negotiated in the GCF market because lending
terms and haircuts apply differently to each trade. Haircuts apply on a treasury bond at one rate while a mortgage-backed security may be negotiated
at another rate. A cash borrower can only seek the best price on borrowed
funds.
Trades are settled based on a delivery-versus-payment basis or a Tri-party
net. Typically established accounts are credited and settled by a book entry.
Banks that clear trades include JP Morgan and Bank of New York Mellon.
Before getting into the details and comments of the white paper released by
the New York Federal Reserve Bank May 17, 2010, that addresses proposed
changes and past problems to the repo market, I borrow two examples from
the report of a repo trade, a Bilateral and Tri-party trade. These trades are performed in simple dollar terms for example purposes yet imagine these trades
performed on $20 million, $30 million, or $100 million, a common daily
occurrence in the repo market.

Short-Term Interest Rates and Money Market Instruments

83

Bilateral Repo Trade

$100 Repo at 1 Percent Repo Rate and 2 Percent Haircut for 30 Days
The borrower sells $102 of securities to the cash lender and receives $100
in cash.
After 30 days, the borrower pays $100 plus 0.083 in interest to the cash
lender to repurchase securities. This deal is arranged through a clearer. Step
one is negotiation while step two informs the clearer of the trade so accounts
can be credited and debited and transfers of cash and securities can occur.
To factor,
$100  (100  1 percent  (30/360))
this accounts for the Tri-party aspect.
At 8:30 the next morning, repo trades are unwound by the clearer bank
to provide intraday credit to the borrower. The lender’s account has $100
cash, the cash borrower has $102 in securities, no cash, and 3 percent clearing bank margin. So allowable intraday credit is equal to the cash borrower
total collateral plus cash borrower total cash balance less the clearing margin.
$102  0  ($102  3 percent)  $98.94
End of day repos are again rewound and both accounts are locked based
on cash and securities of this trade.
When the term of this trade is complete, the clearer bank returns cash
plus interest to the cash lender and securities to the borrower. To calculate:
$100  Repo rate (1 percent for 30 days)
$100  (100  1 percent  (30/360))  $100.83

Tri-Party Repo Infrastructure Reform and White Paper
by New York Federal Reserve Bank

Released May 17, 2010, this report derived from a culmination of meetings
with repo-market practitioners, regulators, academics, banks, broker dealers,
money market participants, mutual funds, borrowers, and lenders. The purpose was to address the deterioration of the repo market during the crisis to
assess problems and recommend changes.

84

Inside the Currency Market

This report is historic because the public is given an extraordinary and
insightful view of a repo market that has been essentially closed to public viewing due to its closed nature and because it is a market not well understood
operationally by the public due to its many nuances. The number of academic
articles and books on the topic is not overly abundant due to lack of understanding and the many details needed to understand this market’s framework.
Michael Fleming and Kenneth Garbade, two economists of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, gave a solid devotion to the U.S. repo market in their many
articles, but few others have followed. This report will open the door to further
research. I quote directly and summarize from this report point by point.
The ﬁrst issue is the conundrum of intraday credit that is explained in
step 3 of my example. This credit is made available to cash borrowers by clearing banks that provide the necessary operational infrastructure to this market.
“Clearing banks clear and settle trades, so the unwinding of trades leaves a
clearing bank exposed to default as lines of credit must be extended, an unlikely
scenario yet an exposure nonetheless.” The purpose of the unwind is to give
collateral to dealers for daily settlement. “The elimination of unwinding of
trades would reduce intraday credit by clearing banks 10 percent, $2.5 trillion
less risk at the May 2008 peak of this market when $2.8 trillion of securities
were ﬁnanced.” Credit and liquidity risk would shift to cash investors.
Instead of intraday credit, it is recommended to allow automatic substitutions by automation of collateralized securities that support the Tri-party
repo while the transaction remains in place. This was proposed for February
2011 if computer operations can support this function and occurred as a
