
Earlier I indicated that intra-day breaks of Ichimoku lines are common, but they also have
an uncanny way of acting as formidable support and resistance, too. In particular, the slower

moving Kijun line can be used as a level to re-enter a prevailing trend, buying a downside
retracement in an uptrend or selling rebounds higher in a downtrend. I always make a point of
noting the Ichimoku levels as part of my daily technical analysis routine.

Chapter 12

Identifying Trade Opportunities
In This Chapter
Organizing market analysis to spot trade setups
Locating pivotal support and resistance levels
Using momentum to spot trades and fine-tune entry and exits
Trading on candlestick patterns
Constructing a real-time trade strategy
Spotting trade opportunities and applying a trading plan are what it all boils down to. Traders and
speculators spend the time and energy to follow the market and know what’s going on. They
analyze and strategize, persistently scanning the market for trade opportunities, or setups, and
waiting for the right time to step in and commit their money. And when they step in, they have a
well-defined trade plan to guide them through whatever the market throws at them.
There’s certainly no shortage of opinions and ideas being voiced by market analysts and
commentators, but in the end the trades you make are your decision. In this chapter, I go through the
key steps to spotting trade opportunities and putting together a risk-aware trading plan to exploit
the setup. In this chapter, I draw on many of the technical analysis concepts I outline in Chapter 11.

Developing a Routine for Market Analysis
The first step is to commit to making time for market analysis. The more regular your
analysis, the greater the feel you’ll develop for where the market has been and where it’s
likely to go. Also, the more regularly you update yourself on the market, the less time it’ll
take to stay up to speed. It’s a lot easier updating yourself every day than it is trying to catch
up on several days’ worth of market news, data, and price developments.
Give some long, hard thought to how much time you can realistically afford to devote to market
analysis before committing yourself to a specific routine. You may find you’re able to devote only
a relatively short amount of time each day, so focus your energies on only one or two currency
pairs. If you have the time, you can more effectively follow and analyze multiple currency pairs.
At the minimum, you should be prepared to devote at least an hour every day to looking at the

market and keeping tabs on upcoming data and events. I like to follow a routine that focuses on:
Multiple-time-frame technical analysis to identify support and resistance levels and to
track overall price developments
Candlestick and Ichimoku analysis after each daily and weekly close
Reading economic data reports that have come out overnight to update our fundamental
model (see Chapter 7)
Assessing the likely market impact of upcoming data reports and events
Reviewing market commentaries to stay on top of major themes and overall market
sentiment
This may seem like a lot to squeeze into a single hour, but with time and practice, you’ll get your
charting and market information sources all lined up so you can streamline the entire routine.

Performing Multiple-Time-Frame Technical
Analysis
Look closely at the charts in Figures 12-1, 12-2, and 12-3. Notice anything similar about them?
Don’t be surprised if you don’t — they all look extremely different. But that’s the point. They’re
all charts of the same currency pair, but viewed in three different time frames. As you can see,
viewing the forest through the trees takes on a whole new meaning when it comes to chart analysis.
Multiple-time-frame technical analysis is nothing more complicated than looking at charts using
different time frames of data. The basic idea is to look at the big picture first to identify the key
longer-term features and then drill down into shorter data time frames to pinpoint short-term price
levels and trends. My own preference is to focus on daily, four-hour, and hourly time frames, but
you can use whichever time frames you think best match your trading style. Short-term traders, for
instance, may want to focus on 2-hour, 30-minute, and 5-minute charts to better reflect the
narrower time frames of their trading.

Figure 12-1:
EUR/USD on
a daily
candlestick
chart.

Source: www.eSignal.com

Figure 12-2:
EUR/USD on
a four-hour
candlestick
chart.

Source: www.eSignal.com

Whichever time frames you end up working with, I strongly recommend that you include
longer time frames, like daily and weekly, so you can get a sense of where the most
significant price levels are. The strength and significance of support and resistance levels are
a function of the time frame in which they’re evident, with longer-term technical levels
holding greater meaning than shorter ones. You don’t want your focus to become so narrow
that you lose sight of the big picture and go with a break of short-term resistance, for instance,
when major daily or weekly resistance is just beyond.

Figure 12-3:
EUR/USD on
a one-hour
candlestick
chart.

Source: www.eSignal.com

The good thing about daily and weekly charts is that the technical levels don’t change quite as
frequently as shorter time frames, so you can probably make do with updating the daily and weekly
charts much less often.
In Figures 12-4, 12-5, and 12-6, I reproduce the same charts as the ones shown in Figures 12-1,
12-2, and 12-3, but this time I include my trend lines. I start by looking at the daily chart to identify
the big levels and draw in longer-term trend lines. Then I drill down to the four-hour chart, where
I take a fresh look based on what I’m seeing in that time frame and draw in more trend lines to
encapsulate any price patterns or trends. To finish, I go down one more level to the hourly charts
for a close-up view of the market’s most recent price action.

Make sure the charting system you’re using has the ability to save trend lines across time

frames, meaning that a trend line you draw on a daily chart should also appear on the fourhour and hourly charts, and vice versa. Also, make sure the charting system has the ability to
save the entire chart so you don’t have to redraw the trend lines every time you pull up the
same chart.
On subsequent updates, keep the trend lines that still appear to be valid (meaning, price action has
not broken through them), and erase trend lines that are no longer active or have been broken. But
don’t be in too great a rush to erase broken trend lines, because they’ll often continue to act as
support or resistance, but in the opposite direction.

When support is broken, it becomes resistance, and vice versa.

Figure 12-4:
Start out by
drawing trend
lines on
longer-term
charts, like
weekly and
daily (shown
here), to
identify major
technical
levels.

Source: www.eSignal.com

Figure 12-5:
Drill down
from a longerterm view to a
medium-term
time frame,
such as four
hours (shown
here) or two
hours, to
identify key
medium-term

support and
resistance
levels.

Source: www.eSignal.com

Over time, you’ll get an idea of how good you are at spotting meaningful trend lines by the
frequency with which you have to discard old trend lines. The longer the trend line contains price
action or the longer prices react substantially when a trend line is broken, the more significant the
trend line was. In Figures 12-4, 12-5, and 12-6, I keep in some of my older trend lines to give you
an idea of how to draw them, as well as to show that some broken trend lines can still be valid.

Figure 12-6:
Focus in on
shorter time
frames using
1-hour (shown
here), 30minute, 15minute, and
shorter time
frames to
identify shortterm support
and
resistance.

Source: www.eSignal.com

Identifying Support and Resistance Levels
Multiple-time-frame technical analysis is your early-warning radar system. It alerts you to key
support and resistance levels that, if broken, are likely to lead to larger directional breakouts and
potential trading signals. Of course, the flip side is that if the support or resistance levels hold,
price direction is likely to reverse course.
Now that you’ve gone through and analyzed a currency pair with trend lines in multiple time
frames, you’re well on the way to identifying key technical support and resistance levels. But
while trend lines are one of the simpler yet more powerful technical tools, there are still plenty of
other sources of support and resistance to take note of. In Figure 12-7, I provide a chart showing
support and resistance derived from the methods I outline in the following sections.

Trend lines
You didn’t think you were done with trend lines yet, did you? Believe me when I say that trend
lines are the gifts that keep on giving, as long as you keep drawing and redrawing them.

Figure 12-7:
Identifying

short-term
support and
resistance
levels on an
hourly chart
using trend
lines, key
price points
(highs, lows,
breakouts),
congestion
zones, and
retracements.

Source: www.eSignal.com

To determine support and resistance levels that correspond to the trend lines you’ve drawn, you
simply need to place the cursor of your charting system on the trend line at the current time period.
Your charting system should display the price value of the cursor placement on the right side of the
chart; if not, you may have to use the crosshairs tool of the charting system to see the value. Keep
in mind that trend-line price values will shift over time based on the slope of the trend line. If
you’ve identified a trend line that’s sloping steeply higher, for instance, its price value will be
higher in later periods. You can run the cursor up the trend line and note the price level and time
interval to gauge how much it will change over time.

Note the price levels of the trend lines you observe and use them for placing orders based
on your fundamental or technical view. Breaks of trend lines are signals for short-term
traders to go with the break. I suggest using a relatively tight stop loss of 20 to 30 points from
the trend line in case the break is not sustained (a false break). You can also use trend lines
as entry points in trending moves, buying on pullbacks of up moves and selling on rebounds
in downtrends. Depending if any chart pattern is evident, the breakout may have a target, or
measured move objective (see Chapter 11), which you can use to establish you’re take-profit
order. Again, allow for a margin of error in case the target level is not quite reached. It’s
better to capture 80 percent of something than 100 percent of nothing.

Breaks of sloping trend lines always have an immediate hurdle to climb, namely the prior

high of a move up in the case of a break of downward sloping trend lines, or the prior low in
the case of upward sloping trend lines. Some technical traders disregard sloping trend lines
altogether and focus only on breaks of recent highs or lows, which I discuss next. (By the
way, you can probably tell I’m not one of them. I’ll leave it to you to judge the importance of
sloping trend lines based on the charts in this book.)

Highs and lows
After trend lines, markets tend to place the greatest amount of emphasis on period highs and lows
as points of support and resistance, frequently referred to as horizontal support/resistance. You
can pinpoint support or resistance levels from highs and lows by simply noting the price high or
low, but give yourself a few pips of latitude (5 to 10 pips), because different charting systems
have different data feeds, which may have slightly different high/low readings.
When you’re looking at a daily chart, you can pretty easily identify the relevant high or low. But
when you’re looking at charts in shorter time frames, it’s not always clear which high/low you
should use. A general rule is to look for significant price reactions from recent prior highs and
lows.

The more sharply prices move away from a high or low, the more significance that high or
low carries as support or resistance. The more slowly or less dramatic the price movement
off the high or low, the less significance that high or low usually carries. Look for long tails
on shorter-term candlestick charts, like 30-minute or hourly time frames, for indications that a
prior high is acting as resistance or a prior low is giving support.

Lots of algorithmic trading systems are based on breaks of period highs and lows. To use
such breaks as trade signals, prices need to finish the period beyond the break of the
high/low. For example, a short-term system will need to see the break of a recent hourly high
sustained on an hourly close basis before going long. A longer-term model will want to see
the break of a daily low sustained on a daily close below it before going short. You can use
such period closes as confirmation the break is valid, but always have a stop in place in case
that level is subsequently breached on another similar period close.

Congestion zones
Congestion zones are price bands in which prior price action gives way to consolidation, or a
period of sideways price action (see Figure 12-7 for some examples). Most congestion zones are
roughly 30 to 50 pips wide, but they may be larger in more volatile pairs, like GBP/USD and
USD/CHF, or the JPY crosses. Unfortunately, there’s no easy recipe when it comes to deciding

whether the top or bottom of a congestion zone will act as support or resistance, so you need to
factor in the whole zone as a potential source of support/resistance. Prices moving higher, for
instance, may stall at the base of a congestion zone, or they may make it all the way to the top. If
the zone is cleared, however, prices are likely to move on to the next resistance level.

Fibonacci Retracements
Fibonacci retracements should be drawn after significant directional price moves when it’s clear
(or as clear as it can be) that the directional movement has stopped and reversed direction. (For
more on Fibonacci levels, see Chapter 11.) You can draw the retracements by using the Fibonacci
retracement drawing tool that’s standard in most charting systems. Figure 12-7 contains a
Fibonacci retracement based on the most recent decline, and with prices currently above them they
serve as potential support levels in any pullbacks.

Breaks of Fibonacci levels on a daily close basis are considered significant by traders.
(See Chapter 11 for a discussion of how breaks of Fibonacci levels can be a trading signal.)
You can also use Fibonacci levels as targets for price moves, placing take profits based on
them or using them as stop loss exit levels.

The 76.4 percent mark is sort of the forgotten Fibonacci level, but it’s often the key turning
point in more volatile currency pairs, like USD/CHF and GBP/USD. Just when you think that
the 61.8 percent level failed, and it looks like the market is going for a 100 percent
retracement, it pulls up short at 76.4 percent.

Fibonacci retracements can be drawn for almost any discernible price movement, but their
significance is closely related to the size of the main directional move. The larger the primary
directional price move, the more significance the support or resistance from the Fibonacci
retracements will be. Generally speaking, don’t get caught up calculating retracements of
moves of less than 200 points. Instead, focus on daily charts to spot the most significant price
moves, and calculate the potential retracements based on them.

Ichimoku levels
Ichimoku, or cloud charts, are an important source of support and resistance levels you won’t find
anywhere else. I discuss the basics of Ichimoku charts in Chapter 11. The key to spotting trade
opportunities with Ichimoku charts are daily closes above/below the various Ichimoku lines
(Tenkan, Kijun, and the leading spans that make up the top and bottom of the cloud). On an intraday basis, those levels may be exceeded, but it’s only on a daily close basis that trading signals

should be taken. After a move higher, for instance, a daily close below the Tenkan line should be
taken as a cue to exit the prior trend, or potentially to go short.

For intra-day trading, Ichimoku levels can provide actionable trading levels, providing
seemingly unseen support or resistance levels to buy or sell on in extreme price moves. But if
those levels are exceeded on a daily close basis, you should exit the trade. For longer-term
traders, those with a wait-and-see attitude, daily closes above/below Ichimoku levels offer a
potentially longer-term trading signal. I like to use pullbacks or rebounds to the Kijun line as
potential entry opportunities when a trend is evident.

Looking for Symmetry with Channels
If you’re new to chart analysis you may be thinking that the array of bars or candles on a price
chart looks like the ultimate in randomness. Sometimes that’s true, but more often than not, you’d
be surprised how frequently symmetrical formations appear. By symmetrical formations, I mostly
mean price channels, but also other chart patterns that I illustrate and cover in detail in Chapter
11.

Drawing price channels
A price channel is nothing more complicated than a series of parallel trend lines that encapsulate
price action over a discernible period. Channels will form in all time frames, with long-term
channels on a daily chart highlighting multiday or multiweek trading ranges, and short-term
channels on an hourly chart revealing steady buying or selling during a trading session. Price
channels can also form in any direction, from horizontal to steeply sloping up or down and
anything in between.
The way to identify price channels is through visual inspection, using your eyes and imagination,
as well as a fair amount of trial and error. Drawing channels is made much easier by the Copy a
Line and Parallel Line functions, which are standard in most charting systems. To begin looking
for and drawing potential channels, you need only one trend line to start with — the primary trend
line. (In Figure 12-7, the lower trend line in the primary upchannel is the primary trend line.)
If the primary trend line is below the price bars or candles (support), look up at the tops of the
price action to see if there is any parallel symmetry to the primary support trend line. If you’re not
sure, simply copy the support trend line and drag it to the tops of the price bars to see if it captures
the highest highs. If the copied trend line fits neatly onto the tops of the price action, you’ve found
yourself a price channel.
That said, the parallel side (the upper channel line based on upward-sloping primary trend lines,

and the lower channel line for downward-sloping primary trend lines) never behaves quite as
neatly as the primary side. For example, during an uptrend most people are looking to buy; that’s
why the price action often goes exactly to the primary channel support and then bounces higher.
However, on rallies during an uptrend, there usually aren’t as many traders looking to sell and
price action frequently exceeds the upper channel line. The same happens with the base of
channels during declines, where fewer buyers are involved.
When you’re looking for channels, especially if prices have just changed direction and a new
move is just beginning, keep in mind that you may have only one or two price points opposite the
primary trend line to connect the parallel channel line. When that happens, go ahead and draw the
parallel channel line — it’ll extend into empty space for the time being — but consider it only a
tentative channel top or bottom until more price action confirms its validity.

The whole point of looking for and drawing channel lines, of course, is to highlight
additional sources of support or resistance. Directional price moves rarely go from Point A
to Point B in a straight line. More typically, for example, prices will move higher for a
period of time before short-term buying interest fades or encounters heavier selling interest,
sending prices back down to the trend-line support. When this pattern repeats itself several
times, a channel is formed.

You can use channels as part of your trading strategy to guide both position entry and exit.
Short-term traders in particular like to use channels to trade around a core position, for
example, selling short on trend-line resistance and buying a portion of the position back if
prices drop to channel support. If the channel continues to hold, they’ll resell on gains back
toward trend-line resistance, reestablishing their core short position. When channels break,
it’s also a sign that prices are either accelerating in the direction of the trend, as shown by the
channel, or that the trend is reversing and prices break out of the channel in the opposite
direction.

Listening to Momentum
In Chapter 11, I look at various momentum indicators, like Relative Strength Index (RSI) and
stochastics, and what they mean. As part of your routine of multiple-time-frame technical analysis,
I strongly suggest that you incorporate two technical studies into your regimen of analysis.

Factoring momentum analysis into your routine
The first study to include in your analysis is a momentum oscillator like RSI or stochastics. I also

recommend Moving Average Convergence/Divergence (MACD) — it’s not technically a
momentum indicator, but it certainly acts like one. In fact, I prefer MACD over the more
traditional momentum studies because MACD tends to change direction and generate crossovers
more slowly than the other momentum studies. The result is fewer false signals, but the trade-off is
that the signal may be delayed, giving you a less advantageous price entry level. In reality, though,
the generally slower MACD signals are well suited to the forex market’s tendency to push a
directional move as far as it will go for as long as possible.
The second study I recommend that you include in your analysis routine is the Directional
Movement Indicator (DMI) system (which I also look at in greater detail in Chapter 11). The DMI
serves as a double check on the momentum study. The Average Directional Index (ADX)
component of the DMI is a trend identification signal that tells you whether the market is trending,
regardless of direction. Relying solely on a momentum study can lead to serious problems when
the market sets off on an extended trending movement.

Momentum studies typically register overbought and oversold readings after an extensive
directional move, potentially signaling that the market is ripe for a correction in the opposite
direction. Worse, shorter-term momentum studies routinely cross over as price movements
inevitably slow in the course of a directional, potentially trending movement, giving a signal
to trade in the opposite direction. But if a trend is, in fact, taking hold, those momentum
readings can be highly misleading.
The key is to double-check momentum readings with the ADX level to see if trending conditions
are in place. If the ADX is above 25, you should discount what the momentum studies are
indicating. Don’t completely ignore what the momentum study is showing — just defer to the ADX
reading while it’s above 25. When the ADX tops out and turns down, you have a second indicator
signaling that the directional move is likely coming to an end. If the ADX is below 25, defer to
what the momentum indicators are signaling.
