percent line to below, an exit entry is indicated. When the VZO moving from below crosses the
50 percent line, it also indicates an entry signal. But when VZO declines from above the 50
percent line and reenters to cross above the 50 percent line again, a buffer line of 57.5 percent
may be used as a safeguard to protect from a whipsaw signal.
Traders must always look at price patterns and their related volume patterns together. In this
case, VZO is plotting the flow of positive volume. The plot should stay positive in a strong
market that is above 50 and negative in a weak market that is below 50.

DECIPHERING TREND WITH VOLUME
A trend directional system, shown in the middle window of
Figure 5.9
, may also be incorporated into the volume indicator. The lower window shows just the
percentage plot of the volume indicator without the trend indicator. When the trend is weak,
the color histogram of the volume plot is red, and it is blue when the trend is strong. A tall red
histogram generally at the halfway point of the decline would indicate bearishness in the
market, and a tall blue histogram would indicate bullishness.
FIGURE 5.9
The difference in the plots of a volume indicator. The lower window shows the normal plot of
a percentage volume indicator and the middle window shows addition of a trend system to the
volume indicator.

The formula for computing an indicator combining volume and trend in TradeStation format
is as follows:
{Parameters Input}
Input: VolLength1(2), VolLength2(10), Percent(200), ShowTrendMarker(True);
{Input of variables}
Vars:BarColor(0), SMA(0), WMA(0);
{Input volume indicator criteria here}
If CurrentBar>1 then begin
Value10=XAverage(Volume,VolLength1);
Value20=Average(Volume,VolLength2);
If Value20<>0 then Value30=100*(Value10/Value20)

else Value30=0;
end;
{Input your system conditions here}
If CurrentBar>1 then begin
SMA=T3(Close, 5);
WMA=T3(TypicalPrice,9);
If SMA > WMA then
BarColor=Blue else
If SMA <= WMA then
BarColor=Red else
BarColor=DarkGreen;
End;
{Input plots here: true/false}
If ShowTrendMarker then begin
Plot1(Value30,"Volume",BarColor);
Plot2(100,"100 Percent");
Plot3(Percent,"Volume Limit");
End;
Note: T3 moving average was developed by Tim Tillson. It is a smoothing technique that is
intended to produce better signals. The function in an EasyLanguage version of the formula is
described in the January 1998 issue of Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities magazine.

CONCLUSION
The aim of this chapter is to show traders the importance of understanding volume in technical
analysis and how volume can be used to identify the change in trend. When volume is used in
conjunction with other supporting indicators, the probability of picking a winning trade is
increased. Price represents the consensus value in a transaction between the buyer and seller,
and volume represents the financial commitment. In short, volume is the liquidity of the
market, without which the market is stagnant. And so, volume is deemed to be the driving
force of price movements. Generally, a rising price trend has to be supported by a positive
volume trend. When volume fails to support the continuing rising price, it signals a weakening
of the rising price trend. On the other hand, when the price is declining with increasing volume,
it confirms the continuity of the bearish outlook. A market is healthy when the trends of both
volume and prices are moving in tandem. But when the movement of price starts to diverge
with the volume trend, the continuation of the prevailing market trend is in doubt. For
example, when a price, trading in a narrow range, fails to continue its rising trend despite heavy
volume, traders should take note as the price may have reached a strong resistance level. And
in reverse, traders should also exercise caution when heavy volume cannot push the price any
lower and price continues to hold its trading in narrow ranges; it may indicate the price has
reached a strong support level. When price spikes up with unconvincing volume, the price spike
is usually short-lived. But when the price spikes up on heavy volume, traders should pay
attention to a probable change in trend, and look for confirmation from other indicators. In
summary, the importance of volume should not be overlooked as it often presages price
direction.

CHAPTER 6

Key Indicators

Price is the only key that leads the direction of trend. There is nothing on a chart that matters
more than price.
Data of daily transactions of prices are generally reported with information of the price range
consisting of open-high-low-close, volume, and turnover of shares. The information is then
used as the basis for calculating indicators.
All indicators in technical analysis are mathematical attempts to predict the future trend of
stock prices based on historical data. Indicators are used as added value to the analysis of price
movements to form buying and selling decisions. Indicators are not indubitable and should only
be used as handy tools. In calculating indicators, it is important to ensure that price data are
adjusted accordingly if there are changes to the company’s equities as a result of schemes of
arrangements, rights issues, or bonus issues. It is also necessary to make adjustments to the
data when trading in the shares is suspended. Such suspension may last from one day to
several months. If the price data are not adjusted, especially when trading in the shares is
suspended for a long period, it is not advisable to do any wave count or any reading of the
indicators or patterns following the resumption of trading.
Figures 6.1
and
6.2
show two charts of a stock whose shares have been suspended for trading. Note the
differences in the patterns of price and indicators before and after adjustments of the price
data due to the suspension of trading.
FIGURE 6.1
Trading in the shares was suspended for 28 days, represented by a flat dotted line. The red
line represents the 50-day moving average. The lower windows are the 14-day RSI and volume.
The drawing of a trend line is meaningless, as it has been distorted by the suspension period.
Compare this chart to
Figure 6.2
.

FIGURE 6.2
Data and indicators adjusted for the suspension on trading in the shares. Patterns of price,
indicators, and volume are showing the true trend, and the drawing of the trend line is reliable
now.

A good chart layout should facilitate meaningful reading of price movements. The layout
should not be crowded with too many indicators. It should have informative indicators that tell
the different aspects of the market, such as a trend indicator to show the probable direction of
the trend, a momentum indicator to measure the speed at which price is changing, and a
volume indicator to measure the stock activities. On no account should the layout have similar
types of indicators, whose functions are of the same nature and parameters.
Oscillators are indicators that are constructed so that the results are plotted between
positive and negative levels, in which case the centerline is 0. If a plot fluctuates within a range
of 0 to 100, the centerline is 50.
Oscillators are useful in identifying overbought and oversold conditions of the market, and in
divulging divergence of directional movements between oscillators and prices. When the
oscillator is above the centerline, the interpretation is positive, and when it is below the
centerline, it is negative. When the oscillator is positive and shows readings in the upper
positive range, it suggests that the market is overbought and is due for a correction. On the

other hand, when the oscillator is negative and shows readings at the bottom of the negative
range, it suggests an oversold market that is due for a rebound.
An alert to sell is triggered when the market is overbought, and when the market is oversold,
traders should be prepared to buy. This does not mean that one should rush to buy when the
market shows the first sign of being in an oversold condition, or to sell when the market is
overbought. The reason is simple. When a market enters initially into either overbought or
oversold conditions, it may continue to remain in such conditions for some time. The market
can even become more overbought or more oversold before making a definitive reversal.
Therefore, it is necessary to keep an eye on the weakening of price when in overbought
condition, and the strengthening of price when in oversold condition. When the oscillator
breaks out from its overbought or oversold levels, it is important to ensure that the breakout of
the oscillator corresponds with the directional movement of the price. This will help traders
avoid getting caught in a false breakout of the oscillator. Sometimes, the oscillator attempts to
break out early from its overbought or oversold levels, only to reverse immediately to its
former levels.
When using more than one oscillator, it is important to make sure that the parameters of
each oscillator are different. A common error is to unknowingly plot various oscillators on the
same chart with the same parameters, particularly the use of closing price for all oscillators.
This is tantamount to multiple counting of the same information. As a result, the readings
generated by each of the oscillators tend to be similar. A better way is to choose different types
of oscillators to complement the trading systems, and use different approaches to analyze the
directional movement of the market. It will not serve any useful purpose if the oscillators are
repeating the same criteria.

MOMENTUM OSCILLATOR
Momentum is perhaps one of the easier oscillators to understand. It measures the speed of
price changes. The Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English defines momentum as “the
force gained by the movement or development of events.” In technical analysis, momentum is
a technique of comparing prices at different times.
A price rise, or a price decline, from one day to the next day, is described as a one-day
momentum. That is, today’s momentum is today’s close minus yesterday’s close.
A 10-day momentum means the comparison of today’s price to the price 10 days ago: Price
[today] less Price [previous 10-day]. If today’s price is greater than the price 10 days ago, it will
be a positive momentum, and if today’s price is less than the price 10 days ago, it will be a
negative momentum. Momentum is also known as the rate of change of price.
Momentum oscillators include popular classics like Appel’s MACD Histogram, Stochastic,
Wilder’s Relative Strength Index, and Williams %R. Momentum is useful in identifying early
trend direction. Momentum has one powerful trait; it tracks how fast the price trend is moving,
and gains or losses of speed. Unfortunately, momentum is sometimes not easy to identify
because price and momentum do not always move in tandem.
If the price increases on a rally, the momentum becomes positive and rises with the price.
However, when the price gets closer to its imminent peak or goes into a bracket market, the
continuing rally in price will slow down its speed, which will then cause a change in the
direction of the momentum. Momentum direction will decline instead. From this, we can make
two simple and powerful observations: (1) momentum’s trend will not always be in the
direction of the price trend; and (2) momentum’s oscillators do not represent price trends.
From these two observations, it can be surmised that reversal of momentum will not
necessarily coincide with a price reversal.
Momentum oscillator is useful in depicting divergence of trend slope between the price and
the oscillator. A bearish divergence occurs when the oscillator is making new lows while prices
are making new highs, and a bullish divergence occurs when the oscillator is making new highs
while prices are making new lows.
Figure 6.3
shows the behavior between the movements of momentum and price. E1 and G1 show that
momentum trend does not reflect price trend. Momentum trend will not always be in the
direction of the price trend. E1 shows a diagonal triangle in price while momentum is in a
horizontal range. G1 shows price declining in a downward channel while momentum was
declining in a parabolic arc. G1 also illustrates that we can draw a trend line to price as well as
in momentum. D1 and H1 show bullish divergences between momentum and price, and F1, J1,
and K1 show bearish divergences. F1 is also known as a hidden bearish divergence, and such
divergences are not often noticeable. Momentum also develops pattern formations; examples
of double tops and double bottoms are indicated by the circles in
Figure 6.3
.
FIGURE 6.3
The bottom window shows the directional movements of momentum of price.

Another important point to note is, when prices have declined for a while and start to change
to bullishness, the momentum oscillator will respond by crossing above its centerline into a
high value area (compared with its historical threshold). Generally, prices will tend to go still
higher, and momentum will form another high, but it will be lower than its previous thrust. (See
Figure 6.4
.)
FIGURE 6.4
Directional movement of momentum responds to change in price trend. After falling for the
prior three months, price reaches its low in October 2008 and starts to reverse. Momentum
responds with great strength to a new high at T1. Thereafter, price goes into a consolidation
before rising again to new highs at T2 and T3, but momentum fails to rise to new highs. Notice
the divergence signals at A-B, and A-T1.

Conversely, if momentum reaches a very low value area, L1 (compared with its historical
threshold), and turns up, forming a higher low, L2, prices may not follow momentum direction
and fall further.
Figure 6.5
shows an example of such characteristics. Notice how price continues to fall to L3 but

momentum holds at about its last low. Again, note that the trend of momentum does not
always reflect price trend. Momentum direction will not always be in the direction of the price
trend.
FIGURE 6.5
Momentum reaches a new low before price, as in L1 and L3. The slope of L1 and L2 marks a
divergence between price and momentum movements.

Momentum oscillators are often plotted with two lines: the raw data line (or, the fast line),
and its moving average. There are three methods of calling entry and exit signals using the
momentum oscillator: (1) zone crossing, or crossing of the oversold or overbought lines; (2)
centerline break, or breaking above or below the centerline; and (3) crossing of the average line
by the fast line.
For those who would like to go further into the subject, they may want to read Momentum,
Direction, and Divergence by William Blau, The New Technical Trader by Tushar S. Chande and
Stanley Kroll, and Martin Pring on Market Momentum by Martin Pring.

QUEUING THEORY OF MOVING AVERAGE
CROSSOVERS (QMAC)
The moving average has remained the most powerful method for analyzing and trading the
market. Moving averages can be applied to a wide range of uses, from identifying market trend
in any time frame, to detecting overbought or oversold conditions. They are easy to use and
form the basis of many trend trading systems. There are numerous ways of calculating moving
average mathematically: simple, exponential, weighted, time series, volume adjusted, and so
forth. Over the years, many new innovative ideas have been added. The basic idea is to
smoothen short-term price fluctuations to have a better picture of the main trend.
The periods commonly used for plotting moving average lines range from 2 days to 250 days.
In this book, moving averages are categorized under three groups. The first group is the shortterm period from 2 days to 9 days, the second group is the mid-term period 9 days to 34 days,
and the third group is the 50-day to 250-day group. When a market is in a strong trend, prices
will cross above all the averages of these three groups, and moving averages lines from each of
the three groups will also follow suit. That is, the shorter period will also cross above the longer
period. And the order of alignment is reversed when the market is very weak. When the market
moves to an extreme level, whether bullish or bearish, prices will lead the directional change,
and will be followed by the various moving averages. This is the first observation of the
Queuing Theory of Moving Average Crossovers (QMAC). That is, when prices make a bullish or
bearish directional change, its relative moving averages should also follow suit and be in a
sequential order. The shorter period moving averages will also cross above or below the slower
period averages. If the price and its moving averages are not aligned in a sequential order, the
respective rally or retracement most probably will be short-lived and prices can be expected to
continue to move in their previous direction or to make further consolidation. For practical
purposes and ease of usage, three moving averages, the 50-day, 90-day, and 200-day, are
illustrated below as examples of the application of QMAC. It also shows the relationships of
price and moving average crossovers, crossovers between two moving averages, and the
relationship of price and two moving averages.
The most popular method of interpreting a moving average is to compare the relationship
and crossovers between a price and its moving average to determine current trend direction
and to anticipate its most likely future direction. Moving averages, though used as a smoothing
technique, also filter out the fluctuations of short-term volatility in price movement. There is,
however, one deficiency in that most moving averages are lagging technical indicators, which
means they tend to trail behind the current price in fast-moving markets. (See
Figure 6.6
.) All moving averages have this weakness—the lag effect. Thus, in a highly volatile or nontrending market, trading signals using moving averages tend to generate faulty signals. This will
cause repeated whipsaws, which can pile up trading losses.
FIGURE 6.6
Crossovers of two moving average lines. Notice the lagging effect of the intermediate-term
average as is typical in a volatile market. Circles mark the crossovers of the two average lines. If
entry and exit were based entirely on the crossovers of the average lines, the lag of the
intermediate-term average would take out a substantial part of the profit.

A sell signal is generated when the share price falls below the moving average, and a buy
signal is generated when the share price rises above its moving average. The critical element in
a moving average is the time period used in calculating the average. The objective of a moving
average system is to pick a trade with a probable price trend by buying shortly after the share
price bottoms and selling after it tops.
Another method is the use of multiple moving averages. For example, in a system with two
moving average lines, a buy is signaled when the shorter moving average crosses above the
longer moving average, and a sell is signaled when the shorter line crosses below the longer
line. The shorter the length of a moving average, the more sensitive it will be to short-term
fluctuations, and the longer the length, the less sensitive to abrupt fluctuations. Shorter-length
averages lag the market less than longer-length averages
A study in moving average will not be complete without the study of the eight principles
regarding the interpretation of price to moving average. The rules are mentioned in Technical
Analysis of Stock Trends by Robert D. Edwards and John Magee. The Eight Rules of Moving
Average Crossovers (Eight Rules) refer to movements between price and its 200-day moving
average. The 200-day moving average is generally accepted as the key psychology line used by
many long-term investors.
The Eight Rules can be applied to almost any period of moving average.
1. If the 200-day average line flattens out or advances following a decline, and the price of the
stock penetrates that average line on the upside, this constitutes a major buying signal.
2. If the price of the stock falls below the 200-day average line while the average line is still
rising, this also is a buy signal.
3. If the stock price is above the 200-day line and declines toward it, but fails to go through and
instead turns up again, this is a buying signal.
4. If a stock price falls too fast and far below the declining 200-day average line, a short-term
rebound toward the line may be expected.
5. If the 200-day average line flattens out or declines following a rise, and the stock price
penetrates that line on the downside, this constitutes a major selling signal.
6. If the price of the stock rises above the 200-day average line while the average line is still
falling, this also is a sell signal.

7. If the stock price is below the 200-day average line and rises toward it, but it fails to go
through and instead turns down again, this is a sell signal.
8. If the stock price rises too fast above the rising 200-day average line, a short-term reaction
may be expected.
Figure 6.7
shows the application of the Eight Rules on the crossovers between an 8-day moving
average and a 34-day moving average as well as the plot of a momentum oscillator between
the two moving averages. When the 8-day moving average crosses above the 34-day average,
the oscillator will be above the zero line.
FIGURE 6.7
The top window displays examples from the Eight Rules principle between the interplay of an
8-day moving average and a 34-day moving average. The bottom window shows the
overbought zone and oversold zone of the momentum oscillator, which is derived from the
difference of the two moving averages.

Referring to the Eight Rules, if another moving average is plotted between price and 200-day
average, say a 50-day average, there will be two moving average crossovers, a 50-day average
and a 200-day average.
The interplay of these two moving averages, 50-day and 200-day, is popularly used in
considering prospective bull and bear markets. When the 50-day is above the 200-day, the
market is considered to be in a long-term bull phase, and when the 50-day is below the 200day, the market is considered to be in a long-term bear phase. When the 50-day crosses from
below to above the 200-day, it is referred as the Golden Cross, signaling a market change to a
bullish outlook, and when the 50-day crosses from above to below the 200-day, it is referred as
the Dead Cross, signaling a market change to a bearish outlook.
Generally, the combination of two moving averages is effective as well as easy to interpret.
The faster line tracks the shorter-term trend, while the slower line tracks the longer-term trend.
When there is a crossing between the faster line and the slower line, it indicates a probable
change in trend. This method of crossover is commonly used in developing automated setup
conditions, and in a rule-based trading system, which will be discussed in later chapters of the
book. However, this system alone is subject to whipsaws in a bracket market condition and
should be supported by a subsequent entry condition or by another supporting oscillator.
In a crossover system of two moving averages, we have three factors: the price, a short-term
moving average, and a long-term moving average. Let’s take the price as the closing price, the
