
make its offer, even though it had had two months to prepare a bid and there was no way to be certain that
Cerberus was serious about buying Clayton—as opposed to showing up as a spoiler to Buffett by coming in
at the last minute.
The Claytons were caught in a terrible bind. If the vote failed, which it very well might do—for one large
shareholder, Fidelity Investments, had announced its intention to change its vote from yes to no—there might
be no deal, and Clayton could get sued for having signed the agreement not to consider other bids. If the vote
passed and Clayton sold to Berkshire, Clayton could get sued for ignoring another, possibly higher bid.
Kevin Clayton left the meeting to call Buffett and ask him to agree to a delay on the vote, to allow Cerberus
time to make a bid. Buffett said okay—if they would pay Berkshire $5 million for the delay. Clayton agreed
to Buffett’s price, reconvened the meeting, and adjourned it before taking a vote.34
By now the business press was covering the story as a David and Goliath set piece in which a gang of tiny
Davids—the hedge funds that were fighting the deal—tried to defeat the greedy Claytons and the colossus
Buffett. Journalists are automatic skeptics of establishment figures; hedge fund managers, by and large, are
anti-establishment by nature; they had learned to play the press for mutual benefit like a virtuoso with his
Stradivarius. The press turned on the mighty Buffett. If he was buying something, the price must be too
cheap.
The test of whether Buffett was stealing Clayton would be whether another bidder could be found. A week
later, when seventy accountants, lawyers, and financial specialists from Cerberus Capital and three other
firms—the Blackstone Group, Credit Suisse, and Texas Pacific Group—descended on Knoxville, Tennessee,
led by the Cerberus chairman, former Vice President Dan Quayle, the clock began to tick toward the moment
of truth. Clayton housed them in its fanciest mobile homes, adjoining the headquarters. Most of the team
toured Clayton’s plants and pored through rooms full of documents, focusing increasingly on the huge maw
of the mortgage unit and the way it sucked down capital.35 Quayle roamed the hallways shaking hands,
repeating that Cerberus was a “family-friendly company.”36
While Cerberus and the other firms were deliberating, the Denver Area Meat Cutters and Employers Pension
Plan filed a lawsuit against Clayton, charging it with “self-dealing, abusive control, and lack of candor.”37
Buffett felt he was being blackmailed. The Meat-Cutters’ Union’s lawsuit was orchestrated by Darren
Robbins, a partner of Milberg Weiss, a law firm that specialized in representing investors in class-action
lawsuits. “It’s a well-known fact that they committed a fraud,” said Robbins.38 Twenty-two plaintiff’s
lawyers, assistants, and researchers descended upon Knoxville. Plaintiff’s lawyers do not stay in mobile
homes. They reportedly bunkered into nine luxury condominiums downtown, ready for a six-month battle.39
After a week of their own digging, the Cerberus people returned to New York and faxed a sheet labeled “for
discussion purposes only”: “Clayton Recapitalization—Sources & Uses.” The sheet was not an offer, but it
contained a price: $14 a share. The Claytons’ first impression was that Cerberus had beaten Buffett’s offer
by a healthy margin. However, a closer look revealed that Cerberus planned to give shareholders only $755
million in cash, whereas Buffett’s $1.7 billion was an all-cash deal. Under the Cerberus deal, the outside
shareholders would get $9 a share out of the $14 total. The balance would be paid in a “recapitalized” stock.
The $9 a share, however, would actually be paid by Clayton itself. Cerberus wasn’t going to invest any
money. Clayton would have to borrow $500 million and sell off $650 million of assets.40
This was a typical leveraged-buyout proposal, in which a company’s assets are sold and it takes on debt in
order to finance its own sale. The recapitalized stock, nominally worth $5, would consist of a piece of a
financial company that had piled additional debt on top of a shrunken capital base. Debt was the blood
coursing through the veins of mobile-home makers; without it they were dead. And lenders were already
shying away from the business. Why would they lend to a company whose ability to repay them had just
been gutted? The Cerberus people obviously knew this; they had delivered a proposal that was the best that
financial engineering could do. The Claytons called Cerberus to discuss it and, without any rancor, they

agreed to go their separate ways.
But CNBC and the financial press were now portraying Buffett as a ruthless financier who had connived with
the Claytons to buy the company cheap. The way that the Clayton deal was playing out in the media, and the
manner in which Buffett’s reputation had compounded to the point where it worked against him, represented
a dramatic reversal of the image of the wise, grandfatherly man who attracted legions of would-be coattailriders. The blister had popped; the opposition to the Clayton merger showed that large investors were no
longer coattail-riding, waiting for his reputation to take prices higher; they wanted to use his reputation
against him, to block him.
Buffett, however, had never really specialized in buying things that other people wanted at a price that was
too cheap. Instead, he bought things that other people didn’t want and thought that they were better off
without. True, they had often been mistaken about that. Increasingly, since the Buffalo Evening News,
however, Berkshire had bought properties that most people really were better off without. There weren’t
many companies that had the balance sheet to look a union in the eye and stare them down, that had the
financial wherewithal to finance Clayton’s debt, that could make decisions on deals like Long-Term Capital
in an hour rather than a week. Berkshire could do all those things, and more. Many of the companies
Berkshire was now buying were businesses like NetJets, built by entrepreneurs who wanted to sell to a buyer
who would treat their babies well, and who trusted Berkshire to behave honestly.41 Buffett’s real brilliance
was not just to spot bargains (though he certainly had done plenty of that) but in having created, over many
years, a company that made bargains out of fairly priced businesses.
On what turned out to be Susie Jr.’s fiftieth birthday, the adjourned Clayton shareholder meeting finally
reconvened. After four months, no other bidder had come forward, and Cerberus had declined to make a
deal. In the end, 52.3 percent of the shareholders voted for the Berkshire deal, barely enough. Excluding the
Claytons, the other shareholders had voted no by a margin of two to one. Buffett sat by the phone until he
got the news. Then he took his daughter out and gave her the gift he had selected for her with the help of
Susan Jacques at Borsheim’s—an eternity ring crowned with a large pink heart-shaped diamond—and her
latest million-dollar birthday gift. The supposedly cold-blooded financier was a soft-hearted sentimentalist
when it came to his daughter, with whom he had an increasingly close and even dependent relationship. He
had been carrying this ring around for a couple of weeks, pulling it out to look at it and getting teary-eyed
with anticipation of his daughter’s reaction. When Susie Jr. saw the ring, she threw her arms around him and
cried.
While they were hugging, Milberg Weiss and Orbis’s William Gray were already starting to try to undo the
vote. Gray challenged the election and won the right to audit the ballots. The Delaware Chancery Court
upheld the vote. Handed defeat, Orbis then joined with Milberg Weiss to ask Tennessee Blount County
Circuit Court Judge Dale Young to restrain the deal from being consummated. Judge Young instead said the
merger should proceed. With Milberg Weiss barking at the door, the Claytons wasted no time. On August 7,
the day the merger was scheduled to close, Clayton’s Delaware attorneys were waiting at the door of the
Secretary of State at daybreak to file the paperwork to certify the merger. By seven-thirty a.m. it was done.42
As soon as the merger was effective, Milberg Weiss and Orbis rushed to file an appeal with the Tennessee
Court of Appeals to overrule Judge Young’s decision of the day before. The next day, the Tennessee Court
of Appeals concurred and temporarily blocked the merger, which had already closed. That prevented
Berkshire from paying out the proceeds. The Court of Appeals gave the lower court a homework assignment,
asking it to rule on a number of issues within two weeks. Clayton started working to fulfill Milberg Weiss’s
eighteen-page document request. Lawyers and company people were working almost around the clock.
Kevin Clayton and his wife had just had a baby; she was colicky from a protein allergy. “It took
twenty-seven formulas before we found one from London that would work,” says Clayton. “Plus, I got
shingles right in the middle of it, from stress. I called up my dad and said, ‘Dad, this is rough.’ And he said,
‘Well, son, I had paralysis on the left side of my face when I was your age from stress.’ Then I called up
Warren, and he said, ‘Well, Kevin, when I was younger, I lost a lot of my hair from stress.’ I got no sympathy
from either one of them.”

On August 18, Judge Young ordered a trial before a jury. Clayton immediately appealed.
Clayton stock had ceased trading weeks ago, but Berkshire could not pay out the merger proceeds, since the
deal marinated in the galley of the appellate court. Forty thousand shareholders awaited their money from
Berkshire Hathaway. All $1.7 billion sat in the bank, earning interest for Berkshire.
Buffett got a fax from a couple who were being foreclosed out of their home. They needed the money from
the Clayton stock to pay their mortgage. Pay what you can, he told the couple, and just explain the situation.
Probably that will be enough to avoid foreclosure.
“It’s the Perils of Pauline,” he said.
The stalemate dragged on for nearly two weeks. Finally, as the calendar turned to September, the court found
“not a scintilla of evidence” that the Claytons had manipulated the voting process. Six days later, Milberg
Weiss filed an appeal with the Tennessee Supreme Court. Buffett was incredulous—or, rather, he would have
been incredulous had it been any law firm but Milberg Weiss. They were still seeking to have the merger
overturned. That was not going to result in a big fat check for the law firm. How did they expect to get paid?
The photocopy machines were running late at night at Clayton’s law firm, kachunking forth documents and
legal bills. Buffett reasoned that Milberg Weiss must be trying to make such a nuisance of itself that Clayton
would simply pay it to go away. He talked to Kevin Clayton. Never, Clayton vowed.43
Buffett mused about the historic position of the Tennessee Supreme Court, which potentially could become
the first court in the history of the United States to unwind a merger that was already complete. The court,
evidently finding itself of the same mind, dismissed the appeal.
Clayton’s insurance company, St. Paul, wanted to settle the remaining shareholder suit filed by Milberg
Weiss for $5 million. The Claytons and Buffett hated the thought of paying people they considered stickup
artists and ambulance chasers because so little of the money would go to the shareholders—maybe a nickel a
share. The lawyers would get most of the money. However, the insurer argued that unless they settled, the
legal bills would cost the company even more. Feeling ransomed, they went ahead and paid. And thus ended
the battle to buy Clayton Homes.
But soon it became clear that sales of manufactured housing were not going to turn around.44 Buffett had not
bought just as the bounce was coming back. In fact, as Ian Jacobs had flown back to report, the downward
spiral in manufactured housing had just begun. The price that had looked so cheap was barely reasonable. To
help the deal’s economics, Buffett had Kevin Clayton begin buying portfolios of distressed loans. It was
going to take some mighty fine footwork to make the Clayton deal work out.

58
Buffetted
Omaha • Summer–Fall 2003

In September, Buffett was in a state of high excitement. Fortune magazine had named him the most
powerful person in business. To many oohs and aahs, he had recently auctioned his battered wallet with a
stock tip inside for $210,000 to benefit Girls Inc., a nonprofit cause of Susie Jr.’s. Next, he had auctioned
himself off on eBay—or, rather, lunch for eight people with him—to benefit Glide Memorial Church in San
Francisco, Susie’s main cause. Glide gave HIV tests during services and held funerals and memorials for gay
men whose families and churches had rejected them. The Reverend Cecil Williams’s watchword was
“unconditional love,” a term that Susie had adopted like a mantra and even Warren now used from time to

time. At Glide, everyone was welcome: hookers, junkies, winos, drifters.1 According to the highest of fifty
bidders on eBay, two hours of Buffett’s time and a lunch for eight at Michael’s were worth $250,100—that
is, more than the stock tip in his wallet. Within days, an artist’s rendering of him dressed in a toga as if
descended from Mount Olympus would appear in Forbes to illustrate a list of “Best-Dressed Billionaires.”
However limited the competition for that list (although billionaires were becoming pretty commonplace these
days), Buffett could never have been considered a contender for best-dressed anything, were he not so
celebrated and popular that pictures of him sold magazines. Not only that, the two Susies were scheduled to
speak on philanthropy at Fortune’s Most Powerful Women Summit the following week, at the beginning of
October, before an audience made up of many of the most important women in America, including CEOs,
entrepreneurs, and women of stature in many different fields. Buffett was elated at this coronation of his wife
and daughter, particularly that they would be making the presentation together.
On the Friday afternoon before the conference began, Susie called Warren to tell him that she was going to
be arriving a day late, because on Monday she was having a biopsy. She had seen her periodontist in June, an
appointment that had been delayed from May by her earlier bowel obstructions, esophageal ulcer, and and
anemia. The periodontist had found some pin-dot-size spots on the floor of her mouth and referred her to a
specialist. Two months had passed as Susie tried to work around the specialist’s schedule and her own
complicated travel itinerary to arrange an appointment. Once the appointment was finally booked, she had
almost canceled it in favor of a visit to the Gates Foundation.
“No. No, no, no, no, no. You’re not canceling,” said Kathleen Cole. It was rare for Cole to contradict her
friend and boss outright. But now she insisted, “You have to go.”2
At the appointment, Dr. Deborah Greenspan had felt around Susie’s neck and found swollen lymph nodes on
one side. She insisted that Susie see yet another specialist, Dr. Brian Schmidt, the following Monday for a
biopsy. Susie seemed unconcerned about the biopsy. She wanted to delay it in order to avoid missing any of
the Fortune conference. “I have to do this,” she told Kathleen, referring to her appearance there. The
specialist, Dr. Schmidt, refused to postpone the procedure, however.3
Buffett absorbed the news quietly, but was deeply shaken. A few hours after Susie called, he carried on a
long, rambling phone conversation with someone else, filling the unrelenting minutes after he got home from
work. Seconds before his bridge game was due to begin, he said casually, but in a low, serious voice, Oh, by
the way, Susie’s having a biopsy on Monday.
For what?! asked his shocked listener.
Some kind of thing in her mouth, he said. Well, I’ll talk to you later. Then he hung up.
Susie had the biopsy. She went and spoke at the conference, then flew east to Decatur to visit Howie on the
farm, see her grandkids, and ride on the combine for the harvest before returning to San Francisco. With
hindsight, Howie would think to himself, Gee, she’d always talked about coming out for the harvest, but
she’d never done it before.4 At the time, however, he noticed nothing unusual, for she behaved as she always
did.5
Warren kept his face glued to the computer screen, whether surfing the news or playing bridge or helicopter.
His rising anxiety showed in the usual manner; he repeated the same questions and statements about a subject
over and over while denying—if asked—that he was concerned.
On Friday, Susie and Kathleen Cole went to USC Medical Center to learn the biopsy results. Susie continued
to seem oblivious to the potential seriousness of the situation. When they arrived at Dr. Schmidt’s office,
Susie said to Kathleen, “You’re so nervous. Why are you so nervous?” Kathleen thought, “Oh, my gosh,
doesn’t she get that this could be bad news?” When they met with the doctor, he told Susie that she had
stage-three oral cancer. She was stunned by the diagnosis. “It was like somebody shot a thunderbolt through
her,” says Cole. She had apparently not even considered this as a possibility.6

Susie had her moment of tears. Then, characteristically, by the time they got into the car she had pulled
herself together and started chicken-souping everybody but herself. She called Warren. He did not say much.
She called Susie Jr. and told her, “Call your dad. He’s going to be a mess.” Then she went home and talked to
Warren again and to Susie Jr., Howie, and Peter.7 By then, Susie Jr. had already gone to the Internet to
research.8 She called her father and said, “Don’t read the oral cancer Web site.”
Oral cancer strikes only 34,000 people a year but kills more than 8,000. An often painless but fast-growing
cancer, it is more deadly than melanoma, brain cancer, liver cancer, cervical cancer, or Hodgkin’s disease;9 it
is particularly dangerous because it’s usually discovered only after it has spread to the lymph nodes of the
neck, at which point the primary tumor may have invaded surrounding tissue and potentially migrated to
other organs. A person with oral cancer has an especially high risk of developing a second primary tumor.
Surviving a first bout with the disease carries a twentyfold greater risk of recurrence.
At least ninety percent of those diagnosed with oral cancer are longtime smokers or use smokeless tobacco.
Alcohol use combined with smoking raises the risk even more. Susie Buffett never smoked or drank. She had
no significant risk factors. The fact that her cancer was stage three meant that it had already spread to at least
one lymph node but probably not to more distant sites.
Susie returned to her apartment overlooking the Golden Gate Bridge, every wall covered with a souvenir of a
trip, a gift from a friend, or a piece of art that meant something to her. The woman who never let go of
anything or anybody started telling people, “I’ve had a wonderful life. My kids are grown. I’ve lived to see
my grandkids. I love my life, but I’ve done my job and I’m not really needed anymore.”
“If it were up to me,” she told Kathleen, “I would go off to a villa in Italy in privacy and just die.” She was
far more fearful of a protracted, painful death than of dying itself. But if she simply gave up, she would be
abandoning people who were important to her, people who had been part of her life for decades. It was really
Warren for whom she was going to have the surgery. However, she told Kathleen and her friend Ron Parks,
among others, that she hadn’t decided whether to do the follow-up radiation that was a standard part of the
treatment to reduce the risk of a recurrence, which was high. For some reason, perhaps because she was in a
state of shock, she didn’t seem to grasp how important it was.10
The following morning, as she and Kathleen were making plans for what was to come, Susie unaccountably
refused to authorize Kathleen to pay for the equipment that would be needed to make her apartment
accessible postsurgery. Kathleen needed to get elevator chairs to carry her up all the flights of stairs to her
apartment at the top of the building. Susie would not hear of it. Kathleen decided that Susie was in some kind
of shock or denial and finally called Susie Jr., who simply said to ignore her mother and make the necessary
arrangements.
Meanwhile, a stunned Warren paced through his routine, as he invariably did in a crisis. He escorted a very
upset Astrid to the Nebraska football game in Lincoln. He flew out to San Francisco the following morning,
where he learned that Susie needed major surgery within the next few weeks. She had a fifty percent chance
of surviving for five years. A large portion of her jaw and most or all of her teeth might be removed. For more
than a month after the surgery, she would be fed through a tube in her nose that led directly into her stomach.
She would not be able to talk during that period and the surgery was potentially disfiguring. Susie told Warren
little more; she did say she was worried that she would frighten her own grandchildren. They decided she
would fly to New York City for a second opinion at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center the following
week, although this was largely a formality.
Once back in Omaha, Warren filled his every conscious moment with phone conversations, Internet bridge
games, work, and strategizing how to handle an upcoming meeting with Karen Elliott House, publisher of the
Wall Street Journal. Buffett by now had had several run-ins with the Journal over its coverage of him,
beginning with the 1992 story that called him a “tough, polished man” beneath the “mask” of a folksy sage.
House was arriving perhaps on a repair mission, perhaps to sound him out about buying the financially
troubled paper. But his mind never really left Susie; he touched on her in brief cloudbursts of conversation.
He had decided to spend every weekend in San Francisco with her during the coming months. Although he

didn’t really know what he was letting himself in for, he wanted to give her in some fashion what he knew
she would have given him, had their situations been reversed. He felt certain, he said, she needed his
presence. For sure, he was going to need hers.
The meeting with House proved uneventful; nobody got strangled, nor did Buffett buy the paper. For the rest
of the week he started every morning in a thunderhead mood—a sure sign that he was not sleeping
well—then brightened through the course of the day. Other than Debbie Bosanek and a few other people,
nobody at Berkshire Hathaway headquarters knew the reason.
During that week he rarely left his corner of the floor next to the Xerox room and the two file rooms,
spending much of his time on the phone with Susie. Although they talked for hours, she was vague about the
ordeal that she faced. Initially, she herself had not grasped the extensiveness of the surgery, which might also
involve a bone graft taken from her leg. The surgeons were not sure how much of her face would be
involved, although they thought they could spare her tongue. Most devastating to her was that she would
probably not be able to sing again. She had discussed the surgery with her former son-in-law, Allen
Greenberg, who had a longtime familiarity with her medical problems, having taken his friend, boss, and
former mother-in-law to the emergency room several times over the years. Sensitive to the way Buffett
recoiled at anything to do with illness, Greenberg did not even mention Susie when he went to Buffett’s
office to update him on the foundation’s projects.
Yet while Warren didn’t want to know much, he talked and talked about what he did know. “They’ve got a
team of five guys, and it’s at least a ten-hour deal. She’s got the best care in the world. She got a letter
from Howie that—no mother could get a better letter. She’s got a lot going for her. But it’ll be a tough
ordeal. They’ve given her a lot of information, and she knows I don’t want the details. She’s told me what
she thinks I can handle. I’m sure the doctors think it’s crazy that I’m not talking to them directly. But I can’t
take that, so she’s sort of told me the key elements.”
A few days later Susie flew into Omaha to pick up Susie Jr., who was going to accompany her to Memorial
Sloan-Kettering in New York for her second opinion. Tests there gave them the good news that there was no
indication that the cancer had spread, and they flew back to Omaha, where Big Susie was going to spend the
weekend. But while there she had another episode of crippling pain from her abdominal adhesions. This
attack, coming less than five months after the obstruction that had prevented the Buffetts from traveling to
Africa the previous May, was disturbing. She had to stay over at Susie Jr.’s, but for once heavy doses of
painkillers enabled her to avoid hospitalization, which had always been required before.
Haggard and pasty-faced, Buffett dragged himself to the office, then left in the middle of the week for a
Coca-Cola board meeting in Atlanta. By the time he returned, Susie had begun to recover and went to pay a
visit to Astrid. When she saw Susie, Astrid simply broke down in sobs, and, once again, it was Susie’s turn to
comfort someone else.
After the weekend, when Susie flew back to San Francisco, Buffett’s mood turned dark again, his voice went
gravelly, and he was clearly having trouble sleeping. The biennial Buffett Group meeting, which was being
held a few days later, weighed on his mind. Susie’s doctors didn’t want her to travel to the meeting, which
was taking place in San Diego. Thus, for the first time since 1969, Warren would be going alone. Not only
would Susie not be there, but his friend Larry Tisch, an early partner and the head of Loews Corporation,
also would be absent, because he was too ill with advanced stomach cancer to attend.
Buffett was obviously preoccupied with thoughts of what it would be like to go to this meeting without Susie.
News of her illness was sure to cause a stir simply because many of the people attending were finding out
about it shortly before the meeting. For five days he was going to have to answer questions about her, accept
sympathy, and keep his emotions in check. He would have to perform his role of master of ceremonies,
maintaining interest in what was going on without striking any false notes of excessive good cheer. Buffett
had mastered the art of compartmentalizing to such a degree that these skills were second nature to him—but
under the circumstances, it was still going to be a hell of a performance. Once he was back in his hotel room
at the end of the evening, he would be alone in the dark with his thoughts and his dreams.
