
 * Technically, the finding that risk is reduced by longer holding periods depends on the reversion-to-the-mean phenomenon described in Chapter 11 . The interested reader is referred to Paul Samuelson’s article “The Judgment of Economic Science on Rational Portfolio Management” in the Journal of Portfolio Management (Fall 1989). 
 † I assume that the savings can be made in an IRA or other tax-favored savings vehicle, so income taxes on interest earnings are ignored. 
 ‡ In the ninth edition of this book, I recommended a 4½ percent rule because bond yields were considerably higher than they were in 2014. Indeed, with interest rates as low as they are, a 3½ percent rule would give retirees even more assurance that they would not outlive their money.

A Random Walk Down Wall Street 

 15 

 THREE GIANT STEPS DOWN WALL STREET 
 Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure nineteen six, result happiness. Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure twenty pounds ought and six, result misery. — Charles Dickens, David Copperfield 
 T HIS CHAPTER OFFERS rules for buying stocks and specific recommendations for the instruments you can use to follow the asset-allocation guidelines presented in chapter 14 . By now you have made sensible decisions on taxes, housing, insurance, and getting the most out of your cash reserves. You have reviewed your objectives, your stage in the life cycle, and your attitude toward risk, and you have decided how much of your assets to put into the stock market. Now it is time for a quick prayer at Trinity Church and then some bold steps forward, taking great care to avoid the graveyard on either side. My rules can help you avoid costly mistakes and unnecessary sales charges, as well as increase your yield a mite without undue risk. I can’t offer anything spectacular, but I do know that often a 1 or 2 percent increase in the yield on your assets can mean the difference between misery and happiness. 
 How do you go about buying stocks? Basically, there are three ways. I call them the No-Brainer Step, the Do-It-Yourself Step, and the Substitute-Player Step. 
 In the first case, you simply buy shares in various broad-based index funds or indexed ETFs designed to track the different classes of stocks that make up your portfolio. This method also has the virtue of being absolutely simple. Even if you have trouble chewing gum while walking randomly , you can master it. The market, in effect, pulls you along with it. For most investors, especially those who prefer an easy, lower-risk solution to investing, I recommend bowing to the wisdom of the market and using domestic and international index funds for the entire investment portfolio. For all investors, however, I recommend that the core of the investment portfolio—especially the retirement portion—be invested in index funds or ETFs. 
 Under the second system, you jog down Wall Street, picking your own stocks and perhaps overweighting certain industries or countries. This involves work, but also possibly a lot of fun. I don’t recommend this approach for most investors. Nevertheless, if this is how you prefer to invest, I’ve provided a series of rules to help tilt the odds of success a bit more in your favor. 
 Third, you can sit on a curb and choose a professional investment manager to do the walking down Wall Street for you. The only way investors of modest means can accomplish this is to purchase managed mutual funds. I don’t prefer actively managed funds, but later in the chapter I will at least present some suggestions that may help you choose the better ones if you insist on this option. 
 Earlier editions of my book described a strategy I called the Malkiel Step: buying closed-end investment company shares at a discount from the value of the shares held by the fund. When the first edition of this book was published, discounts on U.S. stocks were as high as 40 percent. Discounts are far smaller now, as these funds are more efficiently priced. But attractive discounts can arise, especially on international funds and municipal bond funds, and savvy investors can sometimes take advantage. The Malkiel Step is described later in this chapter. 
 THE NO-BRAINER STEP: INVESTING IN INDEX FUNDS 
 The Standard & Poor’s 500-Stock Index, a composite that represents about three-quarters of the value of all U.S.-traded common stocks, beats most of the experts over the long pull. Buying a portfolio of all companies in this index would be an easy way to own stocks. I argued back in 1973 (in the first edition of this book) that the means to adopt this approach was sorely needed for the small investor: 
 What we need is a no-load, minimum-management-fee mutual fund that simply buys the hundreds of stocks making up the broad stock-market averages and does no trading from security to security in an attempt to catch the winners. Whenever below-average performance on the part of any mutual fund is noticed, fund spokesmen are quick to point out, “You can’t buy the averages.” It’s time the public could. 
 Shortly after my book was published, the “index fund” idea caught on. One of the great virtues of capitalism is that when there is a need for a product, someone usually finds the will to produce it. In 1976, a mutual fund was created that allowed the public to get into the act as well. The Vanguard 500 Index Trust purchased the 500 stocks of the S&P 500 in the same proportions as their weight in the index. Each investor shared proportionately in the dividends and in the capital gains and losses of the fund’s portfolio. Today, S&P 500 index funds are available from several mutual-fund complexes with expense ratios of about of 1 percent of assets, far less than the expenses incurred by most actively managed mutual funds or bank trust departments. You can now buy the market conveniently and inexpensively. You can als buy exchange-traded S&P 500 index funds offered by State Street Global Advisors, BlackRock, and Vanguard. 
 The logic behind this strategy is the logic of the efficient-market hypothesis. But even if markets were not efficient, indexing would still be a very useful investment strategy. Since all the stocks in the market must be owned by someone, it follows that all the investors in the market will earn, on average, the market return. The index fund achieves the market return with minimal expenses. The average actively managed fund incurs an expense ratio of about 1 percent per year. Thus, the average actively managed fund must underperform the market as a whole by the amount of the expenses that are deducted from the gross return achieved. This would be true even if the market were not efficient. 
 The above-average long-run performance of the S&P 500 compared with that of mutual funds and major institutional investors has been confirmed by numerous studies described in previous chapters of this book. Yes, there are exceptions. But you can count on the fingers of your hands the number of mutual funds that have beaten index funds by any significant margin. 
 The Index-Fund Solution: A Summary 
 Let’s now summarize the advantages of using index funds as your primary investment vehicle. Index funds have regularly produced rates of return exceeding those of active managers. There are two fundamental reasons for this excess performance: management fees and trading costs. Public index funds and exchange-traded funds are run at fees of of 1 percent or even less. Actively managed public mutual funds charge annual management expenses that average 1 percentage point per year. Moreover, index funds trade only when necessary, whereas active funds typically have a turnover rate close to 100 percent. Using very modest estimates of trading costs, such turnover is undoubtedly an additional drag on performance. Even if stock markets were less than perfectly efficient, active management as a whole could not achieve gross returns exceeding the market. Therefore active managers must, on average, underperform the indexes by the amount of these expense and transactions costs disadvantages. Unfortunately, active managers as a group cannot be like the radio personality Garrison Keillor’s fictional hometown of Lake Wobegon, where “all the children are above average.” 
 Index funds are also tax-friendly. Index funds allow investors to defer the realization of capital gains or avoid them completely if the shares are later bequeathed. To the extent that the long-run uptrend in stock prices continues, switching from security to security involves realizing capital gains that are subject to tax. Taxes are a crucially important financial consideration because the earlier realization of capital gains will substantially reduce net returns. Index funds do not trade from security to security and, thus, tend to avoid capital gains taxes. 
 Index funds are also relatively predictable. When you buy an actively managed fund, you can never be sure how it will do relative to its peers. When you buy an index fund, you can be reasonably certain that it will track its index and that it is likely to beat the average manager handily. Moreover, the index fund is always fully invested. You should not believe the active manager who claims that her fund will move into cash at the correct times. We have seen that market timing does not work. Finally, index funds are easier to evaluate. There are now over 5,000 stock mutual funds out there, and there is no reliable way to predict which ones are likely to outperform in the future. With index funds, you know exactly what you are getting, and the investment process is made incredibly simple. 

 “Leaping tall buildings in a single bound is nice, but can you outperform the S&P 500 Index?” © 2002 by Thomas Cheney: Reprinted with permission. 
 Despite all the evidence to the contrary, suppose an investor still believed that superior investment management really does exist. Two issues remain: First, it is clear that such skill is very rare; and second, there appears to be no effective way to find such skill before it has been demonstrated. As I indicated in chapter 7 , the best-performing funds in one period of time are not the best performers in the next period. The top performers of the 1990s had dreadful returns in the first decade of the 2000s. Paul Samuelson summed up the difficulty in the following parable. Suppose it was demonstrated that one out of twenty alcoholics could learn to become a moderate social drinker. The experienced clinician would answer, “Even if true, act as if it were false, for you will never identify that one in twenty, and in the attempt five in twenty will be ruined.” Samuelson concluded that investors should forsake the search for such tiny needles in huge haystacks. 
 Stock trading among institutional investors is like an isometric exercise: lots of energy is expended, but between one investment manager and another it all balances out, and the trading costs the managers incur detract from performance. Like greyhounds at the dog track, professional money managers seem destined to lose their race with the mechanical rabbit. Small wonder that many institutional investors, including Intel, Exxon, Ford, American Telephone and Telegraph, Harvard University, the College Retirement Equity Fund, and the New York State Teachers Association, have put substantial portions of their assets into index funds. By 2014, about one-third of investment funds were “indexed.” 
 How about you? When you buy an index fund, you give up the chance of boasting at the golf club about the fantastic gains you’ve made by picking stock-market winners. Broad diversification rules out extraordinary losses relative to the whole market. It also, by definition, rules out extraordinary gains. Thus, many Wall Street critics refer to index-fund investing as “guaranteed mediocrity.” But experience shows conclusively that index-fund buyers are likely to obtain results exceeding those of the typical fund manager, whose large advisory fees and substantial portfolio turnover tend to reduce investment yields. Many people will find the guarantee of playing the stock-market game at par every round a very attractive one. Of course, this strategy does not rule out risk: If the market goes down, your portfolio is guaranteed to follow suit. 
 The index method of investment has other attractions for the small investor. It enables you to obtain very broad diversification with only a small investment. It also allows you to reduce brokerage charges. The index fund, by pooling the moneys of many investors, trades in larger blocks and pays minimal fees on its transactions. The index fund does all the work of collecting the dividends from all of the stocks it owns and sending you each quarter one check for all of your earnings (earnings that, incidentally, can be reinvested in the fund if you desire). In short, the index fund is a sensible, serviceable method for obtaining the market’s rate of return with absolutely no effort and minimal expense. 
 A Broader Definition of Indexing 
 The indexing strategy is one that I have recommended since the first edition in 1973—even before index funds existed. It was clearly an idea whose time had come. By far the most popular index used is the Standard & Poor’s 500-Stock Index, an index that well represents the major corporations in the U.S. market. But now, although I still recommend indexing, or so-called passive investing, there are valid criticisms of too narrow a definition of indexing. Many people incorrectly equate indexing with a strategy of simply buying the S&P 500 Index. That is no longer the only game in town. The S&P 500 omits the thousands of small companies that are among the most dynamic in the economy. Thus, I believe that if an investor is to buy only one U.S. index fund, the best general U.S. index to emulate is one of the broader indexes such as the Russell 3000, the Wilshire 5000 Total Market Index, the CRSP Index, or the MSCI U.S. Broad Market Index—not the S&P 500. 
 Eighty years of market history confirm that, in the aggregate, smaller stocks have tended to outperform larger ones. For example, from 1926 to 2014 a portfolio of smaller stocks produced a rate of return of about 12 percent annually, whereas the returns from larger stocks (such as those in the S&P 500) were about 10 percent. Although the smaller stocks were riskier than the major blue chips, the point is that a well-diversified portfolio of small companies is likely to produce enhanced returns. For this reason, I favor investing in an index that contains a much broader representation of U.S. companies, including large numbers of the small dynamic companies that are likely to be in early stages of their growth cycles. 
 Recall that the S&P 500 represents 75 to 80 percent of the market value of all outstanding U.S. common stocks. Literally thousands of companies represent the remaining 20 to 25 percent of the total U.S. market value. These are in many cases the emerging growth companies that offer higher investment rewards (as well as higher risks). The Wilshire 5000 Index contains all publicly traded U.S. common stocks. The Russell 3000 and MSCI Index contain all but the smallest (and much less liquid) stocks in the market. A number of mutual funds are now based on these broader indexes. Such index funds usually go by the name Total Stock Market Portfolio. Although past performance can never assure future results, the evidence clearly indicates that Total Stock Market index funds have provided higher returns than the average equity mutual-fund manager. 
 Moreover, unlike charity, indexing need not begin (and end) at home. As I argued in chapter 8 , investors can reduce risk by diversifying internationally, by including asset classes such as real estate in the portfolio, and by placing some portion of their portfolio in bonds and bondlike securities, including Treasury inflation-protection securities. This is the basic lesson of modern portfolio theory. Thus, investors should not buy a U.S. stock-market index fund and hold no other securities. But this is not an argument against indexing because index funds currently exist that mimic the performance of various international indexes such as the Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) index of European, Australasian, and Far Eastern (EAFE) securities, and the MSCI emerging-markets index. In addition, there are index funds holding real estate investment trusts (REITs). Finally, Total Bond Market index funds are available that track the Barclays Aggregate Bond Market Index. Moreover, all these index funds have also tended to outperform actively managed funds investing in similar securities. 
 One of the biggest mistakes that investors make is to fail to obtain sufficient international diversification. The United States represents only about one-third of the world economy. To be sure, a U.S. Total Stock Market fund does provide some global diversification because many of the multinational U.S. companies such as General Electric and Coca-Cola do a great deal of their business abroad. But the emerging markets of the world (such as China, India, and Brazil) have been growing much faster than the developed economies. China, for example, is still considered an emerging market. But it is now the second-largest economy in the world and is expected by the International Monetary Fund to continue to be the fastest-growing large economy in the world and to surpass the United States in size during the second decade of the twenty-first century. Hence, in the recommendations that follow, you will note that I suggest that a substantial part of every portfolio be invested in emerging markets. 
 Emerging markets are likely to sustain high growth rates well into the twenty-first century. Emerging markets tend to have younger populations than the developed world. Economies with younger populations tend to grow faster. Moreover, at the end of 2014, they had more attractive valuations than those in the United States. We have pointed out that cyclically adjusted P/E ratios (CAPEs) tend to have predictable power in forecasting longer-run equity returns in developed markets. The table below shows that the same relationship holds in emerging markets. Emerging market CAPEs were below 15 in late 2014. Future long-run returns have tended to be generous when stocks could be bought at those valuations. 
 CAPES AND FUTURE RETURNS IN EMERGING MARKETS (2005–2014) 

 CAPE Future 5-Year Annual Equity Return 
 10–15 13% 
 15–20 11% 
 20–25 7% 
 25–30 1% 
 30–40 –3% 

 Indexing also is an extremely effective strategy in emerging markets. The chart below indicates that the overwhelming majority of actively managed emerging-market equity funds are outperformed by the MSCI emerging-markets index. Even though emerging markets are not likely to be as efficient as developed markets, they are costly to access and to trade. Expense ratios of active funds are far higher than is the case in developed markets. Moreover, liquidity is lower and trading costs are higher in emerging markets. Therefore, after all expenses are accounted for, indexing turns out to be an excellent investment strategy. 

 Ten years ended December 31, 2013 (net for fees, including survivorship bias). 
 Source: Morningstar. 
 A Specific Index-Fund Portfolio 
 The table on page 389 presents specific index-fund selections that investors can use to build their portfolios. The table shows the recommended percentages for those in their mid-fifties—the group I call the “aging boomers.” Those who are not in their mid- fifties can use exactly the same selections and simply change the weights to those appropriate for their specific age group. Remember also that you may want to alter the percentages somewhat depending on your personal capacity for and attitude toward risk. Those willing to accept somewhat more risk in the hope of greater reward could increase the proportion of equities. Those who need a steady income for living expenses could increase their holdings of real estate equities and dividend growth stocks, because they provide somewhat larger current income. 
 A SPECIFIC INDEX-FUND PORTFOLIO FOR AGING BABY BOOMERS 

 Cash (5%) * 
   Fidelity Money Market Fund (FXLXX)   or Vanguard Prime Money Market Fund (VMMXX) 
 Bonds and Bond Substitutes (27 ½ %) † 
 7½%   U.S. Vanguard IntermediateTerm Bond (VICSX)   or iShares Corporate Bond ETF (LQD) 
 7½%   Vanguard Emerging Market Government Bond Fund (VGAVX) 
 12½%   Wisdom Tree Dividend Growth Fund (DGRW)   or Vanguard Dividend Growth Fund (VDIGX)† 
 Real Estate Equities (12 ½ %) 
   Vanguard REIT Index Fund (VGSIX)   or Fidelity Spartan REIT Index Fund (FRXIX) 
 Stocks (55%) 
 27%   U.S. Stocks       Schwab Total Stock Market Index Fund (SWTSX)       or Vanguard Total Stock Market Index Fund (VTSMX) 
 14%   Developed International Markets       Schwab International Index Fund (SWISX)       or Vanguard International Index Fund (VTMGX) 
 14%   Emerging International Markets       Vanguard Emerging Markets Index Fund (VEIEX)       or Fidelity Spartan Emerging Markets Index Fund (FFMAX) 

 * A short-term bond fund may be substituted for one of the money-market funds listed. 
 † Although it doesn’t fit under the rubric of an index-fund portfolio, investors might consider putting part of the U.S. bond portfolio in Treasury inflation-protection securities. The dividend growth and corporate bond funds are also an exception since they are not standard index funds. 
 Remember also that I am assuming here that you hold most, if not all, of your securities in tax-advantaged retirement plans. Certainly all bonds should be held in such accounts. If bonds are held outside of retirement accounts, you may well prefer tax-exempt bonds rather than the taxable securities. Moreover, if your common stocks will be held in taxable accounts, you might consider tax-managed index funds. Finally, note that I have given you a choice of index funds from different mutual-fund complexes. Because of my long association with the Vanguard Group, I wanted also to suggest a number of non-Vanguard funds. All the funds listed have moderate expense ratios and are no-load. More information on these funds, including telephone numbers and websites, can be found in the Random Walker’s Address Book, which follows this chapter. ETFs may be used in lieu of mutual funds. 
 ETFs and Taxes 
 One of the advantages, noted above, of passive portfolio management (that is, simply buying and holding an index fund) is that such a strategy minimizes transactions costs as well as taxes. Taxes are a crucially important financial consideration, as two Stanford University economists, Joel Dickson and John Shoven, have shown. Utilizing a sample of sixty-two mutual funds with long-term records, they found that, pre-tax, $1 invested in 1962 would have grown to $21.89 in 1992. After paying taxes on income dividends and capital gains distributions, however, that same $1 invested in mutual funds by a high-income investor would have grown to only $9.87. 
 To a considerable extent, index mutual funds help solve the tax problem. Because they do not trade from security to security, they tend to avoid capital gains taxes. Nevertheless, even index funds do realize some capital gains that are taxable to the holders. These gains generally arise involuntarily, either because of a buyout of one of the companies in the index, or because sales are forced on the mutual fund. The latter occurs when mutual-fund shareholders decide on balance to redeem their shares and the fund must sell securities to raise cash. Thus, even regular index funds are not a perfect solution for the problem of minimizing tax liabilities. 
 Exchange-traded index funds (ETFs) such as “spiders” (an S&P 500 Fund) and “vipers” (a Total Stock Market fund) can be more tax-efficient than regular index funds because they are able to make “in-kind” redemptions. In-kind redemptions proceed by delivering low-cost shares against redemption requests. This is not a taxable transaction for the fund, so there is no realization of gain that must be distributed to the fund’s other shareholders. Moreover, the redeeming ETF shareholder pays taxes based on his or her original cost of the shares—not the fund’s basis in the basket of stocks that is delivered. ETFs also happen to have rock-bottom expenses, sometimes even lower than those of equivalent mutual funds. A wide variety of ETFs are available not only for U.S. stocks but for international ones as well. ETFs are an excellent vehicle for the investment of lump sums that are to be allocated to index funds. 
 ETFs require the payment of transactions costs, however, including brokerage fees * and bid-asked spreads. No-load index mutual funds will better serve investors who will be accumulating index shares over time in small amounts. I suggest that you avoid the temptation to buy or sell ETFs at any hour of the day and to buy such funds on margin. I agree with John Bogle, founder of the Vanguard Group, who says, “Investors cut their own throats when they trade ETFs.” If you are so tempted, follow the practice of Little Miss Muffet and run far away from the spiders and their siblings. 
 In the table on page 392, I list the ETFs that can be used to build your portfolio. Note that for investors who want to make their stock buying as easy as possible, there are Total World Index funds and ETFs that provide total international diversification with one-stop shopping. 
 EXCHANGE TRADED FUNDS (ETFS) 

