effect of position sizing. Table 6-8 shows a summary of Ethel’s
stock trading.
The system made $7,175 over 18 trades during the year. This
amounts to an average gain of $398.61 per trade. Remember that
Fred’s system only made $90 per trade. In addition, Ethel’s system
makes money 55.6 percent of the time, while Fred’s system only
makes money 45 percent of the time. Ethel obviously has a better
system. Or does she?
Let’s look at the expectancy per dollar risked of Ethel’s system
and the opportunity factor. When these factors are considered, does
Ethel have the better system? Table 6-9 shows the various dollar
groupings of Ethel’s system. Ethel had three minimum losses that
were about $500 each--one of $477, one of $501, and one of $589.
Thus, we’ll assume that Ethel’s minimum risk was about $500. We
can develop a probability matrix for Ethel’s trades as shown in
Table 6-10.
Once again, let’s apply Formula 62 to the matrix in Table 6-10
to determine an approximate expectancy per dollar risked. First,
let’s calculate the positive expectancy of the winning trades. The

TABLE69

168 + 0.333 + 0.444 + 0.448 = $1.393

Dollar Grouping of Ethel’s Trades

I

GShlS

LOSSeS
Number

Range

Number

6
1

$300-$600
$1,200-$1,600

3

51,200-$1,600
$1,750-$2,250

0

$1,750-52,250

2

53,50&$4,000
57,300-$7,500

2
1

53,500-54,000

1

Range

530&5600

2

TABLE E-10

Ethel’s Trades as a Probability Matrix

G&L?

When we subtract the total negative expectancy from the total positive expectancy, we end up with 2.229 less $1.393 = $0.836.
Ethel’s expectancy of 84 cents per dollar risked is bigger than
Fred’s expectancy of 78 cents per dollar risked. In terms of
expectancy, Ethel has a slightly better system.
Remember that Fred’s profit was mostly a function of one
good trade. Well, the same is also true of Ethel’s profit. Her one
profit of $7,358 was bigger than her entire l-year net profit of
$7,175. Thus, one trade made her entire profit over the l-year
period. This is quite often true of good long-term systems.
But what about the opportunity factor? Fred produced 18
trades in 4 months-actually more than 18, but some of them were
excluded because they were scratch trades amounting to a gain or
loss of less than $100. In 2 years, Fred might produce three times as
many trades. Let’s compare the expectancy times the number of
opportunities for a l-year period to really evaluate the systems.

LOSSW
Probability

Payoff

Probability

6118 = 0.333

1 to 1

3118 = 0 . 1 6 8

l/18 = 0 . 0 5 6

310 1

208 = 0.111

0

4to 1

2118 = 0.111

z/l8 = 0.111

ato 1

l/18 = 0.056

Ethel’s System

Fred’s Sysiem

EXPecmlCY

Opportunities

TOtal

Expectancy

78 cents

54

542.12

64 cents

Opportunities

Total

18

$15.12

l/18 = 0 . 0 5 6

positive expectancy is equal to (0.333 * 1) + (0.056 * 3) + (0.111 * 8)
+ (0.056 * 15). If we perform the multiplication, we end up with a
total positive expectancy of the following:
0.333 + 0.168 + 0.888 + 0.840 = $2.229
Now we need to find the total negative expectancy of the losing trades. That negative expectancy is equal to (0.168 * 1) +
(0.111 * 3) + (0.111 * 4) + (0.056 * 8). If we perform the multiplication,
we end up with a total negative expectancy of the following:

When you look at the two systems in terms of expectancy times
opportunities, then Fred has a much better system. However, this
assumes that both investors made the maximum use of their
opportunities.
The comparison of the two systems brings up an interesting
variable with respect to opportunity. Ethel only made 18 trades in
a l-year period. But this did not necessarily mean that she only had
18 opportunities to trade. An investor only makes the maximum
use of his or her opportunities under the following conditions: (1)
He or she is fully invested (i.e., makes full use of the position-sizing algorithm) when there are opportunities to trade; (2) he or she
has an exit strategy and exits the market when that strategy is trig-

158

PART 2

Conceptualization of Your System

gered; and (3) he or she makes full use of other opportunities when
cash is available to do so. If any of these three criteria is not met,
then the comparison of systems by expectancy and opportunity is
not necessarily a valid one.
A REVIEW OF HOW TO USE EXPECTANCY
Just as a review, once you have a system, or at least a rudimentary
system, you need to calculate its expectancy and look at a number
of issues involving expectancy. Here are the steps involved.
1. Calculate the overall expectancy of your system. If you
already have a system that you have been using or have
tested, you can calculate the expectancy of the system by
simply dividing the total profit by the number of trades.
Note that you do not yet have the expectancy per dollar
risked at this point.
2. Eliminate the effects of position sizing by only
considering single units or loo-share blocks.
3. Divide your trades into groups of profits and losses,
using $100 or $500 ranges depending upon the size of
the typical smallest loss. Your smallest loss relates to
where you typically put your disaster stops. This is your
system’s 1-R level. In this step, you are simply assessing
the expectancy of your system, not trying to improve it.
4. Convert your groupings of trades into a probability
matrix by using your “smallest loss” as a single unit.
This will help you find your expectancy per dollar risked
5. Calculate the expectancy of your system from the
probability table using Formula 6-2.
6. If your system includes at least 100 trades and has an
expectancy above 50 cents per dollar risked, then it is a
good system. These aie just general guidelines for a good
long-term system. You can be happier with a much lower
expectancy if you get enough opportunity.
7. Determine the opportunity you will have to obtain your
expectancy.
Look at the size of the “marbles” determined in your proba-

bility matrix. What do your marbles tell you about your system?
How can you change your system to include more high-payoff
winning trades? How can you change your system to include fewer
high-cost losing trades?
Remember the following:
1. Expectnncy and probability of winning are not the same thing.
People have n bias to want to be right on every trade or
inzestment. As a result, they tend to gravitate toward highprobability entry systems. Yet quite often these systems
are also associated with large losses and lead to negative
expectancy. As a result, always take your risk in the
direction of the expectancy of the system.
2. Even with a high positive expectancy system you can still lose
money. If you risk too much on a trade and you lose, you
can (and probably will) have trouble recovering.
NOTES
1. $100 times 100 times 0.2 = $2,000. This assumes that your 100 trades
actually net 20 cents per dollar risked.
2. Adapted from Market Mastery, January, 1998.
3 . One share of stock or one futures contract would be a single unit.
4. This would seem to imply that if the cost of trading is factored in, it’s
better to trade more frequently than less frequently. While this
assumption is true, it doesn’t take into account the psychological
wear and tear that comes from frequent trading.
5. This section was written by Chuck Branscomb and originally
appeared in our Market Mastery newsletter (November 1996, pp. 3-5,
and December 1996, pp. 24). It has been adapted for this chapter.
6. This section was written by Chuck Branscomb and originally
appeared in our Market Mastery newsletter (November 1996, pp, 3-5,
and December 1996, pp. 24). It has been adapted for this chapter.
7. Figure 6-1 was generated using TradeStation@. TradeStation is a
registered trademark of Omega Research.
8. This value does not count scratch trades in which you either quickly
get out for some reason or raise your stop to break even and then get
out. What we are looking at is the typical minimum risk you have on
a trade.

PART THREE

-

Understanding the Key Parts
of Your System

This section is designed to help you construct your system
However, before you begin this section, you should thoroughly
understand Parts I and II of the book. They form the necessary
groundwork that you must have before you begin the actual construction.
Chapter 7 talks about setups. Setups are conditions that are
necessary in order for something else to occur. I’ve put the setups
chapter first, because most entry and exit systems usually consist of
a setup plus a trigger for action. In Chapter 7, you’ll learn about the
most common entry setups-both for the stock market and for the
futures market. These are all setups used by master traders and
investors. Quite often they are promoted as systems all by themselves, and people tend to accept that because of the lotto bias.
However, you’ll be able to combine these setups with other critical
parts of a system to create something that really is worthwhile.
Chapter 8 discusses entry techniques. Your entry technique
essentially controls the reliability of your system-how often it
makes money. However, you should know by now that reliability
is not nearly as important as your expectancy in evaluating a system. In addition, reliability can be high, while expectancy can be
negative-as illustrated in one of the problems in the last chapter.
You’ll also learn that entry becomes less and less significant to your
trading as your time frame becomes longer. Chapter 8 will show

that most entry techniques are not much better than random entry,
but it will also give you the few entry systems that seem to produce
system reliability that is higher than you might expect from just
random entry.
The topic of Chapter 9 is taking losses with your system.
Every system should have a method of getting out of the market to
preserve capital. This is the “disaster stop” part of your system. It’s
one of the most important criterion of any system. We’ll be discussing the purpose behind such disaster stops and the advantages
and disadvantages of wide stops and narrow stops.
One of the most important topics of this volume is how to
take profits. Profit-taking exits are the topic of Chapter 10. We’ll be
discussing the purpose of various exits, the advantages of multiple exits, and the importance of simplicity in your exits. You’ll
learn how to develop exits to meet the objectives you developed
earlier.
Chapter 11 is about opportunity and cost factors-topics that
are seldom discussed elsewhere. You’ll learn that you don’t need to
be anywhere near perfect if you have enough trading opportunities. However, cost becomes a very important factor as you trade
more.
The discussion in Chapters 7 through 11 is not exhaustive. Our
goal is simply to give you techniques that work and to avoid discussing, except in a general way, techniques that do not work. Mv
intention is not to give you a complete system. If I did that, it
wouldn’t be right for you. My intention is to give you the tools and
help you overcome your psychological biases so that you can
develop a system that is right for you.
We’ll also be illustrating the parts of a system by showing you
what is commonly known about some well-known trading systems. You can see what parts everyone focuses on and how you
can improve them by emphasizing what everyone neglects. My
goal is in no way to criticize these systems, since most of them are
well known and they all have some excellent qualities. In fact, if
you like one or more of them, I’d encourage you to go to the original source to learn more information. My goal in these chapters is
to review them in enough detail so that you can find out what their
strengths and weaknesses are and perhaps even improve upon
them.
One of the more important topics of the whole book is discussed in Chapter 12--position sizing. Position sizing is the key
topic behind any Holy Grail trading system. It’s the difference

between the ho-hum trading methodology and the world’s best
methodologies. It’s a topic that few people think about, yet much
more effort should be put into position-sizing strategies than into
any other part of your system. Chapter 12 is designed to start you
heading in the right direction.
Coverage of the topic of position sizing has been very inadequate in the past. In fact, most books on system development don’t
even cover it. You’ll learn why in Chapter 12, and we’ll give you a
lot of ideas to get you started in the right direction. You’ll also learn
some ideas with respect to position sizing that are seldom, if ever,
applied to the stock market, but that will give exceptional returns
when they are used.
Finally, Chapter 13 concludes the book by addressing many of
the issues that are important, such as data, software, testing procedures, portfolio design, and the management of other people’s
money.

CHAPTER 7

Using Setups

Speculation, in its truest sense, calls for anticipation.
Richard D. Wyckoff

Setups refer to conditions that must occur before other action is
taken. They are an essential aspect of most entry and exit portions
of any system. I’ve chosen to discuss them first, because they form
a foundation for the subsequent discussions on entry and exit techniques
Many of the ideas presented in the “concepts” chapter
(Chapter 5), for example, simply have to do with setups for entry.
For instance, the concept having to do with “there being an order
to the market” in most cases simply gives you a window of opportunity during which you can expect a substantial move in the market-that window is nothing more than a time setup. It certainly is
not an entry signal, nor a trading system.
For example, I recently consulted with an expert in Elliott
Wave--one of the “there’s an-order-to-the-universe” concepts. He
claimed that he was right on about 70 percent of his ideas, but only
30 percent of his trades made money He typically had a very tight
stop below his exit to preserve his capital. Quite frequently, the
market would take him right out of a position. Thus, he would
have to enter three or four times in order to capitalize on the idea.
In addition, by the time the market went against him three or four

times, he was often too nervous to reenter the market and would
subsequently miss the move. Other times, he would be right about
the idea, but the market would start to move so violently that he
felt there was too much risk to take the move. Essentially, this
trader’s problem was confusing what is essentially a setup (i.e., the
right conditions with respect to Elliott Wave analysis) with an
entire trading system. He had no real entry criteria (as defined in
the next chapter), and he had no way of capitalizing on the great
reliability of his idea because he got stopped out too often.
We corrected both problems with ideas that you’ll learn about
in Chapters 8 and 9. However, the critical issue is a problem that
most investors and traders have-they confuse their setups with a
complete trading system. Most investors and traders buy books on
their craft that consist of nothing but such setups. If the setups are
accompanied by enough best-case examples, then the author can
usually convince his or her readers that the book contains the Holy
Grail.
If you learn one critical thing from this book, it should be
that a setup is about 10 percent (or less) of your trading system.
Most people will place 90 percent of their emphasis on finding
the right setups, but setups are actually one of the least important
parts of the system.
Let’s look at another concept-fundamental analysis-to help
you understand how setups come out of various concepts.
Fundamental analysis simply gives you a number of conditions
which, when favorable, suggest that the market is ripe for entry on
the long or the short side.’ Those conditions might mean that the
market is overvalued or undervalued because of supply-anddemand conditions. However, fundamentals do not give you anything about timing--they simply indicate that conditions are ripe
(i.e., set up) for an entry at some time in the future. The actual market move might not occur for months after the signal is “ripe” for a
move.
To better understand what a setup condition means, let’s talk
about the four phases of entry into the market. Generally, every
trader or investor should give some thought to each of these four
phases.

THE FOUR PHASES OF ENTRY
Market Selection
The first consideration you should give to entering the market is
your selection of what markets you will trade. What qualities must
a market have before you want to be a part of it?
Give some thought to using one or more of the following criteria:
1. Liquidity. How active is the market (or security) you are
planning on investing in the future? Basically, the issue is one of liquidity, which has to do with the ease of getting into or out of the
market at the bid or ask price-or even in the spread between the
bid and ask price. If the market is fairly illiquid, then that spread
could be huge and you would have to pay a large price (beyond
commissions) just to get in and out of that market.
Liquidity is a major factor in entry. Why? If you have substantial size, then the price might move a significant amount in an illiquid market simply because of your presence. On the other hand, if
you are a small trader-who could enter into an illiquid market
quite easily-you might want to avoid such markets because a
“foolish” large trader might enter into those markets, causing a significant move just because of his or her presence.
Stock market traders, for example, might want to avoid stocks
that trade less than 10,000 shares per day This means that a simple
round lot would be 1 percent of the daily activity. That could be a
problem for you when you want to get into or out of that market.
2. Newness of the market. Generally it’s best to avoid a new
market-whether it’s newly created futures contracts or stocks that
have just been introduced onto the exchange. A lot of mistakes are
made in such new issues because you have little idea of what the
underlying product is going to be. On the other hand, if a market
has been around at least a year, you’ll have a much better idea of
what to expect.
Some people specialize in new issues. Certainly, in strong bull
markets, new stock issues often tend to go up rapidly. They also col@se rapidly. Perhaps your “edge” might be that you keep on top of
enough information about new companies that you feel safe invest-

168

PART 3

Understanding the Key Parts of Your System

ing in new issues. However, just remember that this is a dangerous
area for amateurs.
3. Market makers and trading rules. What exchange makes a
market for the underlying investment, and do you know its rules of
trading? In essence, who is behind the market you are trading?
Who are the market makers? What is their reputation? What can
you expect when you deal with these people? Who regulates these
market makers? What’s likely to happen if you put a stop order on
at one of these exchanges? Is that order something that is executed
easily for your benefit, or is it a license to steal?
For example, certain stock and commodity exchanges are
much more difficult to trade than other exchanges. It’s much more
difficult to get good fills. If you have experience trading markets on
these exchanges, and know what to expect, then it’s probably okay
to trade them. On the other hand, if you are new to the market, then
it’s probably best to trade only the most well-established
exchanges-such as the New York Stock Exchange, the Chicago
Board of Trade, or the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
Overseas markets can also be great opportunities or disasters
waiting for the uninitiated trader to step in. Find people who
have traded the markets you want to trade. Ask them what to
expect. What are worst case scenarios? Make sure that you can
tolerate such worst-case scenarios before you trade in those types
of markets.
4. Volatility. Volatility essentially means how much price
movement has occurred within a specific time frame. Day traders,
for example, need to trade highly volatile markets. Since they are
typically out of a position at the end of the day, they need to trade
markets that normally have enough volatility to allow for large
profits even though they will still be out at the end of the day.
Typically, only certain currency markets, the stock indexes, and the
bond markets qualify as good markets for day traders.
If you happen to be trading a system that trades turning
points in consolidating markets, then you probably need to select
markets that have enough volatility to make that sort of trading
worthwhile. Again, volatility of the markets would be an important
consideration.
For both day trading and consolidation market trading, you
need enough volatility to still make a profit that is two to three

CHAPTER 7 Using Setups

169

times the size of your initial risk. This should be your most important criterion in selecting your markets.
5. Capitalization. Stock traders often select stocks on the basis
of capitalization. Some investors only want highly capitalized
stocks, while other investors only want low-capitalization stocks.
Let’s look at the possible reasons for each criterion.
Typically, speculative investors who are looking for sharp
moves in the market want low-capitalization stocks (under $25 million). Research has proved that low-cap stocks account for the
majority of stocks that go up by 10 times or more. Generally, as
demand for the stock goes up, the price will rise dramatically if
there is little supply, because there are only a few million shares
outstanding.
On the other hand, conservative investors don’t want a lot of
price fluctuation. They don’t want to see the price rising a point on
a 1,000.share order and then falling a point again on another l,OOOshare order. Instead, they want slow, smooth changes in price. You
are much more likely to see this kind of behavior in highly capitalized stocks with several hundred million shares or more outstanding.
6. Markets and trading criteria. How well does that market
follow your trading criteria-be it trendiness or seasonality?
Generally, no matter what your trading criteria are, you need to
find markets that fit those criteria well. And the less capital you
have, the more important this selection process is to you.
Thus, if you are a trend follower, you need to find markets that
trend well-be they stocks that show good relative strength or
futures markets that typically show good trends several times each
year. When the market typically has met your trading criteria in the
past, it probably will do so again.
The same goes for any other criteria you may be trading. If
you follow seasonal patterns, then you must trade markets that
show strong seasonal tendencies-agriculture products or energy
products. If you follow Elliott Wave, then you must follow those
markets for which Elliott Wave seems to work best. Whatever your
trading criteria seem to be, you must find the markets that best
meet those criteria.
7. Selection of a portfolio of independen? markets. This topic
