
185
RISK MANAGEMENT

Offered Rate (LIBOR) and the three-month T-bill interest rate, and it measures the risk of bank defaults. In the credit crisis of 2008, TED spread rose
to a record 457 basis points. Since the credit market is dominated by large
institutional players, presumably they are more informed than those indicators based on the stock market where the herd-like instinct of retail investors contributes to its valuation. (The TED spread is useful notwithstanding
the fraudulent manipulation of LIBOR rates by the banks to make them
appear lower, as discovered by Snider and Youle, 2010. What matters is the
relative value of the TED spread over time, not its absolute value.)
There are other risky assets that at different times have served as risk indicators, though we would have to test them carefully to see if they are leading
indicators. These assets include high yield bonds (as represented, for example, by the ETF HYG) and emerging market currencies such as the Mexican
peso (MXN). During the European debt crisis of 2011, the MXN became
particularly sensitive to bad news, even though the Mexican economy remained healthy throughout. Commentators attributed this sensitivity to the
fact that traders are using the MXN as a proxy for all risky assets in general.
More recently, traders can also watch the ETF’s ONN and OFF. ONN
goes up when the market is in a “risk-on” mood; that is, when the prices of
risky assets are bid up. ONN basically holds a basket of risky assets. OFF is
just the mirror image of ONN. So a high value of OFF may be a good leading
risk indicator. At the time of this writing, these ETFs have only about seven
months of history, so there is not enough evidence to confirm that they have
predictive value.
As we mentioned in the section on high-frequency trading in Chapter 7, at
short time scales, those who have access to order flow information can detect
a sudden and large change in order flow, which often indicates that important
information has come into the possession of institutional traders. This large
change in order flow is negative if the asset in question is risky, such as stocks,
commodities, or risky currencies; it is positive if the asset is low risk, such as
U.S. treasuries or USD, JPY, or CHF. As we learned before, order flow is a
predictor of future price change (Lyons, 2001). Thus, order flow can be used
as a short-term leading indicator of risk before that information becomes
more widely dispersed in the market and causes the price to change more.
There are also risk indicators that are very specific to a strategy. We mentioned in Chapter 4 that oil price is a good leading risk indicator for the
pair trading of GLD versus GDX. Other commodity prices such as that of
gold may also be good leading risk indicators for pair trading of ETFs for
countries or companies that produce them. Similarly, the Baltic Dry Index

may be a good leading indicator for the ETFs or currencies of export-oriented countries.
I should conclude, though, with one problem with the backtesting of leading risk indicators. Since the occurrence of financial panic or crises is relatively
rare, it is very easy to fall victim to data-snooping bias when we try to decide
whether an indicator is useful. And, of course, no financial indicators can predict natural and other nonfinancial disasters. As the order flow indicator works
at higher frequency, it may turn out to be the most useful of them all.

KEY POINTS
• Maximization of long-term growth rate:
• Is your goal the maximization of your net worth over the long term? If so,
consider using the half-Kelly optimal leverage.
• Are your strategy returns fat-tailed? You may want to use Monte Carlo
simulations to optimize the growth rate instead of relying on Kelly’s
formula.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

186

• Keeping data-snooping bias in mind, sometimes you can just directly
optimize the leverage based on your backtest returns’ compounded
growth rate.
• Do you want to ensure that your drawdown will not exceed a preset
maximum, yet enjoy the highest possible growth rate? Use constant
proportion portfolio insurance.
• Stop loss:
• Stop loss will usually lower the backtest performance of mean-reverting
strategies because of survivorship bias, but it can prevent black swan
events.
• Stop loss for mean-reverting strategies should be set so that they are
never triggered in backtests.
• Stop loss for momentum strategies forms a natural and logical part of
such strategies.
• Risk indicators:
• Do you want to avoid risky periods? You can consider one of these
possible leading indicators of risk: VIX, TED spread, HYG, ONN/OFF,
MXN.
• Be careful of data-snooping bias when testing the efficacy of leading risk
indicators.
• Increasingly negative order flow of a risky asset can be a short-term
leading risk indicator.

CONCLUSION

E

ven though this book contains an abundance of strategies that should be
interesting and attractive to independent or even institutional traders,
it has not been a recipe of strategies, or a step-by-step guide to implementing them. The strategies described in this book serve only to illustrate the
general technique or concept, but they are not guaranteed to be without
those very pitfalls that I detailed in Chapter 1. Even if I were to carefully
scrub them of pitfalls, good strategies can still be victims of regime changes.
Readers are invited and encouraged to perform out-of-sample testing on the
strategies in this book to see for themselves.
Instead of recipes, what I hope to convey is the deeper reasons, the basic
principles, why certain strategies should work and why others shouldn’t.
Once we grasp the basic inefficiencies of certain markets (e.g., regression
to the mean, the presence of roll returns in futures, the need for end-of-day
rebalancing in leveraged exchange-traded funds [ETFs]), it is actually quite
easy to come up with a strategy to exploit them. This notion of understanding the inefficiency first and constructing a strategy later is why I emphasized simple and linear strategies. Why create all kinds of arbitrary rules
when the inefficiency can be exploited by a simple model?
The other notion I wanted to convey is that the approach to algorithmic
trading can be rather scientific. In science, we form a hypothesis, express it
as a quantitative model, and then test it against new, unseen data to see if
the model is predictive. If the model failed with certain data, we try to find
out the reasons for the failures, perhaps add certain variables to the model,
and try again. This is a very similar process to how we should approach
algorithmic trading. Recall the ETF pair GLD versus GDX that stopped

187

CONCLUSION

188

cointegrating in 2008 (see Chapter 4). A hypothesis was formed that had
to do with the high crude oil price. When oil price was added to the input
variables, the cointegration model started to work again. This scientific process is most helpful when a strategy underperforms the backtest, and we
wanted to know why. Instead of blindly adding more rules, more indicators,
to the model and hoping that they miraculously improve the model performance, we should look for a fundamental reason and then quantitatively test
whether this fundamental reason is valid.
Despite the efforts to make the trading process scientific and rule based,
there are still areas where subjective judgment is important. For example,
when there is a major event looming, do you trust that your model will behave as your backtest predicted, or do you lower your leverage or even temporarily shut down the model in anticipation? Another example is offered
by the application of the Kelly formula to a portfolio of strategies. Should
we allocate capital among these strategies based on the equity of the whole
portfolio, so that the good performance of some strategies is subsidizing
the poor performance of others in the short term? Or should we apply the
Kelly formula to each strategy on its own, so that we quickly deleverage
those strategies that perform poorly recently? Mathematics tells us that the
former solution is optimal, but that’s assuming the expected returns and
volatilities of the strategies are unchanging. Can one really say that such expectations are unchanged given a recent period of severe drawdown?
(On the first judgment call, my experience has been that if your model
has survived the backtest during prior stressful periods, there is no reason
to lower its leverage in the face of coming crisis. It is much better to start off
with a more conservative leverage during good times than to have to lower
it in bad ones. As Donald Rumsfeld once said, it is the “unknown unknowns”
that will harm us, not the “known unknowns.” Unfortunately, we can’t shut
down our models before the unknown unknowns strike. On the second
judgment call, my experience has been that applying Kelly to each strategy
independently so as to allow each one to wither and die quickly when it
underperforms is more practical than applying Kelly asset allocation across
all strategies.)
As these examples show, subjective judgment is often needed because
the statistical properties of financial time series are not stationary, and science can really only deal with stationary statistics. (I am using stationary in
a sense different from the stationarity of time series in Chapter 2. Here, it
means the probability distribution of prices remains unchanged throughout time.) Often, when we find that our live trading experience diverges

from the backtest, it is not because we committed any of the pitfalls during
backtesting. It is because there has been a fundamental change in the market
structure, a regime shift, due to government regulatory or macroeconomic
changes. So the fund managers still have an active ongoing role even if the
strategy is supposedly algorithmic and automated—their role is to make judicious high-level judgment calls based on their fundamental understanding
of the markets on whether the models are still valid.
However, the fact that judgment is sometimes needed doesn’t mean
that developing quantitative rules is useless or algorithmic traders are less
“smart” than discretionary traders. As the oft-quoted Daniel Kahneman
wrote, experts are uniformly inferior to algorithms in every domain that has a
significant degree of uncertainty or unpredictability, ranging from deciding
winners of football games to predicting longevity of cancer patients. One
can hope that the financial market is no exception to this rule.

189
CONCLUSION

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Arnuk, Sal L., and Joseph C. Saluzzi. Broken Markets: How High Frequency
Trading and Predatory Practices on Wall Street Are Destroying Investor Confidence andYour Portfolio. Upper Saddle River, NJ: FT Press, 2012.
Beckert, Walter. Course notes on Financial Econometrics, Birkbeck
University of London, 2011. Available at www.ems.bbk.ac.uk/for
_students/bsc_FinEcon/fin_economEMEC007U/adf.pdf.
Bernard, Victor L., and Jacob K. Thomas. “Post-Earnings-Announcement
Drift: Delayed Price Response or Risk Premium?” Journal of Accounting
Research 27 (1989): 1–36.
Berntson, M. “Steps in Significance/Hypothesis Testing Using the Normal
Distribution.” Course notes for Introduction to Sociology, Grinnell
College, 2002. Available at http://web.grinnell.edu/courses/sst/s02
/sst115-03/practice/hypothesisteststeps1.pdf.
Bollen, Johan, Huina Mao, and Xiao-Jun Zeng. “Twitter Mood Predicts the
Stock Market,” 2010. Available at http://arxiv.org/pdf/1010.3003.pdf.
Bryant, Martin. “Investment Fund Set to Use Twitter to Judge Emotion in
the Market,” The Next Web, December 16, 2010. Available at http://
thenextweb.com/uk/2010/12/16/investment-fund-set-to-use
-twitter-to-judge-emotion-in-the-market/.
Buy the Hype, “The ‘Twitter Hedge Fund’ Has an Out-of-Sample Experience,” Buy the Hype (blog), May 3, 2012. Available at http://sellthenews
.tumblr.com/post/22334483882/derwents-performance.
Chan, Ernest. Quantitative Trading: How to Build Your Own Algorithmic Trading
Business. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2009.

191

BIBLIOGRAPHY

192

Cheng, Minder, and Ananth Madhavan. “The Dynamics of Leveraged and Inverse Exchange-Traded Funds.” Journal of Investment Management, Winter
2009. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1393995.
Clare, Andrew, and Roger Courtenay. “What Can We Learn about Monetary
Policy Transparency from Financial Market Data?” Economic Research
Centre of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 2001. Available at www.olsen
.ch/fileadmin/Publications/Client_Papers//200102-ClareCourtenay
-WhatLearnMonetaryPolTransparencyFinMkts.pdf.
Coval, Joshua, and Erik Stafford. “Asset Fire Sales (and Purchases) in Equity
Markets.” Journal of Financial Economics 86 (2007): 479–512. Available at
www.people.hbs.edu/estafford/Papers/AFS.pdf.
Daniel, Ken, and Tobias Moskowitz. “Momentum Crashes.” Preprint,
2011. Available at www.columbia.edu/~kd2371/papers/unpublished
/mom4.pdf.
Dever, Michael. Jackass Investing. Thornton, PA: Ignite LLC, 2011.
Dueker, Michael J., and Christopher J. Neely. “Can Markov Switching Models
Predict Excess Foreign Exchange Returns?” Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis Working Paper 2001-021F, 2001. Available at http://research
.stlouisfed.org/wp/2001/2001-021.pdf.
Dupoyet, Brice, Robert T. Daigler, and Zhiyao Chen. “A Simplified Pricing
Model for Volatility Futures.” Journal of Futures Markets 31, no. 4 (2011):
307–339. Available at www2.fiu.edu/~dupoyetb/vix_futures.pdf.
Durbin, Michael. All About High-Frequency Trading. New York: McGraw-Hill,
2010.
Durden, Tyler. “Why the Market Is Slowly Dying,” Zero Hedge (blog), April
14, 2012, www.zerohedge.com/news/why-market-slowly-dying.
Engle, R. F., and C.W. Granger. “Co-integration and Error-Correction: Representation, Estimation, and Testing.” Econometrica 55 (1987): 251–276.
Erb, Claude B., and Campbell R. Harvey. “The Strategic and Tactical Value
of Commodity Futures.” Financial Analysts Journal 62, no. 20 (2006):
69. Available at http://ciber.fuqua.duke.edu/~charvey/Research
/Published_Papers/P91_The_strategic_and.pdf.
Falkenberry, Thomas N. “High Frequency Data Filtering,” 2002. Available at
www.tickdata.com/pdf/Tick_Data_Filtering_White_Paper.pdf.
Fama, Eugene F., and Marshall E. Blume. “Filter Rules and Stock-Market
Trading.” Journal of Business 39, no. 1 (1966): 226–231. Available at
www.e-m-h.org/FaBl66.pdf.
Friedman, Thomas. “A Good Question.” New York Times Op-ed, February
25, 2012.

193
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Gill, Jeff. “The Insignificance of Null Hypothesis Significance Testing.” Political Research Quarterly 52, no. 3 (1999): 647–674. Available at
www.artsci.wustl.edu/~jgill/papers/hypo.pdf.
Greenblatt, Joel. The Little Book that Beats the Market. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons, 2006. Also see magicformulainvesting.com.
Hafez, Peter A. “Event Trading Using Market Response,” July 22, 2011,
www.ravenpack.com/research/marketresponsepaperform.htm.
Hafez, Peter A., and Junqiang Xie. “Short-Term Stock Selection Using
News Based Indicators,” May 15, 2012, www.ravenpack.com/research
/shorttermstockselectionpaperform.htm.
Harris, Larry. Trading and Exchanges. New York: Oxford University Press,
2003.
Hellström, Jörgen, and Ola Simonsen. “Does the Open Limit Order Book
Reveal Information About Short-run Stock Price Movements?” Umeå
Economic Studies, 2006.
Hull, John C. Options, Futures, and Other Derivatives, 3rd ed. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1997.
Johnson, Barry. Algorithmic Trading & DMA. London: 4Myeloma Press,
2010.
Kahneman, Daniel. Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux. 2011.
Khandani, Amir, and Andrew Lo. “What Happened to the Quants in August
2007?” Preprint, 2007. Available at http://web.mit.edu/alo/www
/Papers/august07.pdf.
Kleeman, Lindsay. “Understanding and Applying Kalman Filtering.” Course
notes on Robotic Motion Planning, Carnegie Mellon University, 2007.
Available at www.cs.cmu.edu/~motionplanning/papers/sbp_papers
/integrated3/kleeman_kalman_basics.pdf.
Kozola, Stuart. “Automated Trading with MATLAB-2012.” Webinar, 2012.
www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/37932-automated
-trading-with-matlab-2012.
Kuznetsov, Jev. “ActiveX vs Java API What’s the Difference?” Quantum blog,
November 25, 2010, http://matlab-trading.blogspot.ca/2010/11
/activex-vs-java-api-whats-difference.html.
LeSage, James P. “Spatial Econometrics,” 1998. Available at www.spatialeconometrics.com/html/wbook.pdf.
Lo, Andrew W., and A. Craig MacKinlay. A Non-RandomWalk DownWall Street.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

194

Lo, Andrew W., Harry Mamaysky, and Jiang Wang. “Foundations of Technical
Analysis: Computational Algorithms, Statistical Inference, and Empirical Implementation.” Journal of Finance 55, no. 4 (2000): 1705–1770.
Available at http://ideas.repec.org/p/nbr/nberwo/7613.html.
Lyons, Richard. The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 2001.
Malkiel, Burton. A Random Walk Down Wall Street: The Time-Tested Strategy for
Successful Investing. New York: W. W. Norton, 2008.
Maslov, Sergei, and Mark Mills. “Price Fluctuations from the Order Book
Perspective: Empirical Facts and a Simple Model.” Physica A 299, no.
1–2 (2001): 234–246.
Montana, Giovanni, Kostas Triantafyllopoulos, and Theodoros Tsagaris.
“Flexible Least Squares for Temporal Data Mining and Statistical
Arbitrage.” Expert Systems with Applications 36 (2009): 2819–2830. Available at www2.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/FLSTemporalDataMining
.GMontana2009.pdf.
Moskowitz, Tobias, Hua Ooi Yao, and Lasse Heje Pedersen. “Time Series
Momentum.” Journal of Financial Economics 104, no. 2 (2012): 228–250.
Osler, Carol. “Support for Resistance: Technical Analysis and Intraday Exchange Rates.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 6
(July 2000): 53–65.
Osler, Carol. “Currency Orders and Exchange-Rate Dynamics: An Explanation for the Predictive Success of Technical Analysis,” 2001. Forthcoming, Journal of Finance. Available at http://newyorkfed.org/research
/staff_reports/sr125.pdf.
Patterson, Scott. The Quants. New York: Crown Business, 2010.
Philips, Matthew. “Unlocking the Crude Oil Bottleneck at Cushing.”
Bloomberg Business Week, May 16, 2012. Available at www.businessweek
.com/articles/2012-05-16/unlocking-the-crude-oil-bottleneck-atcushing#p1.
Rajamani, Murali. “Data-Based Techniques to Improve State Estimation
in Model Predictive Control.” PhD thesis, University of WisconsinMadison, 2007.
Rajamani, Murali R., and James B. Rawlings. “Estimation of the Disturbance
Structure from Data Using Semidefinite Programming and Optimal
Weighting. Automatica 45 (2009): 142–148.
Reverre, Stephane. The Complete Arbitrage Deskbook. NewYork: McGraw-Hill,
2001.

195
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Rodier, Arthur, Edgar Haryanto, Pauline M. Shum, and Walid Hejazi. “Intraday Share Price Volatility and Leveraged ETF Rebalancing.” October
2012. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2161057.
Schoenberg, Ron, and Alan Corwin. “Does Averaging-in Work?” 2010.
www.optionbots.com/DOE/does_averaging_in_work.pdf. Accessed
January 10, 2010.
Serge, Andrew. “Where Have All the Stat Arb Profits Gone?” Columbia University Financial Engineering Practitioners Seminars, January 2008.
Shankar, S. Gowri, and James M. Miller. “Market Reaction to Changes in the
S&P SmallCap 600 Index.” Financial Review 41, no. 3 (2006): 339–360.
Available at SSRN: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract
_id=886141.
Simon,David P.,and Jim Campasano.“TheVIX Futures Basis:Evidence andTrading Strategies,” 2012. Available at SSRN: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3
/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2094510.
Sinclair, Euan. Option Trading: Pricing and Volatility Strategies and Techniques.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
Snider, Connan Andrew, and Thomas Youle. “Does the LIBOR Reflect
Banks’ Borrowing Costs?” 2010. Available at SSRN: http://papers
.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1569603.
Sorensen, Bent E. Course notes on Economics. University of Houston,
2005. Available at www.uh.edu/~bsorense/coint.pdf.
“The Wacky World of Gold.” The Economist, June 2011.
Thorp, Edward. “The Kelly Criterion in Blackjack, Sports Betting, and the
Stock Market,” 1997. Available at www.EdwardOThorp.com.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

E

rnest Chan is the managing member of QTS Capital Management, LLC,
a commodity pool operator. Ernie has worked for various investment
banks (Morgan Stanley, Credit Suisse, Maple) and hedge funds (Mapleridge,
Millennium Partners, MANE) since 1997. He received his PhD in physics from Cornell University and was a member of IBM’s Human Language
Technologies group before joining the financial industry. He was a cofounder and principal of EXP Capital Management, LLC, a Chicago-based investment firm. He is also the author of Quantitative Trading: How to Build Your Own
Algorithmic Trading Business, published by John Wiley & Sons in 2009, and a
popular financial blogger at http://epchan.blogspot.com. Find out more
about Ernie at www.epchan.com.

197

ABOUT THE WEBSITE

A

ll of the examples in this book are built around MATLAB codes,
and they are all available for download from www.wiley.com/go
/algotrading (password: chan2E). Once redirected to the website with the
codes, you will be asked for another username and password—use “kelly”
for both. Readers unfamiliar with MATLAB may want to study the tutorial
in Quantitative Trading, or watch the free webinars on www.mathworks.com.
Furthermore, the MATLAB Statistics Toolbox was occasionally used. (All
MATLAB products are available as free trials from MathWorks.)
For more from the author on the topic of algorithmic trading and more,
go to www.epchan.com or http://epchan.blogspot.com.

199

INDEX

Accenture, 183
ADF (augmented Dickey-Fuller) test, 41,
42–44
Alexander Filter, 140
Alternative Uptick Rule, 12, 90, 92
APIs (application programming interfaces)
for automatic execution, 29
for news-driven trading, 36
Arbitrage
between ETF and component stocks, 96–102
future and ETF, extracting roll returns
through, 141–144
Asset classes supported by special-purpose
platforms, 31–36
Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test, 41,
42–44
Automated execution platform
backtesting with, 30–31
choosing, 25
FXone, 26–27
high-frequency trading and, 32, 34–35
news-driven trading and, 35–36
programming skill and choice of, 25–29
Averaging-in, 48, 72–74
Back-adjustment methods, 14
Backtesting
currency arbitrage strategies, 112–113
danger of data errors to, 83–84
deciding not to use, 22–24
dividend adjustments and, 7–8
futures and, 12–16, 100
