
VOLATILITY MATH
For the math-minded, here is a formula for volatility.
Vol = 100

252
∑ R12 Rt
n

Vol = realized volatility
N = number of trading days in the period
Rt = continuously compounded daily returns

Advanced Technical Analysis: Volatility Tools

99

Bollinger Bands are a popular indicator used in many markets. They
enable the trader to confirm whether the price is at an upper range or
resistance, and whether the price is at a lower range or support. When
prices are near Bollinger Bands, they have a strong probability of pausing
in their direction and reversing. This has important implications to the
binary option trader because the binary option strike price may be located
above, or below one of the bands. Or the binary option strike price might
be right in the middle of the band. The trader needs to know where the
binary option strike price is in relationship to the band to assess properly
the degree of likely resistance or support that will be encountered as time
moves forward.

Interpreting Bollinger Bands
Interpreting the Bollinger Band patterns (Figure 6.1) is straightforward and
can be explained as a simple three-step process:
1. Notice the shape of the band.
The bands can be narrow or wide. If the band is narrow, it means that
the market is becoming undecided as to which direction to go. A narrow
band becomes narrow as the range between support and resistance
decreases. A band becomes wider as the range becomes wider.
2. Notice the direction of the bands.
The band can be sideways, tilted up, or tilted down. If it is a sideways
band and looks quite level, this means that the trend direction is in a
pause before it resumes going up or down. If the bands are tilted up, this
means that the trend is upward. If the bands are titled down, it means
the trend is downward.
3. Notice the location of the price.
The price (candles or bars) are often right on the band. If there are
several candles in a row on an upper or lower band, it indicates that the
market is sticky and is not ready yet to decide which way to go.

Do’s and Don’ts
When noticing a narrow band, try to avoid trading it because it can suddenly
move against you. It’s actually a very good precondition for a breakout binary
option trade. When the price has moved above the Bollinger Band, watch if
it tries to come back below the band; if it does, it is an indication of a reversal
down. When the price has moved below the Bollinger Band, watch if it tries

100

Trading Binary Options

Figure 6.1 Basic Features of Bollinger Bands

Upper Band

Moving Average Line
20 Periods

Lower Band

Band Narrows

to come back above it; if it doesn’t, it is an indication of a reversal back up.
Don’t assume that if a price is at a Bollinger Band, it will stop there. It can
stay at the band for a long time.
Bollinger Bands also provide a standard and accepted quick look at
volatility. The wider the bands are, the greater the range between support
and resistance. When Bollinger Bands become narrow, it is a signal of breakout potential. When Bollinger Bands are very wide, they reflect increased
volatility conditions. The Bollinger Band has a standard setting of (20, 2).
The number 20 represents the simple moving average, and the number 2
represents the standard deviation around the moving average. This means
that the price is 96 percent of the time between the upper and lower levels.
A price probing or breaking an upper or lower band signals a big change in
volatility. It means the trader should be much attuned to what is going on.
The price is there for a reason, and assumptions that it will reverse have to
be confirmed.
An additional technique useful to traders is to put on an extra outer band
at a setting of (13, 2.618). This additional setting represents 13 periods as the

Advanced Technical Analysis: Volatility Tools

101

moving average and a 2.618 standard deviation. This means that the upper
and lower bands are capturing 99 percent of the move. A price that has gone
through the standard band (20, 2) and also the outer band of (13, 2.618) is at
very high levels of extreme value. This is often associated with very high levels
of volatility and therefore is a reversal signal.

Using Bands with Support and Resistance Lines
In our introductory section, we described the basic definition of Bollinger
Bands. This section will help you identify ways to combine Bollinger Bands
with other technical analysis tools to make them even more effective.
The first tool that should be combined with a Bollinger Band is a support and resistance line. In many ways, a Bollinger Band acts as a kind of
resistance, or support line. By its very nature, the bands are providing a
boundary for the price. It is a statistical boundary and the bands are not
actual price support or resistance lines. A price support and resistance line
connects lows or highs of the prices in a selected time interval. When you
combine Bollinger Bands and support and resistance lines, the effect can
be much greater information about how strong the support or resistance
is. It is always a good idea to use both Bollinger Bands and support and
resistance lines.
We see that the upper Bollinger Band is coinciding almost exactly with
the resistance line (Figure 6.2). When this happens the trader is more confident that there is serious and strong resistance in this area. It’s important to
notice that the price highs are able to go above the upper Bollinger Band. This
shows that the Bollinger Bands are really a zone and should not be interpreted
as a solid resistance or support area. It’s important to observe what the price
is doing after it penetrates the Bollinger Band. Is it returning back into the
band? When this happens, it is a strong reversal condition.

Using Bands with Trend Lines
Another useful approach is to combine Bollinger Bands with trend lines. This
combination works very well together (Figure 6.3).
First, we can notice that the band is fairly sideways and wide in shape.
This provides more opportunity for the price to bounce around. In fact, we
can see that the price came to the bottom of the bands and started turning
up. It created an outer trend and then quickly shifted inward and it created
an inner trend line and then another inner trend line. This showed a great
deal of momentum. By drawing the inner trend lines, the trader can see that

102

Trading Binary Options

Figure 6.2 Bollinger Bands with Support and Resistance Lines

Bollinger Bands coincide
with resistance level

Sell on
break

Sell condition as
price hugs band

the price is very bullish. In fact, the price went up to the top of the Bollinger
Band. When the price is at an upper band, it is a clue that it may turn around.
In this situation, the trader should wait until the price goes back and breaks
the trend line to confirm a selling condition!
Let’s examine a situation in which the price is entering a downward trend
and the candles are sliding down the lower Bollinger Band (Figure 6.4). This
kind of pattern is seen often. The price after going up then breaks its uptrend.
At that point, it is a sell signal. Another sell point occurs when the price on
its way down hesitates, forms a doji, and then breaks down. This is a key sell
point because it shows a failure to go up.

Advanced Technical Analysis: Volatility Tools

103

Figure 6.3 Bollinger Bands and Trend Lines

Resistance

Inner Trend Line

Outer Trend Line

The question will arise: What are indications that a bounce back up is
likely? If the price is in a downtrend line and it breaks that line, then the
situation can be considered a move toward the other side. By using trend
lines in combination with Bollinger Bands, the ability to locate an entry
point is greatly enhanced. If the Bollinger Band is sideways and flat, it really
is the best shape for binary option traders because it’s the condition for a
breakout trade.

104

Trading Binary Options

Figure 6.4 Price Action on the Lower Bollinger Band

Sell on break of
uptrend

Sell on break below doji

Adding Another Band with a Different Setting
To further advance your knowledge and use of Bollinger Bands, we introduce
here the addition of a second band setting. The first setting is a standard,
or default, setting of 20, 2. This, as you know, means, 20 periods, and two

Advanced Technical Analysis: Volatility Tools

105

standard deviations. It captures between the two bands 96 percent of the
prices. What happens if we add another band with a different setting? Another
band might help us understand better what is happening with the first band!
A second band setting suggested here is known as the extended Bollinger
Band (EBB). Its setting is (13, 2.618). This means the moving average is 13
periods and the standard deviation is nearly at 3 or 99 percent. The 2.618 is
really a Fibonacci extension number.
Let’s examine what it means for the trader to put on another Bollinger
Band with the settings of 13, 2.618 (Figure 6.5). First, it means that the
moving average, or the middle line of the Bollinger Band, is a shorter time
line. Contrast this with the 20-period time line. This provides the trader a
view that is nearer to the recent action. But the adjustment of the setting
to 2.618 standard deviations means that the band widens to capture nearly
99 percent of the action. If we put these two settings together, we have two
upper bands and two lower bands! The result is four bands. The trader should
particularly focus on where the price is. If the price is beyond the inner band,
which is usually the standard band setting of 20, 2, it means the price is at
an extreme. But the trader using an extended Bollinger Band can see that it
would be very extreme only if it went to touch or go beyond the outer band
of 13, 2.618. The addition of an extended Bollinger Band is very effective in
alerting the trader to a buy or sell signal. In Figure 6.5 we see that the price hit
a double bottom that was sitting right on both lower bands. That represents
very strong support.
Let’s consider how the EBB generates price signals. For a sell signal situation, the concept is simply that if the price goes to the EBB, the trader has
an extreme situation and can consider it to be a strong predictor of a reversal.
If the price goes beyond the EBB and then returns below it, this is a strong
sell signal.
A buy signal is straightforward. If the price goes beyond the bottom EBB
and then returns above it, it is a strong buy signal!
We can clearly see in Figure 6.5 that when the price went down to the
lower bands, a candle going back up followed it. This showed that the mood
of the market was more bullish. Without the EBB, the trader wouldn’t have
an ability to confirm if the price is about to reverse.

Example of Step-by-Step Analysis
Let’s pause and reflect on the technical analysis process so far, evolving toward
placing a binary option trade (Figure 6.6). The flow of analysis starts with an initial technical scan of fundamental market conditions. A second phase consists

106

Trading Binary Options

Figure 6.5 Buy and Sell Signals with Extended Bollinger Bands

Extended Bollinger Band
setting = (13,2.618)

Strong double bottom

Figure 6.6 Technical Analysis Process Leading to Binary Option Trades

Place Your Trade

Choose Binary Option Strike Price
Check Chart Patterns
Check and Rank
Trend Conditions

Check
Ranging Markets

Scan Fundamental Market Conditions

Advanced Technical Analysis: Volatility Tools

107

of a thorough checking and ranking of trend conditions. The analytical process continues by checking the presence of sideways, or ranging, markets. At
this point, a close look at chart patterns is in order. Some underlying markets
look better than others and will appeal to the trader. Once you select the
underlying market(s) to trade, the challenge is to find the binary option strike
price that matches the pattern. Then place your trade. Let’s explore these steps
with more scrutiny.
Step 1: Scan the Fundamental Market Conditions
The initial technical analysis scanning process starts with a review of the most
important market complexes. They include, but are not limited to the USDX,
gold, oil, the Shanghai Index, SPX, and so on.
The goal of the scan is to evaluate the technical conditions in these
important markets. The conditions include, but are not limited to trends,
momentum, resistance, support, and volatility.
While there isn’t one single method to conduct the technical scan, the
initial scan should include multiple time frames. Multiple time frames need
to be reviewed from the weekly and daily to the four-hour patterns to gain a
sense about any changes in the mood of the market. The four-hour pattern
provides a good interim time period. It reflects most recent market reactions,
and allows the trader to still review the price action over several days. The key
point here is to never review only one time frame. Upon performing the scans,
ask yourself what is interesting that strikes you. Interesting patterns noticed
by the trader are very important. This is also known as the blink effect. It
means one can recognize binary trading opportunities within seconds!
Figure 6.7 Key Markets to Scan

Crude
Oil

Gold

Key
Fundamental
Scans
U.S. Dollar
Index

Copper

108

Trading Binary Options

Step 2: Check and Rank Trend Conditions
The focus of analysis here is on ranking the trend conditions. Trends can be
just starting, strong, and stable. Of course, they can also begin to show weakening. These conditions, once detected, will help the trader match the binary
option strategy that best fits the changing trend conditions.
As noted earlier, a very good charting tool for assessing trend conditions
is the three-line break chart. This charting focuses exclusively on detecting the
strength of the trend. In any case, no matter which charts you are using, ranking the trend conditions is a useful technique. Besides using three-line break
charts, a commonly accepted measure of trend strength is the 50-day moving
average. If the underlying market is probing the 50-day moving average, it
is a signal of a change in the trend. Also, for each underlying market, rank
the trend for the weekly, daily, and four-hour chart. A rank of one means the
trend has just begun after reversing the previous trend. A rank of two means
it’s into the beginning of a new trend. A rank of three means it’s a stable trend
(usually approaching a 37 to 45 degree angle). A rank of four means it’s accelerating; five means it’s almost parabolic.
Step 3: Check If a Sideways Ranging Market Exists
If a market is not trending, it must be in a range. Markets in a range provide excellent binary trading opportunities. So, just as it was important
to rank the trending markets, it’s important to rank those markets that
are ranging. Ask yourself: Have there been multiple tests of resistance or
support?
Is there a breakout pattern forming?
Step 4: Choose Underlying Markets to Trade
While there are more than 20 underlying markets to choose, the simple fact
is that most people should start with trading only a handful. The choice
of what to trade should be based on conclusions derived from Step 1 to
Step 3.
Step 5: Evaluate Volatility Conditions
Once you choose the underlying market to trade, it’s important to look at the
volatility conditions. Many beginning traders ignore this phase. We have not
covered this step, so let’s review what is involved.

Advanced Technical Analysis: Volatility Tools

109

These five basic steps provide a firm foundation for assessing trading
conditions. The trader should always be sure that she has participated in each
step. The effect of using each step is that it will minimize misunderstanding
market conditions.
VIX: The Fear Index

In addition to Bollinger Bands, another tool that binary option traders should
know about and use is the VIX Index. The words fear and risk aversion reflect
bearish sentiment. But even more importantly, they are evidence of a herding
behavior. The crowd has joined the sentiment wave of fear. It’s a powerful
event and moves markets and creates trading opportunities.
Here is what the CBOE says about VIX:
The CBOE Volatility Index (VIX) is a key measure of market expectations of near-term volatility conveyed by S&P 500 stock index option prices. Since its introduction in 1993, VIX has been considered
by many to be the world’s premier barometer of investor sentiment
and market volatility.
What is important about the VIX is its use as a contrarian indicator for
the S&P 500. The inverse correlation often approaches 90 percent (Table 6.1).
The S&P 500 as an underlying market is one of the most important as it
affects many other markets. Trading the S&P 500 depends not only on basic
charting analysis, it requires tracking emotions and the mood of the market.
So if a binary option trader wants to select a direction for trading the
S&P, it’s a very good idea to first check volatility. Historically, the inverse
correlation relationship between the VIX and S&P 500 has been quite high,
reaching to over 85 percent in the opposite direction (Figure 6.8). As with
other instruments, there is never a linear correlation. There are times when
the VIX and the S&P 500 can move together.
Table 6.1 VIX Futures Indexes Have Historically Been Negatively
Correlated with the S&P 500

Date

S&P 500 VIX Correlation

12/17/14

–0.8539

6/24/15

–0.8812

Data source: Bloomberg Financial LP.

110

Trading Binary Options

Strength of Index

Figure 6.8 VIX Movements and the S&P 500

S&P 500

VIX

Source: Bloomberg Financial, L.P.

How should the VIX relationship to the S&P 500 be used? Its most
important use is confirming whether extreme conditions are in place in the
market. If the VIX is rising fast, the S&P 500 is likely falling fast. These
are transient conditions, and the binary option trader, who is looking for a
directional bet for a few days, has to be careful. But the VIX isn’t only for
the S&P 500. Since its introduction, there are a large number of volatility indexes for other underlying markets that provide indicators of whether
those markets are at low or high extremes in volatility. For example, there is
a VIX for the Brent Crude oil market, which is also contrarian. Its symbol is
OVX. We can see that when the OVX hit highs, it was a leading indicator of
a decline in crude (Figure 6.9). West Texas oil has its own volatility index—
OIV (Figure 6.10). Gold spot has a volatility index version with the symbol
GVZ. Binary option traders who trade gold directions use it to see volatility
conditions (Figure 6.11). Silver, like gold has its own volatility index with the
symbol VXSLV (Figure 6.12).
The FTSE index provides an excellent example of the contrarian relationship between extremes in VIX and direction. The symbol VFTSE is the VIX
for the FTSE (Figure 6.13). The DAX30 has a VIX counterpart in the symbol
VDAX (Figure 6.14). The key volatility indexes associated with the binary
option underlying markets are important to follow. They will enable the

Advanced Technical Analysis: Volatility Tools

111

Figure 6.9 Crude Oil and Its Volatility Index (OVX)

OVX

Strength of Price

Crude Oil

Source: Bloomberg Financial, L.P.

Strength of Price

Figure 6.10 West Texas Oil and Its Volatility Index (OIV)

WTI

OIV

Source: Bloomberg Financial, L.P.

trader to spot opportunities and extremes in markets otherwise difficult to
detect. Use the different VIXs as a barometer of market sentiment. It doesn’t
matter if there is no underlying binary option market to trade. They do help.
For example, the Hang Seng index has its own VIX (CHIX) and it provides
an ability to monitor sentiment on the Chinese markets (Figure 6.15). More
volatility indexes in the future are likely to be developed. A good idea is to
always inquire whether a key index has its own VIX version.

112

Trading Binary Options

Strength of Price

Figure 6.11 Gold Spot and Its Volatility Index (GVZ)

Gold

GVZ

Source: Bloomberg Financial, L.P.

Strength of Index

Figure 6.12 Silver Spot and Its Volatility Index (VXSLV)

Silver

Source: Bloomberg Financial, L.P.

VXSLV

Advanced Technical Analysis: Volatility Tools

113

Strength of Price

Figure 6.13 FTSE and Its Volatility Index (VFTSE)

FTSE 100

VTSE

Source: Bloomberg Financial, L.P.

Strength of Price

Figure 6.14 The DAX 30 and Its Volatility Index (VDAX)

DAX 30

VDAX

Source: Bloomberg Financial, L.P.

The overall value of knowing the volatility of the underlying markets is to
use it as a confirming indicator of breakout conditions. Without any volatility, there would be little information about the conditions of market opinion.
Extremes in volatility can be considered valuable information events as well
as contrarian signals that the market direction is about to reverse. While this

114

Trading Binary Options

Strength of Price

Figure 6.15 Hang Seng Index and the Volatility Index (CHIX)

Hang Seng Index

CHIX
50

Source: Bloomberg Financial, L.P.

relationship is never perfect, it acts as a good technical barometer of sentiment
conditions. An additional value of watching several global volatility indexes
is to see which are diverging. While the foreign markets often move in coincidence with each other, they may not react with the same magnitude to an
event. There will be markets with relatively lower volatility compared to others.
This is particularly important in trading the binary option contracts for the
equity indexes (see Table 6.2).

Table 6.2 Volatility Index of Several Underlying Markets

Underlying Volatility Index

Symbol

FTSE 100 Volatility

VFTSE

DAX Volatility

DAX 30

HANG SENG INDEX

CHIX

NIFTY 50

INDIA 50

CRUDE OIL

OVX

NYMEX WTI

OIV

GOLD

GVZ

SILVER

VXSLV

Advanced Technical Analysis: Volatility Tools

115

TIP
Check the latest VIX data at https://www.cboe.com/micro/volatility/pricecharts
.aspx.

Option Volatility and Sentiment: Put/Call ratios

A long established class of volatility indicators is known as the put/call ratio.
It is a classic sentiment indicator. The concept is that when traders are bearish, they buy puts. When they are bullish about direction, they buy calls. As a
result, extremes in sentiment can be detected. How does a trader know when
the sentiment is skewed in favor of puts or calls? There are several ways of
measuring sentiment extremes. First, when the sentiment is predominantly
bearish, there is naturally more contract volume of puts than that of calls. The
result is known as the put/call ratio. This is the volume of put options/volume
of call options. Once again, the concept of volatility or extreme variation in
a pattern comes into play. The key step in relationship to put/call ratios is to
identify when these ratios are at extremes. Put/call premium ratios are reliable
gauges of the skew of opinion.
A second, valuable form of the put/call ratio is the comparison of the
implied volatility of the puts divided by the implied volatility of the calls. The
reasoning is: if buying an at-the-money put is more expensive than an at-themoney call, the market is more bearish.
The binary option trader can use a variety of sources to locate put/call
ratios for a particular underlying market. One common source is the futures
market. Even if you are not trading futures contracts, the value of the put/
call information is worthy of review and is available by viewing the futures
options contracts at the CME, CBOT, NYMEX, and other futures trading
exchanges. A quick guide to whether fear or greed is dominant in the market
can be seen at www.money.cnn.com/data/fear-and-greed.
Their Fear and Greed index monitors seven factors: put/call ratio,
VIX, the McClellan Volume Summation Index, stock price strength, haven
demand, market momentum, and junk bond demand.
