It is patently obvious that few of us are in a position to buy whole companies, as Buffett does. Their stories are included in this chapter because
they give us such crisp insight into Buffett’s way of thinking.

50

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

That same chain of thinking also applies to his decisions about buying stocks, and that does present some examples that ordinary mortals
might follow. We may not be able to buy shares on the same scale as
Warren Buffett, but we can profit from watching what he does.
At the end of 2003, Berkshire Hathaway’s common stock portfolio
had a total market value of more than $35 billion (see Table A.27 in the
Appendix)—an increase of almost $27 billion from the original purchase prices. In that portfolio, Berkshire Hathaway owns, among others, 200 million shares of Coca-Cola, 96 million shares of the Gillette
Company, and 56-plus million shares of Wells Fargo & Company. Soft
drinks, razor blades, neighborhood banks—products and services that
are familiar to us all. Nothing esoteric, nothing high-tech, nothing
hard to understand. It is one of Buffett’s most strongly held beliefs: It
makes no sense to invest in a company or an industry you don’t understand, because you won’t be able to figure out what it’s worth or to
track what it’s doing.

The Coca-Cola Company
Coca-Cola is the world’s largest manufacturer, marketer, and distributor of carbonated soft drink concentrates and syrups. The company’s
soft drink product, first sold in the United States in 1886, is now sold in
more than 195 countries worldwide.
Buffett’s relationship with Coca-Cola dates back to his childhood.
He had his first Coca-Cola when he was five years old. Soon afterward,
he started buying six Cokes for 25 cents from his grandfather’s grocery
store and reselling them in his neighborhood for 5 cents each. For the
next fifty years, Buffett admits, he observed the phenomenal growth of
Coca-Cola, but he purchased textile mills, department stores, and windmill and farming equipment manufacturers. Even in 1986, when he formally announced that Cherry Coke would become the official soft
drink of Berkshire Hathaway’s annual meetings, Buffett had still not
purchased a share of Coca-Cola. It was not until two years later, in the
summer of 1988, that Buffett purchased his first shares of Coca-Cola.
The strength of Coca-Cola is not only its brand-name products, but
also its unmatched worldwide distribution system. Today, international
sales of Coca-Cola products account for 69 percent of the company’s
total sales and 80 percent of its profits. In addition to Coca-Cola Amatil,

Buying a Business

51

the company has equity interests in bottlers located in Mexico, South
America, Southeast Asia, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and China. In 2003, the
company sold more than 19 billion cases of beverage products.
The best business to own, says Buffett, is one that over time can
employ large amounts of capital at very high rates of return. This description fits Coca-Cola perfectly. It is easy to understand why Buffett
considers Coca-Cola, the most widely recognized brand name around
the world, to be the world’s most valuable franchise.
Because of this financial strength, and also because the product is so
well known, I use Coca-Cola as the primary example in Chapters 5
through 8, which detail the tenets of the Warren Buffett Way.

I buy businesses, not stocks, businesses I would be willing to
own forever.11
WARREN BUFFETT, 1998

The Gillette Company
Gillette is an international consumer products company that manufactures and distributes blades and razors, toiletries and cosmetics, stationery
products, electric shavers, small household appliances, and oral care appliances and products. It has manufacturing operations in 14 countries and
distributes its products in over 200 countries and territories. Foreign operations account for over 63 percent of Gillette’s sales and earnings.
King C. Gillette founded the company at the turn of the twentieth
century. As a young man, Gillette spent time strategizing how he would
make his fortune. A friend suggested that he should invent a product
that consumers would use once, throw away, and replace with another.
While working as a salesperson for Crown Cork & Seal, Gillette hit on
the idea of a disposable razor blade. In 1903, his f ledgling company
began selling the Gillette safety razor with 25 disposable blades for $5.
Today, Gillette is the world’s leading manufacturer and distributor
of blades and razors. Razor blades account for approximately one-third
of the company’s sales but two-thirds of its profits. Its global share of

52

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

market is 72.5 percent, almost six times greater than the nearest competitor. The company has a 70 percent market share in Europe, 80 percent in Latin America. Sales are just beginning to grow in Eastern
Europe, India, and China. For every one blade that Gillette sells in the
United States, it sells five overseas. In fact, Gillette is so dominant
worldwide that in many languages its name has become the word for
“razor blade.”
Buffett became interested in Gillette in the 1980s. Wall Street observers had begun to see the company as a mature, slow-growing consumer company ripe for a takeover. Profit margins hovered between
9 percent and 11 percent, return on equity f lattened out with no sign of
improvement, and income growth and market value were anemic (see
Figures 4.1 and 4.2). In short, the company appeared stagnant.
CEO Colman Mockler fought off four takeover attempts during
this time, culminating in a hotly contested battle against Coniston Partners in 1988. Gillette won—barely—but in so doing obligated itself to
buy back 19 million shares of Gillette stock at $45 per share. Between
1986 and 1988, the company replaced $1.5 billion in equity with debt,
and for a short period Gillette had a negative net worth.
At this point Buffett called his friend Joseph Sisco, a member of
Gillette’s board, and proposed that Berkshire invest in the company.
“Gillette’s business is very much the kind we like,” Buffett said.

Figure 4.1 The Gillette Company return on equity.

Buying a Business

53

Figure 4.2 The Gillette Company market value.

“Charlie and I think we understand the company’s economics and
therefore believe we can make a reasonably intelligent guess about its
future.”12 Gillette issued $600 million in convertible preferred stock to
Berkshire in July 1989 and used the funds to pay down debt. Buffett received a 8.75 percent convertible preferred security with a mandatory
redemption in ten years and the option to convert into Gillette common at $50 per share, 20 percent higher than the then-current price.
In 1989, Buffett joined Gillette’s board of directors. That same year,
the company introduced a highly successful new product, the Sensor. It
was the beginning of a turnaround. With Sensor sales, Gillette’s prosperity magnified. Earnings per share began growing at a 20 percent annual rate. Pretax margins increased from 12 to 15 percent and return on
equity reached 40 percent, twice its return in the early 1980s.
In February 1991, the company announced a 2-for-1 stock split.
Berkshire converted its preferred stock and received 12 million common shares or 11 percent of Gillette’s shares outstanding. In less than
two years, Berkshire’s $600 million investment in Gillette had grown
to $875 million. Buffett’s next step was to calculate the value of those
12 million shares; in Chapter 8, we’ll see how he went about it.
Gillette’s razor blade business is a prime beneficiary of globalization. Typically, Gillette begins with low-end blades that have lower
margins and over time introduces improved shaving systems with higher

54

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

margins. The company stands to benefit not only from increasing unit
sales but from steadily improving profit margins as well. Gillette’s future appears bright. “It’s pleasant to go to bed every night,” says Buffett,
“knowing there are 2.5 billion males in the world who will have to
shave in the morning.”13

The Washington Post Company
The Washington Post Company today is a media conglomerate with
operations in newspaper publishing, television broadcasting, cable television systems, magazine publishing, and the provision of educational
services. The newspaper division publishes the Washington Post, the
Everett (Washington) Herald, and the Gazette Newspapers, a group of
39 weekly papers. The television broadcasting division owns six television stations located in Detroit, Miami, Orlando, Houston, San Antonio, and Jacksonville, Florida. The cable television systems division
provides cable and digital video services to more than 1.3 billion subscribers. The magazine division publishes Newsweek, with domestic
circulation of over 3 million and over 600,000 internationally.
In addition to the four major divisions, the Washington Post Company owns the Stanley H. Kaplan Educational Centers, a large network
of schools that prepare students for college admission tests and professional licensing exams. Best known for its original program that helps
high school students do well on Scholastic Aptitude Tests, Kaplan has
aggressively expanded its operations in recent years. It now includes
after-school classes for grades K-12, the world’s only accredited online
law school, test-prep materials for engineers and CFAs, and campusbased schools with programs in business, finance, technology, health,
and other professions. In 2003, Kaplan’s sales totaled $838 million,
making it a significant element in the Post Company.
The company owns 28 percent of Cowles Media, which publishes
the Minneapolis Star Tribune, several military newspapers, and 50 percent of the Los Angeles-Washington News Service.
Today, the Washington Post Company is an $8 billion company
generating $3.2 billion in annual sales. Its accomplishments are especially impressive when you consider that seventy years ago, the company was in one business—publishing a newspaper.
In 1931, the Washington Post was one of five dailies competing for
readers. Two years later, the Post, unable to pay for its newsprint, was

Buying a Business

55

placed in receivership. That summer, the company was sold at auction
to satisfy creditors. Eugene Meyer, a millionaire financier, bought the
paper for $825,000. For the next two decades, he supported the operation until it turned a profit.
Management of the paper passed to Philip Graham, a brilliant
Harvard-educated lawyer who had married Meyer’s daughter Katherine. In 1954, Phil Graham convinced Eugene Meyer to purchase a rival
newspaper, the Times-Herald. Later, Graham purchased Newsweek
magazine and two television stations before his tragic death in 1963. It
is Phil Graham who is credited with transforming the Washington Post
from a single newspaper into a media and communications company.
After Phil Graham’s death, control of the Washington Post passed
to his wife, Katherine. Although she had no experience managing a
major corporation, she quickly distinguished herself by confronting difficult business issues.
Katherine Graham realized that to be successful the company would
need a decision maker not a caretaker. “I quickly learned that things
don’t stand still,” she said. “You have to make decisions.”14 Two decisions that had a pronounced impact on the Washington Post were hiring
Ben Bradlee as managing editor of the newspaper and then inviting
Warren Buffett to become a director of the company. Bradlee encouraged Katherine Graham to publish the Pentagon Papers and to pursue
the Watergate investigation, which earned the Washington Post a reputation for prizewinning journalism. Buffett taught Katherine Graham
how to run a successful business.
Buffett first met Katherine Graham in 1971. At that time, Buffett
owned stock in the New Yorker. Hearing that the magazine might be
for sale, he asked Katherine Graham whether the Washington Post
would be interested in purchasing it. Although the sale never materialized, Buffett came away very much impressed with the publisher of
the Washington Post.
That same year, Katherine Graham decided to take the Washington
Post public. Two classes of stock were created. Class A common stock
elected a majority of the board of directors, thus effectively controlling
the company. Class A stock was, and still is, held by the Graham family.
Class B stock elected a minority of the board of directors. In June 1971,
the Washington Post issued 1,354,000 shares of class B stock. Remarkably, two days later, despite threats from the federal government, Katherine Graham gave Ben Bradlee permission to publish the Pentagon Papers.

56

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

For the next two years, while business at the paper was improving,
the mood on Wall Street was turning gloomy. In early 1973, the Dow
Jones Industrial Average began to slide. The Washington Post share price
was slipping as well; by May, it was down 14 points to $23. That same
month, IBM stock declined over 69 points, gold broke through $100 an
ounce, the Federal Reserve boosted the discount rate to 6 percent, and
the Dow fell 18 points—its biggest loss in three years. And all the while,
Warren Buffett was quietly buying shares in the Washington Post (see
Figure 4.3). By June, he had purchased 467,150 shares at an average
price of $22.75, worth $10,628,000.
Katherine Graham was initially unnerved at the idea of a nonfamily
member owning so much Post stock, even though the stock was noncontrolling. Buffett assured her that Berkshire’s purchase was for investment purposes only. To further reassure her, he offered to give her son
Don, slated to take over the company someday, a proxy to vote Berkshire’s shares. That clinched it. Katherine Graham responded by inviting Buffett to join the board of directors in 1974 and soon made him
chairman of the finance committee.
Katherine Graham died in July 2001, after a fall in which she sustained severe head injuries. Warren Buffett was one of the ushers at her
funeral services at Washington’s National Cathedral.

Figure 4.3 The Washington Post Company price per share, 1972–1975.

Buying a Business

57

Donald E. Graham, son of Phil and Katherine, is chairman of
the board of the Washington Post Company. Don Graham graduated
magna cum laude from Harvard in 1966, having majored in English history and literature. After graduation, he served two years in the army.
Knowing that he would eventually lead the Washington Post, Graham
decided to get better acquainted with the city. He took the unusual path
of joining the metropolitan police force of Washington, DC, and spent
fourteen months as a patrolman walking the beat in the ninth precinct.
In 1971, Graham went to work at the Washington Post as a Metro reporter. Later, he spent ten months as a reporter for Newsweek at the Los
Angeles bureau. Graham returned to the Post in 1974 and became the
assistant managing sports editor. That year, he was added to the company’s board of directors.
Buffett’s role at the Washington Post is widely documented. He
helped Katherine Graham persevere during the labor strikes of the
1970s, and he also tutored Don Graham in business, helping him understand the role of management and its responsibility to its owners.
“In finance,” Don Graham says, “he’s the smartest guy I know. I don’t
know who is second.”15
Looking at the story from the reverse side, it’s also clear that the Post
has played a major role for Buffett as well. Finance journalist Andrew
Kilpatrick, who has followed Buffett’s career for years, believes that the
Washington Post Company investment “locked up Buffett’s reputation
as a master investor.”16 Berkshire has not sold any of its Washington Post
stock since the original purchase in 1973. In 2004, the Class B stock was
selling for more than $900 a share, making it the second most expensive
stock on the New York Stock Exchange. Berkshire’s holdings are now
worth more than $1 billion, and Buffett’s original investment has increased in value more than fiftyfold.17

Wells Fargo & Company
In October 1990, Berkshire Hathaway announced it had purchased 5
million shares of Wells Fargo & Company at an average price of $57.88
per share, a total investment of $289 million. With this purchase, Berkshire became the largest shareholder of the bank, owning 10 percent of
the shares outstanding.
It was a controversial move. Earlier in the year, the share price
traded as high as $86, then dropped sharply as investors abandoned

58

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

California banks in droves. At the time, the West Coast was in the
throes of a severe recession and some speculated that banks, with their
loan portfolios stocked full of commercial and residential mortgages,
were in trouble. Wells Fargo, with the most commercial real estate of
any California bank, was thought to be particularly vulnerable.
In the months following Berkshire’s announcement, the battle for
Wells Fargo resembled a heavyweight fight. Buffett, in one corner, was
the bull, betting $289 million that Wells Fargo would increase in value.
In the other corner, short sellers were the bears, betting that Wells Fargo,
already down 49 percent for the year, was destined to fall further. The
rest of the investment world decided to sit back and watch.
Twice in 1992, Berkshire acquired more shares, bringing the total
to 63 million by year-end. The price crept over $100 per share, but
short sellers were still betting the stock would lose half its value. Buffett
has continued to add to his position, and by year-end 2003, Berkshire
owned more than 56 million shares, with a market value of $4.6 billion
and a total accumulated purchase cost of $2.8 billion. In 2003, Moody’s
gave Wells Fargo a AAA credit rating, the only bank in the country
with that distinction.

THE INTELLIGENT INVESTOR
The most distinguishing trait of Buffett’s investment philosophy is the
clear understanding that by owning shares of stocks he owns businesses,
not pieces of paper. The idea of buying stocks without understanding
the company’s operating functions—its products and services, labor relations, raw material expenses, plant and equipment, capital reinvestment requirements, inventories, receivables, and needs for working
capital—is unconscionable, says Buffett. This mentality ref lects the attitude of a business owner as opposed to a stock owner, and is the only
mentality an investor should have. In the summation of The Intelligent
Investor, Benjamin Graham wrote, “Investing is most intelligent when
it is most businesslike.” Those are, says Buffett, “the nine most important words ever written about investing.”
A person who holds stocks has the choice to become the owner of a
business or the bearer of tradable securities. Owners of common stocks
who perceive that they merely own a piece of paper are far removed

Buying a Business

59

from the company’s financial statements. They behave as if the market’s
ever-changing price is a more accurate ref lection of their stock’s value
than the business’s balance sheet and income statement. They draw or
discard stocks like playing cards. For Buffett, the activities of a common
stock holder and a business owner are intimately connected. Both
should look at ownership of a business in the same way. “I am a better
investor because I am a businessman,” Buffett says, “and a better businessman because I am an investor.”18

THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY
Business Tenets
1. Is the business simple and understandable?
2. Does the business have a consistent operating history?
3. Does the business have favorable long-term prospects?
Management Tenets
4. Is management rational?
5. Is management candid with its shareholders?
6. Does management resist the institutional imperative?
Financial Tenets
7.
8.
9.
10.

What is the return on equity?
What are the company’s “owner earnings”?
What are the profit margins?
Has the company created at least one dollar of market
value for every dollar retained?

Value Tenets
11. What is the value of the company?
12. Can it be purchased at a significant discount to its value?

5
Investing Guidelines
Business Tenets

W

e come now to the heart of the matter—the essence of Warren
Buffett’s way of thinking about investing. Warren Buffett is so
thoroughly identified with the stock market that even people
who have no interest in the market know his name and reputation.
Others, those who read the financial pages of the newspaper only casually, may know him as the head of an unusual company whose stock
sells for upward of $90,000 per share. And even the many new investors
who enthusiastically devote careful attention to market news think of
him primarily as a brilliant stock picker.
Few would deny that the world’s most famous and most successful
investor is indeed a brilliant stock picker. But that seriously understates
the case. His real gift is picking companies. I mean this in two senses:
First, Berkshire Hathaway, in addition to its famous stock portfolio,
owns many companies directly. Second, when considering new stock
purchases, Buffett looks at the underlying business as thoroughly as he
would if he were buying the whole company, using a set of basic principles developed over many years. “When investing,” he says, “we view
ourselves as business analysts—not as market analysts, not as macroeconomic analysts, and not even as security analysts.”1
If we go back through time and review all of Buffett’s purchases,
looking for the commonalities, we find a set of basic principles, or tenets,
61

62

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

that have guided his decisions. If we extract these tenets and spread them
out for a closer look, we see that they naturally group themselves into
four categories:
1. Business tenets. Three basic characteristics of the business itself
2. Management tenets. Three important qualities that senior managers must display
3. Financial tenets. Four critical financial decisions that the company must maintain
4. Value tenets. Two interrelated guidelines about purchase price
Not all of Buffett’s acquisitions will display all the tenets, but taken
as a group, these tenets constitute the core of his investment approach.
They can also serve as guideposts for all investors. In this chapter, we
look at the first group—the characteristics of the business—and study
how some of Buffett’s investment decisions ref lect those tenets.
