
P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

219

Important Characteristics of the U.S. Dollar
r Over 90 percent of all currency deals involve the dollar.
The most liquid currencies in the foreign exchange market are the
EUR/USD, USD/JPY, GBP/USD, and USD/CHF. These currencies represent the most frequently traded currencies in the world, and all of
these currency pairs involve the U.S. dollar. In fact, 90 percent of all
currency deals involve the U.S. dollar. This explains the importance of
the U.S. dollar to all foreign exchange traders. As a result, the most
important economic data that usually move the market are dollar fundamentals.
r Prior to September 11, the U.S. dollar was considered one of
the world’s premier safe haven currencies.
The reason why the U.S. dollar was previously considered one
of the world’s premier safe haven currencies was because prior to
September 11, 2001, the risk of severe U.S. instability was very low.
The United States was known to have one of the safest and most developed markets in the world. The safe haven status of the dollar allowed the United States to attract investment at a discounted rate of
return, resulting in 76 percent of global currency reserves being held
in dollars. Another reason why currency reserves are held in U.S. dollars is the fact that the dollar is the world’s dominant factoring currency. In choosing a reserve currency, the dollar’s safe haven status
also played a major role for foreign central banks. However, post-9/11,
foreign holders of U.S. assets, including central banks, have pared their
dollar holdings as a result of increased U.S. uncertainty and decreased
interest rates. The emergence of the euro has also threatened the U.S.
dollar’s status as the world’s premier reserve currency. Many central
banks have already begun to diversify their reserves by reducing their
dollar holdings and increasing their euro holdings. This will continue
to be a major trend that all traders should watch for in the years ahead.
r The U.S. dollar moves in the opposite direction from gold
prices.
As indicated in Figure 12.1, gold prices and the U.S. dollar have
historically had a near perfect inverse relationship and are near perfect
mirror images of each other; this means that when gold prices rise, the
dollar falls, and vice versa. This inverse relationship stems from the
fact that gold is measured in dollars. Dollar depreciation due to global
uncertainty has been the primary reason for gold appreciation, as gold
is commonly viewed as the ultimate form of money. Gold is also seen
as the premier safe haven commodity; therefore, in times of geopolitical uncertainty investors tend to flock to gold, which in essence hurts
the dollar.

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

220

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

Dollar Index

100
Price of Gold (Ihs)
Dollar Index (rhs)
2000

2002

2004

2006

70

80

400

90

600

Price of Gold

800

110

120

1000

Price of Gold vs. Dollar Index 2000–2008

2008

FIGURE 12.1 Gold versus Dollar Chart

r Many emerging market countries peg their local currencies to
the dollar.
Pegging a currency to the dollar pertains to the basic idea that a
government agrees to maintain the U.S. dollar as a reserve currency by
offering to buy or sell any amount of domestic currency at the pegged
rate for the reserve currency. These governments typically have to also
promise to hold reserve currency at least equal to the amount of local
currency in circulation. This is very important because these central
banks have become large holders of U.S. dollars and take an active
interest in managing their fixed or floating pegs. Countries with currencies pegged to the dollar include Hong Kong and, up until July 2005,
China as well. China is a very active participant in the currency market
because its maximum float per day is controlled within a narrow band
based on the previous day’s closing rate against the USD. Any fluctuations beyond this band during the day will be subject to intervention
by the central bank, which will include buying or selling of U.S. dollars.

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

221

Prior to July 21, 2005, China had pegged its currency at a rate of 8.3
yuan to the U.S. dollar. After years of pressure to revalue its currency,
China adjusted its exchange rate to 8.11 yuan and reset the rate to the
closing price of the currency each day. Along with this, China is gradually moving to a managed float referencing a basket of currencies.
Over the past year or two, the market has paid particular attention to the purchasing habits of these central banks. Talk of reserve
diversification or more currency flexibility in the exchange rates of
these Asian countries means that these central banks may have less
of a need to own U.S. dollars and dollar-denominated assets. If this is
true, it could be very negative for the U.S. dollar over the long term.
r Interest rate differentials between U.S. Treasuries and foreign
bonds are strongly followed.
The interest rate differential between U.S. Treasuries and foreign
bonds is a very important relationship that professional FX traders follow. It can be a strong indicator of potential currency movements because the U.S. market is one of the largest markets in the world and
investors are very sensitive to the yields that are offered by U.S. assets. Large investors are constantly looking for assets with the highest
yields. As yields in the U.S. decrease or if yields abroad increase, this
would induce investors to sell their U.S. assets and purchase foreign
assets. Selling U.S. fixed income or equity assets would influence the
currency market because that would require selling U.S. dollars and
buying the foreign currency. If U.S. yields increase or foreign yields decrease, investors in general would be more inclined to purchase U.S.
assets, therefore boosting the USD.
r Keep an eye on the Dollar Index.
Market participants closely follow the U.S. Dollar Index (USDX) as
a gauge of overall dollar strength or weakness. The USDX is a futures
contract traded on the New York Board of Trade that is calculated
using the trade-weighted geometric average of six currencies. It is important to follow this index because when market participants are
reporting general dollar weakness or a decline in the trade-weighted
dollar, they are typically referring to this index. Also, even though the
dollar may have moved significantly against one single currency, it may
not have moved as significantly on a trade-weighted basis. This is important because some central bankers may choose to focus on the
trade-weighted index instead of the individual currency pair’s performance against the dollar.
r U.S. currency trading is impacted by stock and bond markets.
There is a strong correlation between a country’s equity and
fixed income markets and its currency: If the equity market is rising,
generally speaking, foreign investment dollars should be coming

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

222

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

in to seize the opportunity. If equity markets are falling, domestic
investors will be selling their shares of local publicly traded firms only
to seize investment opportunities abroad. With fixed income markets,
economies boasting the most valuable fixed income opportunities
with the highest yields will be capable of attracting foreign investment.
Daily fluctuations and developments in any of these markets reflect
movement of foreign portfolio investments, which in the end would
require foreign exchange transactions. Cross-border merger and
acquisition activities are also very important for FX traders to watch.
Large M&A deals, particularly those that involve a significant cash
portion, will have a notable impact on the currency markets, the
reason being that the acquirer will need to buy or sell dollars to fund
its cross-border acquisition target.

Important Economic Indicators for the
United States
All of the following economic indicators are important for the U.S. dollar.
However, since the U.S. economy is service oriented, it is important to pay
particular attention to numbers for the service sector.
Employment—Nonfarm Payrolls The employment report is the
most important and widely watched indicator on the economic calendar.
Its importance is mostly due to political influences rather than pure economic reasons, as the Fed is under strict pressure to keep unemployment
under control. As a result, interest rate policy is directly influenced by
employment conditions. The monthly report consists of data from two
different surveys, the Establishment Survey and the Household Survey.
The Establishment Survey takes data from nonfarm payroll employment,
average hourly workweek, and the aggregate hours index. The Household
Survey gives information on the labor force, household employment, and
the unemployment rate. Currency traders tend to focus on seasonally
adjusted monthly unemployment rates and any meaningful changes in
nonfarm payrolls.
Consumer Price Index The consumer price index (CPI) is a key gauge
of inflation. The index measures the prices on a fixed basket of consumer
goods. Economists tend to focus more on the CPI-U or the core inflation
rate, which excludes the volatile food and energy components. The indicator is widely watched by the FX markets as it drives a lot of activity.
Producer Price Index The producer price index (PPI) is a family
of indexes that measures average changes in selling prices received by

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

223

domestic producers for their output. The PPI tracks changes in prices for
nearly every goods-producing industry in the domestic economy, including agriculture, electricity and natural gas, forestry, fisheries, manufacturing, and mining. Foreign exchange markets tend to focus on seasonally
adjusted finished goods PPI and how the index has reacted on a monthly,
quarterly, and annualized basis.
Gross Domestic Product Gross domestic product (GDP) is a measure of the total production and consumption of goods and services in
the United States. The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) constructs two
complementary measures of GDP, one based on income and one based on
expenditures. The advance release of GDP, which occurs the month after
each quarter ends, contains some BEA estimates for data not yet released,
inventories, and trade balance, and is the most important release. Other
releases of GDP are typically not very significant unless a major revision is
made.
International Trade The balance of trade represents the difference
between exports and imports of foreign trade in goods and services. Merchandise data are provided for U.S. total foreign trade with all countries,
detail for trade with specific countries and regions of the world, as well as
for individual commodities. Traders tend to focus on seasonally adjusted
trade numbers over three-month periods as single-month trade periods are
regarded as unreliable.
Employment Cost Index The employment cost index (ECI) data is
based on a survey of employer payrolls in the third month of the quarter
for the pay period ending on the 12th day of the month. The survey is a
probability sample of approximately 3,600 private industry employers and
700 state and local governments, public schools, and public hospitals. The
big advantage of the ECI is that it includes nonwage costs, which add as
much as 30 percent to total labor costs. Reaction to the ECI is often muted
as it is generally very stable. It should be noted, however, that it is a favorite
indicator of the Fed.
Institute for Supply Management (Formerly NAPM) The Institute for Supply Management (ISM) releases a monthly composite index
based on surveys of 300 purchasing managers nationwide representing 20
different industries regarding manufacturing activity. Index values above
50 indicate an expanding economy, while values below 50 are indicative of
contraction. The number is widely watched, as former Fed Chairman Alan
Greenspan once stated it is one of his favorite indicators.

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

224

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

Industrial Production The Index of Industrial Production is a set
of indexes that measures the monthly physical output of U.S. factories,
mines, and utilities. The index is broken down by industry type and market
type. Foreign exchange markets focus mostly on the seasonally adjusted
monthly change in aggregate figure. Increases in the index are typically
dollar positive.
Consumer Confidence The Consumer Confidence Survey measures
the level of confidence individual households have in the performance of
the economy. Survey questionnaires are sent out to a nationwide representative sample of 5,000 households, of which approximately 3,500 respond.
Households are asked five questions: (1) a rating of business conditions
in the household’s area, (2) a rating of business conditions in six months,
(3) job availability in the area, (4) job availability in six months, and (5) family income in six months. Responses are seasonally adjusted and an index is
constructed for each response; then a composite index is fashioned based
on the aggregate responses. Market participants perceive rising consumer
confidence as a precursor to higher consumer spending. Higher consumer
spending is often seen as a spark that accelerates inflation.
Retail Sales The Retail Sales Index measures the total goods sold by
a sampling of retail stores over the course of a month. This index is used
as a gauge of consumer consumption and consumer confidence. The most
important number is typically ex-autos, as auto sales can vary from month
to month. Retail sales can be quite volatile due to seasonality; however, the
index is an important indicator of the general health of the economy.
Treasury International Capital Flow Data (TIC Data) The Treasury international capital flow data measures the amount of capital inflow
into the United States on a monthly basis. This economic release has become increasingly important over the past few years since the funding of
the U.S. deficit is becoming more of an issue. Aside from the headline number itself, the market also pays close attention to the official flows, which
represent the demand for U.S. government debt by foreign central banks.

CURRENCY PROFILE: EURO (EUR)
Broad Economic Overview
The European Union (EU) was developed as an institutional framework
for the construction of a united Europe. The EU currently consists of
15 member countries: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France,

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

225

Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. All of these countries share the
euro as a common currency, except for Denmark, Sweden, and the United
Kingdom. The 12 common currency countries constitute the European
Monetary Union (EMU) and also share a single monetary policy dictated
by the European Central Bank (ECB).
The EMU is the world’s second largest economic power, with gross
domestic product valued at approximately US$12 trillion in 2006. With a
highly developed fixed income, equity, and futures market, the EMU has
the second most attractive investment market for domestic and international investors. In the past, the EMU has had difficulty in attracting foreign
direct investment or large capital flows. In fact, the EMU is a net supplier
of foreign direct investments, accounting for approximately 45 percent of
total world capital outflows and only 19 percent of capital inflows. The
primary reason is because historically U.S. assets have had solid returns.
As a result, the United States absorbs 71 percent of total foreign savings.
However, with the euro becoming a more established currency and the
European Monetary Union beginning to incorporate even more members,
the euro’s importance as a reserve currency is rising in tandem. As a result,
capital flows to Europe have been increasing. With foreign central banks
expected to diversify their euro reserve holdings even further, demand for
euros should continue to increase.
The EMU is both a trade-driven and capital flow–driven economy;
therefore trade is very important to the economies within the EMU. Unlike most major economies, the EMU does not have a large trade deficit or
surplus. In fact, the EMU went from a small trade deficit in 2003 to a small
trade surplus in 2006. EU exports comprise approximately 19 percent of
world trade, while EU imports account for only 17 percent of total world
imports. Because of the size of the EMU’s trade with the rest of the world,
it has significant power in the international trade arena. International clout
is one of the primary goals in the formation of the EU, because it allows
the individual countries to group as one entity and negotiate on an equal
playing field with the United States, which is their largest trading partner.
The breakdowns of the most important trading partners for the EU are:
Leading Export Markets
1. United States
2. Switzerland
3. Japan
4. Poland
5. China

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

226

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

Leading Import Sources
1. United States
2. Japan
3. China
4. Switzerland
5. Russia

The EMU is primarily a service-oriented economy. Services in 2001
accounted for approximately 70 percent of GDP, while manufacturing,
mining, and utilities accounted for only 22 percent of GDP. In fact, a large
number of the companies whose primary purpose is to produce finished
products still concentrate their EU activity on innovation, research, design,
and marketing, while outsourcing most of their manufacturing activities
to Asia.
The EU’s growing role in international trade has important implications for the role of the euro as a reserve currency. It is important for countries to have large amounts of reserve currencies to reduce exchange risk
and transaction costs. Traditionally, most international trade transactions
involve the British pound, the Japanese yen, and/or the U.S. dollar. Before
the establishment of the euro, it was unreasonable to hold large amounts
of every individual European national currency. As a result, currency reserves tended toward the dollar. At the end of the 1990s, approximately
65 percent of all world reserves were held in U.S. dollars, but with the introduction of the euro, foreign reserve assets are shifting in favor of the
euro. This trend is expected to continue as the EU becomes one of the
major trading partners for most countries around the world.

Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers—The
European Central Bank
The European Central Bank (ECB) is the governing body responsible for
determining the monetary policy of the countries participating in the EMU.
The executive board of the EMU consists of the president of the ECB, the
vice president of the ECB, and four other members. These individuals along
with the governors of the national central banks comprise the Governing
Council. The ECB is set up so that the executive board implements the
policies dictated by the Governing Council. New monetary policy decisions
are typically made by majority vote, with the president having the deciding
vote in the event of a tie, in biweekly meetings. Although the ECB meets
on a biweekly basis and has the power to change monetary policy at each
of those meetings, it is only expected to do so at meetings where an official
press conference is scheduled afterward.

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

227

The EMU’s primary objective is to maintain price stability and to promote growth. Monetary and fiscal policy changes are made to ensure that
this objective is met. With the formation of the EMU, the Maastricht Treaty
was developed by the EU to apply a number of criteria for each member
country to help the EU achieve its objective. Deviations from these criteria
by any one country will result in heavy fines. It is apparent, based on these
criteria, that the ECB has a strict mandate focused on inflation and deficit.
Generally, the ECB strives to maintain annual growth in Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) below 2 percent and M3 (money supply)
annual growth around 4.5 percent.
The EMU Criteria In the 1992 Treaty on European Union (the Maastricht Treaty) the following criteria were formulated as preconditions for
any EU member state joining the European Monetary Union (EMU).

r A rate of inflation no more than 1.5 percent above the average of
the three best-performing member states, taking the average of the
12-month year-on-year rate preceding the assessment date.
r Long-term interest rates not exceeding the average rates of these lowinflation states by more than 2 percent for the preceding 12 months.
r Exchange rates that fluctuate within the normal margins of the
exchange-rate mechanism (ERM) for at least two years.
r A general government debt/GDP ratio of not more than 60 percent, although a higher ratio may be permissible if it is “sufficiently diminishing.”
r A general government deficit not exceeding 3 percent of GDP, although
a small and temporary excess can be permitted.
The ECB and the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) are
independent institutions from both national governments and other EU
institutions, granting them complete control over monetary policy. This
operational independence is accorded to them as per Article 108 of the
Maastricht Treaty, which states that any member of the decision-making
bodies cannot seek or take instructions from any community institutions,
any government of a member state, or any other body. The primary tools
the ECB uses to control monetary policy are:
Open Market Operations The ECB has four main categories of open
market operations to steer interest rates, manage liquidity, and signal monetary policy stance.
1. Main refinancing operations. These are regular liquidity-providing re-
