pocketful of cash and are looking for investment opportunities, I
saved money first and then used a portion of that money to trade,
which is why I did not begin trading immediately. It took me two
years to save up the money to do so.

Q.- pia you work a full time job while you were trading?

A : Yes, I did on the side. My primary job at the time was as a
broker and financial advisor.

142


THE WISDOM OF EXPERIENCE

Q.:H ow long did you trade stocks and oil?

A : Up to the present; Although since the beginning of 2005, I
switched away from brokerage to focus more on education and I
trade stocks and oil on the side.

Q. When did you start your own education company?

A : I started the company in 1992, but throughout that time, I
was working as an investment advisor. It was only in the beginning
of last year that I put my full-time focus into my company.

Q.: How much did you start trading with?

A : In 1988, about $50,000 HKD, which would be considered
quite a bit in today’s dollars, and is the equivalent of two years of
savings.

: Was trading easy for you in the beginning or did you feel
frustrated at the start?

A : Yes, it was definitely frustrating. In the beginning, I did face
a lot of failure. I think that when it comes to investments and
trading, in the beginning it’s a cycle of failure, followed by success,
followed by failure again and success again. But the last step is
either success or failure, which is the same as life. You are faced
with many success and failures, and my later successes come from
the experience of my failures. This, too, is a repeated cycle. Even
at times that I think I may have succeeded, I hit a stumbling block,
which becomes another learning experience, and that has really
been all part of my training to become a successful trader.

: What encouraged you to keep on trading when you had
failures?

A : Well, there is a very unique characteristic of trading, which
is that the feeling of success and failure comes quickly. Today you

143


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

make a trade and it becomes a loser, but tomorrow is another day.
So, when I make a bad trade, I forget about it, go to sleep, wake
up and start all over again tomorrow. Success is also very fulfilling,
which is the main thing that pulls me back into the market. In other
jobs or industries, the feelings of success and failure may not be as
strong. When it comes to trading, every day, you get to experience
the feeling of either success or failure. For people who like the
feeling of success and drive, trading presents plenty of opportunity
for fulfillment.

: However, there are many people who face big failures that
make it difficult for them to have the confidence to trade again.
How do you prevent this from happening?

A : Personally, after many mistakes, I have learned that the most
important part of trading is using stops because, at bare minimum,
it allows you to control your risk since bad trades are unavoidable.
Let’s take a casino, for example. There is little chance that you will
be able to win 10 out of 10 bets. As long as you control your betting
size, however, it will allow you to retain some of your capital to
play the game the next time around.

Another thing that I don’t like to do is to average down and post
margin calls. There are many people who will go long a currency
pair and keep injecting money into their accounts if they get margin
calls and buy at even lower prices in hopes that a rally will help
them to recover their entire account. For example, if you are long
10 lots, if the price falls, you add 20, if it falls again, you add 30
etc. Although the ability to recover quickly may seem extremely
attractive, it is very dangerous and it is something I will rarely use.
I feel that if I keep on posting money into my account to meet
a margin call and add into a losing position, I am essentially at
the whim of the market. I can only hope that the trade moves in
my desired direction. But I am stripped of my decision making
power. Perhaps the price movement would have called for a short,
but since I am buried so deep in the long position, I can only let
the market take me where it wants to. So what would I do if I
got a margin call? I would close my position and wait for the next

144


THE WISDOM OF EXPERIENCE

clear opportunity or setup to get into the market because it avoids
letting the market dictate my profits and losses and allows me to
be the decision maker once again. I get to choose when to get into
the market, what product, and what size and this control is very
important to me.

QO: How long did it take you to realize that stops are important?

A: It was something that I realized later on. I remember the first
trade that I lost money, I did not learn that lesson. The second
trade, I didn’t as well but by the third losing trade, I finally realized
the importance of using stops. In addition to stops, there are other
methods that I use to reduce risk. They include spreading out my
entry levels so that I can spread out my risk as well as diversifying
by product or entry levels. If 1 am very confident, I could put my
whole investment into one entry, but I will scatter my exit levels.
If I am not as confident, I would spread out my entry.

Q.- How long did it take you to develop a strategy that worked

well for you?

A : In approximately 1998 when I started making changes to
my trading style. So as you can see, it took approximately 10
years of success, failures and essentially gaining trading experi-
ence for me to get where I am today. Although this may seem like
along time, since then I’ve had 10 years to act effectively on these
experiences—which would be post 98.

Q.-why did your strategy change?

A : After a series of failures, you want to change yourself because
the right direction to look is forward. And the other reason for
the change is age. Before you are 30, you are very aggressive. If
you have $300, you could risk the entire $300. But after 30, you
become more conservative. The younger you are, the riskier, the
older, the more conservative. So I believe people change with age,

145


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

which contributes to the reason why I began to change my trading
style in 1998. After experiencing many different types of markets,
I became more mature and realized that I shouldn’t risk all that I
have, and I should save some on the side. If I make a bad trade,
I have learned to just give up on the trade rather than pressing
further in hopes of making a quick recovery as I may have done
when I was younger.

Q.:s0 you only started to make serious money after 1998?

A: Yes. By that time I developed my technique and system. How
much you make really depends on how much you invest. But if you
have a good system, even if you make one bad trade, you can feel
confident that your next ones may still lead to success. Your system
and technique are very important. Getting into a good trade really
involves having a good eye. None of us can guarantee that, so it
is important to learn how to analyze the markets and to have a
trading plan.

Q.: Have you ever taken any classes that teach you how to create
a system or read charts?

A. When I started to get into the industry, there weren’t that many
classes available. These days, investment classes have become far
more popular in Hong Kong, and the desire to learn more about
investing has as well. But 20 years ago, this was not very popular. I
read newspapers, financial magazines. I used Reuters, read charts,
price levels, which was the way I learned myself.

Q. what is your normal trading day like? How often do you
trade?

A : I prefer a longer-term style. I will pick a direction, probably
based upon last night’s charts and then determine my entry point
based upon economic data and technical levels. I look at country
news or political news, but I don’t give much weight to it because,

146


THE WISDOM OF EXPERIENCE

for example, if I am analyzing the Middle East situation, any infor-
mation that I read in the paper will probably not be as up to the
minute or as in-depth as the information that big banks or large
investors may have. Information can be bought, so I am sure that
there are people who know a lot more than I do. But if those peo-
ple do something, the market will move, so if I look at the charts,
I will see the activity. I may not know why they are moving the
market the specific way, but I do know that people are moving
it at the moment. This may give me enough information to enter
or exit the market vis-a-vis a breakout or breakdown or a bounce
off the average. This is the most common technique that I use to
trade. I will also look at economic data such as upcoming interest
rate movements, whether the U.S. will raise or cut interest rates,
whether the U.K. did so overnight, etc. Interest rates are extremely
important in the FX markets. I will also look at charts and use both
of that information in combination.

A : The way I look at things is that on a normal day, a currency
probably moves 100 pips. If you capture 50 pips during the day,
that is already considered very good. If you capture 80 pips, I would
consider that A-cup. Fifty pips is C-cup, and this is a good way at
looking at it to determine when I should stop trading. C-cup is
pretty good, I am generally happy with it, B-cup is even better, A
is the best, but rare and is basically a long shot.

Q.: Do you look at charts first, then economic data or economic
data first, and then charts?

A : Twill look at charts first because if you do, you can see what
kind of trend is happening in the various currency pairs. This can
also be a neutral point that you work off of. As for economic data, I
use it on a much more short-term basis. For example, let’s say that
I got into the market and there is an important economic release
due out tonight, I will consider whether it will most likely hurt
or benefit my position. This is secondary, though. I think that the
trend and the direction of the trend are most important. I will only
look at data as to how it can impact my position.

147


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q - How long do you usually keep your positions open?

A : On a short-term basis. I have tried to day trade. Day trade has
two meanings to me. The first is that I can earn a large amount
of money if the move happens in one day, so I would pocket that.
For example, if I am long dollars and the U.S. dollar rallied 300
points, I would definitely pocket the money because 300 points is
far beyond what I may have considered for a daily move. So I would
take it as a day trade and bank the money. On the other hand, if
I was long dollars and the dollar is not able rally, and I have some
small profits like 10 or 20 pips, I may pocket that money as well.

The thing is, when I go into the market and enter into a position,
I will not think about whether this will be a day trade. To determine
how long I will hold a position, I look at the charts to see how
long previous trends have lasted and how long the current trend
has been in the works. In these situations, I would be perfectly
comfortable holding a position for as long as a month. When I
hold positions for a month, one of the most important things that
I will always consider is interest. There was a time when I felt
that U.S. interest rates were very high. So I went long the U.S.
dollar against the Swiss franc and Japanese yen because, if I am
holding the position for a month, I will know that at least I will
earn the interest. If I felt that the outlook for the U.S. dollar is
weak, I would short the dollar against the British pound because
at the time I would earn interest going long pounds against the
dollar. So I will pick a direction where the interest is favorable to
me. This is important for longer trades because the amount can be
significant. The interest that you earn is increased by the usage of
leverage so it can be a large amount. This is exceptionally important
for medium-term traders. For short-term traders, interest is not
important because there is only a limit to how much interest you
would end up paying out.

Q_: How long did it take you to figure out the importance of

interest?

A : Not too long after I started trading. The great thing about
the FX market is that you have a choice. I can pick to earn or pay

148


THE WISDOM OF EXPERIENCE

interest. If I didn’t have a choice, I would have to pay the interest,
of course. However, because I do have a choice, I would definitely
pick to earn interest. I can go short or go long dollars and still earn
interest. It’s just a matter of which currency pair. It’s not always
easy because some pairs have narrow interest rate spreads and
others have wider, so you may not always know which one to pick.

Q. what currencies do you trade the most?

A : The Swiss franc. I will spend the most time there. I like it
because of the larger volatility. The euro is good too, but sometimes
the volatility is not as big. When I trade, I usually will look at price,
charts, and overnight Dow Jones activity. I think this is enough

Q.: What type of equipment do you use?

A: I will use basic, free charts. I think that trading FX these days
is much better than in the past. Back then, more sophisticated
people would use Reuters, but that can be very expensive. I was
also previously sponsored by Reuters to use it for over a year. But
afterwards I did not opt to pay for it myself. When it comes to
information these days, there are many places to get it for free
and during that time you can see how the price moves, which is
as reliable as it gets. Reuters, sometimes has false prices. Like the
highs and lows may be indicative and not actually executed prices.
I prefer to watch the dealing station in real active times because
then I can see more reliable prices that are probably being dealt at
the moment.

Q.:s0 you don’t think that an average person needs very expen-

sive equipment similar to what banks have to be successful?

A : [think that it is not necessary these days. In the past it was. But
in the present information is more fluid, so it allows you to avoid
paying up for those services. Also, I don’t think that people should
not get it just to save money, but because many of the cheaper or

149


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

even free resources out there are sufficient if not better. Capital is
important when it comes to trading and there are some costs that
should be made initially, such as a fast computer and connection,
but other things are not as necessary.

Q. ; sometimes the timeliness of certain services may pale in
comparison to Reuters or Bloomberg. Is this a disadvantage?

A : Usually you know in advance when data is going to come out
or when speeches will be made. Sometimes you have scenarios like
9/11. But that is very rare. I don’t feel the need to know the data
the second or even minute it comes out. Most services will release
it shortly afterwards and you can watch the price for the reaction.
If you are really worried about the risk, you could call in and put a
stop or something. When there is a large unexpected event, there
is not much that we, as small investors, can do about it. We find
out as quickly as we can and the key is to focus on reducing risk
on the back of those events—to put in stops as often as possible.
Most investors cannot afford a Reuters or Bloomberg, so the key
is to focus on finding your most reliable news sources and then
watching the price. Sometimes the price can lie too because it can
be late in updating, so make sure you look at a few different charts.

Q.. what time of the day do you trade?

A : I don’t really split between times. Usually I prefer at night
because it is more relaxed and quiet and, as such, I have more time
to look at the charts in finer detail.

Q.: The afternoon in Hong Kong is basically London open, and
the evening is the U.S. open. So is it better to analyze the markets
then because there is more activity?

A : I think that certainly is a reason. If the market is moving
a lot, you get to see a lot more information and understand the

150


THE WISDOM OF EXPERIENCE

currency’s reaction more. Sometimes watching the markets may
require a one-hour, two-hour analysis, or just a quick glance at the
charts. You can even set alerts. What I like to do is to use a price
quote beeper that shows how prices are moving. This is great when
Iam sleeping because I don’t like to have to wake up constantly to
check the price quotes. You can also put alerts on your computer,
but you may not be able to put that next to your bed like you can
a beeper. Instead, with the beeper, I can set the price levels that I
am watching and it will alert me when the price is hit. When the
alarm rings, I know that something unique is happening and I can
go look at my charts to see if I want to do anything. It’s impossible
for me to watch prices constantly, especially if I am in a meeting or
teaching a class. It is also impossible for me to bring my computer
with me into the meetings as well. So a price beeper is a perfect
tool for me to use to keep on top of the markets.

Q.: when did you start using the beeper?

A : In the ’80s. These beepers were available before the ‘90s.
They have changed a lot since then, of course, and are very inex-
pensive and cheap to use. On a monthly basis, here in Hong Kong,
it can cost $300 HKD a month. Now one thing—these beep-
ers are convenient and inexpensive, but you cannot rely on them
100 percent. Sometimes with wireless connections, updates can be
slow, especially if the market is moving very fast. It definitely won’t
be as fast to update as your cable Internet or DSL connections. So
the beepers should only be used as a secondary support tool. In
typical scenarios, it works well. But if there is a major interest rate
decision or a political development, it can be a bit slower because
the connection speed can be a bit slower.

Q. - Typically what timeframe charts do you use?

A : I will use daily charts and minute charts. Daily charts are
for direction to see where the trendline is pointing. If the daily
charts indicate that the currency pair will rally, | may want to avoid

151


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

making shorts on a shorter-term basis. The daily charts can show
the general direction. I use the minute charts to determine whether
the price is the best price to get in at. If I am looking to buy into
a trend, I want to get a nice price, which is really the benefit of
using shorter-term charts. If the minute charts show short-term
weakness and the potential for a 20-point dip, then that could be a
20-point better entry for me.

: Do you think one-minute charts are really more reliable and
better than five-minute charts?

A : I feel that the one-minute chart gives you a closer more instant
look at market behavior and is a truer reflection of current market
activity.

Q.: Have you always used the combination of daily and one-
minute charts, or is that something that you discovered later on?

A : It’s definitely a technique that has evolved. I feel that when it
comes to trading, one is always evolving whether you realize it or
not. It’s all about change for any investor, including myself, Right
now, if you ask me if I have the best strategy, I may say yes. But
in a year, things may change and a scenario that hasn’t happened
in the past may have happened. As a result, I may have to react
to that as well. It’s all about challenging yourself to adapt to the
changes.

Q.: Do you feel that the changes along the way have been big?

A : I think it really has been a small evolution along the way and
not a big change. Training yourself to be a good trader is not like
rebuilding a house, where you can completely strip the old house
and its foundation and start from scratch.

152


THE WISDOM OF EXPERIENCE

QO. - There are some people who start as a trend trader and then
switch to become a range trader or vice versa before they find their
true trading style. Has this happened to you? Have you always been
a trend trader?

A : [ think that I have always thought in the mentality of a trend
trader, just not so perfectly and with as reliable trading strategies.
Most people are this way with the things they do. For example,
if you like martial arts and kung fu, you may begin to do some
of the motions, but at that time you may not know or consciously
care about whether the motions are karate style, taekwondo style
or jujitsu style. Only after you learn and practice more and more
and become a true student of the art do you realize that your
motions may actually be taekwondo and not karate. The same is
with trading. Some traders may start out trading one way, maybe
as a momentum trader who rides the wave of price or a reversal
trader who always tries to pick a top, they may not realize what
category they fall into until much later on.

Q.: when you first started trading, how many hours a day did
you trade for, how long would you hold your positions? Has this
changed?

A : As for how long I would usually spend trading, I consider
every time I check my quote rates on my beeper as part of trading.
Every day I do look at the markets, more so at night. Generally
speaking, the time that I spend at night sitting down and really
analyzing the markets is usually under an hour. The reason is
because usually when I have already identified the major trend in
the market from a broader scale, I already know what I am looking
for on the charts on a daily basis. That is, ifthe trend is still intact,
is it losing momentum, or has it already been compromised and
ready to reverse. Some people find trading currencies very difficult
because they feel that they have to spend a lot of time watching the
markets since it is open 24 hours a day. I don’t think it should be
the case. When I trade, it is usually very relaxed because all I do is
spend a little time every day looking at how the market has moved

153


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

and how that movement plays into the overall trend and from that I
have usually identified the key support and resistance levels, which
I then enter into my beeper machine. Any levels within the support
and resistance zones I am usually very comfortable with. The only
times that I need to keep an eye on the market is when my support
level is breached in an uptrend or resistance level is breached in
a downtrend. But regardless of the direction of the trend, I will
usually check my charts if either the support or resistance zones
have been broken to see if I need to react to it.
