
surrendered himself at the Bastille on the first accusation against him, replied with the
mingled sentiment of pride and innocence, 'When Mathieu de Montmorenci, my ancestor,
married the widow of Louis le Gros, he did not have recourse to the devil, but to the
States-General, in order to obtain for the minor king the support of the house of
Montmorenci.' This brave man was imprisoned in a cell six feet and a half long, and his
trial, which was interrupted for several weeks, lasted altogether fourteen months. No
judgment was pronounced upon him."
The Countess of Soissons fled to Brussels, rather than undergo the risk of a trial; and was
never able to clear herself from the stigma that attached to her, of having made an attempt
to poison the Queen of Spain by doses of succession powder. The Duchess of Bouillon
was arrested, and tried by the Chambre Ardente. It would appear, however, that she had
nothing to do with the slow poisons, but had merely endeavoured to pry into the secrets
of futurity, and gratify her curiosity with a sight of the devil. One of the presidents of the
Chambre, La Reynie, an ugly little old man, very seriously asked her whether she had
really seen the devil; to which the lady replied, looking him full in the face, "Oh yes! I
see him now. He is in the form of a little ugly old man, exceedingly illnatured, and is
dressed in the robes of a counsellor of State." M. la Reynie prudently refrained from
asking any more questions of a lady with so sharp and ready a tongue. The Duchess was
imprisoned for several months in the Bastile; and nothing being proved against her, she
was released at the intercession of her powerful friends. The severe punishment of
criminals of this note might have helped to abate the fever of imitation among the vulgar;
-- their comparative impunity had a contrary tendency. The escape of Penautier, and the
wealthy Cardinal de Bonzy his employer, had the most pernicious effect. For two years
longer the crime continued to rage, and was not finally suppressed till the stake had
blazed, or the noose dangled, for upwards of a hundred individuals.

HAUNTED HOUSES.
Here's a knocking indeed! . . . knock! knock! knock . . .
Who's there, i' the name o' Beelzebub? . . .
Who's there, i' the other devil's name?
Knock! knock! knock! Never at quiet!
-- Macbeth.
Who has not either seen or heard of some house, shut up and uninhabitable, fallen into
decay, and looking dusty and dreary, from which, at midnight, strange sounds have been
heard to issue -- aerial knockings -- the rattling of chains, and the groaning of perturbed
spirits? -- a house that people have thought it unsafe to pass after dark, and which has
remained for years without a tenant, and which no tenant would occupy, even were he
paid to do so? There are hundreds of such houses in England at the present day; hundreds
in France, Germany, and almost every country of Europe, which are marked with the
mark of fear -- places for the timid to avoid, and the pious to bless themselves at, and ask
protection from, as they pass -- the abodes of ghosts and evil spirits. There are many such
houses in London; and if any vain boaster of the march of intellect would but take the
trouble to find them out and count them, he would be convinced that intellect must yet
make some enormous strides before such old superstitions can be eradicated.
The idea that such houses exist is a remnant of the witch creed, which merits separate
notice from its comparative harmlessness, and from its being not so much a madness as a
folly of the people. Unlike other notions that sprang from the belief in witchcraft, and
which we have already dwelt upon at sufficient length, it has sent no wretches to the
stake or the gibbet, and but a few to the pillory only.
Many houses have been condemned as haunted, and avoided by the weak and credulous,
from circumstances the most trifling in themselves, and which only wanted a vigorous
mind to clear up, at once, and dissipate all alarm. A house in Aix-la-Chapelle, a large
desolate-looking building, remained uninhabited for five years, on account of the
mysterious knockings that there were heard within it at all hours of the day and night.
Nobody could account for the noises; and the fear became at last so excessive, that the
persons who inhabited the houses on either side relinquished their tenancy, and went to
reside in other quarters of the town, where there was less chance of interruption from evil
spirits. From being so long without an inhabitant the house at last grew so ruinous, so
dingy, and so miserable in its outward appearance, and so like the place that ghosts might
be supposed to haunt, that few persons cared to go past it after sunset. The knocking that
was heard in one of the upper rooms was not very loud, but it was very regular. The
gossips of the neighbourhood asserted that they often heard groans from the cellars, and
saw lights moved about from one window to another immediately after the midnight bell
had tolled. Spectres in white habiliments were reported to have gibed and chattered from
the windows; but all these stories could bear no investigation. The knocking, however,
was a fact which no one could dispute, and several ineffectual attempts were made by the
proprietor to discover the cause. The rooms were sprinkled with holy water -- the evil
spirits were commanded in due form, by a priest, to depart thence to the Red Sea; but the

knockings still continued, in spite of all that could be done in that way. Accident at last
discovered the cause, and restored tranquillity to the neighbourhood. The proprietor, who
suffered not only in his mind but in his pocket, had sold the building at a ruinously small
price, to get rid of all future annoyance. The new proprietor was standing in a room on
the first floor when he heard the door driven to at the bottom with a considerable noise,
and then fly open immediately, about two inches and no more. He stood still a minute and
watched, and the same thing occurred a second and a third time. He examined the door
attentively, and all the mystery was unravelled. The latch of the door was broken so that
it could not be fastened, and it swung chiefly upon the bottom hinge. Immediately
opposite was a window, in which one pane of glass was broken; and when the wind was
in a certain quarter, the draught of air was so strong that it blew the door to with some
violence. There being no latch, it swung open again; and when there was a fresh gust,
was again blown to. The new proprietor lost no time in sending for a glazier, and the
mysterious noises ceased for ever. The house was replastered and repainted, and once
more regained its lost good name. It was not before two or three years, however, that it
was thoroughly established in popular favour; and many persons, even then, would
always avoid passing it, if they could reach their destination by any other street.
A similar story is narrated by Sir Walter Scott, in his Letters on Demonology and
Witchcraft, the hero of which was a gentleman of birth and distinction, well known in the
political world. Shortly after he succeeded to his title and estates, there was a rumour
among the servants concerning a strange noise that used to be heard at night in the family
mansion, and the cause of which no one could ascertain. The gentleman resolved to
discover it himself, and to watch for that purpose with a domestic who had grown old in
the family, and who, like the rest, had whispered strange things about the knocking
having begun immediately upon the death of his old master. These two watched until the
noise was heard, and at last traced it to a small store-room, used as a place for keeping
provisions of various kinds for the family, and of which the old butler had the key. They
entered this place, and remained for some time, without hearing the noises which they
had traced thither. At length the sound was heard, but much lower than it seemed to be
while they were further off, and their imaginations were more excited. They then
discovered the cause without difficulty. A rat, caught in an old-fashioned trap, had
occasioned the noise by its efforts to escape, in which it was able to raise the trap-door of
its prison to a certain height, but was then obliged to drop it. The noise of the fall
resounding through the house had occasioned the mysterious rumours, which, but for the
investigation of the proprietor, would, in all probability, have acquired so bad a name for
the dwelling that no servants would have inhabited it. The circumstance was told to Sir
Walter Scott by the gentleman to whom it happened.
But, in general, houses that have acquired this character, have been more indebted for it,
to the roguery of living men, than to accidents like these. Six monks played off a clever
trick of the kind upon that worthy King, Louis, whose piety has procured him, in the
annals of his own country, the designation of "the Saint." Having heard his confessor
speak in terms of warm eulogy of the goodness and learning of the monks of the order of
Saint Bruno, he expressed his wish to establish a community of them near Paris. Bernard
de la Tour, the superior, sent six of the brethren, and the King gave them a handsome

house to live in, in the village of Chantilly. It so happened that, from their windows, they
had a very fine view of the ancient palace of Vauvert, which had been built for a royal
residence by King Robert, but deserted for many years. The worthy monks thought the
palace would just suit them, but their modesty was so excessive that they were ashamed
to ask the King for a grant of it in due form. This difficulty was not to be overcome, and
the monks set their ingenuity to work to discover another plan. The palace of Vauvert had
never laboured under any imputation upon its character until they became its neighbours;
but, somehow or other, it almost immediately afterwards began to acquire a bad name.
Frightful shrieks were heard to proceed from it at night -- blue, red, and green lights were
suddenly observed to glimmer from the windows, and as suddenly to disappear: the
clanking of chains was heard, and the howling as of persons in great pain. These
disturbances continued for several months, to the great terror of all the country round, and
even of the pious King Louis, to whom, at Paris, all the rumours were regularly carried,
with whole heaps of additions, that accumulated on the way. At last a great spectre,
clothed all in pea-green, with a long white beard and a serpent's tail, took his station
regularly at midnight in the principal window of the palace, and howled fearfully and
shook his fists at the passengers. The six monks of Chantilly, to whom all these things
were duly narrated, were exceedingly wroth that the devil should play such antics right
opposite their dwelling, and hinted to the commissioners, sent down by Saint Louis to
investigate the matter, that, if they were allowed to inhabit the palace, they would very
soon make a clearance of the evil spirits. The King was quite charmed with their piety,
and expressed to them how grateful he felt for their disinterestedness. A deed was
forthwith drawn up -- the royal sign-manual was affixed to it, and the palace of Vauvert
became the property of the monks of Saint Bruno. The deed is dated in 1259. [Garinet.
Histoire de la Magie en France, page 75.] The disturbances ceased immediately -- the
lights disappeared, and the green ghost (so said the monks) was laid at rest for ever under
the waves of the Red Sea.
In the year 1580, one Gilles Blacre had taken the lease of a house in the suburbs of Tours,
but repenting him of his bargain with the landlord, Peter Piquet, he endeavoured to
prevail upon him to cancel the agreement. Peter, however, was satisfied with his tenant
and his terms, and would listen to no compromise. Very shortly afterwards, the rumour
was spread all over Tours that the house of Gilles Blacre was haunted. Gilles himself
asserted that he verily believed his house to be the general rendezvous of all the witches
and evil spirits of France. The noise they made was awful, and quite prevented him from
sleeping. They knocked against the wall -- howled in the chimneys -- broke his windowglass -- scattered his pots and pans all over his kitchen, and set his chairs and tables a
dancing the whole night through. Crowds of persons assembled around the house to hear
the mysterious noises; and the bricks were observed to detach themselves from the wall
and fall into the streets upon the heads of those who had not said their paternoster before
they came out in the morning. These things having continued for some time, Gilles
Blacre made his complaint to the Civil Court of Tours, and Peter Piquet was summoned
to show cause why the lease should not be annulled. Poor Peter could make no defence,
and the court unanimously agreed that no lease could hold good under such
circumstances, and annulled it accordingly, condemning the unlucky owner to all the
expenses of the suit. Peter appealed to the Parliament of Paris; and, after a long

examination, the Parliament confirmed the lease. "Not," said the judge, "because it bas
not been fully and satisfactorily proved that the house is troubled by evil spirits, but that
there was an informality in the proceedings before the Civil Court of Tours, that rendered
its decision null and of no effect."
A similar cause was tried before the Parliament of Bordeaux, in the year 1595, relative to
a house in that city which was sorely troubled by evil spirits. The Parliament appointed
certain ecclesiastics to examine and report to them, and on their report in the affirmative
that the house was haunted, the lease was annulled, and the tenant absolved from all
payment of rent and taxes. [Garinet. Histoire de la Magie en France, page 156.]
One of the best stories of a haunted house is that of the royal palace of Woodstock, in the
year 1649, when the commissioners sent from London by the Long Parliament to take
possession of it, and efface all the emblems of royalty about it, were fairly driven out by
their fear of the devil and the annoyances they suffered from a roguish cavalier, who
played the imp to admiration. The commissioners, dreading at that time no devil, arrived
at Woodstock on the 13th of October, 1649. They took up their lodgings in the late King's
apartments-turned the beautiful bedrooms and withdrawing-rooms into kitchens and
sculleries -- the council-hall into a brew-house, and made the dining-room a place to keep
firewood in. They pulled down all the insignia of royal state, and treated with the utmost
indignity everything that recalled to their memory the name or the majesty of Charles
Stuart. One Giles Sharp accompanied them in the capacity of clerk, and seconded their
efforts, apparently with the greatest zeal. He aided them to uproot a noble old tree, merely
because it was called the King's Oak, and tossed the fragments into the dining-room to
make cheerful fires for the commissioners. During the first two days, they heard some
strange noises about the house, but they paid no great attention to them. On the third,
however, they began to suspect they had got into bad company; for they heard, as they
thought, a supernatural dog under their bed, which gnawed their bedclothes. On the next
day, the chairs and tables began to dance, apparently of their own accord. On the fifth
day, something came into the bedchamber and walked up and down, and fetching the
warming-pan out of the withdrawing-room, made so much noise with it that they thought
five church-bells were ringing in their ears. On the sixth day, the plates and dishes were
thrown up and down the dining-room. On the seventh, they penetrated into the bedroom
in company with several logs of wood, and usurped the soft pillows intended for the
commissioners. On the eighth and ninth nights, there was a cessation of hostilities; but on
the tenth, the bricks in the chimneys became locomotive, and rattled and danced about the
floors, and round the heads of the commissioners, all the night long. On the eleventh, the
demon ran away with their breeches, and on the twelfth filled their beds so full of pewterplatters that they could not get into them. On the thirteenth night, the glass became
unaccountably seized with a fit of cracking, and fell into shivers in all parts of the house.
On the fourteenth, there was a noise as if forty pieces of artillery had been fired off, and a
shower of pebble-stones, which so alarmed the commissioners that, "struck with great
horror, they cried out to one another for help."
They first of all tried the efficacy of prayers to drive away the evil spirits; but these
proving unavailing, they began seriously to reflect whether it would not be much better to

leave the place altogether to the devils that inhabited it. They ultimately resolved,
however, to try it a little longer; and having craved forgiveness of all their sins, betook
themselves to bed. That night they slept in tolerable comfort, but it was merely a trick of
their tormentor to lull them into false security. When, on the succeeding night, they heard
no noises, they began to flatter themselves that the devil was driven out, and prepared
accordingly to take up their quarters for the whole winter in the palace. These symptoms
on their part became the signal for renewed uproar among the fiends. On the 1st of
November, they heard something walking with a slow and solemn pace up and down the
withdrawing-room, and immediately afterwards a shower of stones, bricks, mortar, and
broken glass pelted about their ears. On the 2nd the steps were again heard in the
withdrawing-room, sounding to their fancy very much like the treading of an enormous
bear, which continued for about a quarter of an hour. This noise having ceased, a large
warming-pan was thrown violently upon the table, followed by a number of stones and
the jawbone of a horse. Some of the boldest walked valiantly into the withdrawing-room,
armed with swords, and pistols; but could discover nothing. They were afraid that night
to go to sleep, and sat up, making fires in every room, and burning candles and lamps in
great abundance; thinking that, as the fiends loved darkness, they would not disturb a
company surrounded with so much light. They were deceived, however: buckets of water
came down the chimneys and extinguished the fires, and the candles were blown out,
they knew not how. Some of the servants who had betaken themselves to bed were
drenched with putrid ditch-water as they lay, and arose in great fright, muttering
incoherent prayers, and exposing to the wondering eyes of the commissioners their linen
all dripping with green moisture, and their knuckles red with the blows they had at the
same time received from some invisible tormentors. While they were still speaking, there
was a noise like the loudest thunder, or the firing of a whole park of artillery, upon which
they all fell down upon their knees and implored the protection of the Almighty. One of
the commissioners then arose, the others still kneeling, and asked in a courageous voice,
and in the name of God, who was there, and what they had done that they should be
troubled in that manner. No answer was returned, and the noises ceased for a while. At
length, however, as the commissioners said, "the devil came again, and brought with it
seven devils worse than itself." Being again in darkness, they lighted a candle and placed
it in the doorway, that it might throw a light upon the two chambers at once; but it was
suddenly blown out, and one commissioner said that he had "seen the similitude of a
horse's hoof striking the candle and candlestick into the middle of the chamber, and
afterwards making three scrapes on the snuff to put it out." Upon this, the same person
was so bold as to draw his sword; but he asserted positively that he had hardly withdrawn
it from the scabbard before an invisible hand seized hold of it and tugged with him for it,
and prevailing, struck him so violent a blow with the pommel that he was quite stunned.
Then the noises began again; upon which, with one accord, they all retired into the
presence-chamber, where they passed the night, praying and singing psalms.
They were by this time convinced that it was useless to struggle any longer with the
powers of evil, that seemed determined to make Woodstock their own. These things
happened on the Saturday night; and, being repeated on the Sunday, they determined to
leave the place immediately, and return to London. By Tuesday morning early, all their
preparations were completed; and, shaking the dust off their feet, and devoting

Woodstock and all its inhabitants to the infernal gods, they finally took their departure.
[Dr. H. More's Continuation of Glanvil's Collection of Relations in proof of Witchcraft.]
Many years elapsed before the true cause of these disturbances was discovered. It was
ascertained, at the Restoration, that the whole was the work of Giles Sharp, the trusty
clerk of the commissioners. This man, whose real name was Joseph Collins, was a
concealed royalist, and had passed his early life within the bowers of Woodstock; so that
he knew every hole and corner of the place, and the numerous trap-doors and secret
passages that abounded in the building. The commissioners, never suspecting the true
state of his opinions, but believing him to be revolutionary to the back-bone, placed the
utmost reliance upon him; a confidence which he abused in the manner above detailed, to
his own great amusement, and that of the few cavaliers whom he let into the secret.
Quite as extraordinary and as cleverly managed was the trick played off at Tedworth, in
1661, at the house of Mr. Mompesson, and which is so circumstantially narrated by the
Rev. Joseph Glanvil, under the title of "The Demon of Tedworth," and appended, among
other proofs of witchcraft, to his noted work, called "Sadducismus Triumphatus." About
the middle of April, in the year above mentioned, Mr. Mompesson, having returned to his
house, at Tedworth, from a journey he had taken to London, was informed by his wife,
that during his absence they had been troubled with the most extraordinary noises. Three
nights afterwards he heard the noise himself; and it appeared to him to be that of "a great
knocking at his doors, and on the outside of his walls." He immediately arose, dressed
himself, took down a pair of pistols, and walked valiantly forth to discover the disturber,
under the impression that it must be a robber: but, as he went, the noise seemed to travel
before or behind him; and, when he arrived at the door from which he thought it
proceeded, he saw nothing, but still heard "a strange hollow sound." He puzzled his
brains for a long time, and searched every corner of the house; but, discovering nothing,
he went to bed again. He was no sooner snug under the clothes, than the noise began
again more furiously than ever, sounding very much like a "thumping and drumming on
the top of his house, and then by degrees going off into the air."
These things continued for several nights, when it came to the recollection of Mr.
Mompesson that some time before, he had given orders for the arrest and imprisonment
of a wandering drummer, who went about the country with a large drum, disturbing quiet
people and soliciting alms, and that he had detained the man's drum, and that, probably,
the drummer was a wizard, and had sent evil spirits to haunt his house, to be revenged of
him. He became strengthened in his opinion every day, especially when the noises
assumed, to his fancy, a resemblance to the beating of a drum, "like that at the breaking
up of a guard." Mrs. Mompesson being brought to bed, the devil, or the drummer, very
kindly and considerately refrained from making the usual riot; but, as soon as she
recovered strength, began again "in a ruder manner than before, following and vexing the
young children, and beating their bedsteads with so much violence that every one
expected they would fall in pieces." For an hour together, as the worthy Mr. Mompesson
repeated to his wondering neighbours, this infernal drummer "would beat 'Roundheads
and Cuckolds," the 'Tat-too,' and several other points of war, as cleverly as any soldier."
When this had lasted long enough, he changed his tactics, and scratched with his iron
