 Before we move on to actual model development, we need to assemble a group of quantitative tools to help us evaluate our strategies and make informed decisions about them. Academics often use factor pricing model alphas to evaluate the efficacy of trading strategies relative to appropriate benchmarks. Advantages of this approach are that you can use risk factors that are most appropriate to the model you are testing, and results can be evaluated using standard tests of statistical significance. The biggest drawback to this approach is that it ignores downside exposure, also known as drawdown. Alpha may be useful to look at in terms of ascertaining statistical significance, but we need to use other measures in order to evaluate strategy risk. 
 A common measure that considers risk in the form of volatility is the Sharpe ratio. The Sharpe ratio is closely related to the t-statistic used for measuring the statistical significance of differential returns. The Sharpe ratio divides an asset’s excess average return (return less the risk-free rate) by the standard deviation of that return. 8 It is a measure of the efficiency of a strategy that tells you how much return you earn per unit of risk that you bear. A higher Sharpe ratio indicates a better risk-adjusted return. A Sharpe ratio of 1.0 or greater is very good. For example, Ilmanen (2011) reports a typical Sharpe ratio of 0 to 0.5 for a single asset using a trend-following strategy, which rises to 0.5 to 1.0 when looking at a portfolio of assets. 
 There are some potential problems, however, with the statistical properties of the Sharpe ratio. For example, rankings based on Sharpe ratios can be misleading if they are not adjusted for the impact of serial correlation. Researchers also usually compare differences in Sharpe ratios, which, due to the additive nature of variance error, is not as accurate as comparing Sharpe ratios of differences. Furthermore, the Sharpe ratio makes no distinction between upside and downside volatility. It penalizes equally both downside risk and upside return potential. Some researchers supplement their use of the Sharpe ratio with the Sortino ratio that uses only volatility below the mean. The Sortino ratio, however, discards all information on upside volatility and the right tail of the distribution, which may be useful to identify profit opportunities. 9 For our internal work, we prefer to use a skewness-adjusted Sharpe ratio, which is easy to calculate and provides additional useful information. 10 For our purposes here though, we will use the standard Sharpe ratio, since others are more familiar with it. 11 
 TAIL RISK AND MAXIMUM DRAWDOWN 
 For normal distributions, upside and downside volatility are approximately the same, but financial market returns are usually non-normally distributed. The difference between upside and downside volatility can be particularly problematic when returns are highly skewed, or nonsymmetric. Stock market returns are often negatively skewed, with an asymmetric left tail extending more toward negative values. 12 This creates tail risk, which can lead to greater-than-expected losses and aggravate the animal spirits mentioned earlier. Positive skewness is much preferred, since surprises should then work in our favor. 
 Academic research often just ignores tail risk. However, left tail risk, indicating negative skewness, is undesirable from a practitioner point of view. It can lead to large equity erosions, emotional distress, and untimely investor withdrawals. 13 What we need is an indicator of maximum adverse consequences so we can avoid strategies that have too much left tail risk. 
 One such indicator is conditional value-at-risk (CVaR), also known as expected shortfall. CVaR uses the actual distribution of returns to determine the expected loss of a portfolio when there is a loss. CVaR is difficult to calculate, and the results are not intuitively appealing. I find it difficult to relate to the CVaR values and prefer instead to use a visual indicator called a box plot. This shows on one comparative chart median returns, interquartile ranges of returns, and expected extreme values. 
 Another simple indicator of tail risk that is intuitive, easy to understand, and relatively easy to calculate is maximum drawdown. 14 Drawdown is the percentage that price moves down from a new high. Since we use monthly returns, maximum drawdown to us means the maximum cumulative peak-to-valley retracement on a month-end basis. 15 
 As with most things, there are some potential drawbacks to using maximum drawdown. First, maximum drawdown is dependent on the length of one’s performance record. All else being equal, maximum drawdown increases with track-record length. Therefore, it is most useful when maximum drawdown is used to evaluate strategies having the same amount of performance history and plenty of historical data. Second, maximum drawdown represents only a single occurrence. The number of drawdowns that occur and drawdowns other than the very worst one may also be important to us. To get a better sense of the depth, quantity, and duration of drawdowns, I look at drawdowns in different ways, at different times, and under different conditions. 
 AN INTEGRATED APPROACH 
 We are now ready to evaluate our strategies numerically and visually using comparative returns, standard deviations, profit consistency, alphas, Sharpe ratios, box plots, and maximum drawdowns under different scenarios. 
 We have looked at the history and evolution of momentum, the rationales that support it, and what we should or should not include as investment assets. Now that we have the requisite background information and some useful evaluation tools, we can move on to model development and presentation. In the next chapter, we will put all the pieces together and see what dual momentum can really do for us.

Dual Momentum Investing: An Innovative Strategy for Higher Returns with Lower Risk 

 CHAPTER 8 
 GLOBAL EQUITIES MOMENTUM 
          There is a tide in the affairs of men which, when taken at the flood, leads to fortune. 
 — William Shakespeare 
 W E HAVE SEEN HOW MOMENTUM evolved, what assets are best to include in a momentum-based model, and what we mean by relative, absolute, and dual momentum. We have also identified the tools and criteria we need for evaluating our results. We are ready now to create an integrated model that transforms momentum concepts into a real-world experience. 
 Based on the past success and high-risk premium of equities, we will anchor our investment portfolio in U.S. stocks and switch into non-U.S. stocks in accordance with relative strength momentum. We will hold bonds (short to intermediate term) only when the U.S. and non-U.S. equity markets are not in an uptrend, as determined by absolute momentum. This should minimize any drag that a bond allocation might have on the long-run performance of our strategy, while allowing bonds to come into play and contribute fully to portfolio returns during equity bear markets. 
 DYNAMIC ASSET ALLOCATION 
 Our dual momentum approach using both absolute and relative momentum to manage asset allocation is a major paradigm shift from what investors usually have done. Typically, investors have a permanent allocation to diversifying assets, such as bonds, since they do not have a way to exit equities early on in bear markets. 
 Greater integration of world markets now and higher intermarket correlations are other reasons that permanent asset allocations may not make as much sense as they once did. Converging asset correlations under market stress means that permanent diversification may not provide the risk reduction that investors want. For example, when U.S. and non-U.S. equities enjoy returns that are one standard deviation above average, which is typical of bull markets, their monthly correlation is –0.17. However, when equity returns are one standard deviation below average, which is typical of bear markets, the monthly correlation between U.S and non-U.S. equities rises to 0.76. Dual momentum can take us from naive diversification to a dynamically adaptive asset allocation approach that keeps us better in tune with changing market regimes and less exposed to converging market correlations. 
 LOOK-BACK PERIOD 
 The momentum formation or look-back period is the amount of history we use to measure momentum and select our momentum-based portfolio. We saw earlier that the best look-back period across most markets is generally 6 to 12 months. 
 The majority of academic literature covering both relative and absolute momentum agrees that a 12-month look-back period gives the best performance. A number of commercial momentum applications also use a 12-month look-back period. 1 We will similarly use a 12-month look-back period and apply it to both types of momentum. Other look-back periods also deliver satisfactory results. However, a look-back period at the long end of the 6- to 12-month effective range minimizes portfolio turnover and transaction costs. 
 In dealing with individual stocks, one often skips the most recent week or month in order to disentangle the intermediate momentum effect from the short-term reversal or contrarian effect in returns at the one-week or one-month level. This is said to be related to liquidity or microstructure issues. We will use broad-based stock market indexes for our momentum model, because they are less subject to noise than individual stocks, and their transaction costs are much lower. Indexes are also less subject to liquidity and microstructure issues, so we will not need to skip a month. 
 APPLIED ABSOLUTE MOMENTUM 
 We will first look at absolute momentum applied to the S&P 500 Index. This means if the S&P 500 shows a positive excess return (return less the Treasury bill rate) during the past 12 months, we stay invested in it. If the prior 12-month excess return of the S&P 500 is negative, we exit the S&P 500 Index and hold the Barclays U.S. Aggregate Bond Index instead. We stay in aggregate bonds until the excess return of the S&P 500 is again positive. The Barclays U.S. Aggregate Bond Index is a relatively stable index of high-quality, investment-grade (78% AAA-rated) bonds with an average maturity under five years. 2 Since its inception in 1976, it has held up well during every bear market in stocks. This should make it a relatively safe place to park our capital when the stock market is weak. 3 What we are doing in effect is staying in stocks if the market has been up for the past year and exiting to the safety of shorter-term bonds if the stock market has been down for the past year. Our approach is both simple and easy. 
 Table 8.1 and Figure 8.1 show the results of applying absolute momentum to the S&P 500 Index versus the S&P Index without the application of absolute momentum. 4 
 Table 8.1 S&P 500 Absolute Momentum, 1974–2013 

 Figure 8.1 S&P 500 Absolute Momentum, 1974–2013 
 Because absolute momentum takes us out of the S&P 500 and into aggregate bonds 30% of the time, we also show the results of a passive benchmark portfolio that is always invested 70% in the S&P 500 and 30% in aggregate bonds. 
 Something as simple as the application of 12-month absolute momentum gives impressive results. Average annual return increases by more than 200 basis points over the S&P 500 Index by itself, while the annual standard deviation drops by more than 3%. Maximum drawdown goes from over 50% to less than 30%. Figure 8.1 shows graphically how absolute momentum sidesteps severe bear market drawdowns, as it did in both 2000 and 2008, while capturing most of the markets upside gains. This is another chart you should stare at until the message fully sinks in. 
 Being a long-term trend-following approach, absolute momentum will not respond to short-term market corrections such as the one that occurred in October 1987. That may be a good thing, since sharp corrections like that often create oversold conditions followed by quick market rebounds. Long-term market tops usually take some time to form as the markets transition from a state of accumulation to a state of distribution. Market technicians look for patterns such as double tops or head-and-shoulder formations to identify such transitional states. 
 As you can see from Figure 8.1 , absolute momentum, being trend following in nature, was not able to exit at the exact market tops in 1981, 1989, 2000, or 2007. However, absolute momentum gave back relatively little in accumulated profits before exiting stocks. It would have taken us out of harm’s way early during each bear market. 
 During bull markets, absolute momentum usually stays dormant, acting as a form of stop loss. However, unlike an actual stop loss, absolute momentum has an inherent way to reenter the market once the trend turns positive again. 
 Professional money managers would gladly give up their firstborn for long-term results that are as good as the absolute momentum results shown in Table 8.1 . We can clearly see how effective absolute momentum is when applied to the U.S. stock market. All stock market investors and professional money managers would do well to take notice of absolute momentum. 
 APPLIED RELATIVE MOMENTUM 
 In order to use relative strength momentum, we need to have two or more assets to choose from. The MSCI All Country World Index (MSCI ACWI) is a float-adjusted, capitalization-weighted index of 24 developed markets and 21 emerging markets. U.S. stocks make up 45% of the MSCI ACWI, other developed markets make up another 45%, and emerging markets comprise the remaining 10%. We will use the MSCI World Index (MSCI World) prior to when the MSCI ACWI became available in January 1988. MSCI World does not include emerging markets. MSCI did not track these until the start of the MSCI ACWI in 1988. From now on, when we refer to ACWI, we mean MSCI ACWI from 1988 onward and MSCI World prior to 1988. We will separate our ACWI into two roughly equal parts: the S&P 500 Index for U.S. stocks and the ACWI ex-U.S. for the rest of the world. 
 Table 8.2 shows the 40-year performance of the ACWI, ACWI ex-U.S., and the S&P 500 from 1974 through 2013. We see that non-U.S. stocks (ACWI ex-U.S.) and the index of both U.S. and non-U.S. stocks (ACWI) have a significantly lower return than just U.S. stocks. This is in line with what we know about the higher long-run risk premium of the U.S. stock market. 
 Table 8.2 ACWI, ACWI ex-U.S., and S&P 500, 1974–2013 

 We will next apply relative strength momentum to the S&P 500 and ACWI ex-U.S. components of the ACWI. (Results are nearly identical using a broader based index for U.S. stocks, such as the Russell 3000 or the MSCI US Broad Market Index.) We use the large-cap S&P 500 to be consistent with the types of stocks selected in the non-U.S. portion of the ACWI. 
 RELATIVE VERSUS ABSOLUTE MOMENTUM 
 Each month we can apply absolute momentum to ACWI by switching between it and the Barclays U.S. Aggregate Bond Index based on whether the excess return of the S&P 500 has been positive or negative during the past 12 months. We use the S&P 500 to determine the trend of all our equities indexes, because the United States leads world equity markets, according to Rapach, Strauss, and Zhou (2013). We apply relative momentum to ACWI by selecting the stronger of its two components based on their relative performance over the preceding 12 months. Table 8.3 and Figure 8.2 show the results of both relative and absolute momentum applied to the ACWI and its components, versus the performance of the ACWI index itself without the use of momentum. 
 Table 8.3 MSCI All Country World Index and Momentum, 1974–2013 

 Figure 8.2 ACWI with Relative and Absolute Momentum, 1974–2013 
 We see that relative strength momentum applied to ACWI gives a 556 basis point greater annual return than ACWI itself. This comes with a slight increase in volatility and a modest reduction in maximum drawdown. Absolute momentum gives a more modest 381 basis point increase in return over ACWI, but with a 3.6% decrease in standard deviation and more than a 60% reduction in maximum drawdown . Absolute momentum is particularly helpful in bear market environments, such in 2000–2002 and 2007–2008. 
 Figure 8.3 shows the ratios of the cumulative returns of relative and absolute momentum to the ACWI index. We see here how well relative and absolute momentum complement each other. Absolute momentum kicks in and adds value in bear market years, such as 1982, 2001, and 2008. Relative momentum, on the other hand, adds value during those times when absolute momentum is dormant and offers no advantage over the market itself, such as from 1986 through 2000, 2003 through 2007, and 2011 through 2013. Relative momentum adds more return than absolute momentum, but it does so with considerably more volatility and drawdown. It is also worth noting that the correlation between the monthly returns of relative and absolute momentum is 0.69, which supports the idea of their diversification value. 

 Figure 8.3 Differences in Cumulative Growth, 1974–2013 
 Investors currently use relative momentum much more than they use absolute momentum. Absolute momentum, though, with its substantial decrease in volatility and drawdown and its higher Sharpe ratio, is superior on a risk-adjusted basis. We are not limited, however, to using just one of these types of momentum. We can benefit from the complementary nature of relative and absolute momentum by using them both together. This is what dual momentum is all about. 
 APPLIED DUAL MOMENTUM 
 Let us see now what happens when we combine absolute and relative momentum together in order to form dual momentum. Aggregate bonds will again serve as a safe harbor during bear markets in accordance with our absolute momentum signals taken from the S&P 500. We will also switch between the S&P 500 and the ACWI ex-U.S. based on relative strength momentum. My name for this particular application of dual momentum is Global Equities Momentum (GEM). It truly is a gem. Figure 8.4 illustrates the logic behind GEM. 

 Figure 8.4 Global Equities Momentum Using Last 12-Month Returns 
 We first compare the S&P 500 to the ACWI ex-U.S. over the past year and select whichever one has performed better. We then check to see if our selected index has done better than U.S. Treasury bills. If it has, we invest in that index. If it has not, we invest instead in U.S. aggregate bonds. We repeat this procedure every month. 
 From 1974 through October 2013, GEM spent 41% of its time in the S&P 500, 29% in the ACWI ex-U.S., and 30% in aggregate bonds. There were only 1.35 switches per year on average between these three assets, which means transaction costs for index switching would have been negligible. 5 Table 8.4 shows the performance of ACWI dual momentum (GEM), ACWI relative momentum, ACWI absolute momentum, and benchmarks of the ACWI index and a permanent 70/30% split between ACWI and U.S. aggregate bonds. 
 Table 8.4 Momentum Performance by Decade, 1974–2013 

 Over this entire 40-year period, GEM has an average annual return of 17.43% with a 12.64% standard deviation, a 0.87 Sharpe ratio, and a maximum drawdown of 22.7%. 6 This almost doubling of the annual rate of return over ACWI comes with a reduction in volatility of 2%. The Sharpe ratio quadruples, and the maximum drawdown drops by nearly two-thirds. 
 As you can see in Figure 8.5 , the absolute momentum component in GEM kept us relatively safe from bear market erosions of capital. 7 Not having to recoup bear market losses is what contributed greatly to GEM’s extraordinary returns. As an indication of robustness, GEM also showed consistency throughout the data, having much higher Sharpe ratios and lower maximum drawdowns than ACWI during each of the four decades. 

 Figure 8.5 Dual, Absolute, and Relative Momentum, 1974–2013 
 Figure 8.6 is a reward-to-volatility plot for GEM, absolute momentum, relative momentum, and the ACWI index. It is easy here to see that GEM has the best reward-to-risk profile. 

 Figure 8.6 Portfolio Return Versus Volatility, 1974–2013 
 Figure 8.7 shows 12-month rolling returns of GEM and ACWI. It gives an indication of extreme upside and downside annual returns. GEM is more consistent in earning positive returns, and it has fewer extreme downside excursions. GEM was weak relative to ACWI in the early 1980s due to the highly unusual situation of short-term interest rates rising to 20%, making Treasury bills temporarily more attractive than equities. GEM was also weaker than ACWI in early 1975, late 2002, and early 2009 when ACWI rebounded sharply following large bear market losses. Otherwise, GEM consistently outperformed ACWI. 

 Figure 8.7 GEM and ACWI Rolling 12-Month Returns, 1974–2013 
 As a check on robustness, Table 8.5 shows GEM with look-back values ranging from 3 to 12 months. All GEM look-back configurations are superior to ACWI in terms of Sharpe ratio and maximum drawdown. 
 Table 8.5 GEM Look-Back Periods, 1974–2013 

 Figure 8.8 shows the cumulative performance of GEM, relative momentum, and absolute momentum in relation to ACWI. Notice how much stronger dual momentum is than either absolute or relative momentum. We also see how GEM benefited from absolute momentum in 1982, 2001, and 2009, when relative momentum offered no advantage over the market. On the other hand, GEM benefited most from relative momentum in 1986 through 1998 and 2004 through 2007 when stocks were strong and absolute momentum provided no advantage over the market. This again illustrates how one can use absolute and relative momentum together in an effective and complementary way. 

 Figure 8.8 Differences in Cumulative Growth, 1974–2013 
 GEM was much stronger than ACWI in 1974, 2001, and 2008 when ACWI suffered through three severe bear markets. This contrary performance during bear markets shows that GEM could have a valuable place as a stabilizing and diversifying asset for those equity investors who do not want to use GEM as a core holding. 
 GEM investors should keep in mind that GEM does not necessarily outperform the market on a short-term basis. This is especially true when the market is rebounding sharply from deeply oversold bear market conditions, as we saw in Figure 8.7 . Trend following typically lags behind market action. The long-term net effect, however, is very positive for GEM. 
 To get a better sense of how and when GEM achieves its outperformance, Table 8.6 shows the number of years that GEM outperformed and underperformed the S&P 500 during up and down years for the S&P 500. Table 8.7 shows average annual returns in those up and down market environments. 
 Table 8.6 Years of Outperformance, 1974–2013 
