
40

50

60

60

50

40

80

90

20

10

DIAGRAM 10. The Evaluative Index shows the percentage of stocks that appear in Bullish or Bearish Major Trends.
In 1961, this Index conflicted with “stock Averages,” suggesting a possible Major Turn.

MARCH
APRIL
DECEMBER
JANUARY
FEBRUARY
NOVEMBER
AUGUST
MAY
JUNE
SEPTEMBER OCTOBER
JULY
7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 12 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23 30

70

580

30

% STRONG (LEFT HAND SCALE)

30

70

10

20

NEUTRAL(AREA BETWEEN GRAPH LINES)

% WEAK (RIGHT HAND SCALE)

1961

80

90

THE EVALUATIVE INDEX

AU3772_book.fm Page 580 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

AU3772_book.fm Page 581 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-eight:

Balanced and Diversified

581

say 80%, it indicates a stronger or more Bullish condition. If it is lower, say
70%, it shows that, on balance, there are fewer of your stocks that look strong,
hence the market is presumably weaker.
As we have said before, if the Averages are making new highs, you will
expect (and find) that the Evaluative Index will range well above 50%. In an
obvious Bear Market, the Index will stand considerably lower than 50%.
But notice that we do not speak, here, of signals. There is no point at
which we need to say, “Sell everything.” Neither is there a point at which
we can say, “Buy now,” in an all-out sense. The Index will float and adjust
itself continually to the shifting conditions.
It must be clear that a market in which only 53% of a large group of
representative stocks are moving Bullishly is not as strong as one in which
80% of these stocks are acting Bullish.
Therefore, you would be justified in making larger commitments on the
long side in this second case.
You would still have the problem of selection of the individual stocks to
buy. But you would be justified in making larger total commitments, or in
assuming total greater risk (see again Chapter 41), than in a market that was
barely qualifying as a Bull Market.
By bringing the total of one’s investment program into line with this
Index, it is possible to roll with the punch; and one would almost automatically be withdrawn from a deteriorating market before things became too
dangerous. Furthermore, this would be accomplished without the need for
torturing decisions as to whether to sell now or wait a while.
There is a further extension of this method. If an investor were to follow
the Evaluative Index only by increasing or decreasing his long commitments
with the rise and fall of the Index, he might be better off than if he had only
the two alternatives of complete optimism or complete pessimism. But in
this case, he would still be pointed always in one direction, and would stand
to lose to some degree on his long commitments if the market did eventually
reverse and go into a Panic Move.
The extension of the method is to proportion capital, or a certain portion
of capital, between the long side and the short side of the market. Assuming
that your interpretation of your own charts is reasonably correct in a majority
of cases, you can, at any particular time, select several stronger-than-average
stocks, and similarly, several weaker-than-average issues.
With the Index standing in the vicinity of 50% (as it did for a number
of months in mid-1956), you can then select several strong stocks to buy, and
several candidates for short sale, making commitments that will approximately balance your total risk. In the case of an upward surge that sweeps
all before it, you will, of course, accrue losses on the short sales, and may
eventually have to reverse your classification of them from minus to plus,
closing them out for a loss. But in such a case, the gains on your good long
positions will more than offset the loss, assuming your choices were well
made; and the loss realized can be absorbed as insurance, the price you have
paid to be in a protected position.

AU3772_book.fm Page 582 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

582

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

On the other hand, should the market collapse suddenly (as it did, for
example, at the time of President Eisenhower’s illness in 1955) (EN: and as
it did on rumors of Reagan’s incompetence in October 1987, and the Aisian Flu of
1998, etc., etc....), the accrual of loss in the long positions will be offset by
accrual of gains in the short positions. And if the decline should continue to
a point calling for sale of the long stock, the losses here could be considered
the price of the insurance protection to the shorts provided by the longs.
EN: In the tradition of the Texas Hedge, I take a somewhat different view of shorts.
While they would be viewed in Pragmatic Portfolio Theory as reducing risk, I like
to view shorts as another profit opportunity with the added benefit of reducing total
risk. Of course, being short a stock in a confirmed Uptrend is simply feckless. And
vice versa.
It is also quite possible, in a more normal market, that both the long
positions and the short positions will show gains.
What we are proposing is a systematic and continuous arbitrage or
hedge. As the Evaluative Index advances, the proportion of short positions
would gradually be reduced, and the long positions increased. As the Index
declines, the reverse would happen. (EN9: I have suggested that the method
outlined here be called a “Natural Hedge,” and the implementation of the hedge be
called Rhythmic Trading. A Natural Hedge of the Dow would consist of a long
commitment to, for example, the DIA in a bull market and short positions in bear
stocks within the Dow. Or, even better, short positions in stocks positively correlated
to the weak Dow stocks. This last because even weak members of the Dow will tend
to be cushioned by the large holdings of passive indexers.)
This method is essentially conservative. Those who have always feared
the short sale as a purely speculative gamble might well reexamine short
selling from the standpoint of using the short sale as a regular part of their
investment program as counterbalance to the long holdings.
The result to be looked for in this conservative balanced and diversified
program is primarily protection of capital. By its very nature, it eliminates
the possibility of plunging for spectacular profits.
But it also provides the mechanism by which the technical method can
stand on its merits, largely independent of the changes and chances of the
market. It makes it possible to eliminate a large part of the anxiety and
uncertainty that so many traders and investors carry every day and often
late into the night.
EN: Many modern readers are probably unaware that John Magee wrote a
weekly advisory letter for four decades. These wise and practical letters comprise
the John Magee Market Letter Archive. From this Archive I append here the letter
of September 28, 1985, relative to the Magee Evaluative Index. It speaks very
strongly for itself:

September 28, 1985: An Oversold Market
This week, the Magee Evaluative Index fell to 9% Strong, its deepest penetration into the oversold quadrant this year. Not since June of 1984 has this

AU3772_book.fm Page 583 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-eight:

Balanced and Diversified

583

DOW–JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
1500
1372
1297

1375
1250

‘GOLDEN AGE’

‘TURBULENT PERIOD’

1125

1067
1001

1000

1026

995
958

1031

1079

918

875
750

688

741

625
564

500
375

416

250

SOURCE

125

627
525

M.C. HORSEY & CO

824

784

736

737

730

770

570

‘RENEWED UPSWING’

MAGEE EVALUATIVE INDEX LESS THAN 5% STRONG
56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85

DIAGRAM 10.1. From Collected Market Letters, September 28, 1985. Magee Evaluative Index computed on the Dow–Jones Industrials illustrating the use of the Index
to identify tops and bottoms in the market. A sort of “oversold/overbought” indicator.

index been lower (see Figure 14; EN: Now Diagram 10.1.). Shortly after its
June low of 8% Strong, the MEI headed steadily higher, giving an Aggressive
Buy signal throughout late June and July.
The June 1984 MEI low of 8% Strong, together with the 8% level reached
on February 25, 1984, constituted a Double Bottom oversold reading for this
index. It corresponded to the 1079 Bottom recorded by the Dow–Jones Industrial Average on June 18, 1984, after which that index advanced steadily to
its recent July peak of 1372.
For over 20 years, all major stock market Bottoms have corresponded
with extremely low MEI readings. During the “turbulent period” when the
stock market oscillated violently but showed no gain at all, MEI readings of
5% Strong or less corresponded with all Major DJIA Bottoms until the June
1982 low of 9% Strong, which immediately preceded the stock market’s
upward explosion.
That slightly higher than “5% Strong or less” Bottom was an important
clue that a reinvigorated stock market was at hand; the straight-line DJIA
advance from 770 to nearly 1300 ended a 17-year “do-nothing” period for
stock prices and ushered in the “renewed upswing” period shown on the
chart.
In this context, the “8% Strong Bottom” of June 1984, and the current
MEI reading of 9% Strong, take on added meaning. If, in fact, we are in a
period of Renewed (or major secular) Upswing, stock market Bottoms will
tend to be less severe and Tops more extremely overbought than would

AU3772_book.fm Page 584 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

584

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

otherwise be the case. Both the June 1982 DJIA low and that of June 1984 fit
this model. Because secular stock market waves tend to last for many years,
even decades, the likelihood is that the current MEI reading of 9% Strong
will also define a Major DJIA low.

AU3772_book.fm Page 585 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter thirty-nine

Trial and Error
You will not expect to turn in a perfect record from the start. You may indeed
do poorly. That is one of the reasons we have suggested using only a safe
amount of your capital, allowing enough leeway so that if you should misread and misdirect your campaigns, or if you should encounter an Intermediate Setback in the trend of a Major Turn, you will be able to get back on
course, undismayed, and richer in experience.
Your records of actual transactions (and notes on theoretical transactions)
will help you. As time goes on, you will discover new trading refinements.
Try these methods against your previous chart records. See whether your
improvements work out consistently to your advantage. In that way, you
can test new details of method without risking actual capital until you have
checked the operation thoroughly.
In one actual case, a trader who had shown a rather poor record of
performance through a fast-moving Bear Phase of the market, rechecked 30
of his actual trades made during that period in the light of new methods he
had subsequently developed. Where the original record showed a loss at the
rate of about 40% per year on the capital for the time it was tied up, the
changes he introduced, applied to the same situations, would have resulted
in a profit at the annual rate of 156%. Such a result, while not conclusive,
would strongly suggest trying out the new method in all similar situations
in the future, and if the performance continued to show this advantage, to
adopt it as a permanent policy. It is only by continual checking and testing
that you can learn to pick up more of the profitable opportunities and protect
yourself better against the unexpected Reversals.
If you follow the suggestions of this book, those already given, and those
in the following chapters, you will proceed slowly and cautiously, not risking
all your capital on a single move in a single stock. Errors and plain bad luck,
when they hurt you, will not hurt you too seriously. You will be prepared
for false moves, wrong interpretations, and complete Reversals of expected
developments.
If you have worked thoughtfully and serenely, without permitting your
emotions to rule your judgment, the law of averages will bring you continually greater success. You are not gambling blindly in this work; you are
intelligently using past experience as a guide — and it is a dependable guide.
Your operations are part of the competitive workings of a free market; your
purchases and sales are part of the process of interpreting the trend, checking
585

AU3772_book.fm Page 586 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

586

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

runaway inflation and crashes, and determining the value of the American
industrial plant.
The market will continue to go up and down in the future as it has in
the past. Your technical knowledge will save you from “buying at the top”
in the final Climactic Blow-off, and it will save you from selling everything
in a fit of depression and disgust when the Bottom is being established. In
your studies of past market action, you have a strong shield against the
sudden thrusts that surprise and often defeat the novice trader.
EN9: I have often told my students that if their knowledge of this material does
nothing more than keep them from making stupid mistakes like buying a top
or buying a downtrend or buying before a bottom has completed forming, then their
time will have been well spent. The elimination of amateur blunders such as these
can immeasurably improve investment performance.

AU3772_book.fm Page 587 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter forty

How Much Capital
to Use in Trading
Up to this point, we have been talking mostly in terms of points and percentages. Little has been said about dollars. From here on we are going to
turn the spotlight on the questions revolving around money, capital, the
dollars you will actually be using in your operations. For, just as an understanding of the technical signals and patterns alone will not guarantee your
profits without a tactical method of applications, so your tactics alone will
not insure you profits until you have tailored your method to fit your pocketbook, and until you have a systematic control of your trading in terms of
dollars and cents.
At the start of your charting operations, you will be using no capital.
You will be making no trades either actual or theoretical. Any commitment
you might make during the first 4 or 5 weeks on a new chart would be no
more than gambling on a hunch. It will take about 2 months of thankless
charting before you have any clear picture of how any of your stocks are
acting technically. From then on, your chart history will become more valuable each week. Your first trades probably will be theoretical ones. You will
want to get the feel of the charts and learn to apply the methods you have
studied. Eventually, you will want to make an actual transaction.
EN: The prudence of this approach can hardly be disputed. And, just as markets
have changed, stock market mentality and awareness have changed. The mere existence of this book and of the general atmosphere enable the modern investor to progress
more rapidly than the old pencil and paper and slide rule chap. The availability of
computers and databases and tutorial tools, not to mention online and offline courses
in the subject, are unparalleled resources.
Then the question will come up, “How much of my capital shall I use
for trading purposes?” EN: In a certain sense, this question begs the question. It
presupposes that the reader has capital. If the reader does not have capital, but is
gambling with the milk money or the mortgage payment, his failure is virtually
assured. Do not speculate with money whose loss will occasion you more than
passing discomfort.
That will depend on your circumstances and how much of your time
and effort you plan to put into stock trading, and also on your experience
in the market. If you have been buying and selling stocks for a number of

587

AU3772_book.fm Page 588 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

588

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

years, you will naturally continue along the same lines, simply applying the
new techniques to your operations.
On the other hand, if stock trading is entirely a new field for you, or if
it is only a minor hobby or sideline, it would pay to make haste slowly. Some
writers have pointed out that it usually takes about 2 years to gain enough
practical experience to operate safely in the market, that during the 2-year
apprenticeship period, many traders come in, gradually lose their capital,
and retire permanently from the field, leaving their money behind them.
Therefore, no matter how confident you may be or how anxious to get in
and start pitching, it would be safest to do most of your experimenting on
the theoretical basis, and to use only a small amount of your actual capital,
so that after, say, 2 years, if you have shown some actual profits, consistently
and regularly, even though small, you will be much better prepared to use
more of your capital wisely and safely. And conversely, if during that time
you have made repeated mistakes and have registered many unnecessary
losses, you will be able to correct your methods and continue on a sounder
basis, without having lost your main capital reserve.
In no case do you want to risk everything you can scrape together on
the theory that here is the quick way to make easy money. That simply is
not true, and the chances are overwhelmingly against you if you go ahead
under any such plan.
Better to figure out how much you can spare, how much you could
afford to spend for experience, considering that the amount you start with
is in the same category as money you might use for taking a special course
of instruction, or for improving property you hope to sell. Or, to take another
example, it would be similar to the salary you might lose in accepting a
lower-paid position in a new kind of work that eventually should be worth
more than your present job.
In other words, you will not depend, from the start, on any returns from
the capital you use in trading. You will plan your own budget outside of
these funds, even if that calls for trimming your budget to make that possible.
Then you can go ahead and follow your trading method free from any
pressure to take unnecessary risks, free from the need to sell stock prematurely to meet obligations, and free from heckling fears and worries.
You can start operations with as little as $500. EN: This is especially true
in the Internet Age. Free commissions in many sites and the availability of low cost
diversified trading instruments like indexes and AMEX trusts offer the small investor more opportunity than ever before in financial market history. Better to have
$1000 or several thousand. It makes little difference, so long as you have
worked out what you can afford to use during the apprenticeship period,
and as long as you are sure you will have capital to continue your operation
as you develop ability. The important thing at the start is not how many
dollars you can make, but what percentage of increase per year you can
average with the capital you are using.

AU3772_book.fm Page 589 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter forty:

How Much Capital to Use in Trading

589

If you approach the serious business of trading in this frame of mind,
you will not be afraid to take losses when it is necessary (and there are times
when that is the only wise course to adopt). You will not be straining to
make an unreasonable or impossible profit (with the usual disastrous
results). And you will be able calmly to build your trading policy in the sure
conviction that the market will still be there next year, that opportunities
will still be waiting for you, and that the basic procedures you are developing
are more valuable than any “lucky break” you might pull out of thin air or
a boardroom rumor.

AU3772_book.fm Page 590 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 591 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter forty-one

Application of Capital
in Practice
EN: Today we would refer to this question as “asset allocation,” about which many
learned books and articles have been written (see Resources, Appendix D). The
modest suggestions in this chapter are, like Magee, very pragmatic and simple —
and quite possibly more effective for the general investor than those complicated
procedures spun out by super computers for complicated Street portfolios.
Let us now restate a number of ideas we have already investigated and
on which (let’s hope) we are thoroughly agreed. EN: If the reader is not in
agreement, he should reread the book up to this point carefully.
1. Major Trends ordinarily run for long periods of time, covering a
tremendous number of points in total advance or decline.
2. Almost unbelievable profits could be made by one who could buy
stocks at the extreme Bottom of a Bear Market and sell at the extreme
Top of the following Bull Market; or sell short at the extreme peak
of a Bull Market and cover at the extreme Bottom of the following
Bear Market.
3. It is not possible to accomplish either of these desirable results.
4. It is possible to avoid becoming trapped in purchases made at or
near the extreme Bull Market Top so that losses become dangerous
or ruinous in a Major Reversal. It is also possible, of course, to avoid
such losses through ill-advised short sales near the extreme Bottom
of a Bear Market.
5. It is possible to make profits by trading in line with the Major Trend,
and in some cases, by trading on the Intermediate Corrections to the
Major Trend, or, occasionally on the individual behavior of a stock
which is moving contrary to the Major Trend.
6. The greatest and most dependable profits may be made along the
Major Trend during the principal period of advance (or decline, in
the case of short sales), but not during the earliest phases when the
movement first gets under way, nor during the rounding off or Reversal phenomena near the end of the movement.

591

AU3772_book.fm Page 592 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

592

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Therefore, in order to get the greatest benefits from following the Major
Trends, one would want to have a relatively small equity in the market at
the very start of the move and very little at or near the termination of the
move, but a very substantial interest during the mid-portion when the
advance or decline was making the greatest headway.
The writers have felt it should be possible to express this relation
between the amount of capital tied up and the state of the Major Trend in a
neat and definite equation. But inasmuch as the idea of a Major Trend is,
itself, a matter of definition, and since, as we have already pointed out, the
trend is an abstraction from the individual movements of many stocks, it
does not seem possible to arrive at any such easy solution to the problem
of how much capital to use at a given time.
Nor is it necessary to have a definite and exact answer. As we have
already seen, it is possible to set up an Evaluative Index which will give an
approximate answer good enough for all practical purposes so far as weighing the “strength” of the trend at a particular time. EN: To clarify and make
more explicit the concept here, I would point out the Asset Allocation implications
of the Magee Evaluative Index. If the analyst’s analysis of the market indicated that
30% of stocks were bullish, 30% bearish, and 40% neutral he might so commit his
capital — 30% long, 30% short, and 40% cash. This would also assume that his
assessment of risk also indicated that the risks of the long and short positions were
balanced, or approximately equal — approximately equal, since infinite precision is
only achievable by the writers of academic treatises working with excellent hindsight.
There are, however, some other questions. Most importantly, there is the
question of how much total “risk” you are assuming. Since some stocks are
very conservative and others are very speculative, it is not enough to determine what part of your capital should be applied in a market trend. The
proportion of your total capital used is not necessarily the whole measure
of your participation. The price level of a stock will affect its habits
(low-priced stocks make bigger percentage moves than high-priced stocks).
The amount of margin you are using will have an effect on the degree of risk.
There is some substance to this plan (otherwise we would not be taking
the time to discuss it here at all), but there is a serious question whether the
decision as to the amount of capital to be used at any specified time can ever
be reduced to a simple mathematical operation. EN: Still true although there
are those who attempt it.
Let us suppose you are convinced that this is a Bull Market, in a phase
of such potency that you would be justified in using 80% of your capital.
But you will immediately realize, from what has been said in earlier chapters,
that if this money is put into a high-priced (EN: and low-beta) stock it will
not give you as much likelihood of either profit (if you are right) or loss (if
you are wrong), as it would if put into a lower-priced (EN: and high-beta)
stock. In the same way, your money put into a stock having a low Sensitivity
Index, that is, a conservative stock like a Utility stock, will not give you as
much likelihood for either profit or loss as a stock of high Sensitivity Index
(EN: volatility), that is, a speculative stock such as an Internet issue. These
