
A

A

B

B

A

B

B
A

FIGURE 56.1â•… WFM daily with 13- and 26-day EMAs. Impulse system with MACD-Histogram 12-26-9.
Red dots—potential or actual bearish divergences. Green dots—potential or actual bullish divergences.
(Chart by TradeStation, scanner by John Bruns/elder.com)

MACD-Histogram Semiautomatic Divergence Scanner
We’ve reviewed MACD Histogram and its divergences in Chapter 23 and returned to this
pattern repeatedly throughout this book. Instead of looking for completed divergences,
this semiautomatic scan finds stocks that have completed parts A and B of a potential
divergence. As part C (the second top or bottom) begins to emerge, this scan starts putting
red dots above or green dots below the bar to alert one to the possibility of a divergence.
This chart of Whole Foods Market, Inc. (WFM) shows that a scanner isn’t an automatic
trade finder. It is a watchdog that alerts you to the possibility that this market is ready
to trade—long or short. Having received such a signal, a trader needs to work up that stock
to establish the level at which the divergence would be completed and write down entry,
target, and stop levels.

232

PRACTICAL DETAILS

the market was perched at the edge of a cliff and I needed to find some shorts for the
coming downturn. I prune my weekly list of trading candidates down to five or six
picks that show the most attractive patterns and the best reward to risk ratios. These
are the stocks that I’ll aim to trade during the week. I have friends who can juggle
twenty stocks at once—this can be done, but not by me, and every serious trader
must know his limitations.
Another “hardworking way” of finding trade candidates involves scanning stock industry groups. For example, if I think that gold is approaching an important bottom,
I’ll pull up the list of all 52 gold stocks and 14 silver stocks that are listed at this time
and look for buying candidates. While doing that, I’ll keep in mind my SLB chart
shown in Figure 55.3—I want to find stocks whose patterns look close to my ideal.
If you’re going to scan a large number of stocks, it pays to add some negative
rules. For example, you may want to omit stocks whose average daily volume is below half a million or even a million shares. Their charts tend to be more ragged and
their slippage worse than in more actively traded stocks. You may want to exclude
expensive stocks from your scans for buying candidates and cheap stocks from your
scans for shorting candidates. Choosing at what levels to place your price filters is a
matter of personal choice. This is why scanning is best left for experienced traders.
Learn to fish with just a few lines in the water before casting a broad net.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

PA R T 11

Good Record-Keeping

T

“

here is no free lunch. As with so many other things, either you’re going to pay
up front or you’re going to pay on the back end for being disorganized, and
unfortunately, when you pay on the way out it’s always more expensive…” writes
Andrew J. Mellon in Unstuff Your Life.
The market is perversely inconsistent in dishing out rewards and punishments.
There is always a chance that a poorly planned trade may bring profits, while a wellplanned and carefully executed trade may end in a loss. This random reinforcement
subverts our discipline and encourages sloppy trading.
Good record-keeping is the best tool for developing and maintaining discipline. It
ties together psychology, market analysis, and risk management. Whenever I teach a
class, I say: “Show me a trader with good records, and I’ll show you a good trader.”
Writing down your trade plans will ensure that you don’t miss any essential market factors. Good record-keeping will save you from stumbling into impulsive trades.
Trading discipline is similar to weight control, which is very hard for most people. If
you don’t know what you weigh today and whether the curve of your weight is rising or falling, how can you control it? Losing weight begins with standing naked on
a scale in the morning and writing down your weight for that day.
We all make mistakes, but if you keep reviewing your records and reflecting on
past mistakes, you’ll be unlikely to repeat them. Good record-keeping will turn you
into your own teacher and do wonders for your account equity.
A quick read of a chapter will not make you a disciplined trader.You’ll have to invest hours in doing homework and accept the pain of having your stops hit. The work
233

234

GOOD RECORD-KEEPING

comes first, the rewards later. As your account grows, you’ll experience a wonderful
feeling of accomplishment.
Let’s review the three key components of record-keeping:
1. Discipline begins with doing your homework (I’ll offer you a homework spreadsheet).
2. Discipline is reinforced by writing down your trade plans (I’ll offer you PDF files
for working up long and short candidates).
3. Discipline culminates in executing those plans and completing trade records (I’ll
offer you a link to an online Trade Journal).
Please feel free to personalize all of these documents. The markets are huge and
diverse, and there is no “one size fits all” system of analysis, trading, and recordkeeping. The basic principles are in this book, but the way you implement them can
be your own.

■■57. Your Daily Homework
When you wake up in the morning and know that you need to be at the office in an
hour, you don’t spend time planning every little step.You follow an established routine: get out of bed, wash, get dressed, have breakfast, get in a car, etc. This routine
puts you in the groove for the day ahead, leaving your mind free for strategic thinking. By the time you arrive at the office, you’re ready to face the day.
It pays to have a morning routine for the market: a sequence of steps for touching
base with the key factors that may dominate today’s trading. This routine should
put you in gear with the market before the opening bell, making you alert and
ready to act.
I use a spreadsheet for my pre-open routine. The person who gave me this idea
was Max Larsen, a money manager in Ohio. I’ve changed Max’s spreadsheet: my current version is numbered 3.7, reflecting two major revisions and a handful of lesser
ones. It is based on how I view the markets, while its imbedded links help me reach
various websites for the information I want.
My homework spreadsheet (Figure 57.1) is a work in progress, as I keep adding
and deleting lines. If you start using it, I’m sure that you’ll modify it to suit your preferences. My firm, Elder.com, offers my latest spreadsheet, complete with its psychological self-test as a public service—simply write to info@elder.com and ask for it.
After filling out this spreadsheet, I turn to my open trades. I review their stops
and profit targets, making any adjustments for the coming day if necessary. Then, if
I’m planning to trade today, I review my short list of candidates, focusing on planned
entries, targets, and stops. Now I am in gear with the market, ready to place orders.
I do this homework even if I know that I will not be able to trade during the day, for
example when traveling. This discipline is just like washing and dressing in the morning, even on the days when you don’t plan to go to the office.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

57. YOUR DAILY HOMEWORK

235

FIGURE 57.1â•… Daily homework spreadsheet. (Source: elder.com)

I begin by looking at the overseas markets, then major news, key currencies and commodities, and the key stock market indicators. With practice, the entire process can be handled
in about 15 minutes. Let’s explore it, line by line.
â•‡1. Check Far East Markets—This link takes me to the relevant page on Finance.Yahoo
.com. I write down overnight percentage changes for Australia and China. Each person’s memory works differently, and mine serves me best when I write things down.
â•‡2. Check Europe markets—Here I write down percentage changes for the German DAX
and the UK FTSE. Markets follow the sun, and you get a feel for how a wave generated in the United States travels to Asia and then to Europe, before returning to our
shores.
â•‡3. Economic Calendar—This link takes me to the page at Briefing.com that lists fundamental reports scheduled to be released each day. It shows the previous number
for each release and the consensus forecast. When an important report, such as
Unemployment or Capacity Utilization, either beats or misses its estimates, you can
expect market fireworks.
â•‡4. Marketwatch—This is a website for the masses, and I look at it to see what they are
being fed this morning. Occasionally it suggests contrary opinion trades.
â•‡5. Euro—I write down the current price of the most active futures contract, followed by
the initials for the Impulse system—green, blue, or red—first for the weekly, then for
the daily. This is the format I use for all other markets mentioned below. I look at the
Euro futures charts for two reasons. First, there are stretches of time when this currency dances either in gear with or against the U.S. stock market. The other reason
is that sometimes Euro futures offer nice day-trading opportunities.
â•‡6. Yen—The second of the two reasons outlined above applies here more than the first.
â•‡7. Oil—This is the lifeblood of the economy, and oil futures rise and fall with its ups and
downs. Oil futures can be traded.
â•‡8. Gold—A sensitive indicator of fear and inflationary expectations as well as a popular
trading vehicle.

236

GOOD RECORD-KEEPING

â•‡9. Bonds—Rising or falling interest rates are among major drivers of stock market trends.
10. Baltic Dry Index—A sensitive leading indicator of world economy. BDI represents the
cost of shipping dry goods, for example textiles from Vietnam to Europe or lumber
from Alaska to Japan. BDI is very volatile, and the absence of any trading vehicles
based on it helps BDI reflect true economic activity. It is extra useful if you trade
shipping industry stocks.
11. NH-NL—I consider the New High–New Low Index the best leading indicator of the
stock market and like to write down the latest weekly and daily figures every morning
as a refresher.
12. VIX—The volatility index, also called “the fear index.” There is a saying: “When VIX is
high, it’s safe to buy; when VIX is low, go slow.” A footnote: beware VIX ETFs, notorious for trading out of sync with the VIX index.
13. S&P 500—I write down yesterday’s closing price for the index and add the Impulse
system initials for its weekly and daily charts.
14. Daily value—I switch to the daily chart of the S&P and note whether its latest bar
closed above, at, or below value and also its relation to the channel lines. It helps me
see whether the market is overbought or oversold.
15. Force Index—I note whether its 13-day EMA is above or below its centerline (bullish
or bearish), as well as any divergences.
16. Expectation of the S&P candle—I test the accuracy of my market expectations by
writing down whether I expect the market to close above or below today’s opening
price. If no opinion, I leave this field blank. The next day I color this box green or red,
depending on whether my expectations turned out to be correct.
17. On the last line of my homework spreadsheet, I summarize it by stating how I’ll trade
today: actively, conservatively, defensively (closing trades only), day-trade, or no
trades at all.

Are You Ready to Trade Today?
There are times when you feel in gear with the market, but at other times you’re
out of touch.Your mood, health, and time pressures influence your ability to trade.
For example, imagine trading while suffering from a toothache.You can’t fully concentrate on the market and should be calling your dentist, not your broker.
This is why each morning, I take a 30-second psychological self-test for an objective rating of my readiness to trade. The first person I saw use a self-test was
Bob Bleczinski, a former Spiker. He may have posted his test online because in 2011,
I saw SpikeTrade member Erin Bruce present her self-test at that year’s reunion. The
questions she asked herself were completely different, but the format looked like
Bob’s.
I modified Erin’s self-test to fit my personality and take it every day before the
market opens. Any self-test must be short and specific. Mine has only five questions,
and each of them can have only one of three answers: yes, no, or so-so. We’ll discuss
the logic of designing such tests in the following chapter. If you start using this test,
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

57. YOUR DAILY HOMEWORK

237

you’ll probably modify it to fit your personality and ask the questions that are most
important to you (Figure 57.2).
A zero rating on some of the questions also warns me not to trade. If I haven’t
done my trade planning or if my schedule is very booked up, this would be a bad day
to trade—better stand aside or place only exit orders.
You, your mind, your mood, and your personality are the essential components of
trading. This is why a quick self-test helps you see whether you should be trading
today.

FIGURE 57.2â•… “Am I ready to trade?” self-test. (Source: elder.com)

I take this test immediately following completion of my homework. Let’s review it line by line:
1. How do I feel physically?
A. Feeling ill = 0
B. Feeling average = 1
C. Feeling excellent = 2
2. How did I trade yesterday?
A. Lost money = 0
B. Both made and lost money or didn’t trade = 1
C. Made money = 2
3. Have I done my trade planning this morning?
A. Not prepared = 0
B. Middling = 1
C. Well prepared = 2
4. How is my mood?
A. Poor = 0
B. Average = 1
C. Great = 2
5. How busy is my schedule today?
A. Very busy = 0
B. Normally busy = 1
C. Pretty open = 2
The spreadsheet adds up scores for all five questions and uses Excel’s conditional
formatting to color the summary cell. If my score is four or lower, this cell turns red. With
so many negatives, it signals me not to trade today. The score of five or six flashes a yellow light—trade very cautiously. The score of seven or eight gives me a green light, but if
the score rises to nine or ten, the light turns yellow again—with everything so perfect, any
change is bound to be for the worse. Don’t let recent success go to your head.

238

GOOD RECORD-KEEPING

■■58. Creating and Scoring Trade Plans
A plan for any trade must specify what strategy you’ll use. It must prompt you to
check the dates of earnings and dividends or contract rollovers, in order to save you
from being blindsided by predictable news. It must spell out your planned entry,
target, and stop as well as your trade size.
Writing down a trade plan makes it real. Once you enter a trade and your equity
starts fluctuating, you may feel stressed and forget to perform certain tasks. The plan
you write prior to entering a trade becomes your island of sanity and stability in the
middle of a storm; it helps ensure that you don’t overlook anything essential.
A really good plan will include a scale for measuring its quality. This objective
rating, which we’ll discuss below, takes less than a minute, but it encourages you to
implement only those plans that have a higher likelihood of success. It prompts you
to drop marginal plans and not chase borderline trade ideas.
While all my records are in electronic format, I like having my trade plans on
paper. I use preprinted forms that I named Tradebills, similar to waybills that come
with the packages we order online. When a company sends you a product, it comes
with a waybill that shows the name of the product, its quantity, your address, the
mode of delivery, rules for returns, and other essential facts. My trades are accompanied by tradebills from the planning stage to the closing day.
I have two separate tradebills for each trading system, one for buying and another
for shorting. Here we’ll review a tradebill for one of my favorite strategies. You can
use it as a starting point for developing your own tradebill.
Whenever a potential trade catches my eye, I decide which system it fits and then
pick up the appropriate blank tradebill. Right there, if a seemingly attractive trade
fits no trading system, then there is no trade. Having decided on a system, I write
down the date and the ticker symbol, and then score that potential trade, as shown
below. If the score is high enough, I proceed to complete my trade plan; otherwise,
I toss that sheet of paper into a wastebasket and go looking for other trades.
Wherever I go, I carry my tradebills for open trades. If I’m at my desk, they are
next to my keyboard. If I go out during the day and bring my laptop, I put those
tradebills between the keyboard and the screen, so they’ll be the first thing to see
when I open up my laptop.
Having written down my trade plans for years, I gradually developed a method for
scoring them before making a go/no-go decision. My habit of scoring plans was reinforced when I read Thinking, Fast and Slow by Prof. Daniel Kahneman. This book on
decision making by a behavioral economist and a Nobel Prize winner underscored
the value of simple scoring systems—they make our decisions more rational and less
impulsive.

Scoring Your Trade Plans (a Trade Apgar)
Among the examples in Prof. Kahneman’s book was his description of the work of
Dr. Virginia Apgar (1909–1974), a pediatric anesthesiologist at Columbia University.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

58. CREATING AND SCORING TRADE PLANS

239

