unimaginably hard to solve. Nuclear proliferation didn’t lend itself well to financial solutions, although
Buffett would have given as much money as he could to his highest priority, any plausible way of reducing
the probability of nuclear war. His analysis of the problem was, characteristically, statistical.
“A nuclear attack is inevitable. It’s the ultimate problem of mankind. If there’s a ten percent probability
that something will happen in a year, there’s a 99.5 percent probability that it will happen in fifty years.
But if you can get that probability down to three percent, that reduces the probability to only seventy-eight
percent in fifty years. And if you can get it down to one percent, there is only a forty percent probability in
fifty years. That’s a truly worthwhile goal—it could literally make all the difference in the world.”
The other great problem, in Buffett’s view, was the strain placed on the over-burdened planet by too many
people. Lacking a way to solve the nuclear problem, population control was where the Buffett Foundation
had spent most of its money since the mid-1980s. This, too, he approached from a mathematical perspective.
In 1950, the world’s population had been about 2.5 billion. A mere two decades later, shortly after Paul
Ehrlich’s The Population Bomb was published, the world population was close to 3.7 billion.44 Ehrlich had
predicted that the 1970s and 1980s would be times of massive, worldwide starvation, with hundreds of
millions of people dying. By 1990 the world’s population had passed the five-billion mark, mass starvation
had not occurred, and Ehrlich’s ideas were no longer taken seriously by many experts—even though the
population had grown dramatically. The debate essentially centered over whether technology could outpace
population growth, species extinction, and global warming. Buffett looked at the problem of expanding
population and diminishing resources in terms of a “margin of safety.”
“There is a carrying capacity to the earth. It’s far, far, far, far, far greater than [Thomas] Malthus ever
dreamed. On the other hand, there is some carrying capacity, and the one thing about carrying capacity is
that you want to err on the low side. If you were provisioning a huge rocket ship to the moon and had
enough for two hundred people and didn’t know how long the journey would take, you probably wouldn’t
put more than a hundred fifty people on the ship. And we have a spaceship of sorts, and we don’t know how
much the provisions are good for. It’s very hard to argue that the earth would be better off in terms of
average happiness or livelihood with twelve billion people instead of six.45 There is a limit, and if you don’t
know what that limit is, you’re better off erring on the safe side. It’s a margin of safety approach for the
survival of the earth.”
Since the 1970s, Buffett had focused on giving women access to contraception and abortion—issues that
were close to Susie’s heart—as the answer to out-of-control population growth. This was a standard point of
view among humanist organizations at the time.46 Munger, Tolles had gotten Buffett involved in supporting
an important court case in California, People v. Belous, which was a major step on the road to the landmark
abortion ruling in Roe v. Wade.47 Charlie Munger took up this case with a passion; the firm had chosen it out
of concern over the way young women were being maimed and killed through illegal abortions. Buffett and
Munger sponsored a “church” called the Ecumenical Fellowship, which became part of the country’s
abortion underground railroad.48
Buffett had been especially moved by the logic of Garrett Hardin, whose 1968 article “The Tragedy of the
Commons” laid out the way that people who have no ownership stake in common goods—the air, the
seas—overuse and destroy them.49 While Buffett adopted many principles conceived by Hardin, a leader of
the “population control” movement, he rejected solutions favored by Hardin, who espoused authoritarian
ideas and took a eugenicist approach. Hardin had written that the meek not only would inherit, but already
had inherited the earth. He considered this “genetic suicide”: “Look around you. How many heroes do you
number among your neighbors? Or your colleagues?…Where are the heroes of yesteryear? Where is Sparta
now?”50
Buffett thought that the idea of bringing back Sparta had already been tried. The man who had tried it was
Adolf Hitler. The Spartans had groomed themselves genetically by abandoning weak or “undesirable” babies
on a mountain-side. Modern eugenics was a social philosophy formulated by Sir Francis Galton, who drew on
the work of his cousin Charles Darwin and theorized that selective breeding of the human race could improve

the quality of the population. This notion had received extremely widespread support in the early twentieth
century, until discredited by the experiments of Nazi Germany.51 There was no safe way to think along lines
like those Hardin was pursuing, which led to a deadly division of humanity into competing groups.52 Buffett
had renounced this view in favor of a civil-rights-based approach to the problems of spaceship Earth.
Accordingly, by 1994, Buffett’s emphasis had shifted from “population control” to reproductive rights.53
This change corresponded with a worldwide evolution in thinking among the population control movement.
Women “were no longer to be treated as a convenient means toward the ‘end’ of population control.”54
Buffett had always felt that any means of solving the population problem that involved coercion was out of
the question.55 Now he went a step further. “I wouldn’t in any way limit a woman’s right to bear children
even if the world were extremely overpopulated, and I wouldn’t ban the right to choose even if there were
only two people on the planet and fertility was critical. I think the world should be limited to wanted people
first. I don’t think that the numbers should determine how many people are wanted. Even if everybody had
seven children, I wouldn’t do as Garrett Hardin said and link the right to the numbers.” So the Buffett
Foundation supported reproductive rights.
Increasingly, the complexities and nuances of reproductive rights, civil rights, and population control had all
gotten lost in the controversy over abortion. Buffett’s giving ultimately was based on what he called the
Ovarian Lottery.56 He had passed the idea along to a group called Responsible Wealth. The idea had great
resonance for Buffett.57
“I’ve had it so good in this world, you know. The odds were fifty-to-one against me being born in the United
States in 1930. I won the lottery the day I emerged from the womb by being in the United States instead of
in some other country where my chances would have been way different.
“Imagine there are two identical twins in the womb, both equally bright and energetic. And the genie says
to them, ‘One of you is going to be born in the United States, and one of you is going to be born in
Bangladesh. And if you wind up in Bangladesh, you will pay no taxes. What percentage of your income
would you bid to be the one that is born in the United States?’ It says something about the fact that society
has something to do with your fate and not just your innate qualities. The people who say, ‘I did it all
myself,’ and think of themselves as Horatio Alger—believe me, they’d bid more to be in the United States
than in Bangladesh. That’s the Ovarian Lottery.”
The Ovarian Lottery had come to shape all of his opinions about politics and philanthropy; Buffett’s ideal
was a world in which winners were free to strive, but narrowed the gap by helping the losers. In his lifetime
he had seen the extremes of inequality; had grown up with the lynchings and beatings of the civil-rights
years; and had heard over and over of the Court House Riot, authority shoved onto a scaffold with a noose
around its neck, at a time and in a place when one group of people felt themselves more deserving than
another. Perhaps without being aware of it, Buffett had many years ago abandoned the libertarian leanings of
his father58 and spiritually circled back toward the democratic idealism of Nebraska’s William Jennings
Bryan, who had written of “the class that the rest rested upon.”
Buffett, one of the least peripatetic people imaginable in both philosophy and geography, could make the
occasional tectonic shift if enough conviction piled up. Now, after he and Susie returned from Ireland, they
met in Vancouver to embark on a seventeen-day trip to China, “Across Cathay.” Buffett’s motivation for this
round-the-world jaunt was the Gateses. Bill and Melinda had gone to considerable trouble to make the trip
enjoyable for him. Ahead of time, they sent him and the other guests a questionnaire asking what they liked
to eat. Buffett was not taking any chances on an experience like the one he’d had at the Moritas’. “I don’t
eat any Chinese food,” he responded. “If necessary, serve me rice and I’ll just move it around on my plate,
and I’ll go back to my room afterward and eat peanuts. Please get me a Journal every day; it’s really hard if I
don’t have my Journal.”59
And so Buffett went to China.

After checking in to Beijing’s grand old Palace Hotel on Goldfish Lane, the tour group met Dr. Robert
Oxnam, president of the Asia Society, who was to be their lecturer for the trip.60 Following a talk on modern
China, they ate a magnificent Sichuanese dinner in the hotel’s Emerald Room. Waiters placed course after
course on the rotating platters: tea-smoked duck, twice-cooked pork with chili sauce, spicy chicken, and
Sichuan hot pot. But the Gateses had arranged for the tour company, Abercrombie & Kent, to send people
ahead to teach the chefs to make hamburgers and french fries for Buffett. To his delight he was served course
after course of his french fries—even for dessert.
The following morning, the group set off to tour the Forbidden City, Beijing University, and the National
Palace Museum. At Fangshan restaurant, for lunch, and again that evening at the Diaoyutai State
Guesthouse, an imperial family fishing ground and retreat, Buffett was served hamburgers and french fries
while the rest of the group feasted on Chinese cuisine.
In Beijing, the group met the Premier of China, and Gates arranged a Ping-Pong match between Buffett and a
twelve-year-old champion. On the third day, Dr. Oxnam lectured on the history and folklore of the Great
Wall. When they climbed to the top, the group found champagne awaiting them—and Cherry Coke for
Buffett. Looking down at the world’s largest structure, which represented eleven centuries of innovative
engineering, human labor, and Chinese history, everyone waited for Buffett to say something profound.
Surely he would be moved by the sight.
“Boy, I sure would have liked to have been the company that got the brick contract for this thing,” he
quipped.
The following morning, he skipped the martial-arts lesson in favor of a tour of the local Coca-Cola plant. The
next day, the group boarded a Chinese military transport plane to fly to Ürümqi, a town in far northwestern
China near Mongolia that was once an important stop on China’s Silk Road. There, they would board a
train—no ordinary train, for the Gateses had arranged for the group to be the first Westerners to rent
Chairman Mao’s personal train—for a journey across northwest China. The train followed the Old Silk Road
route, making stops along the way so that the group could ride camels in the desert, visit ancient cities and
caves, see the giant pandas in Xi’an, and tour the archaeological dig of the imperial Terra Cotta Warriors and
Horses, believed to be the largest funerary site on earth. The trip allowed for hours and hours of
conversation, during which Buffett and Gates continued their discussions of why some banks are better than
other banks, why retailing is such a tough business, the value of Microsoft stock, and the like.61
On the tenth day they visited the site of the Three Gorges Dam project, then boarded the M.S. East Queen, a
huge, five-deck cruise ship, with a ballroom, a barbershop, a masseuse, and a musician on the deck in formal
clothes who played “Turkey in the Straw.”
The boat passed into the first of the three gorges, the Shennong Xi, where many of those onboard donned
orange life vests and climbed into longboats that were poled and pulled by river trackers along an upstream
tributary of the river. A group of ten men using ropes dragged each boat against the current, while young,
supposedly virginal girls sang to encourage the men at their grueling work.
Buffett cracked jokes about the virgins. But that night during the Cantonese dinner, his mind obviously
flashing to the implications of the Ovarian Lottery, he said, “There could have been another Bill Gates
among those men pulling our boat. They were born here, and they were destined to spend their lives tugging
those boats the way they did ours. They didn’t have a chance. It was pure luck that we had a shot at the brass
ring.”
From Shennong Xi, the boat steamed on to Outang Gorge, passing villages where schoolchildren came out to
bow at the strange Americans. Past a silk-reeling mill, between sheer, mist-shrouded peaks, alongside a
traditional cobblestone village, the boat slowly wound its way down the Yangtze. Finally, they arrived in
Guilin for a private Li River barge cruise through one of the most scenically beautiful spots on earth, a
pristine river lined with thousands of limestone pinnacles covered in a mantle of green, “like jade hairpins,”
according to the Tang poet Han Yu. Many of the Gates party bicycled along the riverbank to experience the
long waterside parade of two-and three-hundred-foot-high untouched prehistoric stone shafts. Warren, Bill

Sr., and Bill Jr. had obtained permission from their wives to have an hours-long bridge orgy on the boat as the
barge floated through the magnificent pine-forested landscape.
When they finally arrived in Hong Kong at the end of the trip, Buffett towed the Gateses straight to
McDonald’s to buy hamburgers in the middle of the night. “And all the way back from Hong Kong to San
Francisco and then on to Omaha, I just read newspapers.”
But long after that journey through China, for years afterward in fact, Buffett’s mind kept returning over and
over to one of its moments. It was not the scenery, which he had barely noticed, or the camel ride,
memorialized in a photograph. It was not the endless meals of french fries during the Chinese banquets that
everyone else had enjoyed. He was thinking about the Three Gorges Dam project and the longboats on the
Shennong Xi. But it was not the singing virgins that had beguiled him. It was the fate of the men who spent
their lives ceaselessly dragging the longboats upstream that stayed with him, haunting his thoughts about
individual destiny and fate.

51
To Hell with the Bear
Omaha and Greenwich, Connecticut • 1994–1998

Through the bridge, through the golf, through Ireland, through China, as late as 1994, Buffett devoured the
Wall Street Journal every day looking for stock to buy for Berkshire Hathaway. But it was growing steadily
more difficult to find a wonderful business at a fair price. He was still putting money into Coca-Cola, until he
had spent a total of $1.3 billion on 100 million shares. He bought another shoe company, Dexter. Here he was
a little outside his “circle of competence,” making a bet that demand for imported shoes would wane.1 A
jeweler named Barnett Helzberg Jr., who knew about Borsheim’s, saw Buffett in New York in a conversation
on Fifth Avenue, and sold him Helzberg Diamonds almost on the spot. Buffett was also buying American
Express stock again.
He wanted the rest of GEICO.
Since October 1993, GEICO had been run by co-CEOs: its chief investment officer, Lou Simpson, and Tony
Nicely, a soft-spoken, silver-haired teddy bear of a man who had worked there since he was eighteen years
old and now ran the insurance operations. Nicely had put the pedal to the floor, and GEICO, after a period of
dormancy, started adding half a million new customers a year. In August 1994, Buffett talked to Nicely,
Simpson, and Sam Butler, the chairman of the board’s executive committee and the man who, many years
before, had found Jack Byrne to rescue the company. Nicely, who did not enjoy dealing with Wall Street, had
thought ever since he became co-CEO that GEICO should be privately owned.2 He would much rather work
for Buffett than a bunch of analysts and money managers.
Butler led the negotiation. He wanted stock and a price in the $70s. Buffett regarded that as outrageous. He
wanted to pay cash and a price in the high $50s.3 For a year, they bargained. Buffett pulled out the Circular
Saw. This was his technique to cut the floor out from under GEICO by trying to make Butler feel the
company was weak and vulnerable. The market was getting out of hand, Buffett said. This high-tech Internet
stuff is going crazy and it’s going to hurt the whole industry, including GEICO. You guys have a significant
advantage selling over the telephone, but the Internet is going to narrow that quite a bit. It was apparent that
by 1994, before the average person even had an e-mail address, Buffett, who supposedly knew nothing about
computers, had already grasped how the Internet was going to affect the auto-insurance industry in the
coming decades—better than the auto-insurance industry itself had.

But Butler was a tough and experienced lawyer, and couldn’t be Buffetted. Berkshire’s stock price had
doubled in two years. That April, with BRK trading at $22,000 a share, Money magazine cited the Overpriced
Stock Service newsletter, which said the price of BRK “makes sense only if the company is run by God.”
Butler refused to lower his number. He wanted as many Berkshire shares as he could get. The two reached an
impasse. Finally, Buffett resorted to the ultimate weapon and brought in Charlie Munger as the Appointed
Bad Guy. At Salomon, this had been predictably successful, but Sam Butler proved so tough that he couldn’t
even be Mungered.
After a year, it became clear that if Buffett wanted GEICO, he was going to have to meet Butler’s price.
Buffett wanted GEICO so badly that he capitulated. In August 1995 he paid $2.3 billion dollars for fifty-two
percent of GEICO, after having spent $46 million for the first forty-eight percent. And he paid with Berkshire
stock, not cash. Despite having fought so hard, Buffett actually regarded the price as reasonable looked at as
a whole, given the bargain he’d gotten on the first half of the stock.
The GEICO deal marked a turning point. The stock market had been on a tear, with new offerings of hot
stocks unexpectedly popular in 1994, coming on the heels of a big 1993.4 In February 1995, the Dow hit
4,000 for the first time. Microsoft brought out Windows 95 and sold $700 million worth the first day.
Suddenly everyone who worked in an office had a computer on their desk. People bought computers for their
kids to do homework after school. Mothers of kindergarteners got e-mail addresses to keep up with carpool
news. Web-site designers couldn’t meet the demand from businesses. Computer hackers made front-page
news.
In August 1995, an Internet service provider named Netscape went public to raise money for its expansion.
Many people were familiar with Netscape’s product, but the company had never earned a dime. So many
calls to buy the stock came into banker Morgan Stanley that the company set up a toll-free number to handle
them. Orders for 100 million shares poured in for a company that had originally wanted to sell 3.5 million
shares.5
Despite Buffett’s use of a computer to play bridge and the insights about the Internet that he had displayed in
bargaining for GEICO, his knowledge of technology was spotty. He remained personally indifferent to
computers, while the rest of the world couldn’t buy them fast enough. Bill Gates took this as a challenge. He
brought Buffett and Munger to a gathering at Microsoft to talk about technology. The evening before, he and
Melinda held a dinner at their house at which she seated Munger with Nathan Myhrvold, chief technology
officer of Microsoft. The two soon fell into a lengthy conversation about naked mole rats. A naked mole rat
looks like a boudin blanc—a French milk sausage—with teeth; it feels no pain when cut, scraped, or
burned.*31 Munger, a science buff, had some tangential knowledge on this topic. Sandy Gottesman had once
invested in laboratory mice, trying to make a quick buck on rising demand for experimental animals. But
Gottesman’s investment hadn’t worked out, and he got stuck with a building full of mice under some bridge
in New York City. The naked mole rat was a superior beast, not only insensitive to pain but parthenogenic:
The queen of the colony fertilizes and gives birth without assistance from the males. Munger and Myhrvold
held an animated conversation about the sex life of mole rats while the others sat listening in numb disbelief.6
The next morning, Gates took Buffett and Munger over to Microsoft so that his number two, Steve Ballmer,
and half a dozen engineers could interview them, almost as anthropologists, so strange did it seem to them
that these two incredibly brilliant men were such latecomers to the world of computers. They were like a
couple of cavemen savants discovered in the bush who had seen an airplane but wouldn’t take a ride. Despite
his sense of the Internet’s importance, for example, it had not yet occurred to Buffett to tell GEICO to hurry
up and exploit the Internet to sell insurance. To Buffett, computers were just tunnels that enabled him to
reach other people who could play bridge.
“That was quite interesting to Bill, because he saw how some guy who had no interest in the computer, per
se, could be drawn in by an application. The computer itself was interesting to all the people around
him—but to me, only the application was interesting. You sell the computer first to people who are
interested in computers, and then you sell it to people like me who don’t give a damn about computers.”

Buffett, who deemed computers outside his “circle of competence,” might still have been the richest man in
America instead of Gates, had he bought stock in Microsoft and Intel. Instead, he was now number two. But
he did not care. Or rather, he did care—he cared a lot; he would rather be number one, much rather—but he
cared far more about avoiding excess risk. He didn’t know which company would turn into the next
Microsoft or Intel and which would crash and burn. He would never give up his margin of safety. He knew
that the life cycle of many technology businesses was as short as a naked mole rat’s.
Even had he been of the temperament to do so, Buffett didn’t need to make risky bets. Decisions made years
ago were still compounding for him. The hiring of Ajit Jain had meant that when Hurricane Andrew blew
South Florida off the map in 1992, Buffett was able to start a new business, “catastrophe reinsurance,” which
charged a premium price to stand by as insurer of the unthinkable. Then the Northridge earthquake hit.
Almost no one else had the capital to put up billions on a risk like that. But Berkshire Hathaway did.
Buffett’s relationship with the Blumkins brought him the chance to buy R. C. Willey, a Salt Lake City–based
furniture chain. The old days of scouring the Moody’s Manuals for teensy companies were long gone; instead
he played white knight once again to save FlightSafety from a corporate raider. This was a unique and
profitable company that trained pilots and made the enormous flight simulators used for that training. He
would go on to buy Star Furniture and International Dairy Queen. However, most of the ideas that were
brought to him were what he called “cocker spaniels,” when he had asked for “collies.” In reply to these
proposals, “If the phone don’t ring you’ll know it’s me,” he quipped in Berkshire’s annual report.
Some may have thought, If he’ll buy Dexter Shoe, Buffett will buy anything. He was starting to regret that
deal. Dexter was getting killed by foreign competition; people had not lost their interest in buying imported
shoes. But the mistakes were few and the home runs many: Cap Cities/ABC negotiated a deal to sell itself to
Disney for $19 billion, and Berkshire made $2 billion, almost four times its original investment. Tom Murphy
went on the board of Disney, and Buffett became linked to Michael Eisner, the CEO of Disney, through
Murphy. At Sun Valley, the Buffetts now mingled easily with a crowd that ranged from Coca-Cola
executives to movie stars. He also went back on the board of the Washington Post, which was now being run
by Don Graham, one of his favorite people, enabling him to rejoin his favorite company in his favorite milieu
—newspapers.
In early 1996, Berkshire stock suddenly rocketed to $34,000 a share, valuing Berkshire as a company at $41
billion. An original partner who invested $1,000 in 1957 and left it untouched would now have $12 million
stashed away—double the amount of just a couple of years before. Buffett himself was worth $16 billion.
Susie now had $1.5 billion worth of Berkshire stock—which she had promised not to touch.7 Both she and
Charlie Munger were now on the Forbes 400 list—as billionaires. Once invisible, Berkshire was noticed by
people who had never heard of it before. That year, five thousand people from all fifty states came to the
shareholder meeting–cum–discount mall.
Buffett took pride in having never “split” the stock and swore he never would. “My ego is wrapped up in
Berkshire….” he said. “I can gear my whole life by the price of Berkshire.”8 But now it cost so much to buy
a share of BRK that copycats set up investment trusts. Their idea was to mimic Berkshire Hathaway’s stock
portfolio and let people buy in smaller units, as if it were a mutual fund. But Berkshire was not a mutual fund;
it was a perpetual-motion vacuum cleaner that sucked up businesses and stocks and spit out cash to buy more
businesses and stocks. That couldn’t be replicated by buying the stocks it owned. Among other things, you
didn’t get Buffett.
Moreover, the copycat funds were buying the stocks that Berkshire owned at prices far higher than Berkshire
had paid, and charging fat fees to do it. They were cheating investors. Now the cop in Buffett came out.
“I don’t want anybody buying Berkshire thinking that they can make a lot of money fast. They’re not going
to do it, in the first place. And some of them will blame themselves, and some of them will blame me. They’ll
all be disappointed. I don’t want disappointed people. The idea of giving people crazy expectations has
terrified me from the moment I first started selling stocks.”
