
subsequent periods. It is sufficient with most of them that an anecdote be ben trovato; the
veto is but matter of secondary consideration.]
About a hundred and eighty millions of livres were levied in this manner, of which eighty
were applied in payment of the debts contracted by the government. The remainder found
its way into the pockets of the courtiers. Madame de Maintenon, writing on this subject,
says, "We hear every day of some new grant of the Regent; the people murmur very
much at this mode of employing the money taken from the peculators." The people, who,
after the first burst of their resentment is over, generally express a sympathy for the weak,
were indignant that so much severity should be used to so little purpose. They did not see
the justice of robbing one set of rogues to fatten another. In a few months all the more
guilty had been brought to punishment, and the chamber of justice looked for victims in
humbler walks of life. Charges of fraud and extortion were brought against tradesmen of
good character, in consequence of the great inducements held out to common informers.
They were compelled to lay open their affairs before this tribunal in order to establish
their innocence. The voice of complaint resounded from every side, and at the expiration
of a year the government found it advisable to discontinue further proceedings. The
chamber of justice was suppressed, and a general amnesty granted to all against whom no
charges had yet been preferred.
In the midst of this financial confusion Law appeared upon the scene. No man felt more
deeply than the Regent the deplorable state of the country, but no man could be more
averse from putting his shoulders manfully to the wheel. He disliked business; he signed
official documents without proper examination, and trusted to others what he should have
undertaken himself. The cares inseparable from his high office were burdensome to him;
he saw that something was necessary to be done, but he lacked the energy to do it, and
had not virtue enough to sacrifice his case and his pleasures in the attempt. No wonder
that, with this character, he listened favourably to the mighty projects, so easy of
execution, of the clever adventurer whom he had formerly known, and whose talents he
appreciated.
When Law presented himself at court, he was most cordially received. He offered two
memorials to the Regent, in which he set forth the evils that had befallen France, owing
to an insufficient currency, at different times depreciated. He asserted that a metallic
currency, unaided by a paper money, was wholly inadequate to the wants of a
commercial country, and particularly cited the examples of Great Britain and Holland to
show the advantages of paper. He used many sound arguments on the subject of credit,
and proposed, as a means of restoring that of France, then at so low an ebb among the
nations, that he should be allowed to set up a bank, which should have the management
of the royal revenues, and issue notes, both on that and on landed security. He further
proposed that this bank should be administered in the King's name, but subject to the
control of commissioners, to be named by the States-General.
While these memorials were under consideration, Law translated into French his essay on
money and trade, and used every means to extend through the nation his renown as a
financier. He soon became talked of. The confidants of the Regent spread abroad his

praise, and every one expected great things of Monsieur Lass. [The French pronounced
his name in this manner to avoid the ungallic sound, aw. After the failure of his scheme,
the wags said the nation was lasse de lui, and proposed that he should in future be known
by the name of Monsieur Helas!]
On the 5th of May, 1716, a royal edict was published, by which Law was authorised, in
conjunction with his brother, to establish a bank, under the name of Law and Company,
the notes of which should be received in payment of the taxes. The capital was fixed at
six millions of livres, in twelve thousand shares of five hundred livres each, purchasable
one-fourth in specie and the remainder in billets d'etat. It was not thought expedient to
grant him the whole of the privileges prayed for in his memorials until experience should
have shown their safety and advantage.
Law was now on the high road to fortune. The study of thirty years was brought to guide
him in the management of his bank. He made all his notes payable at sight, and in the
coin current at the time they were issued. This last was a master-stroke of policy, and
immediately rendered his notes more valuable than the precious metals. The latter were
constantly liable to depreciation by the unwise tampering of the government. A thousand
livres of silver might be worth their nominal value one day and be reduced one-sixth the
next, but a note of Law's bank retained its original value. He publicly declared at the
same time that a banker deserved death if he made issues without having sufficient
security to answer all demands. The consequence was, that his notes advanced rapidly in
public estimation, and were received at one per cent. more than specie. It was not long
before the trade of the country felt the benefit. Languishing commerce began to lift up her
head; the taxes were paid with greater regularity and less murmuring, and a degree of
confidence was established that could not fail, if it continued, to become still more
advantageous. In the course of a year Law's notes rose to fifteen per cent. premium, while
the billets d'etat, or notes issued by the government, as security for the debts contracted
by the extravagant Louis XIV, were at a discount of no less than seventy-eight and a half
per cent. The comparison was too great in favour of Law not to attract the attention of the
whole kingdom, and his credit extended itself day by day. Branches of his bank were
almost simultaneously established at Lyons, Rochelle, Tours, Amiens, and Orleans.
The Regent appears to have been utterly astonished at his success, and gradually to have
conceived the idea, that paper, which could so aid a metallic currency, could entirely
supersede it. Upon this fundamental error he afterwards acted. In the mean time, Law
commenced the famous project which has handed his name down to posterity. He
proposed to the Regent, who could refuse him nothing, to establish a company, that
should have the exclusive privilege of trading to the great river Mississippi and the
province of Louisiana, on its western bank. The country was supposed to abound in the
precious metals, and the company, supported by the profits of their exclusive commerce,
were to be the sole farmers of the taxes, and sole coiners of money. Letters patent were
issued, incorporating the company, in August 1717. The capital was divided into two
hundred thousand shares of five hundred livres each, the whole of which might be paid in
billets d'etat, at their nominal value, although worth no more than 160 livres in the
market.

It was now that the frenzy of speculating began to seize upon the nation. Law's bank had
effected so much good, that any promises for the future which he thought proper to make
were readily believed. The Regent every day conferred new privileges upon the fortunate
projector. The bank obtained the monopoly of the sale of tobacco; the sole right of
refinage of gold and silver, and was finally erected into the Royal Bank of France. Amid
the intoxication of success, both Law and the Regent forgot the maxim so loudly
proclaimed by the former, that a banker deserved death who made issues of paper without
the necessary funds to provide for them. As soon as the bank, from a private, became a
public institution, the Regent caused a fabrication of notes to the amount of one thousand
millions of livres. This was the first departure from sound principles, and one for which
Law is not justly blameable. While the affairs of the bank were under his control, the
issues had never exceeded sixty millions. Whether Law opposed the inordinate increase
is not known, but as it took place as soon as the bank was made a royal establishment, it
is but fair to lay the blame of the change of system upon the Regent.
Law found that he lived under a despotic government, but he was not yet aware of the
pernicious influence which such a government could exercise upon so delicate a
framework as that of credit. He discovered it afterwards to his cost, but in the mean time
suffered himself to be impelled by the Regent into courses which his own reason must
have disapproved. With a weakness most culpable, he lent his aid in inundating the
country with paper money, which, based upon no solid foundation, was sure to fall,
sooner or later. The extraordinary present fortune dazzled his eyes, and prevented him
from seeing the evil day that would burst over his head, when once, from any cause or
other, the alarm was sounded. The Parliament were from the first jealous of his influence
as a foreigner, and had, besides, their misgivings as to the safety of his projects. As his
influence extended, their animosity increased. D'Aguesseau, the Chancellor, was
unceremoniously dismissed by the Regent for his opposition to the vast increase of paper
money, and the constant depreciation of the gold and silver coin of the realm. This only
served to augment the enmity of the Parliament, and when D'Argenson, a man devoted to
the interests of the Regent, was appointed to the vacant chancellorship, and made at the
same time minister of finance, they became more violent than ever. The first measure of
the new minister caused a further depreciation of the coin. In order to extinguish the
billets d'etat, it was ordered that persons bringing to the mint four thousand livres in
specie and one thousand livres in billets d'etat, should receive back coin to the amount of
five thousand livres. D'Argenson plumed himself mightily upon thus creating five
thousand new and smaller livres out of the four thousand old and larger ones, being too
ignorant of the true principles of trade and credit to be aware of the immense injury he
was inflicting upon both.
The Parliament saw at once the impolicy and danger of such a system, and made repeated
remonstrances to the Regent. The latter refused to entertain their petitions, when the
Parliament, by a bold, and very unusual stretch of authority, commanded that no money
should be received in payment but that of the old standard. The Regent summoned a lit de
justice, and annulled the decree. The Parliament resisted, and issued another. Again the
Regent exercised his privilege, and annulled it, till the Parliament, stung to fiercer

opposition, passed another decree, dated August 12th, 1718, by which they forbade the
bank of Law to have any concern, either direct or indirect, in the administration of the
revenue; and prohibited all foreigners, under heavy penalties, from interfering, either in
their own names, or in that of others, in the management of the finances of the state. The
Parliament considered Law to be the author of all the evil, and some of the counsellors, in
the virulence of their enmity, proposed that he should be brought to trial, and, if found
guilty, be hung at the gates of the Palais de Justice.
Law, in great alarm, fled to the Palais Royal, and threw himself on the protection of the
Regent, praying that measures might be taken to reduce the Parliament to obedience. The
Regent had nothing so much at heart, both on that account and because of the disputes
that had arisen relative to the legitimation of the Duke of Maine and the Count of
Thoulouse, the sons of the late King. The Parliament was ultimately overawed by the
arrest of their president and two of the counsellors, who were sent to distant prisons.
Thus the first cloud upon Law's prospects blew over: freed from apprehension of personal
danger, he devoted his attention to his famous Mississippi project, the shares of which
were rapidly rising, in spite of the Parliament. At the commencement of the year 1719 an
edict was published, granting to the Mississippi Company the exclusive privilege of
trading to the East Indies, China, and the South Seas, and to all the possessions of the
French East India Company, established by Colbert. The Company, in consequence of
this great increase of their business, assumed, as more appropriate, the title of Company
of the Indies, and created fifty thousand new shares. The prospects now held out by Law
were most magnificent. He promised a yearly dividend of two hundred livres upon each
share of five hundred, which, as the shares were paid for in billets d'etat, at their nominal
value, but worth only 100 livres, was at the rate of about 120 per cent. profit.
The public enthusiasm, which had been so long rising, could not resist a vision so
splendid. At least three hundred thousand applications were made for the fifty thousand
new shares, and Law's house in the Rue de Quincampoix was beset from morning to
night by the eager applicants. As it was impossible to satisfy them all, it was several
weeks before a list of the fortunate new stockholders could be made out, during which
time the public impatience rose to a pitch of frenzy. Dukes, marquises, counts, with their
duchesses, marchionesses, and countesses, waited in the streets for hours every day
before Mr. Law's door to know the result. At last, to avoid the jostling of the plebeian
crowd, which, to the number of thousands, filled the whole thoroughfare, they took
apartments in the adjoining houses, that they might be continually near the temple
whence the new Plutus was diffusing wealth. Every day the value of the old shares
increased, and the fresh applications, induced by the golden dreams of the whole nation,
became so numerous that it was deemed advisable to create no less than three hundred
thousand new shares, at five thousand livres each, in order that the Regent might take
advantage of the popular enthusiasm to pay off the national debt. For this purpose, the
sum of fifteen hundred millions of livres was necessary. Such was the eagerness of the
nation, that thrice the sum would have been subscribed if the government had authorised
it.

Law was now at the zenith of his prosperity, and the people were rapidly approaching the
zenith of their infatuation. The highest and the lowest classes were alike filled with a
vision of boundless wealth. There was not a person of note among the aristocracy, with
the exception of the Duke of St. Simon and Marshal Villars, who was not engaged in
buying or selling stock. People of every age and sex, and condition in life, speculated in
the rise and fall of the Mississippi bonds. The Rue de Quincampoix was the grand resort
of the jobbers, and it being a narrow, inconvenient street, accidents continually occurred
in it, from the tremendous pressure of the crowd. Houses in it, worth, in ordinary times, a
thousand livres of yearly rent, yielded as much as twelve or sixteen thousand. A cobbler,
who had a stall in it, gained about two hundred livres a day by letting it out, and
furnishing writing materials to brokers and their clients. The story goes, that a humpbacked man who stood in the street gained considerable sums by lending his hump as a
writing-desk to the eager speculators! The great concourse of persons who assembled to
do business brought a still greater concourse of spectators. These again drew all the
thieves and immoral characters of Paris to the spot, and constant riots and disturbances
took place. At nightfall, it was often found necessary to send a troop of soldiers to clear
the street.
Law, finding the inconvenience of his residence, removed to the Place Vendome, whither
the crowd of agioteurs followed him. That spacious square soon became as thronged as
the Rue de Quincampoix : from morning to night it presented the appearance of a fair.
Booths and tents were erected for the transaction of business and the sale of refreshments,
and gamblers with their roulette tables stationed themselves in the very middle of the
place, and reaped a golden, or rather a paper, harvest from the throng. The Boulevards
and public gardens were forsaken; parties of pleasure took their walks in preference in the
Place Vendome, which became the fashionable lounge of the idle, as well as the general
rendezvous of the busy. The noise was so great all day, that the Chancellor, whose court
was situated in the square, complained to the Regent and the municipality, that he could
not hear the advocates. Law, when applied to, expressed his willingness to aid in the
removal of the nuisance, and for this purpose entered into a treaty with the Prince de
Carignan for the Hotel de Soissons, which had a garden of several acres in the rear. A
bargain was concluded, by which Law became the purchaser of the hotel, at an enormous
price, the Prince reserving to himself the magnificent gardens as a new source of profit.
They contained some fine statues and several fountains, and were altogether laid out with
much taste. As soon as Law was installed in his new abode, an edict was published,
forbidding all persons to buy or sell stock anywhere but in the gardens of the Hotel de
Soissons. In the midst among the trees, about five hundred small tents and pavilions were
erected, for the convenience of the stock-jobbers. Their various colours, the gay ribands
and banners which floated from them, the busy crowds which passed continually in and
out--the incessant hum of voices, the noise, the music, and the strange mixture of
business and pleasure on the countenances of the throng, all combined to give the place
an air of enchantment that quite enraptured the Parisians. The Prince de Carignan made
enormous profits while the delusion lasted. Each tent was let at the rate of five hundred
livres a month; and, as there were at least five hundred of them, his monthly revenue
from this source alone must have amounted to 250,000 livres, or upwards of 10,000
pounds sterling.

The honest old soldier, Marshal Villars, was so vexed to see the folly which had smitten
his countrymen, that he never could speak with temper on the subject. Passing one day
through the Place Vendome in his carriage, the choleric gentleman was so annoyed at the
infatuation of the people, that he abruptly ordered his coachman to stop, and, putting his
head out of the carriage window, harangued them for full half an hour on their
"disgusting avarice." This was not a very wise proceeding on his part. Hisses and shouts
of laughter resounded from every side, and jokes without number were aimed at him.
There being at last strong symptoms that something more tangible was flying through the
air in the direction of his head, Marshal was glad to drive on. He never again repeated the
experiment.
Two sober, quiet, and philosophic men of letters, M. de la Motte and the Abbe Terrason,
congratulated each other, that they, at least, were free from this strange infatuation. A few
days afterwards, as the worthy Abbe was coming out of the Hotel de Soissons, whither he
had gone to buy shares in the Mississippi, whom should he see but his friend La Motte
entering for the same purpose. "Ha!" said the Abbe, smiling, "is that you?" "Yes," said La
Motte, pushing past him as fast as he was able; "and can that be you?" The next time the
two scholars met, they talked of philosophy, of science, and of religion, but neither had
courage for a long time to breathe one syllable about the Mississippi. At last, when it was
mentioned, they agreed that a man ought never to swear against his doing any one thing,
and that there was no sort of extravagance of which even a wise man was not capable.
During this time, Law, the new Plutus, had become all at once the most important
personage of the state. The ante-chambers of the Regent were forsaken by the courtiers.
Peers, judges, and bishops thronged to the Hotel de Soissons; officers of the army and
navy, ladies of title and fashion, and every one to whom hereditary rank or public employ
gave a claim to precedence, were to be found waiting in his ante-chambers to beg for a
portion of his India stock. Law was so pestered that he was unable to see one-tenth part of
the applicants, and every manoeuvre that ingenuity could suggest was employed to gain
access to him. Peers, whose dignity would have been outraged if the Regent had made
them wait half an hour for an interview, were content to wait six hours for the chance of
seeing Monsieur Law. Enormous fees were paid to his servants, if they would merely
announce their names. Ladies of rank employed the blandishments of their smiles for the
same object; but many of them came day after day for a fortnight before they could
obtain an audience. When Law accepted an invitation, he was sometimes so surrounded
by ladies, all asking to have their names put down in his lists as shareholders in the new
stock, that, in spite of his well-known and habitual gallantry, he was obliged to tear
himself away par force. The most ludicrous stratagems were employed to have an
opportunity of speaking to him. One lady, who had striven in vain during several days,
gave up in despair all attempts to see him at his own house, but ordered her coachman to
keep a strict watch whenever she was out in her carriage, and if he saw Mr. Law coming,
to drive against a post, and upset her. The coachman promised obedience, and for three
days the lady was driven incessantly through the town, praying inwardly for the
opportunity to be overturned. At last she espied Mr. Law, and, pulling the string, called
out to the coachman, "Upset us now! for God's sake, upset us now!" The coachman drove

against a post, the lady screamed, the coach was overturned, and Law, who had seen the
accident, hastened to the spot to render assistance. The cunning dame was led into the
Hotel de Soissons, where she soon thought it advisable to recover from her fright, and,
after apologizing to Mr. Law, confessed her stratagem. Law smiled, and entered the lady
in his books as the purchaser of a quantity of India stock. Another story is told of a
Madame de Boucha, who, knowing that Mr. Law was at dinner at a certain house,
proceeded thither in her carriage, and gave the alarm of fire. The company started from
table, and Law among the rest; but, seeing one lady making all haste into the house
towards him, while everybody else was scampering away, he suspected the trick, and ran
off in another direction.
Many other anecdotes are related, which even, though they may be a little exaggerated,
are nevertheless worth preserving, as showing the spirit of that singular period. [The
curious reader may find an anecdote of the eagerness of the French ladies to retain Law in
their company, which will make him blush or smile according as he happens to be very
modest or the reverse. It is related in the Letters of Madame Charlotte Elizabeth de
Baviere, Duchess of Orleans, vol. ii. p. 274.] The Regent was one day mentioning, in the
presence of D'Argenson, the Abbe Dubois, and some other persons, that he was desirous
of deputing some lady, of the rank at least of a Duchess, to attend upon his daughter at
Modena; "but," added he, "I do not exactly know where to find one." "No!" replied one,
in affected surprise; "I can tell you where to find every Duchess in France :--you have
only to go to Mr. Law's; you will see them every one in his ante-chamber."
M. de Chirac, a celebrated physician, had bought stock at an unlucky period, and was
very anxious to sell out. Stock, however continued to fall for two or three days, much to
his alarm. His mind was filled with the subject, when he was suddenly called upon to
attend a lady, who imagined herself unwell. He arrived, was shown up stairs, and felt the
lady's pulse. "It falls! it falls! good God! it falls continually!" said he, musingly, while the
lady looked up in his face, all anxiety for his opinion. "Oh! M. de Chirac," said she,
starting to her feet, and ringing the bell for assistance; "I am dying! I am dying! it falls! it
falls! it falls!" "What falls?" inquired the doctor, in amazement. "My pulse! my pulse!"
said the lady; "I must be dying." "Calm your apprehensions, my dear Madam," said M. de
Chirac; "I was speaking of the stocks. The truth is, I have been a great loser, and my mind
is so disturbed, I hardly know what I have been saying."
The price of shares sometimes rose ten or twenty per cent. in the course of a few hours,
and many persons in the humbler walks of life, who had risen poor in the morning, went
to bed in affluence. An extensive holder of stock, being taken ill, sent his servant to sell
two hundred and fifty shares, at eight thousand livres each, the price at which they were
then quoted. The servant went, and, on his arrival in the Jardin de Soissons, found that in
the interval the price had risen to ten thousand livres. The difference of two thousand
livres on the two hundred and fifty shares, amounting to 500,000 livres, or 2O,000
pounds sterling, he very coolly transferred to his own use, and, giving the remainder to
his master, set out the same evening for another country. Law's coachman in a very short
time made money enough to set up a carriage of his own, and requested permission to
leave his service. Law, who esteemed the man, begged of him as a favour, that he would
