ffirs.indd i

06/12/12 11:52 AM

17 Proven
Currency
Trading
Strategies

ffirs.indd i

06/12/12 11:52 AM

Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing company in the United States. With ofﬁces in North America, Europe,
Australia, and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and marketing print and electronic products and services for our customers’
professional and personal knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have
survived the market’s ever-changing temperament and have prospered—
some by reinventing systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether
you are a novice trader, professional, or somewhere in between, these
books will provide the advice and strategies needed to prosper today and
well into the future.
For a list of available titles, visit our website at www.WileyFinance.com.

ffirs.indd ii

06/12/12 11:52 AM

17 Proven
Currency
Trading
Strategies
How to Profit in the
Forex Market

MARIO SINGH

John Wiley & Sons Singapore Pte. Ltd.

ffirs.indd iii

06/12/12 11:52 AM

Copyright © 2013 by John Wiley & Sons Singapore Pte. Ltd.
Published by John Wiley & Sons Singapore Pte. Ltd.
1 Fusionopolis Walk, #07-01, Solaris South Tower, Singapore 138628
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
otherwise, except as expressly permitted by law, without either the prior written permission
of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate photocopy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center. Requests for permission should be addressed to the Publisher,
John Wiley & Sons Singapore Pte. Ltd., 1 Fusionopolis Walk, #07–01, Solaris South Tower,
Singapore 138628, tel: 65–6643–8000, fax: 65–6643–8008, e-mail: enquiry@wiley.com.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect
to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any
implied warranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may
be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and
strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a
professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss
of proﬁt or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental,
consequential, or other damages.
Other Wiley Editorial Ofﬁces
John Wiley & Sons, 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
John Wiley & Sons, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, P019 8SQ,
United Kingdom
John Wiley & Sons (Canada) Ltd., 5353 Dundas Street West, Suite 400, Toronto, Ontario,
M9B 6HB, Canada
John Wiley & Sons Australia Ltd., 42 McDougall Street, Milton, Queensland 4064, Australia
Wiley-VCH, Boschstrasse 12, D-69469 Weinheim, Germany
ISBN 978–1–118–38551–7 (Cloth)
ISBN 978–1–118–38553–1 (ePDF)
ISBN 978–1–118–38554–8 (Mobi)
ISBN 978–1–118–38552–4 (ePub)
Typeset in 10/12 pt, ITC Century by MPS Limited, Chennai, India.
Printed in Singapore by Ho Printing Pte. Ltd.
10

ffirs.indd iv

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

06/12/12 11:52 AM

To my three angels:
Shalyn, my beautiful soul mate
Chantelle, my vivacious daughter
Elliot, my bubbly son
Thank you for showing me every day that while
the forex market holds the key to abundant wealth, my true treasure
is found in the three of you.
I love you with all my heart.

ffirs.indd v

06/12/12 11:52 AM

ffirs.indd vi

06/12/12 11:52 AM

Contents

Preface

xi

Acknowledgments

xix

PART ONE

Forex Is a Game

1

CHAPTER 1

How to Play the Game

3

The Forex Game

3

Forex and the Seven Majors

5

Leverage

11

Summary

14

How Money Is Made in the Game

15

Buy Low, Sell High

15

CHAPTER 2

Three Points in Every Trade

17

Bid/Ask Spread

23

What Causes the Price of Currencies

CHAPTER 3

to Fluctuate?

25

Fraction Theory

30

Reading the Charts

31

Market Structure

37

Summary

48

The Six Major Players

51

Central Banks

51

Commercial and Investment Banks

58

vii

ftoc.indd vii

12/3/12 7:02 PM

viii

CHAPTER 4

CHAPTER 5

PART TWO

CONTENTS

Multinational Corporations

62

Institutional Traders

68

Retail Forex Brokers

69

Retail Traders

70

Summary

70

Why You Must Play the Game

73

Top 17 Reasons to Trade Forex

73

Summary

84

Play It Your Way: Understanding
Your Profile

87

The Experiment

88

Five Categories of Forex Traders

92

Your Perfect Strategy

98

Summary

107

Strategies to Win the Game

109

Includes details on the FXPRIMUS
100% bonus trading credit

CHAPTER 6

CHAPTER 7

ftoc.indd viii

Strategies for Scalpers

111

Strategy 1: Rapid-Fire Strategy

111

Strategy 2: Piranha Strategy

118

Strategies for Day Traders

125

Strategy 3: Fade the Break

126

Strategy 4: Trade the Break

131

Trading the News

138

Strategy 5: Gawk the Talk

143

Strategy 6: Balk the Talk

148

12/3/12 7:02 PM

Contents

CHAPTER 8

CHAPTER 9

ix
Strategies for Swing Traders

155

Strategy 7: Trend Rider

155

Strategy 8: Trend Bouncer

163

Strategy 9: Fifth Element

169

Strategy 10: Power Ranger

177

Strategy 11: The Pendulum

185

Strategies for Position Traders

191

Strategy 12: Swap and Fly

192

Strategy 13: Commodity Correlation (Part 1)

199

Strategy 13: Commodity Correlation (Part 2)

204

Strategy 14: Siamese Twins

210

CHAPTER 10 Strategies for Mechanical Traders

217

Strategy 15: Guppy Burst

217

Strategy 16: English Breakfast Tea

223

Strategy 17: Good Morning Asia

228

CHAPTER 11 Conclusion

235

Bibliography

239

About the Author

241

About the Website

243

Plus FXPRIMUS 100% bonus trading credit

Index

ftoc.indd ix

245

12/3/12 7:02 PM

ftoc.indd x

12/3/12 7:02 PM

Preface

Y

ou can’t afford to ignore forex anymore.
This is an urgent message I carry everywhere I go. It really
doesn’t matter who we are or what stage in life we’re at. You could
be in school and you can’t seem to ﬁgure out the rules of global ﬁnance.
You could be holding down a job but you desire to make a decent second
income in your spare time.
You could already be involved in the ﬁnancial markets as a retail trader
or investor, but with low yields and depressed growth all around the world,
you are searching for an asset class that offers unparalleled returns. You
might even be a fund manager who holds an international portfolio in different asset classes, such as equities, bonds, and commodities.
However, with central banks lowering rates and injecting record
amounts of liquidity into the ﬁnancial system, you realize the importance
of protecting your entire portfolio against currency risks.
Finally, you might be someone running a multinational company. You
could be based in one country, but your ofﬁces span across many countries
all around the world. Expenses for salaries, infrastructure, machinery, and
supplies are paid out in different currencies every single month. As the
business gets larger, you can’t turn a blind eye to the currency ﬂuctuations,
which have a signiﬁcant impact to the company’s bottom line every month.
If you ﬁnd yourself in any one of these categories, this book is for you.
The sooner we all understand the forex “game,” the better it is going to
be for us. Forex is a game for three reasons. First, playing it must be fun.
Second, we play it with an intention to win. Finally, it has rules. If you break
the rules, the rules will break you.

HOW IT ALL BEGAN
I had a painful start to forex trading because I broke a cardinal rule. Allow
me to share my story with you. I’ll be the ﬁrst to admit that I’m not a smart
guy. I don’t have a ﬁnance degree or an economics degree.
xi

fpref.indd xi

03/12/12 4:33 PM

xii

PREFACE

I studied chemical engineering in school but graduated with third-class
honors, dashing my mother’s hopes of my becoming a top chief executive
for a Fortune 500 company. After graduation, I proceeded to apply for a job
at petroleum giant Shell, but I haven’t heard from them yet.
Sometimes I console myself by thinking that my resume lost its way in
the mail. I didn’t have much materially then, but what I had was the burning
desire to achieve success in life. It was this desire to succeed that led me to
my ﬁrst experience with forex trading.
Six years ago, I was with a friend in a local coffee shop when he suddenly ﬂipped open his laptop to reveal a screen full of charts. Through the
charts and jumping numbers on the screen, I asked him, “What’s this?”
He coolly replied, “Forex trading.”
Thinking it was some hobby he recently picked up, I asked again, “Real
cash?”
“Yes.” He nodded smugly. “Real cash.”
That began to draw me in, slowly but surely. Looking back, it wasn’t the
fact that forex was the biggest ﬁnancial market in the world that drew me in.
What drew me in was the fact that all you needed was an Internet connection
and a laptop to make money from this market anywhere in the world.
Fascinated, I started to ask my trader friend some questions. When he
shared with me the story of how George Soros broke the Bank of England
on September 16, 1992, and made $1 billion in a day, I was hooked.
I’m the kind of guy who only needs one live example of someone who
has done something to convince me that I can do it too. Excited about this
new discovery called forex trading, I went off and started to do my own
reading on free websites.
Soon I started my ﬁrst account with USD3,000.

MY FIRST TRADE
My ﬁrst trade was on the GBP/USD. It was on an uptrend, and the price had
reached a new high. This is it, I thought, rubbing my hands gleefully. I’m
going to be a millionaire by next Friday. Seeing that the price had reached a
new high, I was convinced that gravity would pull it right down.
I clicked “sell.” That poignant moment was the start of my painful lesson. After I clicked “sell,” the price continued to creep up. That’s not supposed to happen, I thought.
As prices continued climbing, I decided to hit the sell button again,
only this time with double the lot size (and double the intensity) as my ﬁrst
trade. I reasoned that if I clicked twice the number of lots, all that needed
to happen was for prices to fall a little before I could see some nice proﬁts.

fpref.indd xii

03/12/12 4:33 PM

Preface

xiii

After the second “sell” click, I couldn’t believe my eyes. The price
went up further. My hands started to get sweaty. My head started to shine
from the beads of sweat that started to trickle down from my bald head.
Murphy’s Law was in full motion. In desperation, I actually grabbed the
laptop and turned it upside down to paint me a picture of falling prices.
My ego was badly hurt.
“It’s got to come down,” I muttered to myself. At that point, I clicked
“sell” for a third time, with double the lot size of the second trade.
The numbers on my laptop screen at the time weren’t very far from the
numbers my friend had shown me. The only difference was that mine had a
stubborn negative sign preceding them that just wouldn’t go away. A couple
of days after my third dreaded click, the broker closed off all my positions.
I was hit with the dreaded margin call.
In a grand total of just six days, I had lost my entire account.
Whenever I share my story in my forex seminars, I replicate the scenario and draw an uptrend on the whiteboard.
“Would you click ‘buy’ or ‘sell’ over here?” I always ask, as I circle the
highest point reached by the price. At every single seminar, most people
choose to sell, conﬁdent that high prices will fall.
It’s almost a consolation to know that we human beings are wired in
much the same way. Needless to say, after I blew up my account, I was
devastated.

THERE ARE NO SUCCESSFUL BUSINESSES
Losing USD3,000 of my hard-earned money in a week was heart-wrenching.
Self-defeating thoughts appeared in my mind incessantly.
“Forex is risky.”
“Forex is gambling.”
“Forex is not for me.”
I was tempted to wash my hands from the forex market and walk away.
However, it was at this low point of my life that the words of a rich and
successful Chinese businessman who was my mentor came to mind.
Ϫ⬠Ϟ≵᳝៤ࡳⱘџϮˈা᳝៤ࡳⱘҎǄ
“There are no successful businesses in this world, only successful
people.”
At this point, I stopped the pity party and asked myself two questions:
Do I know people who are making money in the forex market? And: Do I
want to be in that group?

fpref.indd xiii

03/12/12 4:33 PM

xiv

PREFACE

I picked myself up again after I answered yes to both questions. I
started to work on myself. You see, it’s very easy for you and me to get
sucked into recognizing that 80% of people lose money in the forex market.
However, why can’t we decide to be in the group that makes money?
Isn’t it just a simple switch in our thinking? If 20% of the people are making
money, let’s decide ﬁrst to have our names in that special group. That selftalk was the turning point in my forex trading journey. I made up my mind
to master forex trading.
Picking myself up from the setback, I began to equip myself with
the right trading skills. I started devouring books by successful traders.
Emulating their beliefs, knowledge, and habits, I worked hard on honing
my trading skills every single day. My quest for mastery also led me to seek
out two of the biggest names in the forex industry as my mentors: Kathy
Lien and Ed Ponsi.
I reasoned that a mentor could help me to drastically cut short my
learning curve. And cut short my learning curve they did.
Knowing what I know now, I recognize that the cardinal rule that I
broke in my ﬁrst live trading experience was to trade against the trend.
Within three years and several buckets of blood, sweat and tears later,
I became an expert in trading the forex market. Less than a year later, I was
invited to appear on CNBC to give my opinions on global ﬁnance.

WISH THAT YOU WERE BETTER
Given my bubbly character, many people think that it’s easy being on camera, speaking live to a camera that holds the attention of over 300 million
viewers. The truth for me is that it’s not.
“Mario, what do you think the CPI is going to be for Singapore?”
“Mario, what’s your view on the U.S. dollar this week?”
“Mario, do you think China will report a good number for trade surplus
this month?”
The TV anchor and the reporters on site ﬁre questions from every
angle, and you need to have the answers at your ﬁngertips. They expect
you to know, or you have no business being on the biggest stage in international ﬁnance.
How ridiculous it would be if I were to fake an answer like “I think
inﬂation in Singapore is going to hit 65% next year.” I would be laughed off
the chair.
So I had to study. In fact, to be in that three-minute hot seat, I had to
study for three hours. That’s right: three full hours of study for three minutes on CNBC.

fpref.indd xiv

03/12/12 4:33 PM

Preface

xv

Thankfully, I did well. In fact, I did so well that I was called back, again
and again. CNBC has three major shows that cover the ﬁnancial markets.
The early morning segment is called Squawk Box, in the early afternoon
it’s called Capital Connection, and the evening’s slot is called Worldwide
Exchange.
Eventually I was invited to appear on all three major shows. In fact, I
was then asked to be a guest host on Worldwide Exchange. As guest host,
I sat with the news anchor and instead of being there for three minutes, I
would be there for a full hour.
My job was to have a conversation with some of the most brilliant
ﬁnancial minds on the planet who would come in and take their place on
the hot seat. As I warmed up to the new role as a guest host, I had an important revelation. The job was getting easier. In fact, I didn’t have to study
when I was guest host.
Do you know why? Because this time, it was my turn to ask the allimportant question, “So, Jack, what’s your view on the U.S. dollar this week?”
This was my revelation: As you get better, it gets easier.
So, my friend, don’t wish that it were easier, wish that you were better.
Kaizen is the Japanese word for improvement. When we embrace
kaizen in any endeavor, mastery is bound to be the result.
My kaizen approach to forex trading has enabled me to be a consistently
proﬁtable trader. Today, I am living the dream of traveling and spreading the
message of proﬁtable forex trading everywhere I go. I’ve even had the privilege to coach forex traders in some of the largest banks in the world. Forex
trading has given me this new life, and I know that it can do the same for you.

AUDIENCE
Today the Forex Market is considered the largest ﬁnancial market in the
world. With that famous tagline, thousands of books have sprung up giving
people insights into this amazing market. I did not write this book with the
intention of adding to the vast list of global resources already available on
the topic of forex.
My inspiration for this book is drawn from three speciﬁc groups of
people:
1. All forex traders around the world. It is my humble wish that this book

will become the platinum standard in forex education. The rich content here will suit you regardless of which stage you are in your trading
career: beginner, intermediate, or advanced. Pay particular attention
to Chapter 5, which puts you through a fun and interesting quiz. At the

fpref.indd xv

03/12/12 4:33 PM

xvi

PREFACE

end of the quiz, you will discover which one of the ﬁve categories of
traders you belong to. If you stick to the strategies pertinent to your
proﬁle, you will be pleasantly surprised by the results.
2. Finance and business professionals who are not currently involved in
the forex market. You may be involved in equities, ﬁxed-income instruments, or commodities. An understanding of global ﬁnance and forex
movements will greatly help you in your decision making. Remember,
capital ﬂows into a country ﬁrst, before it ﬂows into any speciﬁc asset
class. An understanding of the forex market puts you in prime position
to anticipate these ﬂows. Chapter 3 is dedicated to business corporations that must understand the importance of hedging. Hedging helps
corporations gain certainty of price, even when payments are made or
received in different currencies. Hedging thus helps corporations to
mitigate the foreign exchange risk exposure.
3. Ordinary folks outside of the ﬁnance industry who are looking to cre-

ate a powerful second income. With a potent combination of unprecedented liquidity and sovereign debt levels in the world today, there
truly has never been a better time to get involved in forex. I ask you
humbly to consider this opportunity.

OVERVIEW OF THE CONTENTS
The book is broken into two parts:

Part One: Forex Is a Game
Part One of this book is divided into ﬁve chapters, and it centers on the
core description of forex as a game. We discover insights on the rules of
the game, the major players, and how money is made.
Chapter 1 introduces the forex market. It begins by describing the total
daily turnover and the seven major currency pairs. It then explains how to
read a forex quote and how prices move. The chapter ends with a framework of how margin and leverage are employed in a forex trade.
Chapter 2 focuses on how money is made in a forex trade. We learn
about long and short and the three points in every trade. We then move to
the four big reasons that cause currencies to move and get a grasp of the
fraction theory. Chapter 2 ends with an understanding of market structure.
Chapters 3 and 4 cover the six major players in the forex market and
the numerous advantages associated with trading the market. Some of the
major players include central banks, commercial banks, multinational

fpref.indd xvi

03/12/12 4:33 PM

Preface

xvii

companies, and retail traders. We also get a glimpse of three of the biggest
blow-ups in proprietary trading in banking history.
Chapter 5 is devoted to discovering your unique proﬁle in trading.
It includes a proﬁling test to help you ﬁnd out how your personality can
help or hurt your trading style. There are essentially ﬁve types of traders:
scalper, day trader, swing trader, position trader, and mechanical trader. By
the end of this chapter, you will know which group you belong to.

Part Two: Strategies to Win the Game
Part Two is also divided into ﬁve chapters. Each chapter covers strategies
for the ﬁve proﬁles of scalper, day trader, swing trader, position trader, and
mechanical trader.
Chapter 6 covers two strategies for scalpers, called the rapid ﬁre
and the piranha. These strategies are used on the shortest time frames,
namely the minute chart and the 5-minute chart.
Chapter 7 covers four strategies for day traders. The ﬁrst two strategies
are focused on breakouts while the next two are centered purely on trading
the news. A unique way of trading the news, called the Rule of 20, is also
discussed here. All four strategies are employed using the 15-minute and
30-minute time frame.
Chapter 8 covers ﬁve strategies for swing traders. As swing traders
typically exit their positions within two to ﬁve days, the time frames used
for the strategies are longer than the day traders. Hence, all ﬁve of the
swing trading strategies are used on the 1-hour and the 4-hour time frame.
Chapter 9 covers three strategies for position traders. The ﬁrst one,
swap and ﬂy, takes advantage of the interest rate differentials between the
currencies and aims to earn maximum returns by holding on to positions
for an extended period of time. The next two strategies are used speciﬁcally for the two most popular commodities in the world: oil and gold.
The ﬁnal chapter covers three strategies for mechanical traders.
Traders in this category are oblivious to the passing of time. This is why all
strategies discussed here employ three different time frames from the other
categories: the 5-minute chart, the 15-minute chart, and the daily chart.
