
cross back above the longer ones and each lines up in order again. Expect choppy price action
during phases when the averages criss-cross out of sequence. Price can bounce around like a pinball
several times before breaking free when it gets caught between inverting averages.
Use standard settings of 20-50-200 for the daily time frame or speed them up to 18-50-150 for an
aggressive view. Popular daily averages provide an easy framework for quick digestion of a large
number of stock charts. Watch them to measure the opposing crowd. Focus on the common belief
that short-term trends pull back to the 20-day MA while intermediate and long-term impulses find
support at the 50- and 200-day MAs.
Intraday chart views must be faster because participants tend to react very quickly and trend
changes can take place in minutes rather than days. Five, 8 and 13 period settings for 1-minute, 5minute, and 60-minute charts tune to the swing of the short-term market. These Fibonacci numbers
correspond to dynamic, routine, and weak trend action within individual equities, indices, and
derivatives, and they interact powerfully with short-term central tendency tools such as Bollinger
Bands.
MARs generate layers of convergence-divergence feedback. Instead of price interaction with
averages, the averages now interact with each other. Classic crossover strategies evolve into
complex patterns with many unique formations. Ribbons reveal subtle relationships among price,
time, and trend. Major averages tend to print S/R behavior with each other. Swing traders use this
mechanism to generate original execution when other price action verifies opportunity. This
behavior also assists precise timing because MAs lag price movement. They reduce whipsaws and
false breakouts as they turn slowly to meet new conditions. Complex math indicators will often
point right to entry where major moving averages converge. MA ribbons ease the swing trader’s
work through their visual simplicity and their unique spectrum analysis.
Trending markets echo characteristic price behavior over and over again. Measure this fractal
fingerprint in the depth that an issue corrects after each impulse of a trend. MARs allow quick
examination to locate classic retracement levels to use for entry on the next pullback. These can be
very pleasant times for swing traders. Watch closely how price penetrates the ribbon. The depth it
reaches before emerging often reflects a level that the trend will repeat over and over again. When
price undergoes a sudden shift in direction, ribbons twist and mark clear signposts for awakening
volatility. Each of the averages requires a different time period to absorb price change and roll over.
This emits a broad range of rainbow patterns that have obvious predictive power.
MARs slowly invert to accommodate changing conditions as price shock induces a new trend.
Manage positions using these visual interrelationships. Execute short-term swing trades when crisscross MARs predict pivoting price movement. Once inversion completes, shift to momentum entry
that takes advantage of the new convergent environment. Spreading MARs signal accelerating
momentum when layered through adjacent time periods.
The practice of technical analysis often lacks simplicity. Many swing traders believe that they
cannot succeed without complicated sets of math input to predict price change. On the cóntrary,
many earn their living through simple elements of price and volume, packaged with moving
averages. These primary indicators provide the essential link among time, price, and trend, and
these natural building blocks easily tie together into powerful visual trading systems.
FIGURE 2.8
MA ribbons mark Amazon’s progress after a major selloff on the 60-minute chart. This versatile tool offers continuous
feedback on relative momentum through many time frames. Watch how deeply price penetrates the ribbon column and
the unique types of patterns that the interaction creates. Note how AMZN price bars move up one major average at a
time before falling back to retest the lows.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

CANDLESTICKS
Candlestick history goes back much further than standard price bars. Japanese traders used them in
the 18th century to forecast rice prices. According to legend, one local speculator executed over 100
consecutive winning positions by applying this simple tool. The military names for many
candlestick formations arise from that era’s feudal system. The pattern names that compare trading
sessions to battles and blood remain valid 300 years later.
Candlestick charts condense far more information than standard bar plots. They separate price range
extremes within a chosen period from the central opening and closing values. The candlestick real
body represents the core price action, measured from open to close. Upper and lower shadows mark
the range outside this boundary. Candlesticks illustrate intrabar conflict between bulls and bears.
They reveal price action in the time frame below the one measured by the chart.
Color-coding of intrabar price movement adds another dimension to candle study. When the open
prints above the close, the real body will usually appear hollow and designate upward change.
Alternatively, the body will fill with black, red, or any other color when the open lies below the
close. The interplay of hollow and filled candles reveals very short-term swing conditions as well as
surges in volatility. It also uncovers hidden gaps that fill by the bar’s close. While most Western
charting ignores these important failures, swing traders can examine many hidden levels with
candlesticks and locate significant S/R.

Candles print numerous predictive patterns with only one to four bars of data, making them an
outstanding tool for short-term trading. Candle prediction depends on the location of the pattern
within the charting landscape. Two identical formations at different S/R boundaries will generate
unique outcomes. Consider abandoning plain vanilla price bars and trading with candles
exclusively.
Use candlesticks for all charts in all time frames, but exercise caution on very short-term views.
Extremes of intraday candles (shadow zones) generate inaccurate information created by bad ticks.
Mentally filter price extremes to avoid executing positions based on faulty data. Act only on candles
that print with length and volume both well above the average of the previous bars and those
precisely located at major S/R pivots. Avoid all signals based on patterns in low-priced or thin
issues.
Candlesticks illustrate reversal patterns better than any other technical tool. Many changes in trend
originate within the time frame below the primary view of the swing trader. Common formations
such as shooting stars, hammers, dojis, and haramis provide early warning to prepare strategies
against the crowd. But all signals must work within the context that the candles print.
FIGURE 2.9
Candlesticks work well in conjunction with Bollinger Bands and other central tendency tools. Look for reversal patterns
when price pushes outside of the top or bottom band. Candle action at Apple’s central band signals several intermediate
swings that precede sharp thrusts back toward the band extremes. Notice that many of these reversal patterns also
correspond with key highs and lows as well as pullbacks to support after breakout movement.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Locate S/R convergence through cross-verification before relying on any interesting pattern.
Japanese candlesticks work very well in conjunction with classic Western technical analysis. Watch
for their appearance along moving average barriers in trending markets. Look for high-volume
reversal candles at tests of tops and bottoms, major zones of S/R, and standard Fibonacci
retracements.
Stop loss raids cripple trendlines drawn from standard price bars, but candle charts survive these
short-term violations of known S/R. While the bar chartist concludes that support has broken and
moves on to the next opportunity, the candle chartist knows that the same level still remains
intact. Candle construction permits trendlines both at the shadow extreme and the real body’s edge.
This allows a powerful contrary view in an environment where everyone knows the basics of
technical analysis.
Manipulation at major S/R generates frequent price violations and increased risk. Candles provide a
perfect tool to adapt in this noisy environment. Doji and hammer reversal patterns reach across
many S/R barriers, only to close back within support. Both their location and appearance signal that
the boundary’s support remains well intact. These important levels generate interesting contrary
strategies and improve timing. (See Chapter 10).
Forget most standard candle pattern definitions found in modern financial books. Concentrate on
the few major formations that consistently point to crowd conflict and resolution. Every setup acts
differently, depending on location, volume, and trend. See the truth whether it confirms or disputes
popular opinion. Undocumented patterns with strong predictive power appear every day. Learn to
read the message of the candles even if they don’t carry a warrior identity. Most hidden archetypes
of crowd excitement, panic, and reversal arise in the unconscious mind and can be understood
through trader intuition as well as analysis.

BOLLINGER BANDS
Swing traders must investigate central tendency in every promising opportunity. Market action
should spring back toward a center of gravity after extending sharply in either direction. This axis
tends to support price from below and resist it from above during active markets. In flat rangebound
periods, price action commonly oscillates back and forth across the pivot until volatility triggers a
new directional impulse.
Bollinger Bands (BBs) focus analysis of central tendency in real-time. As markets evolve, this
powerful tool draws upper and lower channels that predict extremes based on price’s relationship to
the most recent action. To use the bands effectively, apply a central moving average that tunes into
the expected holding period. Choose this important value carefully. Longer averages will lead to
later signals, while shorter ones will generate whipsaws. Pick shorter settings for intraday charts
such as 5-minute and 60-minute bars. Swing traders can’t afford late information when playing in
this frantic time frame. Expand to longer averages for daily or weekly charts to uncover broad
market cycles and emerging trends.
Set standard deviation (std dev) parameters to regulate how far price will stretch before striking a
band. Most technical analysis sources advise 2 std dev as the common setting. Shorten this length to
speed up signals but face the same whipsaws encountered with moving average manipulation. Most
swing traders should start with the most popular parameters for each time frame and adjust them

to the volatility of their favorite markets. Price should rarely exceed upper or lower boundaries in
average trends when Bollinger Bands are set at 2 std dev. But parabolic rallies and selloffs can
exceed bands set all the way to 3 std dev and above.
Don’t try to find perfect settings. Learn how imperfect ones work and when they flash false signals.
Similar bars may repeatedly pop through certain bands but still offer valuable feedback on
impending reversals. Predictive BB patterns print on all charts regardless of inputs and reward entry
with great accuracy. When in doubt about which settings to use for a specific market, create a BB
ribbon by layering multiple deviation levels on a single chart. Then see how that market responds to
the bands through different trend phases.
FIGURE 2.10
Standard deviation predicts how far price will stretch before it reverses. Bollinger Bands set to a 20-bar moving
average and 2 std dev will enclose most market swings within its boundaries. But when volatile stocks start to
exceed these common settings, expand outward toward 3 std dev. This adjusts to peak volatility and will work in
most parabolic markets.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Most charting programs default to the popular 20-bar, 2 std dev settings. Pull up this common view
frequently to eavesdrop on how the crowd views its positions. This standard BB promotes simple
tactics that align to common herd reactions. Enter fade positions when price strikes horizontal top or
bottom bands that hold firm after the collision. Look for bands to tighten around a dull market in

expectation of a sharp breakout move. In active markets, congestion often forms as price nears the
center band and persists until bars expand sharply through the barrier or reverse in a failure. Enter
positions in the direction of the expansion or place entry stops at both extremes of the
congestion. Consider new short sales when price pops more than 50% out of the top band and new
longs after the same violation of the bottom band.
Swing traders require faster signals than investors. Consider a 13-bar, 2 std dev setting for most
intraday charts. This more sensitive input captures trend activity and breakdown better than the 20bar. All BBs work best in combination with other moving averages placed over the bands. Add 5bar and 8-bar SMAs to create a 5-8-13 combination. This Fibonacci number set consistently picks
up major intraday swings and reversals. Use the 5-bar for S/R on dynamic trends, the 8-bar for
pullbacks, and the 13-bar to locate trend change and reversal.
Bollinger Bands identify subphases within the current trend. Price enters a bull phase when it rises
above the center band. That central axis now supports price on pullbacks. When crossed, price tends
to move all the way to the top band before any major reversal takes place. This pattern supports
long swing entry when confirmed by other landscape features. The center band becomes resistance
when price breaks below it. Odds favor price falling all the way to the bottom band when the central
pivot breaks. This pattern supports short swing entry when confirmed by other landscape features.
Bollinger Bands combine the sophistication of complex mathematics with the simplicity of pattern
recognition. A strong trend in either direction prints bar patterns that appear to cling to the top or
bottom band like curtain rungs. Often they display a series of small pullbacks that never reach the
center band before resuming the trend. These sharp moves may climax when more than 50% of the
price bar reaches outside the end of a band. This signals an overbought or oversold state that
triggers sharp resistance and pulls price back within its limits. But trade timing with this
phenomenon can be tricky. Very strong issues may overcome this strong central tendency for a
number of price bars before fading back into the boundaries.
Bollinger Bands add horsepower to analysis of multiple time frame events. Toggle from weekly
through intraday bands without changing any of the settings. This exercise reveals a 3D view with
excellent predictive power. It may even uncover hidden S/R and pinpoint reversals to within a
single price bar. A similar method builds a simultaneous three-chart display that tracks market
progress through different time frames. Apply Elder’s Triple Screen strategy with either method to
align entry to the relative bull/bear price positions within the bands.
Someday another Charles Dow or Edwards and Magee will come along to categorize the great
variety of band/price patterns and assign effective trading rules for them. Until then, apply these
simple band concepts to daily market preparation:
1. Location and direction determine trading phase:
•

•

•

Upper vs. lower action: Location of price bars determines the strength of the current
phase. Price within the upper band signifies power while price within the lower band
signals weakness.
Price direction: Direction of price within the band identifies convergence-divergence with
the current trend. Divergence prints when price rises within the lower band or falls within
the upper band. Convergence prints when price rises within the upper band or falls within
the lower band.
Trend testing: The lower, center, and upper bands represent S/R for the trend. Reversal off
any band increases odds that price will expand in the reversed direction and return to the last
band crossed or touched.

FIGURE 2.11
The 5-8-13 Bollinger Bands offer intraday traders a powerful analysis tool. Use them on 1-minute, 5-minute and
60-minute charts to track very short-term market oscillations and opportunities. Note how Applied Materials pulls
back repeatedly to the 8-bar MA during the big rally from 69 to 83. The 5-8-13 will often signal low-risk entry to
within a single tick.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

2. Penetration through the center band increases directional momentum:
•
•

Crossing from below center to above: Uptrend increase in strength. Observe directional
movement of the upper band as price approaches.
Crossing from above center to below: Downtrend increase in weakness. Observe directional
movement of the lower band as price approaches.

3. Bands open in response to awakening trend:
•

•

Climbing the ladder: If the angle of the upper band rises in response to approaching price,
expect a series of upward price bars, each riding higher along the top band. This is an
uptrend in progress.
The slippery slope: If the angle of the lower band falls in response to approaching price,
expect a series of downward price bars, each pushing lower along the bottom band. This is a
downtrend in progress.

4. Bands flatten in response to awakening trend:
•

•

Head in ceiling: If the angle of the upper band flattens in response to approaching price,
expect price bars to pierce the band and reverse. This will likely end an upward swing and
start a downward one. But watch if price pulls back slowly while the band then opens. This
will signal an impending breakout.
Foot in floor: If the angle of the lower band flattens in response to approaching price, expect
price bars to pierce the band and reverse. This will likely end a downward swing and start an
upward one. But watch if price pulls back slowly while the band then opens. This will signal
an impending breakdown.

Bollinger Bands define natural extremes in trend development. As bands are hit, price often
bounces backward until sufficient strength can push the band out of the way. Congestion will likely
develop just below the top band or above the bottom band if the overall pattern supports increasing
momentum. This will continue until the band turns and opens away from price, indicating that
resistance has been overcome. Price may then eject into a sustainable trend and cling to the band’s
edge. But keep in mind that ultimate movement will depend on all S/R boundaries and not just
those associated with BBs.

FIGURE 2.12
The 5-minute Lucent landscape prints common Bollinger Band patterns while classic S/R converges at important
band turning points: 1. Head in ceiling reversal appears at short-term double top. 2. Price action retests the high
while upper band turns away from price to signal an impending breakout. 3. The new uptrend climbs the ladder

into another top. 4. Price rises into a sharply declining band that signals another downward swing and break of the
2-day trendline. 5. Price action retests the low in a descending triangle while the lower band turns away from
price to signal an impending breakdown. 6. The new downtrend slides down the slippery slope.

CHART POLARITY
Interpreting the endless variety of patterns, indicators, bands, and lines can seem overwhelming.
Fortunately, the market simplifies this process through its native polarity. Price action shifts
movement between two polar states or flattens it toward a neutral middle. This underlying axis
characterizes almost all market phases, conditions, and indicators. For example, prices can only rise
or fall with directionless periods in between. This signals the existence of bull, bear, or sideways
markets.

BULL-BEAR
Effective swing trading begins with identification of the current market phase. But strategies require
more detailed information before trade execution. Start with the following questions: How quickly
are conditions changing? Do they represent broad or narrow events? How will volatility affect the
trading environment? The answers may mark the difference between a simple price correction and a
market crash.
Bull markets represent periods in which strong buying pressure characterizes price movement. Bear
markets represent periods in which strong selling pressure characterizes price movement. These
graphic images have no correlation to a specific time frame but commonly represent action on daily
charts. The most popular view establishes the 200-day moving average as the interface between bull
and bear markets within individual equities.
Swing traders can apply this concept to any time frame by establishing an appropriate bull-bear
axis. Fibonacci retracement provides a more powerful tool for this purpose than standard moving
averages. First establish the major uptrend or downtrend that guides the trade setup. Then draw a
Fib grid over the extremes. During relative uptrends, avoid short sales when price remains at least
38% above the low. Through relative downtrends, avoid long entry when price remains at least 38%
below the relative high. Alternatively, look at a violation of any 62% retracement as a shift through
the bull-bear axis.
This simple concept may confuse at first glance. Trends and bull-bear sentiment actually represent
separate forces. An uptrend can exist within a bear environment and vice versa. In fact, early phases
of new trends often travel in a hostile atmosphere and without recognition by the crowd. Trend
relativity also allows strong contrary movement in smaller time frames than the major bull-bear
interface. Use this polarity to prepare pullback entry strategies. Identify the current sentiment and
active trend within the market of interest. Watch for countertrend pullbacks when both forces line
up. Follow price until it reaches a strong S/R level and then execute a position as it realigns with the
primary force. The active trend should reassert itself quickly and carry price back in the other
direction.
