
R

STRONG TREND BAR
A very important signal bar is a strong trend bar, especially during the spike phase
of a trend. For example, if the market just broke above a bottom at an area of major
support on a major news item that will affect the market for days, traders will look
for any reason to get long. One common approach is to wait for a bar to close and
if the bar is a strong bull trend bar, traders will buy at the market as soon as the bar
closes. Many will try to quickly place a limit order at the price of the close, and if
their order is not filled within a few seconds, they will change it to a market order.
Other traders will enter on a stop at one tick above the high of the bar. This urgency
results in a series of bull trend bars and an increasingly larger bull spike.

REVERSAL PATTERNS
Traders are always looking for a change of direction, and they rely on reversal
patterns as the earliest sign that a change might be taking place. The risk is to the
101

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

102

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

opposite end of the bar and the reward is often several times greater. For example,
if a trader buys on a stop at one tick above a bull reversal bar that is eight ticks tall,
he might put a protective stop at one tick below the bar and the total risk would
then be 10 ticks. However, the trader might be planning on taking profits at 20 or
more ticks above the entry.
When there is a strong trend that might be reversing into a trading range or into
an opposite trend, traders will want a strong reversal setup, which is often simply called a reversal. This is because trends are resistant to change and if traders
are to bet on a move in the opposite direction, they will want a strong sign that
the market is about to reverse. However, if there is a strong trend and then a pullback, traders are so confident that the trend will resume that they will not require a
strong reversal setup at the end of the pullback. In fact, the majority of signal bars
for trend pullback trades look weak. If a pullback setup looks perfect and easy, it
usually means that the trend is not strong. So many traders would take it that it often becomes the final flag in the trend, leading to a bigger correction. Trends require
traders to keep missing entries so there is a constant tension, a constant desire to
get in, and one of the ways that trends accomplish this is through weak signal bars.
For example, if there is a two-legged pullback to the moving average in a strong bull
trend, traders might be willing to buy above the high of the prior bar even if it is a
bear trend bar and not a strong bull reversal bar. They are afraid that the pullback
will reverse back into the direction of the bull trend and the rally might quickly accelerate. They wanted a pullback so they could buy at a lower price, and now that
they have one, they want to be sure that they buy before the breakout from the bull
flag goes very far. All traders have this sense of urgency, which is why the rally to
a new high is often very fast. Traders who did not take the trade because the signal
looked weak will remain eager to buy, and many will keep buying in small pieces
all the way up, just to be certain that they have at least a small position. Trapped
shorts keep waiting for a deeper correction and a clearer buy signal to let them out
with a smaller loss, but one never comes and they have to keep buying back their
shorts in pieces as the trend continues higher. Most trends eventually have at least
a minor climax before a deeper correction comes, and the climax is usually due to
the weak traders finally entering late and the last traders on the wrong side finally
exiting. When no traders are left on the wrong side, the sense of urgency disappears
and the market usually enters a trading range, at least for a while.
Besides a classic reversal bar, other common reversal setups (some are two- or
three-bar patterns) include the following.

Two-Bar Reversal
Two-bar reversals are one of the most common reversal setups and therefore are
very important. It is useful to think of every reversal as a type of two-bar reversal

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

SIGNAL BARS: OTHER TYPES

103

because the phrase reminds traders that the market made a strong move in one
direction and then a strong move in the opposite direction. The strongest moves
usually begin with either a reversal bar or a two-bar reversal for the signal. This
is why it is so important to be ready to place a trade when the setup occurs at a
time when a strong move might follow. Two-bar reversals have many variations
and are a part of every reversal, but they may not be apparent on the chart you are
using. However, as long as you understand that the market is reversing, it is not
necessary to look at many types of charts to find a perfect two-bar reversal or a
perfect reversal bar, although they both are present in every reversal.
The best-known version is a pair of consecutive 5 minute trend bars of approximately the same size but opposite directions. A long setup is a bear trend bar
immediately followed by a bull trend bar, and a bear setup is a bull trend bar immediately followed by a bear trend bar. These two bars create a 10 minute reversal bar,
but the reversal bar is evident on the 10 minute chart only 50 percent of the time
because only half of the 5 minute two-bar reversals will end at the same time as the
10 minute bar. The other half will result in some other usually less clear reversal on
the 10 minute chart.
It is important to realize that all climactic reversals, all reversal bars, and all
two-bar reversals are exactly the same and all are present at all reversals, and you
will be able to see them if you look at enough different types of charts. If you think
about it, even a classic reversal bar is actually a two-bar reversal on some smaller
time frame or on some other type of chart, like a tick or volume chart that uses the
right number of ticks or shares per bar. Also, the two bars in opposite directions
do not have to be consecutive, and most of the time they are not. However, if you
look at all possible higher time frame charts, you will be able to find one where the
setup actually is a perfect two-bar reversal. You can almost always find one where
it becomes a single reversal bar. Always be open to all possibilities because you
will then find many more setups that you understand and have confidence to trade.
The key is to recognize that a reversal is taking place, and you need to be aware
of the many ways that it can appear. A bear reversal always has a bull trend bar,
which is acting as a buy climax, followed before long by a bear trend bar, which is
acting as a breakout to the downside. A bull reversal is the opposite, with a bear
trend bar that is acting as a sell climax and then a bull trend bar that is acting as a
bull breakout.
A reversal bar can be the second bar of a two-bar reversal. When it overlaps
more than about 75 percent of the prior bar, it is better to regard the two bars as
a two-bar reversal setup rather than as a reversal bar. If you do so, the odds of
a successful reversal trade are higher. For example, if the market is rallying and
forms a bear reversal bar with a low that is one tick above the low of the prior bar,
this is often a bear trap. The market frequently falls one tick below the bear reversal
bar but not below the bull trend bar that preceded it, and then rallies to a new high

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

104

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

within a couple of bars. This happens much less often if that bear entry bar falls
below the low of both bars and not just below the low of the bear reversal bar. When
the reversal bar overlaps the prior bar by too much, they form a two-bar trading
range and the breakout entry is beyond the entire trading range. Since the trading
range is only two bars long, the entry is beyond both bars, not just the second bar.
If that bear reversal bar falls below the prior bull trend bar, treat it like an
outside bar, even if its high is below the high of the bull trend bar. In general, it is
then better to wait for a pullback to a lower high before going short. Otherwise you
are shorting so far below the top of the bull leg that there is too much risk that you
might be shorting at some support level, like the bottom of a developing trading
range, and the market might rally.
There is a special type of two-bar reversal that signals a trade in the opposite
direction. If there is a two-bar reversal that is sitting on or touching the bottom
of the moving average and the two bars almost entirely overlap one or more prior
bars, the breakout usually fails. If the market is in a strong trend, however, the
signal will usually work, since almost any with-trend entry works in a strong trend.
When there is not a strong trend, the signal usually fails even if there is a perfect
two-bar reversal. Any three or more large, overlapping bars will do. For example,
if there is a two-bar bull reversal just above the moving average and the bars are
relatively large and mostly overlap a third or fourth bar, do not buy above the high
of the signal bar. The market has formed a small trading range, and traders who are
confident in their read of the overall price action can often short the market at or
above the bull signal bar for a scalp down.

Three-Bar Reversals
A three-bar reversal is just a variation of a two-bar reversal where there are three
consecutive bars, with the first and third being the bars of a two-bar reversal and
the middle bar being an unremarkable bar, like a small bar or a doji. This creates a
15 minute reversal bar when the third 5 minute bar closes at the same time as the
15 minute bar. When that happens, it is likely more reliable because it would then
bring in traders who are trading off of 15 minute charts. In the two out of three times
that it does not, the 5 minute signal usually results in some other 15 minute reversal
pattern. When looking for any 5 minute reversal entry, it is helpful to think about
whether there are three consecutive bars that might also be forming a 15 minute
reversal bar. If so, this should give you more confidence in your trade since a higher
time frame signal is more likely to be followed by a larger move, and you might be
more comfortable swinging more of your position and using a wider profit target. In
general, traders should view them as simple two-bar reversals and not worry about
whether they are also creating a 15 minute reversal bar.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

SIGNAL BARS: OTHER TYPES

105

Small Bars
A bar that has a small range compared to the prior bars can be a reversal signal bar.
Here are common examples:

r An inside bar, which is a bar with a high below the high of the prior bar and a
low at or above the low of the prior bar, or a low above the low of the prior bar
and a high at or below the high of the prior bar. It is more reliable if it is small
and has a body in the opposite direction of the current trend and less reliable
if it is a large doji bar. In fact, a large doji is rarely a good signal bar even if it
is an inside bar, and since it is a one-bar trading range, it is usually followed by
more two-sided trading.
r An ii (or iii) pattern, which is two consecutive inside bars with the second being
inside of the first (an iii is made of three consecutive inside bars).
r A small bar near the high or low of a big bar (trend bar or outside bar) or trading
range (especially if its body is in the direction of your trade, indicating that your
side has taken control).
r An ioi pattern, which is an inside bar followed by an outside bar and then another inside bar (inside-outside-inside). If it occurs in an area where a breakout
seems likely, traders can enter on the breakout of that second inside bar. These
are often breakout mode setups, meaning that the move can be in either direction, and it is often prudent to place a sell stop below and a buy stop above that
second inside bar and enter in the direction of the breakout. The unfilled order
then becomes the protective stop.
Note that doji bars are rarely good signal bars because they are one-bar trading
ranges and when the market is in a trading range, you should not be looking to
buy above the high or go short below the low. They can be decent signal bars for
reversal trades if they occur near the high or low of a trading range day, or if they
are a with-trend setup in a strong trend. In a trading range, it can be fine to sell
below a doji if the doji is at the high of the range, especially if it is a second entry.
The bigger trading range trumps the tiny trading range represented by the doji bar,
so selling below the doji bar is also selling at the top of a large trading range, which
is usually a good trade.

Outside Bar
An outside bar is a bar with either its high or its low beyond that of the prior bar
and the other extreme of the outside bar at or beyond the prior bar’s extreme. See
Chapter 7.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

106

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

Micro Double Bottom
A micro double bottom is consecutive or nearly consecutive bars with identical or
nearly identical lows. When it forms in a bear spike and it is a bear trend bar closing
on or near its low and then a bull trend bar opening on or near its low, it is a onebar bear flag. If the lows are identical, consider selling at one tick below the low. At
all other times, it is more likely a reversal pattern, since most small bull reversals
come from some type of micro double bottom (discussed in book 3).

Micro Double Top
A micro double top is consecutive or nearly consecutive bars with identical or
nearly identical highs. When it forms in a bull spike and it is a bull trend bar closing
on or near its high and then a bear trend bar opening on or near its high, it is a
one-bar bull flag. If the highs are identical, consider buying at one tick above the
high. At all other times, it is more likely a reversal pattern, since most small bear
reversals come from some type of micro double top (discussed in book 3).

Reversal Bar Failure
A reversal bar failure is the bar after a reversal bar that breaks out of the wrong
side of the reversal (e.g., if there is a bear reversal bar in a bull trend and the next
bar trades above its high instead of below its low).

Shaved Bar
A shaved bar has no tail at one or both of its extremes. It is a setup only when it
forms in a strong trend (e.g., in a strong bull trend, if there is a bull trend bar with
no tail on its top or bottom, then it is a buy setup).

Exhaustion Bar
An unusually large trend bar in the direction of the trend can often represent an
emotional exhaustion of a trend. All trend bars are spikes, breakouts, gaps, and
climaxes or exhaustion bars, and sometimes the exhaustive component can be the
dominant feature.

Trend Bars
Besides being signal bars for with-trend entries in strong trends, trend bars can also
be signal bars for reversal trades, like a pullback reversing back in the direction of

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

SIGNAL BARS: OTHER TYPES

107

