
Sample Mean for Variable X

x=

Where Xi is an individual observation on variable X
NG RE 4.14 Sample mean for variable X.

192 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Statistical Measures of Variability (Dispersion)
Measures of variability describe the degree to which the observations in a
sample are dispersed about their central tendency. In other words, measures of variability quantify the width of a frequency distribution.
Among the widely used measures of dispersion are the variance, the
mean absolute deviation, and the standard deviation. They are important
in the traditional approach to statistics (i.e., classical statistics). The standard deviation is the square root of the average squared deviation of each
observation from the mean of the data. The formula for the standard deviation of a sample is shown in Figure 4.15.
An intuitive notion of dispersion is best conveyed with pictures. Figure 4.16 shows a number of idealized frequency distributions with differing degrees of variation and different central tendencies. They are
idealized in the sense that the stair-step look that characterizes real frequency distributions has been smoothed away. The key point of Figure
4.16 is that central tendency and variation (dispersion) are independent
characteristics of a frequency distribution. In row 1 of Figure 4.16, the
four distributions have the same degree of variation but different central
values. In row 2 the distributions have the same central value but different
degrees of variation. In row 3 all distributions have different central values and different degrees of variation.

Standard Deviation of a Sample of Observations

s

n
Where:

Xi

Is an individual observation on variable X

X

Is the sample mean on variable X

n

Is number of observations in the sample

FIGURE 4.15 Standard deviation of a sample of observations.

193

Statistical Analysis

I Same Degree of Dispersion but Different Means I

o

5

10

15

I Equal Means but Different Degrees of Dispersion I
2

3

1?IGURE 4.16
a distribution.

Central tendency and dispersion are distinct attributes of

PROBABILllY
The notion of probability is important in statistics because it is used to
quantify uncertainty. A conclusion reached via statistical inference is uncertain; that is, there is a chance of error. Thus, an inference about the
value of a population parameter has some chance of being wrong. This
chance is given in terms of a probability.
We routinely use informal notions of probability to form expectations
and make choices. Is the person I find so wonderful now, likely to remain
so after marriage? What is the chance I will find gold if I dig in a certain
spot? Is it probable I will feel fulfilled pursing a career in law? Should I
buy that stock, and if I do, how much profit am I likely to make?
The informal usage of probability is connected to a cluster of interchangeable terms illustrated in Figure 4.17.
For our purposes, something more definitive is required. The definition of probability that makes the most sense for the work that lies ahead
is based on the notion of relative frequency. The relative frequency of an
event is the number of times the event actually occurred divided by the total number of opportunities on which the event could have occurred. Relative frequency is given as a fraction between 0 and 1. It could rain every

194 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
Uncertainty
Chance

Risk

Probability
Likelihood

Luck
Random

FIGURE 4.17 Common notions of probability.

day, but in the month of April the relative frequency of rain has actually
been 0.366 (11 out of 30 days). If rain never occurred, then its relative frequency would be O. If rain occurred every day, its relative frequency is 1.0.
Thus, the relative frequency of an outcome is equal to:
Number of occurrences of an event
Number of possible opportunities for the event to occur

In the box-of-beads experiment the value of f-g was measured 50
times. This was the maximum number of opportunities for any specific f-g
value to occur. In fact, the value f-g = 0.65 occurred on 5 out of 50. Therefore, it had a relative frequency of 5/50 or 0.10.
Probability is the relative frequency of an event over the long runthe very long run. That is to say, the probability of an event is its relative
frequency of occurrence given an infinite number of opportunities for its
occurrence. Probability is stated as a number that lies in the range of 0 to
1 inclusive. A probability value of 0 means the event never occurs,
whereas a value of 1.0 means it always occurs.
Probability is a theoretical notion because it is never possible to observe an infinite number of anything. For practical purposes, however,
when the number of observations becomes very large, relative frequency
approaches theoretical probability.
The Law of Large Numbers

The tendency of relative frequencies to converge to theoretical probabilities, as the number of observations becomes large, is called the Law of
Large Numbers. 20 The operation of the Law of Large Numbers can be illustrated with coin tossing. The possible outcomes (events) are heads or tails
and the probability of heads is known to be 0.50. The Law tells us that the

195

Statistical Analysis

relative frequency of heads will converge to its theoretical value, 0.5, as
the number of coin tosses becomes large. However, even for a large number of tosses, a departure from 0.50 can still occur, though the likely size
of the departures decreases as the number of tosses increases. For small
samples, however, The Law of Large Numbers warns us that the relative
frequency of heads can differ substantially from 0.50. When the number of
tosses is only three, a value of 1.0 can easily occur-three heads in three
tosses.
Figure 4.18 shows the fraction of heads in a coin-toss experiment as
the number of tosses grows from one to one thousand. When the number
of tosses (observations) is less than 10, the fraction of heads experienced
two large deviations from 0.50. At 3 tosses the fraction of heads reached
0.66 (2 out of 3). At 8, the fraction was 0.375 (3 out of 8). However, as the
number of tosses increased the random variable, fraction heads, experienced progressively smaller deviations from the expected value of 0.50.
This is exactly what the Law of Large Numbers predicts.
Now imagine a naive coin flipper. Upon observing five heads in five
tosses, he loudly proclaims, "I've found the holy grail of coins. It always
comes up heads." The Law of Large Numbers says that the poor fellow's
optimism is unwarranted. This is also likely to be true for the TA researcher who finds a rule with five historical signals, all of which were
correct. Optimism is most likely unwarranted. Chapter 6 will show that if
this rule was selected because it was the best perfoIDling rule out of a
large universe of back-tested rules, that is to say, it was discovered by data
mining, there would be even less reason to be optimistic about its future
performance.

F 1.0
R
A
C 0.80

T
I

a 0.60

~~----0.50

N

0.40
H 0.20
E
A
0

5

10

100

Number of Coin Flips (log scale)
FIGURE 4.18 Law of Large Numbers.

1,000

196 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Theoretical versus Empirical Probability
There are two kinds of probabilities: theoretical and empirical. "Theoretical probabilities can be determined with a good degree of confidence purely on logical grounds. They are derived independent of prior
experience, most often based on arguments of symmetry."21 In other
words, they can be deduced without any reference to the world of experience. The probability of a head in a coin toss is a theoretical probability. There is no need to toss it ten thousand times to predict that over
the long run the probability of heads is 0.50. Simply the fact that the
coin is fair, that it has two faces, and that it is unlikely to land on its
edge is sufficient grounds for suspecting heads and tails are equally
likely. The probabilities for being dealt a royal flush in poker, the occurrence of a six in a dice roll, and the chance of winning Lotto are also
theoretical because each can be determined by a logical analysis of the
situation.
Empirical probabilities are based on observed frequencies. Technical analysis is concerned with this type of probability. The chance of
new snowfall on Mount Hood during the month of July or the likelihood
of a rise in the stock market following a 2 percent drop in interest rates
are examples of empirical probabilities. They can only be detennined
by observing numerous past instances of the specified conditions
(Mount Hood in July), and determining the relative frequency of the
event (new snow).
When determining empirical probabilities, it is vitally important
that each instance be characterized by the same set of conditions. In TA
this is a practical impossibility. Each past instance of a 2 percent drop
in interest rates is similar with respect to that specific condition, but
there are numerous other conditions that may not be the same. For example, the level of interest rates prior to the 2 percent drop may differ
from observation to observation. In one instance, interest rates were at
5 percent prior to the drop whereas in another they were 10 percent. Of
course, the level of interest rates could be added to the set of conditions that define each instance, but that has the downside of reducing
the number of comparable instances. Moreover, there will always be
other conditions that are not part of the specified condition set. The inability to control all potentially relevant variables is an unfortunate fact
of life in nonexperimentaVobservational sciences. In contrast, the experimental scientist enjoys the supreme advantage of being able to hold
constant all or nearly all relevant variables except the one being investigated. Imagine being able to do that in TA! I am told this is how it is in
the afterlife.

197

Statistical Analysis

PROBABILl1Y DISTRIBUTIONS OF RANDOM VARIABLES
A probability distribution shows how often we can expect the different
possible values of a random variable to occur (Le., their relative frequencies). The probability distribution of a random variable is a relative frequency distribution built from an infinite number of observations.
The concept of a probability distribution can be understood by
thinking of a sequence of relative frequency distributions, each built
from increasing numbers of observations and progressively narrower
bins or intervals. Gradually, the relative frequency distribution becomes
a probability distribution. With increasing numbers of observations,
more discrete intervals of decreasing width can be created. 22 As the
number of observations approaches infinity, the number of intervals
approaches infinity and their widths shrink to zero. Thus, the relative frequency distribution morphs into what is called a probability
distribution, more technically referred to as a probability density
function. 23
Figures 4.19 though 4.23 show how a relative frequency distribution
evolves into a probability density function as the number of intervals is
increased and their interval widths are decreased. The height of each
bar represents the relative frequency of events falling within the bar's interval. The figures presume that the random variable is a measure of
price change.
This succession of diagrams shows that a probability density function
is, in effect, a relative frequency distribution composed of an infinite number of observations whose intervals are infinitely narrow. Here is where
things get a bit strange. If the intervals of a probability distribution have

Relative
Frequency

Price Change Intervals

FIGURE 4.19 Relative frequency distribution based on five intervals.

198 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Relative
Frequency

Price Change Intervals
FIGURE 4.20 Relative frequency distribution based on seven intervals.

Relative
Frequency

Price Change Intervals
FIGURE 4.21

Relative frequency distribution based on fifteen intervals.

Relative
Frequency

Price Change Intervals
FIG RE 4.22

Relative frequency distribution based on twenty nine intervals.

199

Statistical Analysis

Probability
Density

No Specific Intervals

FIGURE 4.23

Probability density function.

zero width, then there are zero observations per interval. This seems to
make no sense! However, it is quite common for mathematical concepts
to be at odds with common sense. In geometry, a point has location but
occupies no space (i.e., length, width, and breadth equal zero), a line has
length but zero width, and so forth.
The fact that an interval has zero observations has a strange implication-the probability that any single value of a continuous random variable will ever occur is equal to zero. For this reason, it only makes sense
to speak of the probability that a random variable will assume a value
within a specified range of values. In other words, it makes sense to speak
of the probability that a random variable will assume a value between
specified minimum and maximum values. It also makes sense to speak of
the probability that a random variable will assume a value that is equal to
or greater than some specified value or less than or equal to a specified
value. For example, we can speak of the probability that a value of 3.0 or
greater will occur. However, it would make no sense to speak of the probability of a value of exactly 3.0. 24
This somewhat counterintuitive idea fits nicely with rule testing.
When testing the statistical significance of a rule's past rate of return, we
will be concerned with the probability that a rate of return of + 10 percent
or higher could have occurred by chance under the condition that the rule
has no predictive power. Probability density functions can provide such
information.

200 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

RElATIONSHIP BE1WEEN PROBABILITY AND
FRACTIONAL ARFA OF TIlE PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTION
Let's recap what has been established up to this point:
1. The probability of an event is its relative frequency of occurrence
given an infinite number of instances in which the event could have
occurred.
2. A probability density function is a relative frequency distribution built
from an infinite number of observations and intervals of zero width.
3. The relative frequency of a random variable taking on a value within a
given interval is equal to the fractional area of the frequency distribution sitting on top of that interval. See Figure 4.24.
We are now ready to take the final step in this sequence of thinking. It
is analogous to point 3 in the preceding list, except that the term relative
frequency distribution is replaced with probability density function. The
probability that a continuous random variable will assume a value within
a specified range is equal to the fraction of the probability density func-

Relative
Frequency

Relative Frequency
of a Value in This Range = 0.344

FIGURE 4.24
a distribution.

The correspondence of relative frequency and fractional area of

201

Statistical Analysis

tion encompassed by (sitting above) that range. This concept is illustrated
in Figure 4.25. It shows the probability that X, a continuous random variable, will assume a value within the range A-B is equal to 0.70.
In many instances, the interval in question refers to the extreme or
tail of the distribution. For example, Figure 4.26 shows the probability
that random variable X will assume a value of B or greater. The probability is 0.15.
The probability distribution of a random variable is a very useful concept. Even though an individual future observation on random variable X
is not predictable, a large number of observations form a highly predictable pattern. This pattern is the random variable's probability density
function.
Now, here is where these ideas start to come together for us. Chapter
5 will show that when a hypothesis is represented by the probability distribution of a random variable we will be able to use an observed value of
the random variable to test the veracity of the hypothesis. This will enable
us to conclude if a rule's back-tested profitability was due to luck or genuine predictive power.
The probability distribution used for this purpose is a specific type. It
is called a san1pling distribution-perhaps the most important one in all of
statistics and certainly the most important for TA analysts.

P
R

o 0
B E
A N
B 5
I I
L T
I y
T
Y

A

B

Range of Random Variable X
FIGURE 4.25 The probability random variable X will assume a value between A
and B equals the fraction of the distribution's total area above the interval A,B.

202 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
P

R

o D
B E
A
B
I
L
I
T
Y

N
S
I
T
Y

Fraction of
Distribution
Beyond "B" = 0.15
of Area

B

Range of Random Variable X
FIGURE 4.26 The probability random variable X will assume a value equal to or
greater than B equals the fraction of the distribution's total area equal to or greater
than B.

THE SAMPLING DISTRIBUTIO : THE MOST IMPOR11\NT
CONCEPT IN S1l\TISTICAL INFERENCE
To recap:
1. A random variable is the outcome of a probability experiment.
2. Taking a sample of a given number of observations from a population
and computing the value of a statistic such as the sample's mean is a
probabilityexperiment. 25
3. A sample statistic26 is a random variable in the sense that it fluctuates
unpredictably from one sample of observations to the next. The sample statistic fluctuates randomly because chance determines which
specific observations wind up in a particular sample, and it is that particular set of observations that determines the value of the statistic for
that sample. In the box-of-beads experiment, the value f-g varied randomly from one 20-bead sample to the next because the particular set
of beads that wound up in a given sample was determined by chance.
4. A relative frequency distribution describes how often the possible
values of a random variable occur over a very large number of
observations.
We are now ready to meet the sampling distribution, the most important concept in statistical inference.

Statistical Analysis

203

The Sampling Distribution Defined
The sampling distribution is the probability distribution of a random variable, and that random variable happens to be a sample statistic. In other
words, the sampling distribution shows the various possible values the
sample statistic can assume, and their associated probabilities. 27 For example, "the sampling distribution of the sample mean refers to the probability
distribution of all possible means for all possible random samples of a
given size from some population."28 Here, the sample statistic is the mean.
The sample statistic in the box-of-beads experiments was f-g. Its random variation across 50 samples, each comprised of 20 beads, was shown
by the relative frequency distribution in Figure 4.8. If, instead of 50 values
we were to take all possible 20-bead sanlples-a very large number-this
theoretical distribution would be f-g's sampling distribution.
In rule back testing, the sample statistic is a measure of performance
observed in a back test. In this book that sample statistic will be the rule's
average rate of return. A back test typically produces a single observed
value for the performance statistic because we have a single sample of
market history. Now imagine what it would be like if we were able to test
a rule in an infinite number of independent samples of market history.
This would provide an infinite number of values for the perfornlance statistic. If this set of data were then converted into a relative frequency distribution, it would be the statistic's exact sampling distribution. This is
obviously not possible because we do not have an infinite number of independent samples of historical data. However, statisticians have developed
several methods to get something that approximates the exact sampling
distribution closely enough to be useful, despite the fact that we have only
one sample of historical data and one value of the sample statistic. Two of
these methods will be discussed later in this chapter.

The Sampling Distribution Quantifies Uncertainty
The sampling distribution of a statistic is the foundation of statistical inference because it quantifies the uncertainty caused by the randomness of
sampling (sampling variability).
As stated above, the sampling distribution displays the relative frequencies of a statistic if it were to be measured in an infinite number of
random samples of the same size, drawn from the same parent population. The box-of-beads experiments showed that the value of a statistic, f-g
fluctuated randomly from sample to sample. Figure 4.8 showed that these
values tend to fall into a well-behaved pattern, not a random chaotic mess.
The fact that the pattern of random variation is well behaved is what
makes statistical inference possible.

204 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
It may seem ironic that a sample statistic would show such a regular pattern given that it is, in fact, a random variable. Thankfully for statisticians, it does. Figure 4.8 revealed a central value (i.e., the mean of
the sampling distribution) of approximately 0.55. It also showed a welldefined pattern of dispersion about this central value. This pattern allowed us to conclude, with a fair degree of assurance, that the value of the
population parameter F-G was contained within the range 0.40 to 0.65. It
also allowed us to conclude, although with somewhat diminished confidence, that F-G was more accurately pinned in the range between 0.50
and 0.60. It was the degree of dispersion in f-g's sampling distribution that
permitted these statements to be made about the value of the population
parameter F-G.
The dispersion of the sampling distribution quantifies the uncertainty
of our knowledge about the population parameter F-G. The distribution's
central tendency conveys information about the most likely value of F-G,
approximately 0.55. Knowing this is nice, but it is not enough. It is also important to know about the reliability of the value 0.55. In other words,
how accurately does the sampling distribution's central tendency of 0.55
portray the true value of F-G?
The reliability (degree of certainty) is conveyed by the dispersion of
the sampling distribution. The greater the distribution's dispersion around
its central value, 0.55, the less certain we can be that 0.55 accurately informs us about the true value F-G, the proportion of grey beads in the entire box.
To illustrate this point consider the two following sampling distributions. Both have central values of 0.55 but their dispersions are quite different. The first shown in Figure 4.27 is a narrow dispersion thereby
delivering a strong impression that F-G is in the vicinity of 0.55. The distribution in Figure 4.28 is wider thus conveying a less certain message about
F-G value. It is saying that the true value F-G may be considerably different from the central value of the sampling distribution.
In summary, certainty is directly related to the dispersion of the sampling distribution. And the certainty of a conclusion about a population
parameter depends upon the width of the statistic's sampling distribution-greater width means greater uncertainty.
Suppose it is hypothesized that a rule's expected return is equal to
zero. Also suppose the rule's back-tested return turns out to be greater
than zero. Is the positive return sufficient evidence to conclude that the
hypothesized value of zero is false? The answer will depend on how far
above zero the back-tested return is relative to the width of the sampling distribution. If the relative deviation is large the hypothesis can be
rejected. Quantifying the relative deviation and the reasoning behind a
