
53

Figure 3.5
What is also nice is that, once the trade is placed, all these orders are easy to follow and are marked visually on a screen of the market being traded.
In Figure 3.5, the screen shows that an order was filled for six contracts on the E-mini S&Ps at 1188.00. That is also where the market is currently trading, so the
P&L at the bottom of the screen says 0.00, as there isn’t a profit or a loss at the moment. The total number of contracts being traded is displayed on the middle left
side, showing +6, since the position is long. If I were short here, it would have said –6. At point 1, this is where I can choose my initial stop (in this case, 10 ticks) and
then how I want my stop to change if targets are hit. In this case, if the first target is hit at 1189.00, my stop will automatically move from my entry –10 ticks (see
point 2) to entry –4 ticks. In addition, the stop quantity will automatically change from 6 contracts to 4 contracts. If the second target is hit at point 3, at 1190.00,
then my stop will automatically move from –4 ticks to my entry point, creating a “breakeven” stop on the last part of my trade. This just means that while I have
booked gains on the first two-thirds of my trade, the worst I can do on the last third is break even. Of course, if my second target is hit, my stop quantity also changes
automatically from 4 contracts to 2 contracts. The “Flatten” button in the middle left of the screen is also very useful. This closes out all open positions and cancels all
orders with the click of a mouse. There are other things that these platforms can do, but this should give you an idea of what your software, at the very least, should be
capable of doing for you.

Why Do Most Financial Newsletters Suck?
This section isn’t about recommending good financial market subscription services that are available. It’s about how to treat them. There are many market-related
services, newsletters, and Internet chat rooms that are operating today. These services typically offer opinions on the markets, and they usually charge a fee for
accessing their information. They offer thoughts on market direction and sometimes specific market picks. I used to be a newsletter junkie, and I still am to some
extent. However, these days I’m much less interested in individual opinions and more interested in websites that offer a quick synopsis of the current state of the
markets through a variety of technical data. To that end, one of the best sites on the Internet is Decision Point, run by Carl Swenlin (www.decisionpoint.com). This
site allows traders to get a quick feel for the markets and offers an endless amount of drilldown detail, which I like to peruse on Sundays. In addition to getting quick
readings on key numbers such as NYSE (New York Stock Exchange) M ember Net Buy/Sells, Investor Sentiment, and key put/call readings, traders can sort sectors and
markets by relative strength and quickly see where the next rallies and declines will emerge. I find this tool priceless for gauging market direction and for seeing
firsthand where the big money is flowing. It’s the best $20 a month ever spent. I also like to read comments by John M auldin in his weekly newsletter, Thoughts from
the Frontline (www.2000wave.com). His writing is lucid, far-reaching, and entertaining.
I also find it useful to read and balance the views of the people who think the Dow is going to 3000 with the views of the people who think the Dow is going to
30,000. There are both rational and ridiculous arguments for both cases. I personally don’t have an opinion on where the stock market is going to be by M arch 27,
2023. I’m more focused on what its range over the next several months is going to be. Also, it is important to take these views with a grain of salt. With Wall Street, if
everyone is expecting the same thing to happen, then it’s not going to happen. It is certainly important to stay on top of the major trends affecting the world today,
namely, an aging population, the great deleveraging process that is taking place as a result of the 2008 financial crisis, and the explosive economic growth of China and
India. These are real trends that affect nearly everything in our lives. Where there are trends, there are opportunities to make money.
The main thing to keep in mind is that everyone is offering an opinion, especially if it’s regarding a specific trade recommendation. The writer may sound absolutely
convinced that this is the best trade on the planet, and this conviction can easily pass into the brain of the reader. The bottom line is this: first, great conviction is in no
way correlated with a greater chance of said recommendation actually happening. (Remember, even newsletter writers would rather be right than make money.) Second,
if traders take a recommendation from a subscription service, they still have to set appropriate risk parameters and decide how much they are willing to lose on the
pick. They also must realize that it is just an opinion—it doesn’t mean that things are going to unfold the way the writer says. Just because a guru thinks the market is
going to crash doesn’t mean that it is going to crash. I’ve heard more stories about people blowing out their accounts because “they put it all on a newsletter
recommendation.” There is a tendency for traders to feel more confident in a trade because it is being recommended by somebody else. A tip! In reality, it’s just a trade
setup like any other, and it is important that a trader not get lured in with a false sense of security that this particular trade is going to work out exactly as planned.
Whether traders found a setup for themselves or whether they are following a trade setup recommended in a newsletter, the ultimate responsibility is the traders’.
Don’t get overconfident just because you read about something online.

How to Establish Priorities: If You Are Getting Interrupted During the First Two Hours of the Trading Day, Why Is It
Your Fault?
I talk more about this at the end of the book when I discuss the business plan, but it does touch a little on technology here. The bottom line is that a trader needs focus
and concentration in order to be successful in this business. The most critical hours in the stock market are generally the first two hours of the trading day. This is
where most of the setups occur. It is up to a trader to communicate to his colleagues or, if he is trading from home, to his spouse and children that he cannot be
disturbed during this time. When I am trading, I am not checking e-mail, I am not answering the phone, and I am not accepting uninvited visitors. If my wife wants to
be dropped off at the gym before the trading day starts, she knows the deadline. If she lets me know after the deadline, my answer is always the same, “Honey, you
know I love you. The trade is on.” Click. (I usually remember flowers on those days.)
It can be hard to communicate things like this directly. You’ll find it is helpful to write out a fully developed trading plan and then share it with the people in your
life. Once they understand that this is important to you and that you are serious, they will generally respect any boundaries that are clearly outlined in what they are
reading. Think of it from their perspective. I know that when my wife visits me at my office, it doesn’t look as if I’m working very hard. I’m just kicked back, looking
at charts. Of course, I’m actually very focused, and I’m watching and waiting for the market events to unfold. “Just because I’m not digging a ditch,” I like to tell her,
“doesn’t mean I’m not working.”
In terms of communicating with people throughout the day, for anyone who doesn’t utilize instant messaging software, this is an incredibly efficient way to stay in
touch. People can call at exactly the wrong moments during a trade. With instant messaging, people can type in a question and the trader can get back to them at her
leisure. Instant messaging was built for traders. This is free software, and I used to utilize the three most popular programs: M SN, Yahoo!, and AOL. I now mostly
use Skype and the chat feature that comes with Gmail (Google’s e-mail service). The key with instant messaging software, however, is to block everybody except for
54

people that the trader has specifically permitted on her list. If everyone knows you are online, then everyone will bug you. For traders, instant messaging between their
brokers and other traders is appropriate. It is inappropriate from anyone else who could interrupt a trader’s workday, and this includes family members and clients.
There are very few people who are on my list, but they are all important to my trading day. M y wife did make the cut, however, and it has proved to be a useful way
to stay in touch when the markets are moving. It is your life. Life is short. Put a stake in the ground and own your time.

Why Is Watching Harry Potter on DVD After 12 Noon Eastern Better Than Watching CNBC?
I am bringing this up because I’ve seen too many traders who quit their jobs and follow what I call the “CNBC setup.” They are excited because they are finally able to
trade full-time. They feel they’ve been at a disadvantage all these years, getting quotes from the Internet, sneaking trades onto their computers in between meetings,
and hearing about key news events only after the markets have already closed. So what do they do? They plop a TV down right next to their computers, turn on
CNBC, and glue themselves to the screen, looking for trading opportunities.
CNBC has a very specific job: to provide viewers with enough entertainment so that they tune in and watch. When a lot of people are watching, the network makes
more money from the commercials. It’s as simple as that. CNBC is fun to watch, and when things get serious, it does a great job of reporting. I found out about 9/11 as
it unfolded live before my eyes from M ark Haines. I flipped to some of the other channels, but I ended up parking it on CNBC that day because it did, hands down,
the best job of reporting about it. Who can forget M aria Bartiromo reporting about the event, covered in ash and soot just after the first building collapsed? It was a
gut-wrenching experience to watch, and the reporters and the network did a great job.
That said, traders must realize that they cannot make a living “trading the news” off any financial news channel. By the time something appears on television, it is
way too late to react. Trading floors have already heard the news, and by the time it makes it to the public, the floor traders are closing their positions, ideally to
suckers who just saw the headlines. If anything, CNBC can be used as a fading tool—taking the opposite side of the news. Once it runs out of stories and starts
repeating the same things over and over, I turn down the volume and either turn on a commercial-free music radio station or, once in a while, plop in a DVD. Who can
get tired of watching Gladiator?
Traders who do this for a living spend their days waiting for specific setups to take shape. Yet one of the biggest weaknesses of most traders is a need to be in every
move. If the markets start running away, many traders just can’t help but jump in, fearing that they may be missing something big. This is a fatal flaw that will ruin
any trader who can’t control this habit. If there is anything I can hammer into your brain as you are reading this book, it is this: it is okay to miss moves. Professional
traders miss moves; amateur traders try to chase every move. By listening to music or keeping a DVD on in the background, traders have something they can use to
pass the time while they wait for their specific setup to take shape. This makes them less prone to jump impulsively into trades just because they are bored or because
they can’t stand missing out on a move. The goal is not to catch every move in the market. The goal is to take the specific setups that you have outlined as a part of
your business plan. Otherwise you are just a gunslinger, and sooner or later all gunslingers get killed.
We’ve set up www.tradethemarkets.com/platforms with information on discounted commissions and VIP service with the brokers discussed in this chapter.

55

4
Futures Markets 101—
Understanding the Basic
Mechanics of the Futures and
Commodity Markets
To the brave man every land is a native country.
GREEK PROVERB

The World Beyond Stocks: Why Is It Important?
We’ve covered why markets move, how traders sabotage themselves, and what to do with your computer. That was the equivalent of prep school. It’s time for you to
graduate and start looking at the markets. Deciding what markets to trade is critically important. The reality is, some markets offer much better opportunities than
others. Where would you rather open up a hot-dog stand—inside Yankee Stadium or at the side of a dirt road in the middle of Nebraska?
I wrote this chapter specifically for stock traders who have never ventured beyond those borders into the world of futures contracts, which include stock indexes,
currencies, interest rates, gold, oil, grains, and a variety of other asset classes. M y goal is to provide a straightforward guide to these markets from a trader’s
perspective. I’m not going to go into a dissertation on contract specifications or all the other mechanics of these contracts. This information is readily available at
www.cmegroup.com. I’m just going to focus on the mechanics of buying or selling these contracts from a trader’s perspective, and the key things to know if you do
decide to give them a try. I also am not going to try to talk a person into trading these markets—more individual traders get eaten for lunch in these markets than
anywhere else. Why? Because they jump right in without understanding the leverage involved and end up trading way too many contracts for their account size. We
already know what happens to a trader who is not psychologically ready to do this for a living. Add leverage to that equation, and a trader is behind the eight ball from
the get-go. That said, futures are great once you understand them. They provide 24-hour access to all the major asset classes in the world, they are great for day trading
or longer-term trades, and there is always something that is moving. That is, if the stock market is having a quiet week, a trader can always check out what is happening
in the gold market.
I also will not attempt to discuss how all these markets interact with and influence one another on a global level (although I will hit upon some of the basics). That
would involve a macro discussion of how the world works, and it is not within the scope of this book. I just want to show you how I trade them for a living.
Ultimately, if you decide not to trade them, that is completely fine. At least you’ll know how they work, how they affect the stock market, and even how to use them
to time your stock picks.
For traders who are already familiar with these markets, feel free to skim through this chapter and move on to the next—although I would read both the next section
and the part that compares trading the mini-sized Dow (YM ) to trading the E-mini S&Ps (ES).
Although I say in the introduction that I won’t be focusing on basic trading terminology such as uptrends, I do want to explain the other markets outside of stocks
that I refer to in this book. The reason for this is that most traders I’ve met are stock traders only. Some might have a little experience with the E-mini futures, but for
the most part, their focus is on actual stocks and that’s it. To put this in perspective, there are roughly 25 million stock brokerage accounts in the United States. When
I wrote this book in 2005, there were only about 450,000 futures accounts. However, that number has grown exponentially as large brokers such as TD Ameritrade
have embraced futures trading. For people who are familiar only with stocks, contracts such as the 30-year bond, soybeans, S&Ps, euros, and gold often seem
nebulous, scary, and out of reach. But are they really? Not really, and they provide a lot of flexibility that can’t be found in stocks alone.
Figure 4.1 shows a very good reason for knowing how all these various markets work, and that reason is as follows: there are always going to be some markets that
are trending and some that are stuck in a trading range. Some are going to be moving higher while others are moving lower. While Figure 4.1 shows uptrending gold and
10-year note markets, the S&P 500 is forming a double top, and the euro currency is range-bound. Although Figure 4.1 is based on a weekly time frame, this same kind
of thing happens on all intraday time frames as well. While one market is chopping, another market is trending. I have setups for both types of markets that I review
later in this book.

Markets Are a Reflection of the People Who Trade Them: Is Your Competition Wired on Starbucks or Methodically
Filling In a Crossword Puzzle?
In addition to traders exposing themselves to a wider variety of potentially trending markets, it’s important to at least understand how these other markets work for
three reasons. First, these other markets affect stock prices. A lasting rally in bonds can force large funds to start buying stocks in order to readjust their allocations. A
surge in oil prices can place downward pressure on stocks. Rising lumber and steel costs can hurt some companies’ earnings but help others. Second, there are going to
be times when the stock market is dead in the water, and these other markets will provide opportunities for traders to continue making a living. Third, each market has
its own personality. Traders who have been exposed only to stocks are betting it all that this is the market that best suits their personality. There may be another one
out there that fits like a glove, so to speak, which makes the traders’ job that much easier. For example, the ES (E-mini S&P 500) isn’t that great to trade if you are
looking for momentum-type moves. For momentum moves, it’s better to look to GC (gold), EC (euros), and S (soybeans).

56

Figure 4.1
In the end, all charts and all markets are the same. They always have been, and they always will be, because all chart patterns depict the same thing—emotional
reactions and decisions made by human beings. Even if it is a mechanical system that is making the trades, it was still written by a human. A trader is always trading
with other traders, no matter what the market.
Yet each market is made up of different types of traders. What are these traders like? If they are S&P traders, then it’s possible that they are wired on Starbucks and
are super-aggressive. If they are trading bonds, it’s possible that they are methodically filling in a crossword puzzle in between trades. If they are trading corn, it is
possible that they are napping at their desk, as they are more concerned with hedging a cash crop. Which type of trader would you rather trade against? Compete
against? One of the key differences between most successful traders and unsuccessful traders is this: successful traders are in markets where their personalities shine.
A stark example of this can be found in a friend of mine who trades 10-year notes. He routinely makes just over seven figures a year trading this market. A few years
ago, he got bored and decided to start trading the S&Ps. He liked the excitement and the action, and he wanted to be a part of that game. The result? It was a struggle
from the first trade, and he lost hundreds of thousands of dollars. Licking his wounds, he went back to trading 10-year notes—and making just over seven figures a
year. Boring is not necessarily a bad thing. I can’t emphasize enough the importance of trading the right market for your personality.
Also keep in mind that many firms realize that there are many newer traders out there who are buying the latest software packages in order to “beat the markets.”
These firms buy the same software and use it to trade against the newbies. This is in addition to these firms having a full-time research staff and access to tons of
information. These types of firms usually focus on the S&P futures. Are you prepared to trade against these guys in the S&Ps and make a living off their occasional
57

mistakes and bad judgment?
I started off as a stocks and options trader. I liked these markets, did well in these markets, and continue to trade in these markets. However, I was always curious
about the other markets that were available. For a long time I didn’t do much about this curiosity. Why? Frankly, the futures markets seemed scary. Yet I really just
wanted to see how these other markets worked and at least to see how I would do trading them. M aybe I would find something I liked better than stocks. However, I
felt that futures and foreign exchange currency trading (forex) were suited only to traders sitting behind a desk at a large bank or institutional trading firm, so it took me
a while to finally venture into these markets. This isn’t so much the case today because these markets have become more accessible. Ironically, however, some of these
same institutional traders now visit me at my offices to learn the various trade setups I utilize in these markets. They had no problem trading these instruments with
the firm’s money, but when they left to try it with their own money, the psychological factors kicked in, and they struggled.
I eventually worked with some traders in these markets in the mid-1990s, and they helped to strip away the myths, showing me how these markets worked and
how to reduce risk and create solid trading opportunities. In my search to understand the futures and forex markets, I had to pull bits and pieces together from different
sources over the course of several months before I finally understood how all these trading instruments worked. M ost of the information was elusive at best— a more
apt description would be worthless. I never was able to find a consistent, easy-to-understand summary that told me everything I needed to know about trading these
instruments, and this process was frankly frustrating and annoying. As a trader, I just wanted to know the basics—how do I trade them, how much money do I need to
trade them, and how does the price movement affect my P&L? I’ll use the rest of this chapter to create the summary information I wish I’d had then. In the end, I’m
glad I tried out these other markets, as it is these other markets that allowed me to make the jump to trading full-time for a living.
