
Burniske 01.indd 49

9/9/17 1:12 PM

50 CRYPTOASSETS

information being revealed other than the validity of the transaction. While it
is still early days for Zcash, we are of the belief that the ethics and technology
chops of Zooko and his team are top-tier, implying that good things lie in wait
for this budding cryptocurrency.
•

•

•

By the end of 2016, the price of bitcoin had reached a level just below $1,000
(which it broke in January 2017), and there were over 800 cryptoassets in a
market that totaled over $17 billion. At that time, the top assets in order of
network value were: Bitcoin, Ethereum, Ripple, Litecoin, Monero, Ethereum
Classic, and Dash.
The innovative investor may note from this list that Ethereum follows
Bitcoin. Its story is one that includes brilliant developers, a wider definition of
blockchain technology, and one of the largest hacks on a cryptoasset ecosystem to date. In the next chapter, we’ll look at the creation of Ethereum and the
significant impact it has and will have on the future of cryptoassets.

Burniske 01.indd 50

9/9/17 1:12 PM

Chapter 5
Cryptocommodities
and Cryptotokens

C

ryptocurrencies are a powerful vertical of cryptoassets, but as we laid
out in the start of the last chapter, only one of three. The other two,
cryptocommodities and cryptotokens, are a rapidly growing segment
of this budding new asset class. First, let’s look at cryptocommodities.
In some ways, cryptocommodities are more tangible in value than crypto­
currencies. For example, the largest cryptocommodity, Ethereum, is a decentralized world computer upon which globally accessible and uncensored
applications can be built. It’s easy to appreciate the value of using such a computer, and therefore Ethereum provides a digitally tangible resource. Paying
to use Ethereum’s world computer—also known as the Ethereum Virtual
Machine (EVM)—is reminiscent of when schools and libraries had shared
computers that students could use. One person could sit down and use a computer for a while before moving on, and then another person would come and
use it.
The Ethereum Virtual Machine operates somewhat similarly to a shared
computer, except it is global in scale and more than one user can operate it
at a time. Just as everyone can see Bitcoin transactions from anywhere in the
world, anyone can see Ethereum’s programs running from anywhere in the
world. While this chapter will dive deep into Ethereum as a cryptocommodity,
there are many other budding cryptocommodities, provisioning decentralized

51

Burniske 01.indd 51

9/9/17 1:12 PM

52 CRYPTOASSETS

resources like cloud storage, bandwidth, transcoding, proxy re-encryption,
and so on.

THE IDEA BEHIND ETHEREUM’S WORLD COMPUTER
The founding team of Ethereum and its native asset, ether, weren’t the first
to dream of globally distributed computer programs, or what are commonly
referred to as smart contracts. For example, Nick Szabo, who was also one
of Chaum’s disciples at DigiCash (Chapter 4), had been talking about smart
contracts and digital property since the early 1990s. In 1996, he published an
article in the magazine Extropy on the topic entitled “Smart Contracts.”1
Smart contracts are critical to understand but have a misleading name. The
first thing people think of when they hear smart contracts is legal documents
that think for themselves, which misses the mark by a wide margin. We believe
smart contracts are better thought of as conditional transactions because they
refer to logic written in code that has “IF this, THEN that” conditions. For
example, it can easily be programmed in a smart contract that “IF Jack misses
his flight and IF it was the airline’s fault, THEN the airline pays him the cost of
the flight.” A vending machine is another commonly used example of a smart
contract: “IF the user puts in enough money and IF the user types in the right
code, THEN the user gets Doritos.” These conditions can become much more
complex, creating conditional waterfalls depending on the process being programmed and the variables that need to be met.
While Szabo had the early vision for smart contracts, the Ethereum team
would be the first to create a mainstream and attention-grabbing platform to
execute smart contracts in a decentralized manner. At the core of the team is
Vitalik Buterin, who many regard as Ethereum’s Satoshi.
Buterin was born in Russia but grew up in Canada. He had the good fortune of a freethinking father,2 who in February 2011 introduced 17-year-old
Buterin to Satoshi’s work and Bitcoin.3 Bitcoin had only been functioning for
two years at that point, and no major alternative was in existence. It would not
be until October of that year that Charlie Lee would release Litecoin.
It wasn’t long before Buterin fell down the Bitcoin rabbit hole. He quickly
became one of the first well-known journalists pioneering the world of crypto­
assets, even cofounding Bitcoin Magazine, which remains one of the best deep
dive sites for technical analysis of blockchain architectures. While writing articles that merged sophisticated technical information with an enthusiastic and
optimistic style, he used his mathematical prowess to consider how to improve

Burniske 01.indd 52

9/9/17 1:12 PM

Cryptocommodities and Cryptotokens

53

on the technology. He was, after all, a Bronze medal winner at the International
Olympiad in Informatics4 at the age of 18 and could reportedly add three-digit
numbers in his head at twice the speed of the average human being.5
To that end, Buterin tinkered with a number of Bitcoin projects that would
inform his future work on Ethereum. In a blog post titled “Ethereum: Now
Going Public,” he started with a tip of the hat to Bitcoin:
I first wrote the initial draft of the Ethereum whitepaper on a
cold day in San Francisco in November, as a culmination of
months of thought and often frustrating work into an area that
we have come to call “cryptocurrency 2.0”—in short, using the
Bitcoin blockchain for more than just money. In the months
leading up to the development of Ethereum, I had the privilege
to work closely with several projects attempting to implement
colored coins, smart property, and various types of decentralized
exchange.6

The projects Buterin references in the last sentence approached the transaction of bitcoin using Bitcoin’s blockchain more abstractly. As we have already
learned, transacting bitcoin involves the transmission of information that
results in a debit or credit of a balance of bitcoin in a user’s address.
In his blog post, Buterin mentions colored coins. These involve the marking
of an address in Bitcoin with information beyond just the balance of bitcoin in
that address. Further identifiers could also be appended to the address, such
as information that represented ownership of a house. In transferring that bitcoin in that address to another address, so too went the marker of information
about house ownership.
In this sense, by sending bitcoin, the transaction also signified the transaction of property rights to a house. There are several regulatory authorities that
need to recognize that transfer for this example to become an everyday reality,
but the point is to show how all kinds of value can be transmitted through
Bitcoin’s blockchain.
COUNTERPARTY: SMART CONTRACTS ON BITCOIN
Counterparty is a cryptocommodity that runs atop Bitcoin, and was launched
in January 2014 with a similar intent as Ethereum. It has a fixed supply of

Burniske 01.indd 53

9/9/17 1:12 PM

54 CRYPTOASSETS

2.6 million units of its native asset, XCP, which were all created upon launch.
As described on Counterparty’s website, “Counterparty enables anyone to
write specific digital agreements, or programs known as Smart Contracts,
and execute them on the Bitcoin blockchain.”7 Since Bitcoin allows for small
amounts of data to be transmitted in transactions and stored on Bitcoin’s
blockchain, it becomes the system of record for Counterparty’s more flexible
functionality. Since Counterparty relies upon Bitcoin, it does not have its own
mining ecosystem.
The reason Bitcoin developers haven’t added extra functionality and flexibility directly into its software is that they have prioritized security over complexity. The more complex transactions become, the more vectors there are
to exploit and attack these transactions, which can affect the network as a
whole. With a focus on being a decentralized global currency, Bitcoin developers have decided bitcoin transactions don’t need all the bells and whistles.
Instead, other developers can either find ways to build atop Bitcoin’s limited
functionality, turning to Bitcoin’s blockchain as a system of record and means
of security (e.g., Counterparty), or build an entirely different blockchain
system (e.g., Ethereum).

Many were working on building this decentralized future on top of
Bitcoin, but it wasn’t easy. The flexibility in adding identifiers to addresses
and creating different kinds of transactions was purposefully restricted in
Bitcoin for the sake of scalability and security. Bitcoin, after all, was still an
experiment. A decentralized currency was enough of a holy grail for Satoshi,
and he didn’t have to swallow the whole world in one bite. But Buterin
wasn’t satisfied with Bitcoin as it was and had wide-ranging aspirations for
improvements. He wanted a system that was more flexible and that behaved
more like a computer and less like a calculator for debits and credits of bitcoin balances.
Although he invented Ethereum in 2013, Buterin formally announced it in
January 2014 at the North American Bitcoin Conference,8 where he was surrounded by eager reporters, many of whom had been his colleagues in months
past. By that time, he had already garnered the support of over 15 developers
and dozens in the community outreach team.9
In Ethereum’s white paper that initially described its inner workings,
Buterin’s team made no qualms about their aspirations:

Burniske 01.indd 54

9/9/17 1:12 PM

Cryptocommodities and Cryptotokens

55

What is more interesting about Ethereum, however, is that the
Ethereum protocol moves far beyond just currency. Protocols
around decentralized file storage, decentralized computation
and decentralized prediction markets, among dozens of other
such concepts, have the potential to substantially increase the
efficiency of the computational industry, and provide a massive
boost to other peer-to-peer protocols by adding for the first time
an economic layer.10

Importantly, Buterin did not intend for Ethereum and its native asset, ether, to
be a minor variation on Bitcoin’s codebase. This distinguished Ethereum from
many of the altcoins that came before it.
By having no affiliation with “coin” in its name, Ethereum was moving beyond the idea of currency into the realm of cryptocommodities. While
Bitcoin is mostly used to send monetary value between people, Ethereum
could be used to send information between programs. It would do so by
building a decentralized world computer with a Turing complete programming
language.11 Developers could write programs, or applications, that would run
on top of this decentralized world computer. Just as Apple builds the hardware and operating system that allows developers to build applications on top,
Ethereum was promising to do the same in a distributed and global system.
Ether, the native unit, would come into play as follows:
Ether is a necessary element—a fuel—for operating the distributed application platform Ethereum. It is a form of payment
made by the clients of the platform to the machines executing the
requested operations. To put it another way, ether is the incentive ensuring that developers write quality applications (wasteful
code costs more), and that the network remains healthy (people
are compensated for their contributed resources).12

Miners of Ethereum would be processing transactions that could transfer not
just ether but also information among programs. Just as Bitcoin miners were
compensated for supporting the network by earning bitcoin, so too would
Ethereum miners by earning ether, and the process would be supported by a
similar proof-of-work consensus mechanism.

Burniske 01.indd 55

9/9/17 1:12 PM

56 CRYPTOASSETS

GETTING ETHEREUM OFF THE GROUND
Buterin understood that building a system from the ground up required a significant amount of work, and his announcement in January 2014 involved the
collaboration of a community of more than 15 developers and dozens of community members that had already bought into the idea. Satoshi’s announcement of Bitcoin, in contrast, had involved a quiet mailing of the white paper
to a relatively unknown mailing list composed mainly of academics and hardcore cryptographers. The ensuing development of the Bitcoin software before
launch mostly involved just two people, Satoshi and Hal Finney.13
Buterin also knew that while Ethereum could run on ether, the people who
designed it couldn’t, and Ethereum was still over a year away from being ready
for release. So he found funding through the prestigious Thiel Fellowship.
Billionaire Peter Thiel, who cofounded PayPal and was Facebook’s first outside
investor, created the Thiel Fellowship to reward talented individuals who leave
the traditional path of college and pursue immediate ways to make an impact
in the world. Winners might conduct scientific research, create a startup, or
find other ways to improve society and the world. Thiel Fellowship’s carefully chosen visionaries receive $100,000 over the course of two years, and the
award has been considered more competitive than gaining acceptance to the
world’s best universities. In June 2014, Buterin received the Thiel Fellowship14
as a 20-year-old dropping out of the University of Waterloo to pursue his interest in Ethereum on a full-time basis.
While Buterin may go down as one of Thiel’s greatest investments, Thiel
wasn’t alone in recognizing the potential of Ethereum. In 2014, Buterin was
given the World Technology Award in Information Technology Software,15
alongside influential names such as Elon Musk in the Energy category and
Walter Isaacson in Media & Journalism.
While the Thiel Fellowship was an indication of what was to come for
Buterin, $100,000 wasn’t enough to sustain his team. To that end, from July 23,
2014, to September 2, 2014, they staged a 42-day presale of ether, the cryptocommodity underlying the Ethereum network.16
Ether was sold at a range of 1,337 to 2,000 ether per bitcoin, with 2,000
ether per bitcoin on offer for the first two weeks of the presale and then declining linearly toward 1,337 ether per bitcoin in the latter half of the sale, creating
momentum by incentivizing people to buy in at the beginning. Overseeing the
legal and financial nuances around this sale was the newly created Ethereum
Foundation headquartered in Zug, Switzerland.17

Burniske 01.indd 56

9/9/17 1:12 PM

Cryptocommodities and Cryptotokens

57

Ethereum’s fund-raising effort was not only innovative and timely, it was
also record-breaking. The public invested 31,591 bitcoin, worth $18,439,086,
for a total of 60,102,216 ether—an implied rate of $0.31 per ether. At the time,
it was the largest single crowdfunding effort.18 Some thought it outrageous that
the team supporting a blockchain architecture could raise $18 million without
a functioning product, as this was clearly different from Bitcoin’s process.
Venture capital investors (VCs) often invest in ideas and development
teams, having faith they will work their way toward success. Ethereum democratized that process beyond VCs. For perspective on the price of ether in this
crowdsale, consider that at the start of April 2017, ether was worth $50 per
unit, implying returns over 160x in under three years.19 Just over 9,000 people bought ether during the presale, placing the average initial investment at
$2,000, which has since grown to over $320,000.20
According to the Ethereum white paper, the profits from this sale would
be “used entirely to pay salaries and bounties to developers, and invested
into various for-profit and non-profit projects in the Ethereum and cryptocurrency ecosystem.” In addition to the 60 million ether sold to the public,
roughly 6 million was created to compensate early contributors to Ethereum,
and another 6 million for long-term reserves of the Ethereum Foundation.
The extra allocation of 12 million ether for the early contributors and
Ethereum Foundation has proved problematic for Ethereum over time, as
some feel it represented double dipping. In our view, with 15 talented developers involved prior to the public sale, 6 million ether translated to just north
of $100,000 per developer at the presale rate, which is reasonable given the
market rate of such software developers.
That said, the allocation of capital into founders’ pockets is an important
aspect of crowdsales. Called a “founder’s reward,” the key distinction between
understandable and a red flag is that the founders should be focused on building and growing the network, not fattening their pockets at the expense of
investors. In our opinion, the Ethereum developers were not fattening their
pockets, they were putting food on the table. Their modest allocation is a far
cry from the antics that some cryptoasset creators have attempted since.
Following the presale, it was a year of development before the Ethereum
network went live. During this time, the Ethereum team stayed in close touch
with its burgeoning community, releasing proof-of-concepts for the community to evaluate, organizing conferences, funding projects based on Ethereum,
and writing frequent blog updates.21 Perhaps taking note from Dogecoin, the
Ethereum team understood the importance of the community in bootstrap-

Burniske 01.indd 57

9/9/17 1:12 PM

58 CRYPTOASSETS

ping support for its decentralized system. Although blockchain architectures
are cold code, they are warm social networks.
With the money they raised, the Ethereum team was also able to test the
network before launch in a way that Satoshi and his small group of supporters were not able to. Starting at the end of 2014 and for the first half of 2015,
the Ethereum Foundation encouraged battle testing of its network, both in a
grassroots bug bounty program and in formal security audits that involved
professional third-party software security firms.22 The innovative investor
should take note of this battle-testing practice, which we also saw with Zcash,
as it is an indicator of how seriously core developers take security in their
decentralized architectures.

ETHEREUM AS A PLATFORM FOR dAPPS
Ethereum’s network with its underlying blockchain went live on July 30, 2015.
While much development energy had gone into creating the Ethereum software, this was the first time that miners could get involved because there was
finally a blockchain for them to support. Prior to this launch, Ethereum was
quite literally suspended in the ether. Now, Ethereum’s decentralization platform was open for business, serving as the hardware and software base for
decentralized applications (dApps). These dApps can be thought of as complex
smart contracts, and could be created by developers independent of the core
Ethereum team, providing leverage to the reach of the technology.
To explain how a dApp works, we’ll use an example from the company
Etherisc, which created a dApp for flight insurance to a well-known Ethereum
conference. This flight insurance was purchased by 31 of the attendees.23
Figure 5.1 shows a simplified diagram. Using Ethereum, developers can mimic
insurance pools with strings of conditional transactions. Open sourcing this
process and running it on top of Ethereum’s world computer allows everyday
investors to put their capital in an insurance pool to earn returns from the
purchasers of insurance premiums that are looking for coverage from certain
events. Everyone trusts the system because it runs in the open and is automated by code.

WELCOME TO THE AGE OF dAPPS AND CRYPTOTOKENS
Since the launch of Ethereum, a near endless stream of dApps have been
released to run on it, many of which have their own native unit. We refer to

Burniske 01.indd 58

9/9/17 1:12 PM

Cryptocommodities and Cryptotokens

59

Flight
Insurance

Flight
Successful

Flight
Unsuccessful

Fault of
Passenger

Fault of
Airline

No
Payment
Payment
Made

No
Payment

Figure 5.1 n Hypothetical dApp-based flight insurance

many of these dApp native units as cryptotokens, while others refer to them as
appcoins. A dApp with its own native cryptotoken will use ether as a crypto­
commodity to pay the Ethereum network to process certain dApp transactions. While many dApps use a cryptotoken, the native units of some dApps
should be classified as a cryptocommodity layered on top of Ethereum, like
Golem, which aims to be a supercomputer for compute intensive problems.
The difference boils down to whether a raw digital resource is being provisioned (cryptocommodity) or if the dApp is providing a consumer-facing finished digital good or service (cryptotoken).
Most cryptotokens are not supported by their own blockchain. Often
these cryptotokens operate within applications that are built on a cryptocommodity’s blockchain, such as Ethereum. To continue with the Apple analogy:
applications in Apple’s App Store don’t have to build their own operating systems, they run on Apple’s operating system. Due to Ethereum’s wild success,
other decentralized world computers have popped up, such as Dfinity, Lisk,
Rootstock, Tezos, Waves, and more that can support their own dApps. Just as
many altcoins tried to improve upon Bitcoin, these platforms are cryptocommodities that aim to improve upon Ethereum’s design, thereby attracting their
own dApps and associated cryptotokens.
A full list of Ethereum dApps can be seen and explored here: http://dapps
.ethercasts.com/. The code of many can be investigated in full here: https://live

Burniske 01.indd 59

9/9/17 1:12 PM

60 CRYPTOASSETS

.ether.camp/contracts. We will look at the most (in)famous of the dApps thus
far, as it will inform the innovative investor on all future dApps and potential cryptotoken investments. We should note that dApp development and the
associated native units has been one of the fastest moving areas in the crypto­
asset space, as we watched new ones come out each week during the writing
of this book. Thus, the curious reader should take time after this chapter to
further explore them as we are only scratching the tip of the iceberg in this
section.
