
201
And Here's The Big One
As I snooped around I noticed something else ... the one big thing that about 95 percent of the patients with
major problems shared in common.
I had noticed this earlier when I took my mom to a doctor appointment. Virtually all the people
coming in to see the sawbones had this one ingredient in common. Also noticed that of my mom's friends
the healthiest and most vibrant one of the group did not share this in common. In short, whether they were
smokers, drinkers, Mormons, Catholics, short or tall, old or very old, it came down to this:
The more overweight they were, the more health problems they bad.
That is a powerful statement and I hope you will take a long hard look at your waistline-right now-to see
if you are not headed for problems. (I am personally convinced that being overweight is worse than smoking,
some smokers don't seem to be fazed by it, but all overweight people suffer.) The important thing, as Dr.
Meltzer told me, is that once a person gets so out of shape or overweight, the trendline is too steep to correct.
You just can't pull out of it, the bear market begins and thanks to old man age, it gets pretty ugly.
Well, enough of this wandering from the markets, but it's done with intent ... I do want you to live life at
its best and for a long time ... after all it's hard getting good subscribers, I want those renewals!

August 1997

Volume 34, issue 8
The Number One Reason We Lose Money Trading

Let others talk about how much they make, I want to work on losing less!
There are as many ways to lose big money trading as there are traders, yet there is a strong common
denominator to each and every loss I have taken. If I can avoid this, I should be able to sidestep much of the
pain usually associated with this business.
Here it is then, the biggest reason we have big losses ...
Large losses come about when we let our belief systems override reality.

202
What I mean by this is that we pay more attention to our advisors, prejudices, hopes and aspirations
than we do to what's really going on. That literally forces us to hold onto losing trades ... and to keep
holding on. The secret to winning in this business is to get out of the losers as soon as possible and hold
onto the winners.
While I have a strong belief that I will make money trading, I have an equally strong belief that every
possible trade I enter may well wipe out my account.
My belief system used to be that every trade would work out OK, and I had some very disastrous
equity dips. I held onto what I should have pitched, which also forced me to pitch what I should have held
onto! My positive approach to life, my belief system, was killing me, as I was not listening to reality: Rocks
are hard, water is wet, bad things happen, commodities are risky. Believe that and you will sure as heck
protect your hard-earned dollars. I trust my systems and trading techniques, but I don't believe for an instant
that they will work on the next trade! That's a healthy, profitable attitude.
This is a universal truth. How many people do you have in your life that you should have "stopped
out" of the relationship long ago? I know my life works best when I cut away from so-called friends that
are really emotional drains and stay with those that enhance my enjoyment of life. if that works in living, it
will work in trading!
September 1997

Volume 34, Issue 9
The Most Important Trading Belief You Have

In this business a positive mental attitude and affirmations can
kill you. Instead, try this.
Belief Systems
While it is true that you are only as powerful as your belief system, the real advantage a belief system
can bestow upon you is that a firmly held belief will give you more certainty to take action.
Traders have trouble taking correct action, as we lack certainty, thus the study of what we believe is
critical to our success.
If you get all pumped up with positive beliefs about your market success you will believe so much (in
that coming about) that you will mismanage losing trades. After all, if your belief system is that your
current trade will be a winner-and it isn't-the certainty of that belief will have you holding onto losers,
something no

203
successful trader does. Ever. An outrageously positive belief about your success (on any one to two trades,
not your total career as a trader) will have you rushing in where angels themselves fear to trade.
My strange belief system is that the current trade I am in will be a
loser ... A big loser at that!
Sounds negative, but it is most positive. If that is my belief, I will certainly be careful in taking the
trade and for sure will manage the trade "by the books" that means my stops will be in-at all times-I will
exit when my methodology says to, not my whims, wife, or broker. Every major loss 1 have had trading
(and I've had more than my fair share) has come from believing my current trade would be a big winner, so
I did not follow the rules of the game.
Adopt my belief system, that this trade will most likely be a loser, and you sure as heck will protect
yourself!
A Note on Fear and Greed
Some years ago I postulated that greed is a greater motivating factor than fear. Recently a student, and
psychologist, questioned that with convincing evidence that most people fail as fear (of failure or loss)
keeps them from taking action.
My reply was that those of us who have decided to trade are not Most people" we have already broken
the shackles of fear, evidenced by the fact we are trading. Back to his studies went the PhD and discovered
this is true in animals as well. Rats when hungry (motivated by "greed") will take risky action to get food
that they will not take when not hungry. We traders are like the hungry rats ... motivated by greed.

November 1997

Volume 34, Issue 7 7

How to Buy a System/ Newsletter ... They Are All Making Money!
That is all the system/software/newsletter seminar types were raking money in at the recent Futures West
Symposium ...

204
Opening Up the Hornet's Nest
Let me first say I've sold as many books, seminars, maybe even systems, as anyone, so it's fair to ask
is the pot calling the kettle black about this month's comments on "vendors" of commodity information.
The recent Futures West Symposium presented a great opportunity for traders to see new products,
hear from speakers and mingle with one another. I certainly enjoyed seeing many of you there.
What I did not enjoy was the hawking of supposedly infallible systems and techniques by a host of
vendors, many whom, from what I can tell, don't even trade. The claims of profits and "ease" of trading
have gotten way out of hand. Accordingly, here are my comments on how to spot the good and bad apples.
How to Spot a Good Trading System/Program
All the vendors have fancy brochures, impressive track records, scads of testimonials,
computer printouts and the like, making it very difficult to separate reality from hype. It gets even
worse when you read Investors Business Daily, as you can see from the recent crop of ads.
All the computer printouts and fancy brochures are meaningless, so is the price (1 recently monitored
one of those $10,000 types of systems and saw it lose on just about every trade). Frankly, so it is having a
NAME behind the system, mine or anyone else's. Yes, it tells about credibility but is still no assurance of
future success.
Signs of a Bad System or System Seller
Anyone who tells you this is easy, implies little risk, and "almost" assures profits is a definite pass.
T'’aint so. Anyone who claims very high rates of return-without confirmation slips and account statements
from a broker-is also a hustle in my opinion. The lack of a guarantee or a wishy-washy one is a red flag.
Testimonials can be bogus. I know of several systems sellers that have shills professing how great the
system is. Also, don't trust the limited quantities to be sold" pitch. Most the sellers I know use this but have
yet to turn away a single buyer. Finally, the more complicated and/or technically oriented the system is, the
worse it will probably do. There must be a reason or theory to why it should work; check the premise as
much as you check out claimed results.

205
The Sure Sign of a Good System
The proof is in the pudding and when it comes to tasting the pudding we're looking for brokerage firm
confirmations. Little else matters. If a system is as great as the seller claims it is, he/she should sure as heck
be trading it. Given most any form of money management, the simplest of valid systems can make far more
money trading than by being sold ... and without the pressure of dealing with the public.
Advisory Services present a little different problem. There is only one that I know of that takes all their
own trades, that's Russell Sands Turtle Talk. Without this, you need an independent measure of the letter's
success. There's only one, Commodity Traders Consumer Reports. If a service is not monitored here it's
probably because they don't want the warts to be exposed. Being under the microscope is not fun ... just
necessary. Also, I suggest you check several time periods to see if the letter is just currently on a hot or cold
streak. Has their performance been dependable? That's the issue.

April 1998

Volume 35, Issue 4
Twitching Worms and Traders

A recent seminar attendee, "Trader Rick” E-mailed the following; it's good reading to understand
what to look for and reflect on in yourself.
"Would you like yet another story that proves you
should not be an emotional trader? Well here it goes;
you'll find it interesting.
"Last weekend 1 decided to place a buy stop in May Copper at 77.80, first thing Monday morning. Shortly
after Copper opened I called my broker (unfortunately my regular broker does not come in until around
8A.m.) and asked, "What's Copper called this morning?" He replied, "I don't follow Copper, I really don't
know, I'd have to look it up . . ." (Oh brother, never mind)
"OK," I said, "what's the last price" and was told it was trading at 77.00 down from 77.90, this told
me price had already gone above my stop so 1 thought I'd wait for a pullback.

206
Afraid to Buy, Afraid to Sell
I called back later, price was at 77.30. Again, I did nothing. Why you ask? 1 really don't know, except
1 thought I'd "watch the market" to see what it would do. The funny thing is 1 now know if it went higher 1
would have waited for a pullback, if it went lower 1 would have been afraid to buy. Up or down would
score me out, and that's just what happened! What would 1 have "seen" anyway, handwriting from God?"
"Later in the day 1 called back, Copper was now at 80.30. "Damn . . . OK, buy one at the market."
Now 1 knew that Copper was really hot, and 1 was violating everything you had taught us that weekend.
But something, almost a mysterious force, "pushed" me into the trade. 1 bought pretty much at the high of
the day, because 1 was so upset 1 had not gotten in earlier.
"The very next day Copper began a pullback, fortunately, it eventually went higher, but the cost would
be $500. Dumb, dumb, and dumb. Haven't 1 learned anything yet? Yeah, 1 have, it's simply this, "Plan your
trades and don't deviate, don't let emotions push you over the cliff at just the wrong time."
It's just Like Fishing
1t kind of reminded me of fishing, how I'll toss a worm in and wiggle it just a little, no bite, then a little
more, still no bites, then just a little twitch and ... BLAM! I've hooked a nice fish. The market seems to hook
me just like 1 catch fish with those little wiggles until 1 just can't resist and 1 fall for it, hook line and
sinker.
"Trouble is this is not catch and release, it's bite and lose, no more "forced feeding frenzies" for me!"
The next time old man greed taps you on the shoulder or you hear its emotional call luring you to the bait ...
don't bite!
In fact when in "the old days" when 1 did very short-term trading off a quote machine, one of my best
rules was to cancel any entry into a trade if there have been 18 rally bars. It didn't seem to matter if they
were 5-minute bars, 30 minutes or hourly, but on a consistent basis 1 would say that 18 bars, worm twitches
it you will, is about all the human mind can take before it snaps, and is then snapped in the pocketbook.

207
May 1998

Volume 35, Issue 5
The Worst Dog I Ever Had, Cost the Most

It was the snippiest, most belligerent untrainable mutt you could imagine and it cost the most because
it had been bred for a couple of hundred years to be the perfect dog. Instead it was a disaster.
Commodity trading systems are a lot like that damned dog. The more you tweak and refine them, the
more you optimize and try to improve the breed of trades the system kicks out the worse the dog performs.
So far this year my personal trading sucks. I've been up as much as 30
percent, down the same amount and sit today with about a 10 percent gain
for the year, not much considering the risk and effort for all this.
Naturally, I had to ask myself why.
The answer came pretty quick. Last year was a great year, the account I traded went from $50,000 to
over $1,000,000. And guess what ... that wasn't good enough for me so I kept breeding the system,
tweaking it, thinking I was fixing it. Some fix! The peak of perfection in commodity trading is not
attainable, yet we strive, and in my case, overstrive for it.
What works is to keep it simple, understanding perfection or anything close to it does not exist in this
business. In short, forget the glitzy impossible, the show dogs, find a mongrel and take good care of it.
More on What Works
Well, well, Commodity Traders Consumers Reports just came out and gives us an immense insight into
how to make money in trading commodities. Let me explain. This service, started by Bruce Babcock and
now aptly run by Courtney Smith (a for-real guy who actually trades, by the way) monitors 26 of the most
popular market letters' REAL PERFORMANCE. It is a tedious task, to say the least, in the last 12 months
they have had to follow each of the 3,590 trades we services had cranked out!
Here's some observations I've made about the services that make money; to begin the services with the
greatest number of trades have been consistent losers. Guess, that old saw about over-trading is correct. By
the same token, services that don't trade often seem to be consistent winners. But, the most consistent
winnings have been picked up by services have about 200-300 trades in any given 12-month time period.
Services with more trades than that perform poorly. Currently the best performing services are Futures
Factors, up $92,761 on 252 trades in the last 12 months, Taurus up $94,307 on 355 trades in the last 12

208
months and Commodity Timing, up $119,716 on 290 trades in the last three months. The service with the
most trades, 655, was down close to $50,000.
We can also break the newsletters into trading approaches. Generally speaking they are Seasonal,
Trend following, Chartists and Gann/Elliot/Arcane, and here are the differences.
Here the performance figures are immensely more revealing. I went back the last three years and found
that the poorest performers in 1995, 1996, and 1997 have consistently been the Gann/Elliott/Arcane group
who, as a group, has averaged a loss of close to 100 percent a year. This from the crowd that claims all can be
known, that you really can buy bottoms and sell exact tops.
Here's another interesting point, the most expensive service has lost money on balance the last three years
(they charge $5,000 a year) while the cheapest service, $45 a year, is a net winner!
The seasonal letters did well a few years ago but in the last 12-18 months have not fared so well. The
long-term trend followers led by Commodity Research Bureau and Commodity Trend Service have shown
consistent profits. In the last three years no service has been in the top 5 performers each year. But, the
following have been in the top performing group 2 of the last three, Commodity Trend Service, Commodity
Timing, and Futures Factors. Hope all this helps you place performance, and the performers into some sort of
viable and working understanding of this business.

June 7998

Volume 35, Issue 6
"The Most Important Athletic Ability Is the Talent to Comeback from Behind"

