
77

Understanding Price Action
· IFig 5.11

www. ProReaITime.com

o ProRetliTirne.com
01:00

eur/usd s..min� E

02:00

03JXl

04:00

05:00

0000

07:00

Figure 5.1 A typical characteristic of a sideways market is the way prices
tend to alternate above and below a rather flat 2 5ema. In the early
stages of it, in the absence of a dominant party, there may not be much
telling who will come out on top. But by patiently monitoring the way
the price action revolves around the average and by carefully tracking
the highs and lows along the way, we can usually obtain a pretty good
idea on the side of the market that is slowly getting the upper hand.
The first notable event in the session above was the sideways "cor­
rection" 2-3, hanging from the pole 1 -2 . Horizontal pullbacks are the
market's way to absorb the implications of a foregoing move. Inevitably,
at some point, prices can only do one of two things: they either break
away in the dominant direction (think flag) , or they break away at the
other end, possibly setting up a reversal of sorts (think M and W-pat­
tern middle-parts) .
Bears will not have been amused to see the latter outcome come
about (4) . Just moments before they had been well on their way to the
50-level below, only to suddenly see their opponents aim for the round
number above. (Note the completion of the W-pattern in the 3-4 swing.)
Following this countercharge was a lengthy skirmish over the pos­
session of the 25ema, which ultimately resolved in favor of the bears. A
development that may have played a decisive role in this victory was the
fact that bulls, despite repeated attempts, had proved unable to reach,
let alone retake, the round number of 1 .36. At some point these misad­
ventures were bound to affect their morale.

78

But let us zoom in on the initial bull attack first (4) . When the ave-

Chapter 5

Trade Setups - Pattern Break

rage is perforated from below, and the next so many bars manage to
close above it, we can refer to this as bulls retaking possession ofthe av­

erage. From here on, prices may still have a hard time reaching higher,
but they do stand a pretty good chance of getting picked up whenever
they hit back on the average, particularly on first touch; and even more
so when this coincides with an element of technical support.
In a rather slow and compressed session, support or resistance is
never far away. For example, when the low of bar 7 hit upon the high of
bar 5, this was a spot-on ceiling test that coincided with a touch on the
25ema and a 50/ 60 percent correction of the 5-6 maneuver. In an ear­
lier discussion, we referred to this threefold collision as a triple: a strong
turning point candidate. Scalpers in particular love to take advantage
of these little pullbacks to support, if only to rake in a handful of pip in
the initial bounce. But for prices to head out more authoritatively, or
lastingly, decent sideline assistance is usually required. In the session
above, this never convincingly materialized for the bulls. Not long after
taking possession of the average, they were twice forced to retreat below
it (8-9 and lO- l l )-and then failed to recoup third time around.
Note: As previously noted, there is no point in overanalyzing every
little skirmish in the chart; most of the time there are no trades near
and it will do to sit back with just an overview perspective on the open
session. Yet always interesting to monitor in any chart are the attempts
of either side to reach the next round number in line. Both parties have
their own level to gun for, and these pursuits, in the end, will either fail
or succeed. Of course, these levels do not have to be reached on any
first try. But whenever we see one side repeatedly fail to make it to their
magnet and then lose the initiative, a power shift is likely at hand. Put
differently, the failure of one side to reach their round number very often

sets the stage for a successful attack on the number at the other end.
This is essentially what happened in the chart above. Moreover, the
failed attempts to reach the OO-level-at 1 , 4, 6, 8, 10, and finally at
12-will not only have had an impact on the bullish morale, they will
have boosted the confidence of the bears with equal prowess.
Initially, the pattern line may have been plotted slightly more as­
cended to connect the 2-3 element with the low of bar 9. But when

79

Understanding Price Action
the 1 1 - 1 3 progression took shape later on in the session, the situation
called for a little adjustment. When drawn as depicted, the seven bars
caught between the pattern line and the average represent a textbook
squeeze. Whenever prices break away from such a "trapped" progres­
sion, the double-pressure response can be very powerful.
Textbook in it also was a failed attempt of the bulls to break away
from the bearish grip ( 1 2). You may not think much of such a tiny
false high, but it can be a great harbinger of bullish capitulation further
down the line. Just try to imagine the predicament of the bulls: so far all
their upside attacks had failed and now they were being reprimanded
yet again, and in support of a pattern line to boot. If not even an upside
break in support could tempt a sideline bull to come to the rescue, then
what is a bull in position to think.
With a bear break now seriously on the boil, this leaves us to discuss
our pattern break entry technique. Despite its excellent tip-off, bar 1 2
itself did not qualify a s a signal bar. Should we have shorted below it,
our entry would have been straight into the support of the pattern line.
On certain occasions, a trader could decide to apply a little more ag­
gression (we'll take it up later on), but this is seldom a smart idea in a
relatively slow chart. Best to give the market a fair chance to set up the
trade properly.
There were at least five reasons why bar 1 3 fit the description of
a valid signal bar: ( 1 ) it was part of a solid squeeze; (2) it nicely filled
the space between the 2 5ema and the pattern line, leaving virtually
no room for another bar to get printed in the squeeze; (3) it confirmed
the false high at 1 2 ; (4) it closed bearishly, in line with the anticipated
break and right up against the pattern line; and (5) there was a highly
favorable 50-level magnet waiting about 25 pip below. What more does
a bear want to see to get ready for action.
In the vast majority of entries, position is taken the very moment
the entry bar surpasses the high or low of the signal bar by a pip (fire
short below bar 13). When this moment draws near, get ready with your
cursor on the buy or sell ticket, but never front-run the event; fire only
when the signal bar is truly taken out.
The very moment position is taken in the market, a preset bracket

80

Chapter 5

Trade Setups - Pattern Break

will automatically spring into action to eventually close out the trade
for either a profit or loss. As already stated, there are countless ways
to set these orders, but let us for now agree on the suggested 1 0 pip
stop and the 20 pip target. As we will come see many times over in the
pages and chapters ahead, this is an excellent bracket to work with
on a "normally active" 5-minute frame. Should you prefer to manage
your trades on a more discretionary basis, if only on occasion, this is
of course heartily encouraged, but at this stage of our studies our pur­
poses are best served by keeping things both simple and unambiguous.
(Alternative management techniques will be taken up in Chapter 6 on
Manual Exits.)
Note: In most breakout situations, and this regards all setups, we
should only step in if the close of our signal bar is in line with the direc­
tion of the anticipated break. This means we will short below a bearish
bar and enter long above a bullish one. At times, though, neutral dojis
can qualify as signal bars as well, and on occasion we may even accept
a short below a small bullish bar or go long above a small bearish one
(think inside bars) . But at all times it is highly recommended not to
short below a strong bullish bar, or to enter long above a strong bearish
one. These type of entries are less likely to provoke an immediate follow­
through response and thus more likely to present the trade with a bad
start. And that is a situation best avoided, especially when working with
tight stops.

81

Understanding Price Action
IFig 5.21

'tIiIINI. ProReamme.com

eur/usd 5·minU1e

2

....

08:00

moo

'0:00

11:00

12;00

Figure 5.2 There's no denying the pressure was up from the moment the

European opening bell rang at 08:00. Just look at that bull swing 1 -2,
not a bearish bar in it. Savvy contrarians may have smacked their lips
at the sight of it, but from where we stand, there will be no selling such
an opening rally.
Bar 2 , and the two bars before it, show what is referred to as top­
ping tails. In Japanese candlestick analysis, a tail is the part of the bar
outside the body (can be a bottoming tail also). If rather tall, it indicates
that in the course of bar formation, prices reached a certain high or
low but then closed significantly away from that level (price rejection).
Tail bars in the current highs or lows of a rally can provide valuable
information indeed, but to take a reversal position merely on account of
their presence can be a very dangerous practice. Aspiring contrarians
should take note.
Even so, no rally can last forever and all have to face a serious pull­

back at some point. Yet if the trending move was any good, we can

almost be certain that there will be many parties on the lookout to pick
up prices on a correction of sorts. If so, the key question is, how far will
prices retrace?
We have already voiced the dangers of trying to simply guess the
turning point of a pullback. Arguably, a safer approach would be to wait
for prices to stall first and then try to hop on. Unfortunately, that can

be tricky also; many times the initial stalling is only temporary and the
pullback may retrace a little deeper still. For example, bulls who entered
long in bar 3 , or above it, were the first casualties to fall in the failed

82

Chapter 5

Trade Setups - Pattern Break

pullback reversal. Those who stepped in on the break of bar 4 (better
already) may soon have regretted their purchases also.
Troubling the bulls here was the fact that the 1 -2 rally had been so
one-sided (no stalling on the way up) that it failed to offer a decent level
of support for a pullback to gun for and turn around in. In such cases,
there is usually less consensus on where to pick up the reversal, even
when plenty of bulls are aiming to buy. And as the buying thus comes
in less unanimously, prices tend to respond less unanimously also. The
25ema can sometimes help out, as it tried to do at 4, but without a

technical element to coincide with its slope, the supporting powers of a
moving average are usually little more than an optical illusion.
As it turned out, it needed a deeper pullback for the bulls to come
out and defend the opening rally with a little more verve (5-6). Even
though the tiny bottoming tail of bar 6 was not a great marker of bullish
enthusiasm yet, bears did take heed of this bar's message, if only for
the fact that prices now resided in the notorious 60 percent retracement
wne of the 1 -2 rally: a last resort for the bulls to keep the pressure up.
To the careless eye, progression 6-8 may seem like a nondescript set
of little doji bars; but if we examine the action more closely, these bars
tell us the interesting story of how the bulls and bears fought it out in
the lows of that pullback. Note that within this progression most bars
closed away from their lows, already a fair indication that bears were
slowly being pushed aside.
Let's worn in a little further. With the two doji bars at 8 together
taking ten minutes to complete there was ample time to plot the de­
scending pattern line as depicted. While the highs of these dojis were
thus curbed by the resistance of a pattern line, their lows found support
in the highs of another doji duo, the two bars at 7 . Perhaps not a perfect
squeeze, but there was little room to move without breaking out either
way, and this always adds to the tension.
A development that favored the bull breakout was the fact that the
entry bar (above the arrow) had first taken out the low of its direct
neighbor only to reverse strongly up (false low). From this still picture,
though, we cannot tell with certainty whether this took place before or
after the pattern line was broken, but if we consider the opening price

83

Understanding Price Action
of our entry bar, it is fair to assume that the false low was put in first.
While this particular break may have been accepted either way, given
the bullish prospects, the false low scenario prior to entry is of course
the preferable order.
Next to examining the conditions that favor a positive outcome, we
should also scan the chart for elements of potential obstruction on the
road to target. When doing so, it is good to realize that a free path out is
probably more rare than common. A former swing high or low may not
pose too big a problem; double tops and bottoms can be a little tougher
to crack but need not necessarily be feared when not too prominently
displayed in the chart. Never pleasant, though, are fat, blocky clusters
of price action not too far to the left that need to be eaten through to get
to target. (We will see plenty of this soon enough.)
As to the bull trade in question, there was little call for pessimism
when aiming for a 20 pip target; in fact, there were two eventualities
likely to help the trade along: first there was the magnetic pull of the
50-level to get prices going, and then there was the former high of 2 to
finish off the job. Recalling our discussions on price action principles,
former highs and lows can be strong magnets also.
In this instance, resistance may have kicked in just a pip shy of
target (9) . Since few trades will reach destination without suffering at
least a little setback on the way, it's best to stay calm when this hap­
pens and just wait for the trade to recoup. Of course, never pleasant is
to see a pullback suddenly eat back all the open profits on a trade and
then even go on to challenge the stop. But it is vital to accept that this is
an inevitable part of the trading game and best taken in stride. Cleverly
pulling away a stop in the hopes of a favorable bounce (at 1 O?) may oc­
casionally save a trade from annihilation, but it is a terrible practice to
engage in and a losing proposition on the whole. Regardless of style and
technique, one of the first tasks in trading, for any trader, is to learn
how to take a loss gracefully.
Bulls did come out to defend their pattern line ( 1 -6- 1 0), but few were
prepared to join higher up. We can imagine the round number overhead
and the now prominent double top a little above it (2-9) to have played
their part in this lack of buying enthusiasm.

84

Chapter 5

Trade Setups - Pattern Break

A development of attention is progression 1 0 - 1 3 ; even though the
25ema is running flatly through this buildup, this is a squeeze variant,
too, with the bars now caught between pattern line support and 50-level
resistance. Whenever a cluster of bars shows up between two opposing
elements, of whatever kind, this always raises the tension-and sooner
or later demands a conclusion.
Let us zoom in on this seven-bar squeeze to find out if we could
have seen the break below bar 1 3 coming. To begin, the buildup had
started out with the 1 0- 1 1 bull swing, which was a perfect ceiling test
with the 8-9- 1 0 arch, and also a failure of the bulls to reach the 50-level
magnet. As prices fell back to the pattern line, bulls quickly responded
by swinging them back up (higher low) . But before the high of bar 1 1
was reached, prices fell back to the pattern line once more (lower high).
With now two false highs in the squeeze, and prices closing bearishly on
the pattern line as well ( 1 3), the situation had reached a critical phase.
Should bar 13 be broken at the bottom, not only would this technically

confirm the false high in bar 1 2 (bull break followed by a bear break),
it would show that sideline bulls were no longer able, or willing, to de­
fend their pattern line support. And that left the bulls in position highly
exposed, possibly prompting many of them to bail out to keep their
damages small. Couple that to the bearish outlook, and we indeed have
all the ingredients here for a nice double-pressure pop on the sell side
(enter short on the break of bar 1 3) .
Notice that our entry bar, below the arrow, did not sell off right away.
Evidently, even in the face of a solid break, contrarian parties can be
very resilient. But do not let this disturb you. A bit of pulling and push­
ing in the breakout area is all part of the game for dominance. Whatever

you do, avoid exiting in the entry bar itself. Nine times out of ten that will
be a fear-based exit, and a poor one at that. Also, with a stop safely in

place, what is there to fear? This is not to suggest that an open position
cannot be validly exited before either the stop or target is reached, but
bailing out in the entry bar is seldom a valid display of such technique.
For now, let's just stick to a rigid application of the 20/ 1 0 bracket and
see what that brings.

85

Understanding Price Action
IFig 5.31

_.ProRoammo.com

our/usd 5-minuto

1 .335

1 .33

o ProReaTine.com
05:00

06:00

07:00

08:00

09:00

10;00

Figure 5.3 To avoid trading against dominance, our first task in any
session is to examine the bigger picture. An excellent starting point is
to monitor the directional efforts of the 25ema. Is the average sloping
down, with most bars traveling below it, we are currently dealing with
a southbound market and our trades are best chosen in line with this
slope (lengthy flag-type corrections may form an exception).
Another way to get a dependable idea on the pressures in play-and
very handy also when the average is running more or less flat-is to
track the last so many arches in the chart and see how they relate to
one another. Figure 5.3 demonstrates how this can be helpful. Starting
from 07:00, we can count four arches standing in support of the round
number of 1 .33: progressions 1 -2-F, F-3-T, T -4-5 and 5-6-7. As is often
the case, the first arch is the biggest of the series and the rest gradually
goes down in size. Sometimes an arch in the middle will be the most
prominent, as in a head-and-shoulders variant, but whenever there is
a smaller arch following, the implications are basically the same. Natu­
rally, the last arch is the one to observe with most attention for detail,
particularly when compressed. Not seldom this arch is so flattened out,
as was the case with the 5-6-7 progression, that it is hardly recogniz­
able as an actual arch (think squeeze) . Needless to say, all this applies
to a bullish chart also, with V-shaped arches hanging below a barrier,
working up to an upside break. Furthermore, we will not only find these
arches standing on or hanging below a horizontal barrier, they can just
as well reside beneath or on top of a tilted pattern line. Have a look
again at our previous chart, Figure 5.2, and check out the three arches

86

Chapter 5

Trade Setups - Pattern Break

standing on top of the ascending pattern line. Note also that the last
arch was a squeeze progression leading up to the break below bar 1 3 .
The great benefit o f these arch progressions is that they are very
easy to track and seldom demand a high level of attention when still in
development. When dealing with a multiple-arch formation in the mak­
ing, we usually get fair warning as to when to sharpen our focus. For
example, even though the false break at F, the tease break at T and the
false highs at 3 and 4 were all interesting elements to detect, none of
them got us anywhere near a trade at the time. In the end, all we had to
do was keep a half eye on the action until things called for a little more
attention, probably somewhere around bar 5.
Although in most sessions we can usually tell the bullying party from
the underlying one in little more than a glance, we should never make
assumptions on the outcomes of their battles. What we can do, howev­
er, is promise ourselves not to trade in favor of the oppressed for as long
as their underlying status has not been set straight. In the chart above,
the down-sloping 25ema and the shrinking arches clearly let on that
the bears currently had the best of the action; in fact, bulls could do
little else than bravely defend themselves against the repeated attacks
on the round number of 1 .33. Without thinking short yet, this tells us
that all bets on the buy side are off for the moment.
As is very common in a: round number fight, there were incidental
perforations below the level but they did not lead to immediate collapse.
Always keep in mind that round number defense can be very tenacious
and perforations seldom follow through without at least some form of
buildup backing up the charge.
Notice that the false break at F was no cause to redraw the box yet
(its falseness validated the prior low of 1 ) ; but when later on the lows of
5 and 6 came to match the low of F, the barrier could have been lowered
to the level of the dotted line (now ignoring the break at T) . It remained
to be seen, though, how indicative a mere break of this "tricky" barrier
would be with the round number still very much in play. While it could
never hurt to put the level in, this is one such situation in which we
should be extra cautious not to get trapped into a premature break; a
careful tracking of the buildup in the round number area is paramount.

87

Understanding Price Action
Progression 5-8 was a four-bar squeeze caught between the barrier
and the 25ema; but prior to its bearish close, bar 8 had already per­
forated the dotted line by a pip. Perhaps a less conservative bear may
have deemed this a good enough signal to have fired short straightaway,
as opposed to waiting for bar 8 to close and be broken by another bar.
But that would have left the squeeze rather thinly built up. In most
similar situations, and in the tricky environment of round number de­
fense in particular, my advice would be to sooner wait for an extra bar
to fatten up the squeeze than to act on a somewhat premature break
in fear of missing out. In this view, the entry below bar 8 is the more
textbook pattern break short.
If fear of missing out is an issue in your trading, causing you to act
before your turn a little too often, consider concentrating on indisput­
able breakouts only; a great benefit of this approach is that you can now
