
 It is very common to make some mistakes when you are getting used to Hotkeys. When I was learning to use them, I had stickers on my keyboard to help me to keep track of the different key combinations. When I try to define new Hotkeys, I will ensure that I only practice with them in my simulator account. It takes some time, but eventually you will remember your Hotkeys and use them efficiently. Another important reminder is to always use a wired keyboard that is plugged into your computer. Wireless keyboards can send repeat keystrokes, errant keystrokes, or can fail to send orders at all, especially when low in battery power. This could impact and quite simply mess with your trading. I have seen traders in difficult and costly situations because their wireless mouse or keyboard was low in battery power and did not work properly. I even keep one extra keyboard in my office, ready to go, just in case something happens to the keyboard I’m using. One time I spilled water on my keyboard while trading. My keyboard stopped working. Fortunately, I did not have any open position at that moment. I immediately purchased two new sets of keyboards and mice and I keep one set as a backup next to my trading desk.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Watchlist and Scanner s 

 I talk to new traders almost every single day. I talk to hundreds of traders every month. One of the common challenges that new traders mention is not knowing what to trade. Thousands of stocks are moving in the market every single day, but finding a setup that is both consistent and a good fit is really hard. I use Trade Ideas software ( www.trade-ideas.com ) for scanning the market and finding good trades. As I mentioned earlier, for a link to their website, along with a special discount code, please check my website. I explained my scanners and watchlist building in Chapter 4 and I will explain in detail later in this book what I am looking for with my scanner as well as with my trading strategies. You will also see some pictures of my scanner in the sections that follow. If you join our chatroom, you will see my scanner online in real time and you will be able to observe how I use it.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Community of Traders 

 Trading alone is very difficult and can be emotionally overwhelming. To whom will you ask your questions? It is beneficial to join a community of traders and ask questions, talk to them if needed, learn new methods and strategies, get some hints and alerts about the stock market, and also make your own contributions. Online trading rooms are excellent places for meeting like-minded traders, and they can be powerful learning tools. 

 Two long-standing trading rooms are Linda Bradford Raschke’s trading room, which emphasizes technical trading across multiple markets ( www.lbrgroup.com ), and the trading room run by author John Carter and Hubert Senters ( www.tradethemarkets.com ). You should also take a look at the educational programs run by Jim Dalton and Terry Liberman ( www.marketsinprofile.com ) as another possible place for connecting with like-minded traders. Another two well-known trading forums are Elite Trader ( www.elitetrader.com ) and Trade2Win ( www.trade2win.com ). Indeed, if you have a favorite trading platform or application, connecting with traders who are using the same tools can be quite valuable. Market Delta ( www.marketdelta.com ) and Trade Ideas ( www.trade-ideas.com ) run educational programs and online chatrooms for their users that I’ve found useful. 

 I personally trade in our chatroom with some of my friends and family. We can talk to each other and everyone can view my live screen and platform and watch how I am trading. It is a fun, interactive environment, and we all learn from each other. I frequently answer questions from other traders, and if there is anything I’m not sure of, I will ask other traders. There are some experienced traders in our chatroom that I learn much from, and we tip each other off about potential good trades and setups. We would like to grow our chatroom slightly and therefore everyone who is reading this book is welcome to join with us. You will benefit from both watching me trade and hearing my responses to questions people have, including your own questions. Don’t be shy to ask! 

 New and developing traders will absorb the knowledge of mentors and experienced traders like a sponge; this helps them establish the right trading behaviors faster and more effectively. When you share your trading results and your ups and downs with fellow professionals, you turn social interaction into social learning. Find experienced traders who will not hesitate to tell you when you are making a mistake. It is in interacting with other traders that you will learn to teach yourself. 

 If you join me, you will see that quite often I lose money. It is always a good feeling to see that losing money is not just limited to yourself, but that everyone, including experienced traders, have to take some losses. It is part of the process. There are many chatrooms that you can join on the Internet. Some of them are free but most of them require payment. You can join our chatroom and see my screen in real time while I am trading and explaining my strategy. You can take trades with me, or just watch and listen. You can also take your own trades and still be part of my community. If you are interested in watching me trade or in talking with me, check out our chatroom at www.BearBullTraders.com . 

 It is extremely important to remember, however, that if you are in any community of traders, either our chatroom or the dozens of others that are out there, you should not follow the pack. You need to be an independent thinker. Generally, people change when they join crowds. They become more unquestioning and impulsive, nervously searching for a leader whose trades they can mirror. They react with the crowd instead of using their minds. Chatroom members may catch a few trends together, but they will also get killed together when trends reverse. Never forget that successful traders are independent thinkers. Simply use your judgment to decide when to trade and when to not.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Chapter 6: Introduction to Candlesticks 
 To understand my strategies in the next section, we need to quickly review the price action and the fundamentals of candlestick charts. The Japanese began using technical analysis and some early versions of candlesticks to trade rice in the 17 th century. Much of the credit for candlestick development and charting goes to a legendary rice trader named Homma from the town of Sakata, Japan. While these early versions of technical analysis and candlestick charts were different from today’s version, many of the guiding principles are very similar. Candlestick charting, as we know it today, first appeared sometime after 1850. It is likely that Homma’s original ideas were modified and refined over many years of trading, eventually resulting in the system of candlestick charting that we now use. 

 In order to create a candlestick chart, you must have a data set that contains (1) opening price, (2) highest price in the chosen time frame, (3) lowest price in that period, and (4) closing price values for each time period you want to display. The time frame can be daily, 1-hour, 5-minute, 1-minute, or any other period you prefer. The hollow (white) or filled (red) portion of the candlestick is called “ the body ”. The long thin lines above and below the body represent the high/low range and are called “ shadows ” (also referred to as “ wicks ” and “ tails ”). The high is marked by the top of the upper shadow and the low by the bottom of the lower shadow. Two examples follow in Figure 6.1. If the stock closes higher than its opening price, a hollow candlestick is drawn with the bottom of the body representing the opening price and the top of the body representing the closing price. If the stock closes lower than its opening price, a filled (usually red) candlestick is drawn with the top of the body representing the opening price and the bottom of the body representing the closing price. 

 Figure 6.1 - Candlestick Examples. 

 Besides candlestick charting, there are other styles for representing price action including bars, lines, and point and figure. I personally however consider candlestick charts more visually appealing and easier to interpret. Each candlestick provides an easy-to-decipher picture of price action. A trader can immediately compare the relationship between the open and close as well as the high and low. The relationship between the open and close is considered vital information and forms the essence of candlesticks. 

 Here is my ninth day trading rule: 

 Rule 9: Hollow candlesticks, where the close is greater than the open, indicate buying pressure. Filled candlesticks, where the close is less than the open, indicate selling pressure.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Price Action and Mass Psychology 

 Traders, at any time, can be divided into three groups: buyers, sellers, and the undecided. Buyers want to pay as little as possible and sellers want to charge as much as possible. Their permanent conflict is reflected in bid-ask spreads (Chapter 5). “Ask” is what a seller asks for the stock to sell. “Bid” is what a buyer offers for that position. Prices are determined by all of the traders at any given moment: buyers, sellers, and undecided people. 

 The presence of undecided traders puts pressure on buyers (bulls) and sellers (bears). The actions of buyers and sellers cause the prices to move because they know that they’re surrounded by a crowd of undecided traders who could step in and snatch away their deal at any moment. Buyers know that if they think too long, another trader will very likely step in and buy ahead of them and push the price higher. Sellers know that if they try to hold out for a higher price, another trader might step in and sell at a lower ask and cause the price to go lower. The crowd of undecided traders makes buyers and sellers more willing to deal with their opponents. 

 Buyers are buying because they expect prices to rise. Buying by bulls pushes the market up, or as I like to phrase it, “ Buyers are in control .” This means that buyers are willing to pay higher and higher prices, bidding on top of each other, as they are afraid that they may not be able to buy any lower and will have to pay a higher price if they miss buying now. Undecided traders make price increases happen faster by creating a sense of urgency among the buyers. They rush to buy and push the prices higher. 

 Sellers are selling because they expect prices to fall. Selling by bears pushes the market down, or as I like to express it, “Sellers are in control.” This means that sellers are willing to accept lower and lower prices, as they are afraid that they may not be able to sell any higher and will have to sell at an even lower price if they miss selling now. Undecided traders make prices decrease faster by creating a sense of urgency among the sellers. They rush to sell and push the prices lower. 

 The goal of a successful day trader is to discover the balance of power between the buyers and the sellers and then bet on the winning group. Fortunately, candlestick charts reflect this fight in action. The price action reflects the mass psychology of all traders at any given moment. A successful day trader is a social psychologist behind a computer and charting software. Day trading is the study of mass psychology. 

 Candlestick patterns tell us a great deal about the general trend of a stock and the power of buyers or sellers in the market. Candles are always born neutral. After birth, they can grow to become either bearish, bullish or, on rare occasions, neither. When a candle is born, traders do not know what it will become. They may speculate but they do not truly know what a candle is until it dies (closes). After a candle is born, the battle begins. The bulls and the bears fight it out, and the candle displays who is winning. If buyers are in control, you will see the candle move up and form a bullish candle. If sellers are in control of the price, you will see the candle move down and become a bearish candle. You may be thinking that this is all very obvious, but many traders don’t see candles as a fight between buyers and sellers. That little candle is an excellent indicator that tells you who is currently winning the battle, the bulls (buyers) or the bears (sellers). 

 In the next section, I’ll provide you with a quick overview of the three most important candlesticks for day trading (bullish, bearish, and indecision) and then, in Chapter 7, I will explain how you can trade using these patterns in each of your trading strategies.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Bullish Candlesticks 

 Candles with large bodies toward the upside, as you will see in Figures 6.2 and 6.3 below, are very bullish. It means that the buyers are in control of the price action, and it is likely that they’ll keep pushing the price higher. The candle not only tells you the price, it tells you that the bulls are winning and that they have power. 

 Figure 6.2 - Bullish Candles 

 Figure 6.3 - A series of bullish c andles shows bulls (buyers) are in control of the price.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Bearish Candlesticks 

 On the other hand, bearish candles are any candles that show a bearish body. So what does the bearish candle tell you? It tells you that the sellers are in control of the price action in the market and that buying, or a “long” position, would not be a great idea. 

 Filled candles that have a big filled body, such as in Figures 6.4 and 6.5 below, mean that the open was at a high and the close was at a low. This is a good indicator of a bearishness in the market. 

 Figure 6.4 - Bearish Candles 

 Figure 6.5 - A series of bearish c andles shows bears (sellers) are in control of the price. 

 Just by learning to read candlesticks, you will begin to generate an opinion on the general attitude for a stock. Again, this is called the “ price action ”. Understanding who is in control of the price is an extremely important skill in day trading. The price action reflects the mass psychology of all traders at any given moment. As I mentioned, a successful trader is a social psychologist armed with a computer and trading software. Day trading is the study of mass psychology during the day. 

 A major goal of a serious day trader is to discover the balance of power between bulls and bears and to bet on the winning group. If bulls are much stronger, you should buy and hold. If bears are much stronger, you should sell and sell short. If both camps are about equal in strength, wise traders stand aside. They let the bulls and the bears fight with each other and then enter trades only when they are reasonably certain which side is likely to win. 

 You never want to be on the wrong side of the trade. It is important therefore to learn how to read candlesticks and how to constantly interpret the price action while you are trading.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Indecision Candlesticks 

 In the next section, I’ll provide you with a quick overview of the two most important indecision candlesticks for day trading (spinning tops and Dojis). Later, in Chapter 7, I will explain how you can trade using these indecision candlesticks. 

 Spinning Top s 

 Spinning tops, as seen in Figures 6.6 and 6.7 below, are candles that have similarly-sized high wicks and low wicks that are usually larger than the body and will often be a little bit more indecisive. Let’s call them indecision candles . In these candlesticks, the powers of the buyers and the sellers are almost equal. Although no one is in control of the price, the fight continues on. Usually, the volume is lower in these candlesticks as traders are waiting to see who wins the fight between the sellers and the buyers. Trends in price can change immediately after indecision candles and they therefore are important to recognize in the price action. 

 Figure 6.6 - Buying and selling pressure definition on spinning top candlestick. 

 Figure 6.7 - Formation of spinning top candlesticks for reversal trends. 

 Doji s: Simple, Shooting Star, Hammer 

 Dojis are another important candlestick pattern and come in different shapes and forms but are all characterized by having either no body or a very small body. A Doji is also an indecision candlestick that is similar to a spinning top. When you see a Doji on your chart, it means there is a strong fight occurring between the bears and the bulls. Nobody has won the fight yet. 

 Figure 6.8 - Examples of Doji candlesticks. 

 In Figure 6.8 above, a Doji tells us the same story as a spinning top does. In fact, most indecision (reversal) candles tell you basically the same thing. This will be discussed in greater detail in the next section. 

 At times, Dojis will have unequal top and bottom wicks. If the top wick is longer, it means that the buyers tried unsuccessfully to push the price higher. These types of Dojis, such as the shooting star, are still indecision candlesticks, but they may indicate that the buyers are losing power and that the sellers may take over. 

 If the bottom wick is longer, as in hammer Dojis, it means that the sellers were unsuccessful in trying to push the price lower. This may indicate an impending takeover of price action by the bulls. 

 Figure 6.9 - Bottom Reversal Strategy with an indecision hammer candlestick formed as a sign of entry. 

 All Dojis indicate indecision and possible reversals if they form in a trend. If a Doji forms in a bullish trend, it suggests that the bulls have become exhausted and the bears are fighting back to take control of the price. Similarly, if a Doji forms in a bearish downward trend, it suggests that the bears have become exhausted and the bulls (buyers) are fighting back to take control of the price. You will see examples of these in Figures 6.9 and 6.10. 

 Figure 6.10 - Top Reversal Strategy with an indecision s hooting star candlestick formed as a sign of entry. 

 After learning to recognize these candlesticks, it is important that you not get too excited too quickly. Candles are not perfect. If you take a trade every time you see a Doji formed in a trend, you will end up with significant losses. Always remember that these candles only indicate indecision and not a definite reversal. To use indecision candles effectively, you must look for confirmation candles and ideally use them with other forms of analysis such as support or resistance levels, both of which are explained in Chapter 7.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Candlestick Patterns 

 Many traders love to identify complicated chart patterns and make trading decisions based on them. There are hundreds of imaginatively-named candlestick patterns that you will find with a Google search including Head-and-Shoulders, Cup-and-Handle, Abandoned Baby, Dark Cloud Cover, Downside Tasuki Gap, Dragonfly, Morning Star, Evening Star, Falling Three Methods, Harami, Stick Sandwich, Three Black Crows, Three White Soldiers, and many more. Believe me, I did not make any of these names up. These candlestick patterns are really out there. As intriguing as their names might be, many of them, in my opinion, are useless and confusing. Most charting patterns are quite subjective and can result from wishful thinking and self-deception. The biggest pitfall with this kind of pattern trading is wishful thinking. Traders will find themselves identifying bullish or bearish patterns depending on whether they’re in a mood to buy or sell. If you’re in a mood to buy, you will find a Cup-and-Handle Pattern. If you feel like selling short, you’ll “recognize” a Head-and-Shoulders Pattern. None of those patterns are objective in my opinion, and I am skeptical of even the most classical and famous patterns, such as the above mentioned Cup-and-Handle and Head-and-Shoulders Patterns. Therefore, I skip discussing these patterns in this book. In Chapter 7, I introduce a day trading strategy based on a simple formation: the ABCD Pattern.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Chapter 7: Most Important Day Trading Strategies 
 In this chapter, I will introduce some of my strategies, based on three elements: (1) price action, (2) technical indicators, and (3) candlesticks and chart patterns. It is important to learn and practice all three elements at the same time. Although some strategies require only technical indicators (such as Moving Average and VWAP), it’s helpful to also have an understanding of price action and chart patterns in order to become a successful day trader. This understanding, especially regarding price action, comes only with practice and experience. 

 As a day trader, you shouldn’t care about companies and their earnings. Day traders are not concerned about what companies do or what they make. Your attention should only be on price action, technical indicators and chart patterns. I know more stock symbols than the names of actual companies. I don't mingle fundamental analysis with technical analysis while making a trade; I focus exclusively on the technical indicators. I don't care about the fundamental aspects of companies because I'm not a long-term investor - I'm a day trader. We trade very quickly - guerrilla trading! – at times we will trade in time periods as short as ten to thirty seconds. 

 There are millions of traders out there and even millions more of strategies. Every trader needs their own strategy and edge. You need to find your spot in the market where you feel comfortable. I focus on these strategies because these are what work for me. 

 I’ve come to recognize in my trading career that the best setups are the nine strategies that I will be explaining in this chapter. These are simple strategies in theory, but they are difficult to master and require plenty of practice. These trading strategies give signals relatively infrequently and allow you to enter the markets during the quiet times, just like the professionals do. 
