
Introduction • xxi

half years the Turtles earned an average return of over 80 percent per
year. But why the name Turtles? That name comes from the place
where Dennis and Eckhardt stood when the long-running debate
turned serious: a turtle farm in Singapore. Seeing the turtle farm up
close, Dennis reportedly blurted out, “We’re going to raise traders like
they raise turtles in Singapore.”
So there I was, age 19, palms sweating, on the verge of meeting the
Prince of the Pits. Walking down the hallway, I shouldn’t have been
surprised by the utilitarian look of the ofﬁces. There was no grand
entrance, no fancy lobby, no attempt to impress clients, brokers, or any
other kind of bigwig. Dennis was known for not wasting money on
showy display, and so the frugal surroundings made sense; even so, I
expected more. Everything seemed smaller than I had envisioned.
I found the door with the nameplate “C & D Commodities” and
opened it.

Dale Deluttri, Dennis’s business manager, greeted me at the door and
told me that Richard was ﬁnishing another interview. I already knew
what Richard looked like, having seen his photo in a few articles, but
I did not have a clear insight into his personality, and so I passed the
time worrying about that.
In preparation for the interview I had read everything I could ﬁnd
on or about Richard, and so I did have a few clues about his personality but not as much as I wanted. I also had taken Richard’s 40-question
test (that was part of the application), and so I knew something about
what he considered important in a trader.
When the door to Richard’s ofﬁce opened, the previous candidate
exited, told me a bit about his interview, and wished me luck. He must
have done well; I saw him a few weeks later at the ﬁrst training class. I

xxii • Introduction

walked in and met Richard and his partner, William Eckhardt—Rich
and Bill as we would later call them and as I still think of them. Rich
was a mountain of a guy with a friendly face and a quiet manner. Bill
was thin and of average height. He looked and dressed like a professor
of applied mathematics at the University of Chicago.
The interview paralleled the written test that I had received from
Rich’s C&D Commodities as part of the application process. Rich was
interested in my theory of the markets and why I thought money could
be made by trading. They were both very interested in the speciﬁcs of
my background. Looking back on it now, I was an aberration. Even
today very few people have the speciﬁc experience I had at 19 years of
age, at least as it related to the trading methods we were later taught.
In the fall of 1983 few people had personal computers; in fact, PCs
had just been invented. Yet for the previous two years I had been programming the Apple II computer as a part-time job after school. I programmed the computer to analyze what were then known as systems:
trading strategies with speciﬁc rules that deﬁned exactly when to buy
and sell stocks or commodities on the basis of their price movement.
During those two years I had written 30 or 40 different programs that
tested trading systems through the use of historical data to determine
how much money would have been made if those systems had been
used in various markets. I later realized that this was cutting-edge
research in 1983.
What had begun as an interesting after-school job evolved into a passion. I was working for a company called Harvard Investment Service
that was located in the kitchen of a small house in the town of Harvard,
Massachusetts, about 40 miles west of Boston. Harvard is the quintessential New England small town: apple orchards, a small library, a town
hall, and the town square. Harvard Investment Service consisted of just
three people: George Arndt (who owned the kitchen and the company

Introduction • xxiii

and told us what to do), my friend Tim Arnold, and me. Tim and I did
the grunt work.
George had been the ﬁrst one to interest me in trading. He had lent
me his personal copy of Reminiscences of a Stock Operator, Edwin
Lefèvre’s ﬁctional biography of the famous speculator Jesse Livermore.
I’m not sure whether it was Lefèvre’s ﬁne storytelling or Livermore’s
larger-than-life character, but after reading that book I was hooked. I
wanted to be a trader. I also believed that I could be a great trader, that
I would be a great trader. I carried that conﬁdence into the interview
with Rich and Bill as only a 19-year old could.
Analyzing trading systems turned out to be excellent preparatory work
for both the interview and the training sessions that would follow. I believe
that background was one of the reasons why I took to Rich and Bill’s methods faster and more conﬁdently than the other trainees and ultimately was
able to make more money for Rich than any of the other Turtles. From
the very start, I had more conﬁdence in both their approach and the concept of trading systematically than did any of the others.
That conﬁdence played an important role in Rich’s faith in my eventual success as well as in my ability to reach my trading potential. My
background enabled me to do what none of the other Turtles could:
follow the simple rules outlined in our two-week training class. The
fact that none of the other Turtles followed those rules that ﬁrst month
may seem strange, but I’ll save that story for later.

I was concerned at ﬁrst that I might be at a disadvantage because I had
not actually traded before. I believed my system-testing background might
provide enough of an edge to counteract that, but my lack of experience
was a primary concern. It was clear from the questions Rich and Bill
asked that the candidates were being interviewed to assess our raw intel-

xxiv • Introduction

lect and reasoning abilities. That did not surprise me, since one of the
questions on the preinterview questionnaire had been about our SAT
scores, and there had been many other questions that sought to assess our
mental capacity. What did surprise me was that they were as interested
in what I did not believe as in what I did believe as it related to trading.
I remember the actual moment during the interview when I became
convinced that I was going to get an offer. We were discussing my disbelief at how many people were sure that there was some secret philosopher’s stone that would allow one to predict the markets with uncanny
accuracy. I thought that there were far too many variables involved in
something as complex as the price of wheat or gold for any kind of real
prediction and that the people looking for the philosopher’s stone were
going to be disappointed.
As an example, I recounted a story George had told me about a glass
disk with many curved and straight lines on it that one could lay on a
chart so that the top and bottom of the price chart would magically hit
the lines as if the markets were responding to some secret order. They
seemed to respond well to the story, and at that point I thought, “I’m
going to get the position.”
I was right—about a few things. I did get the spot, and Rich and Bill
were testing for intelligence and aptitude. They wanted people who
shared the traits they believed were necessary for proﬁtable trading.
They were also being good scientists, experimenting by intentionally
building diversity into what would become known as the Turtle Class.
Members of the ﬁrst class included, among others, the following:
• A man who had a strong interest in gaming and games in
general. He also happened to be the editor of the Dungeon
Master’s Manual for the role-playing game Dungeons and
Dragons, which was all the rage in the early 1980s.

Introduction • xxv

• A man with a Ph.D. in linguistics from the University of
Chicago.
• A man who traded grains for Cargill and had been the
Massachusetts state chess champion while in school.
• A few people with trading backgrounds.
• An accountant.
• A professional blackjack and backgammon player.
Many of these individuals were among the brightest I had ever met.
Rich and Bill deﬁnitely had been screening for high intelligence,
with a particular emphasis on mathematical and analytical abilities.
Rich subsequently said in an interview that they were looking for
“extreme intelligence,” since they had so many applicants and could
afford to be picky. This characteristic described many, but not all, of
the Turtles. Surprisingly, I don’t think that our intelligence necessarily correlated with our eventual success or failure. Another common thread was a background in gaming theory and strategy, and a
good knowledge of probability mathematics as it related to games of
chance. It soon would become clear why they considered this experience relevant.

A few weeks after my interview, I received a phone call from Rich
telling me that I had been accepted into the training program. I must
not have appeared very excited because he later told me that I was the
only one of the accepted trainees who did not seem overwhelmed by
the news. He wasn’t even sure that I would show up for the class.
Rich told me that the training would be held during the last two
weeks of the year and that after this two-week session, we would begin

xxvi • Introduction

trading a small account. He also said that if we did well for an initial
trial period with that small account, he would give us each a $1 million trading account.
It may surprise some people that Rich thought he could teach a
group of traders in only two weeks. What surprises me now is that he
thought it would take that long. In fact, in the second year Rich and
Bill hired a new crop of Turtles and trained them in only one week.
The difﬁculty in trading lies not in the concepts but in the application.
It is relatively easy to learn what to do when trading. It is very difﬁcult
to apply those lessons in actual trading.
At the end of the trial trading period, which lasted one month, Rich
evaluated our performance. Some Turtles received the full $1 million
to trade, others were given smaller accounts, and still others were told
to keep trading with the original account size. Rich gave me a $2 million account, and for the duration of the Turtle program I continued
to trade the largest account for him.
In this book I will give you some of the reasons why after only one
month Rich was able to assess our relative abilities, what it was he was
looking for; and why he gave me a much larger account than he gave
the other Turtles. Rich found this ability early on in me and eventually in many of the others; it’s what I call the Way of the Turtle.
Before we get into the speciﬁcs of the Turtle Way, let me put things
in context by discussing trading in general terms; and provide some
insight on the psychological reasons why the Turtles were so proﬁtable
and why good traders are able to make money. The next two chapters
provide a foundation for Chapter Three where we will return to the
Turtle story and then dive into the details of the Turtle Way.

one
RISK JUNKIES
High risk, high reward: It takes balls of steel to play this game.
—Told to a friend before starting the Turtle program

eople often wonder what it is that makes someone a trader
rather than an investor. The distinction is often unclear
because the actions of many people who call themselves investors
are actually those of traders.
Investors are people who buy things for the long haul with the
idea that over a considerable period—many years—their investments will appreciate in value. They buy things: actual stuff. Warren Buffett is an investor. He buys companies. He doesn’t buy stock.
He buys what the stock represents: the company itself, with its management team, products, and market presence. He doesn’t care that
the stock market may not reﬂect the “correct” price for his companies. In fact, he relies on that to make his money. He buys companies when they are worth much more to him than the price at which
the stock market values them and sells companies when they are
worth much less to him than the price at which the stock market
values them. He makes a lot of money doing this because he’s very
good at it.

P

• 1 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

2 • Way of the Turtle

Traders do not buy physical things such as companies; they do not
buy grains, gold, or silver. They buy stocks, futures contracts, and
options. They do not care much about the quality of the management team, the outlook for oil consumption in the frigid Northeast,
or global coffee production. Traders care about price; essentially they
buy and sell risk.
In his informative and engaging book Against the Gods: The
Remarkable Story of Risk, Peter Bernstein discusses how markets
developed to allow the transfer of risk from one party to another.
This is indeed the reason ﬁnancial markets were created and a
function they continue to serve.
In today’s modern markets, companies can buy forward or futures
contracts for currencies that will insulate their business from the effects
of ﬂuctuations in currency prices on their foreign suppliers. Companies also can buy contracts to protect themselves from future increases
in the price of raw materials such as oil, copper, and aluminum.
The act of buying or selling futures contracts to offset business
risks caused by price changes in raw materials or ﬂuctuations in foreign currency exchange rates is known as hedging. Proper hedging
can make an enormous difference for companies that are sensitive
to the costs of raw goods such as oil. The airline industry, for example, is very sensitive to the cost of aviation fuel, which is tied to the
price of oil. When the price of oil rises, proﬁts drop unless ticket
prices are raised. Raising ticket prices may lower sales of tickets and
thus proﬁts. Keeping ticket prices the same will lower proﬁts as
costs rise because of oil price increases.
The solution is to hedge in the oil markets. Southwest Airlines
had been doing that for years, and when oil prices rose from $25
per barrel to more than $60, its costs did not increase substantially.

Risk Junkies • 3

In fact, it was so well hedged that even years after prices started to
go up, it was getting 85 percent of its oil at $26 per barrel.
It is no coincidence that Southwest Airlines has been one of the
most proﬁtable airlines over the last several years. Southwest’s executives realized that their business was to ﬂy people from place to
place, not to worry about the price of oil. They used the ﬁnancial
markets to insulate their bottom line from the effects of oil price
ﬂuctuations. They were smart.
Who sells futures contracts to companies like Southwest that
want to hedge their business risk? Traders do.

Traders Trade Risk
Traders deal in risk. There are many types of risk, and for each type
of risk there is a corresponding type of trader. For the purposes of
this book, we divide all those smaller risk categories into two major
groups: liquidity risk and price risk.
Many traders—perhaps most of them—are very short-term operators who trade in what is known as liquidity risk. This refers to the
risk that a trader will not be able to buy or sell: There is no buyer
when you want to sell an asset or no seller when you want to buy
an asset. Most people are familiar with the term liquidity as it
applies to ﬁnance in the context of the term liquid assets. Liquid
assets are assets that can be turned into cash readily and quickly.
Cash in the bank is extremely liquid, stock in a widely traded company is relatively liquid, and a piece of land is illiquid.
Suppose that you want to buy stock XYZ and that XYZ last traded
at $28.50. If you look for a price quote for XYZ, you will see two
prices: the bid and the ask. For this example, let’s say you get a

4 • Way of the Turtle

quote on XYZ as $28.50 bid and $28.55 ask. This quote indicates
that if you wanted to buy, you would have to pay $28.55, but if you
wanted to sell, you would get only $28.50 for your XYZ stock. The
difference between these two prices is known as the spread. Traders
who trade liquidity risk often are referred to as scalpers or market
makers. They make their money off the spread.
A variant of this kind of trading is called arbitrage. This entails
trading the liquidity of one market for the liquidity of another. Arbitrage traders may buy crude oil in London and sell crude oil in New
York, or they may buy a basket of stocks and sell index futures that
represent a similar basket of stocks.
Price risk refers to the possibility that prices will move signiﬁcantly
up or down. A farmer would be concerned about rising oil prices
because the cost of fertilizer and fuel for tractors would increase. Farmers also worry that prices for their produce (wheat, corn, soybeans, etc.)
may drop so low that they will not make a proﬁt when they sell their
crops. Airline management is concerned that the cost of oil may rise
and interest rates may go up, raising airplane ﬁnancing costs.
Hedgers focus on getting rid of price risk by transferring the risk
to traders who deal in price risk. Traders who jump on price risk
are known as speculators or position traders. Speculators make
money by buying and then selling later if the price goes up or by
selling ﬁrst and then buying back later when the price goes down—
what is known as going short.

Traders, Speculators, and Scalpers—Oh, My
Markets are groups of traders that interact to buy and sell. Some of
the traders are short-term scalpers who are only trying to make the

Risk Junkies • 5

tiny spread between bid and ask over and over again; others are
speculators who are trying to proﬁt from changes in prices; yet others are companies trying to hedge their risks. Each category is rife
with experienced traders who know their jobs well, along with
novices. Let’s examine a set of trades to illustrate how different
traders operate.
ACME Corporation is trying to hedge the risk of rising costs at its
British research laboratory by buying 10 contracts of British pounds
on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME). ACME is at risk
because the British pound has been rising and costs at the research
laboratory are paid in British pounds. A rise in the exchange rate
between the British pound and the dollar will increase the costs for
its research facility. Hedging that risk by purchasing 10 British pound
contracts will protect it from a rise in the exchange rate because the
proﬁts on the futures contracts will offset the increased costs that result
from the change in the exchange rate that occurs when the British
pound rises against the dollar. ACME buys the contracts for $1.8452
from a Chicago ﬂoor trader, Sam, who trades as a scalper.
The actual transaction is executed by ACME’s broker, MAN
Financial, which has employees on the ﬂoor. Some of those
employees are phone clerks at a bank of desks that surround the
trading ﬂoor, and others are traders in the British pound trading
pits who execute trades for MAN. Runners take the orders from the
phone desk to the trader in the pits, where that trader executes the
trade with Sam. For large orders or during fast markets, the trader
representing MAN on the ﬂoor may use hand signals to receive buy
and sell orders from MAN’s phone clerks.
Futures contracts are deﬁned by the exchange on which they are
traded in a document known as a contract speciﬁcation. These doc-

6 • Way of the Turtle

uments deﬁne the quantity, the type of goods, and in some cases
the quality of a particular commodity. In the past, the size of a contract was based on the quantity that would ﬁt into a single railroad
car: 5,000 bushels for grains, 112,000 pounds for sugar, 1,000 barrels for oil, and so on. For this reason, contracts sometimes are
referred to as cars.
Trading takes place in units of a single contract: You cannot buy
or sell less than one contract. The exchange’s contract speciﬁcation also deﬁnes the minimum price ﬂuctuation. This is referred
to in the industry as a tick or minimum tick.
A contract for British pounds is deﬁned by the CME to be 62,500
British pounds, and the minimum tick is a hundredth of a cent, or
$0.0001. Thus, each tick of price movement is worth $6.25. This
means that Sam stands to make $62.50 for every tick in the spread
because he sold 10 contracts. Since the spread at the time he sold
the contracts to ACME was two ticks wide at $1.8450 bid and
$1.8452 ask, Sam will try to buy 10 contracts at the other side of the
spread at $1.8450 immediately. If he buys successfully at $1.8450,
this will represent a proﬁt of two ticks, or just over $100. Sam buys
his 10 contracts from a large speculator, Mr. Ice, who is trying to
accumulate a position betting on the price going down; this is known
as a short position. Mr. Ice may hold those contracts for 10 days or
10 months, depending on how the market moves after this purchase.
So, there are three types of traders involved in this transaction:
• The hedger: ACME Corporation’s trader in the hedging
department, who wants to eliminate the price risk of
currency ﬂuctuation and hedges by offsetting that risk in the
market

Risk Junkies • 7

• The scalper: Sam, the ﬂoor trader, who trades liquidity risk
and quickly trades with the hedger, hoping to earn the
spread
• The speculator: Mr. Ice, who ultimately assumes the
original “price risk” that ACME is trying to eliminate and is
betting that the price will go down over the next few days or
weeks

Panic in the Pits
Let’s change the scenario slightly to illustrate the mechanisms
behind price movement. Imagine that before Sam is able to unload
his 10 contract short position by purchasing them back, a broker
who works for Calyon Financial starts buying up contracts at the
$1.8452 ask price. That broker purchases so many contracts that all
the ﬂoor traders start to get nervous.
Although some of the ﬂoor traders may have long positions, many
of them already may be short 10, 20, or even 100 contracts; this
means that they will lose money if the price goes up. Since Calyon
represents many large speculators and hedge funds, its buying activity is particularly worrisome. “How many more contracts is Calyon
trying to buy?” the ﬂoor scalpers ask. “Who is behind the order?” “Is
this just a small part of a much larger order?”
If you were a ﬂoor trader who already had sold 20 contracts short,
you might be getting nervous. Suppose Calyon was trying to buy
500 or 1,000 contracts. That might bring the price up as high as
$1.8460 or $1.8470. You deﬁnitely would not want to sell any more
contracts at $1.8452. You might be willing to sell some at $1.8453
or $1.8455, but maybe you would be looking to get out of your con-
