
Model Analysis

123

run out of reserves with which to defend it within a matter of days. On July 2, 1997, the baht peg
to the US dollar was scrapped and the currency allowed to ﬂoat freely. It promptly collapsed
in value, falling by some 10% on that day alone.
6.1.3 Phase III: The Liquidity Rally
Theory
A pegged currency that is allowed to ﬂoat freely usually falls sharply for at least the ﬁrst
six months after the free ﬂoat is put in place, overshooting any idea of fair value. The rule is
the longer a central bank tries to defend it, the further the currency falls in the end. Currency
market participants who earlier dismissed the idea of currency risk have to chase the market
to put belated hedges in place. In addition, at the macroeconomic level inﬂation rises as the
pass-through effect to the real economy of maxi-devaluation. The signal that the devaluation is
at an end is when that inﬂation rate peaks. At that time, portfolio money starts to ﬂow back into
the country, attracted by high nominal interest rates. This in turn allows the local currency to
recover potentially signiﬁcant ground. In line with this, the trade account improves signiﬁcantly
as import demand collapses in the wake of economic contraction. Thus a liquidity-based rally
in local asset markets and the local currency is created through lower interest rates and renewed
portfolio inﬂows. This is different from Phase IV, which sees a fundamentally-based rally, as
demand-side indicators continue to deteriorate during this period.
Practice
The collapse of the Thai baht extended well beyond levels seen on the ﬁrst day of “ﬂotation”.
Having been around THB25 to the US dollar before the “ﬂotation” (devaluation), it subsequently fell to a low of 56.3 in the coming months, a decline in value of over 40%. In the case
of the Indonesian rupiah, the fall was even more spectacular, plunging from IDR2,300 to the
dollar to a low of 17,000, a devaluation of 85%! Asian countries generally tightened monetary
policy in order to temper the threat of imported inﬂation from currency devaluations and in line
with the IMF’s initial call for tightening of both ﬁscal and monetary policy. Policy tightening
in the face of maxi-devaluation of the currency tends to cause a slowdown in the economy to
become a recession (if not a depression!), and in the cases of Thailand and Indonesia that is
indeed what happened. In 1998, the Thai economy contracted 9.5%, while that of Indonesia
contracted 13.2%. Whatever the merits of these policies, which were ostensibly aimed at providing long-term economic stability, there is no question that in the short term they severely
exacerbated the regional economic slowdown. At street level, millions were forced into poverty.
The World Bank estimated that half of Indonesia was living in a state of absolute poverty in
1998, deﬁned as earning less than USD1 a day. Unemployment levels skyrocketed. Retail
prices rose sharply to offset the free-falling currency in the likes of Indonesia, the Philippines
and Thailand. Interest rates were tightened to offset this, compounding the misery.
In the wake of this, several leading commentators were heavily critical of the IMF policy
response to the Asian crisis, saying the combination of tight ﬁscal and monetary policy represented a worse cure than the disease itself. While I have some sympathy with this view,
particularly as public policy adjustment is not necessarily the appropriate policy response to
private sector imbalance (too many Asian companies borrowing too much in dollars and speculating too much in their own stock and property markets), this still does not answer the question

124

Currency Strategy

of how one stops a currency from free-falling. This is a key consideration bearing in mind that
the collapse of the rupiah resulted in the bankruptcy of almost every company in Indonesia.
Whether you favoured the argument of the IMF’s Herbert Neiss or Harvard’s Jeffrey Sachs, it
is pretty irrelevant. By then, the damage was already done; the battle had already been lost.
By then, it was a question only of damage limitation.
The example of the Brazilian crisis, however, suggests some reﬁnements to the standard IMF
policy response have been considered — not least at the IMF — in the wake of the Asian crisis.
When the Brazilian real devalued in January 1999 and subsequently fell to a low of 2.2200
to the dollar from its 1.20 band level, many forecast 2.50 or even 3.00 and a similar type of
recession to that Asia had experienced. In reality, neither of those two possibilities happened.
Clearly, the appointment of Arminio Fraga as the new head of the Brazilian central bank was an
important stabilizing measure, as Fraga was a widely respected ﬁgure in the ﬁnancial markets.
The maintenance of trade ﬁnance for Brazil was also a crucial difference.
Whatever the differences, the similarities between the crises in Asia and Brazil — and also
with Mexico, Russia and Turkey — are clear. Most notably within this was the fact that once
inﬂation peaked so too did local interest rates, allowing for a substantial rally in asset markets
and the currencies themselves. In Indonesia, for example, this meant interest rates coming
down from around 75–80% and the dollar–rupiah exchange rate falling back from around
17,000 to around 6500. Equally, in Thailand, the dollar–Thai baht exchange rate fell back from
56 to around 35. In the case of Brazil, the dollar–Brazilian real exchange rate fell back from
2.22 to 1.63. Fundamentally, during this period, the trade accounts in many Asian countries
swung from signiﬁcant deﬁcits to massive trade and current account surpluses.

6.1.4 Phase IV: The Economy Hits Bottom
Theory
While Phase III remains ongoing, the economic patient is still showing no major sign of
recovery. Inﬂation peaks, which in turn allows domestic interest rates to peak. The trade
account swings hugely, in many cases from a deﬁcit to a surplus as import demand collapses.
This accelerates the recovery in liquidity, helping to force down interest rates and thus causing
the liquidity-based rally which we talked about earlier. Eventually, the trade surplus, low interest
rates and basing effects help support the economy. Put bluntly, the economy hits bottom and
a period of stabilization ensues.
Readers should note that economic stabilization does not mean the same as recovery, in the
same way that hitting the ground after a fall from some height does not entail recovery (indeed,
if the height is sufﬁcient there is unlikely to be any recovery!). Both processes usually entail
a prolongation of pain, but at least the pain is not getting worse. Thankfully, economies are
not as frail as the human body. They can indeed fall from great heights, smack down hard on
the concrete with a sickening thud and yet still recover; the timing of that recovery depending
crucially on the extent of the fall.
At the microeconomic level, companies are still continuing the process of de-stocking of
inventory. Consumers remain very cautious and retail prices continue to decline to levels aimed
at causing them to buy. That said, the fall in interest rates eventually provides crucial support
for cash-strapped companies and banks. These hastily complete their inventory de-stocking
process, switching most of that supply to export markets unaffected by the crisis, and start the
process of re-stocking. At the international level, the reality of the economy hitting bottom, as

Model Analysis

125

evidenced by declining contractions in economic indicators, leads to the expectation of Phase V,
economic recovery. Phase IV is not plain sailing for local currencies however. As domestic
economies stabilize, so do imports. Indeed, year-on-year basing effects accelerate that process.
Thus, what we usually see in Phase IV is those trade and current account surpluses peaking on
a monthly basis. During Phase III and the initial part of Phase IV, trade ﬂows are actually more
important than capital ﬂows — as most offshore investors have already left by then, taking their
capital with them. Reduced trade surpluses thus have a greater effect on market movements
than would otherwise be the case, serving to weaken the local currencies.
Practice
During Phase III, Asian currencies appreciated on the back of the liquidity-based rally.
However, during Phase IV, trade and current account surpluses peak as import demand hits
bottom. This is of course good news for the domestic economy, however it temporarily reduces
the beneﬁcial liquidity effect on local assets and local currencies. For this very reason, just as
Asian economies bottomed around the turn of 1998/99, so Asian currencies started to weaken
again, giving back some of the ground they had gained during the second half of 1998. More
speciﬁcally, the Thai baht, which had risen to a high against the US dollar of THB35.65, fell
back to around 38–39. The same kind of thing happened to the Indonesian rupiah, the Philippine
peso and the Singapore dollar. The Malaysian ringgit was pegged to the dollar on September 1,
1998 at 3.80, hence it did not experience this renewed setback, nor for that matter did it experience the fundamental recovery which most Asian currencies subsequently enjoyed. In the
case of Brazil, Phases III and IV happened much more quickly, partly because Brazil, unlike
in Asia, was alone in its devaluation and not affected by region-wide devaluation. In addition,
it continued to beneﬁt from strong demand for its exports. Finally, at the corporate level, there
was not nearly the same degree of structural dislocation, as Brazilian corporates were by then
well aware of what had happened to their Thai and Indonesian counterparts and had already
begun to hedge external liabilities long before the real’s ﬁnal devaluation in January 1999.
The case of Russia is special for many reasons, not least because several key elements of the
Russian government were not informed of the decision to devalue the rouble and default on
the domestic debt market until the actual announcement was made. In addition, the size of
the black market economy relative to the real economy, and the seemingly persistent state of
chaos in the Russian government, has somewhat distorted price and economic development
as anticipated by the model. Nonetheless, the key aspects of the model — the turnaround in
the trade account, the defeat of inﬂation, the liquidity-based rally, still held true. So Phase IV
sees a decidedly more bumpy ride for emerging market currencies than Phase III. Yet, economic stabilization, all else being equal, gradually becomes economic recovery — the person
eventually picks him/herself off the ﬂoor after lying there in pain after the fall.
6.1.5 Phase V: The Fundamental Rally
Theory
What does economic recovery mean and how is it different from mere “stabilization”? It is the
equivalent of the patient on the one hand getting back his/her vital signs but still remaining
essentially horizontal, and on the other hand wandering around the ward. There is a clear
difference! In economic terms, recovery means real economic indicators such as retail sales,
@Team-FLY

126

Currency Strategy

industrial output and imports are no longer contracting, but actually rising. In particular, as
imports start rising, ﬁrst on a year-on-year basis due to basing effects and then on a month-onmonth basis, this is the ﬁrst real sign of fundamental recovery. At street level, more practically,
the ﬁrst sign of recovery is people back in the shops and retail prices making a bottom.
During Phases III and IV, prices fall until such time as consumers are tempted back by bargain
basement prices. Phase V is when that temptation produces results. The elimination of corporate
de-stocking which had hitherto been a drag on growth, coupled with lower interest rates and
looser ﬁscal policy which provide support for weak domestic demand, help boost economic
growth. Corporate re-stocking of inventories gives a further lift to that growth take off. In
terms of the trade balance, inventory re-stocking accelerates the recovery in imports, in turn
accelerating the pullback in monthly recorded trade surpluses. However, by this time, capital
ﬂows have begun to offset and then exceed trade ﬂows as investment returns to the region.
Rising real economic indicators attract rising capital inﬂows, helping once again to produce a
rally in the local currency. However, unlike in Phase III, this time the rally is fundamentallybased rather than just liquidity-based.
Practice
Fundamental rally was indeed the driving force for Asian currency strength in the second
quarter of 1999. As the Asian economies showed increasing signs of recovery, so capital
inﬂows resumed, more than offsetting renewed deterioration in their trade and current account
balances. Asian currencies maintained their strength also for much of the third quarter before
concerns over Y2K and speciﬁc microeconomic concerns in Korea and Thailand over Daewoo
and Krung Thai Bank caused a retracement. In addition to these speciﬁc concerns, at the global
level the US Federal Reserve changed the rules of the game. At its June 30 meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee, the US central bank raised interest rates for the ﬁrst time
since its March 25, 1997 meeting. The Fed hiked the Fed funds’ target rate by 25 basis points
to 5.00% from 4.75%, however it was not so much the degree of the move as what that move
itself signiﬁed — the end of monetary easing.
Candidly, the problem with any economic model is that it does not, indeed cannot, take
account of what we call “event risk”. That is to say, it cannot by deﬁnition allow for events
which occur unexpectedly and which can and often do cause temporary or even extended
reversals in market sentiment. The CEMC model is no different in this. Its aim is to provide a
framework for anticipating how emerging market currencies might perform, based on the phase
in which they ﬁnd themselves, all other factors being equal. Of course, in reality all factors are
frequently not equal and event risk can play a part in distorting price action. A model aimed at
targeting the various phases of emerging market currency crises cannot include external factors
such as a change in Fed policy. That said, such external factors or event risk notwithstanding,
CEMC is still a robust model in providing a predictive framework for emerging market pegged
currencies.
This was not aimed at pegged currencies deliberately, but rather as a result of trying to
provide an explanation for the Asian crisis and in turn link it to other emerging market currency
crises — which also happened to involve currency pegs. The policy of pegging their currencies
to the US dollar had provided substantial stability for the likes of Mexico, Asia, Brazil, Russia
or Turkey. This had attracted signiﬁcant capital inﬂows. In all cases however, those capital
inﬂows caused real exchange rate appreciation and led to trade balance deterioration. The
degree of that real exchange rate appreciation was much more signiﬁcant in a ﬁxed or pegged

Model Analysis

127

exchange rate regime. Equally, pegged currencies that experienced the greatest degree of
real exchange rate appreciation also had the greatest degree of trade and current account
deterioration. The one major exception was China, which in 1994–1995 experienced a real
depreciation, thus cushioning the current account balance (a signiﬁcant surplus) from the aftereffects of the Asian crisis in 1997–1998. By early 1997, it was clear there were overvaluation
concerns over several Asian currencies and that such overvaluation had been a major factor
in current account deterioration. There were two possible macroeconomic responses. Either
domestic prices collapsed to reduce the lost trade competitiveness as reﬂected by current
account deterioration or the currency experienced a real depreciation to offset the previous
appreciation. In the end, the currency took most of the burden of adjustment, and in spectacular
fashion.
The lesson from this is that the type of exchange rate regime has a major inﬂuence on the real
exchange rate performance and thus in turn on the trade balance. Indeed, the type of exchange
rate regime coupled with an event — such as the US dollar’s real exchange rate appreciation —
led to a series of events. While the degree of eventual market reaction (the Asian currency
crisis) could not have been and generally was not predicted, the series of events itself was
predictable. For this very reason, we can deduce two things:

r The Asian currency crisis happened because of fundamental imbalances created by the
exchange rate regime.

r A model can be created to reﬂect this series of events for the purpose of looking at other
emerging and developed market currencies.
Thus, CEMC was created and can be used to watch the progress of the likes of Turkey, Argentina
and Venezuela going forward.
Floating exchange rate regimes behave differently as the transmission mechanism from the
exchange rate regime through the real exchange rate to the trade balance is also different. As
an example, let’s look again at the Polish zloty during 2001. During the ﬁrst half of 2001,
the zloty was one of the top performing currencies in the world against both the Euro and
the dollar, supported by heavy capital inﬂows. Then, in early July 2001, it collapsed. What
happened? In April 2000, the National Bank of Poland had made one of its smartest decisions,
scrapping the zloty’s crawl and peg regime and making the currency fully ﬂoating. Since the
zloty was a ﬂoating currency how could it collapse? Economic theory suggests a ﬂoating
currency will reﬂect economic deterioration gradually, thus militating against the worst effects
of that deterioration. Economic theory suggests that economic deterioration through a widening
current account deﬁcit should lead to gradual real exchange rate depreciation in order to restore
equilibrium. Yet, there is nothing gradual about a freely ﬂoating currency losing almost 10%
of its value in a couple of days, as happened with the Polish zloty. Similarly, in the autumn of
1998 as noted earlier, the dollar–yen exchange rate collapsed from 135 to 114 in less than two
days. So, what happened?
To answer this question, we have to refer back to the speculative cycle of exchange rates
we ﬁrst looked at in Chapter 2, which focuses speciﬁcally on speculative ﬂow to explain moves
and trends in freely ﬂoating exchange rates. To recap, the central idea behind this is that the
longer an exchange rate trend develops, the inherently more speculative in nature it becomes.
Eventually, speculative buying (selling) is overwhelmed by fundamental selling (buying) and
the exchange rate trend reverses. Sometimes, this reversal is sudden and dramatic, as in the
cases of the Polish zloty and the Japanese yen. Somewhat helpfully, ahead of that reversal,
option volatility tends to start rising, which currency market practitioners should view as a

128

Currency Strategy

warning of the reversal to come. This is indeed what happened with the zloty and the yen.
We looked at this phenomenon brieﬂy in Chapter 2. Here, in the context of a chapter devoted
speciﬁcally to exchange rate models, we do so in considerably more detail. While this can be
applied to developed market currencies, there are speciﬁc considerations with these such as
“safe haven” and “reserve currency” status, which distort all models. This particular model
is particularly effective with freely ﬂoating emerging market currencies, given how capital
inﬂows inﬂuence nominal and real interest rates. In the case of the CEMC model, we used
the example of Thailand to demonstrate it in practice. With the freely ﬂoating exchange rate
model, specializing in emerging markets, we use the example of Poland.

6.2 A MODEL FOR FREELY FLOATING EXCHANGE RATES
6.2.1 Phase I: Capital Inﬂows and Real Exchange Rate Appreciation
Theory
Under a pegged exchange rate, capital ﬂows are attracted by the perception of exchange
rate stability created by the peg itself. Conversely, under freely ﬂoating exchange rates, such
capital ﬂows are attracted by the prospect of high returns, either of income or capital gain.
Fundamental ﬂows are attracted to a currency, attracted both by currency and underlying asset
market-related valuation considerations. Such capital inﬂows force the currency to appreciate
and simultaneously force nominal interest rates lower. As a result, during this period, the
correlation between the asset markets and the currency increases. Capital ﬂows lead to both
nominal and real exchange rate appreciation.
Practice
During much of 2000, the National Bank of Poland tightened monetary policy by hiking interest
rates to squash inﬂation. Towards the end of that year, with the NBP’s 28-day intervention rate
having peaked at around 19%, nominal and real interest rates peaked, as did inﬂation. The result
was irresistible to ﬁxed income investors, attracted both by extremely high interest yields and
the prospect of capital gains. As the NBP began cautiously to relax its monetary policy, this
triggered an increasing tide of capital inﬂows. Asset managers reduced or even eliminated
their currency hedges. Dedicated emerging market investors raised their asset allocation in
Polish bonds, while cross-over investors increased their exposure to what was an off-index
investment.
6.2.2 Phase II: Speculators Join the Crowd — The Local Currency Continues to Rally
Theory
Most speculators, though admittedly not all, are trend-followers. Thus, the longer the fundamental trend continues, the more trend-following speculators are attracted to what seems
risk-free proﬁt and thus ultimately the more speculative the trend becomes. As the exchange
rate continues to appreciate, nominal interest rates to decline and capital inﬂows to continue,
so the other side of the balance of payments starts to deteriorate. The balance of payments
must balance and therefore including errors and omissions, a rising capital account surplus
must be offset by a widening current account deﬁcit. Equally, real exchange rate appreciation

Model Analysis

129

must lead to external balance deterioration. For now, the deterioration is not sufﬁcient to cause
concern among fundamental investors and is more than offset by speculative inﬂows, thus the
trend becomes self-fulﬁlling as more and more speculators join the trend.
Practice
From October 2000 through March 2001, Polish bonds roared higher, beneﬁting from cuts in
ofﬁcial policy interest rates in response to clear signs of slowing economic activity within the
Polish economy. The dollar–Polish zloty exchange rate, which at one time had been as high as
4.75 extended its downward trend, at one point breaking through the 4.00 barrier. More and
