
I

Morning star-a major bottom reversal pattern formed by three candlesticks. The first is a long black real body, the second is a small real
body (white or black) which gaps lower to form a star, the third is a
white candlestick that closes well into the first session's black real
body.

Morning Star

Morning doji star-the same as a morning star except the middle candlestick is a doji instead of a small real body. Because there is a doji in
this pattern it is considered more bullish than the regular morning
star.
Morning Doji Star

Morning attack-the Japanese expression for a large buy or sell order on
the opening that is designed to significantly move the market.
Night attack-the Japanese expression for a large order placed at the close
to try to affect the market.
On-neck line-a black candlestick in a downtrend is followed by a small
white candlestick whose close is near the low of the session of the
black candlestick. It is a bearish continuation pattern. The market
should continue to move lower after the white candlestick's low is
broken. Compare to an in-neck line, a thrusting line, and a piercing
pattern.
Petrifying pattern-another name for the harami cross.
Piercing pattern-a bottom reversal signal. In a downtrend, a long black
candlestick is followed by a gap lower during the next session. This

on-~eck
Line

pattern

296

Glossary A: Candlestick Terms and Visual Dictionary

session finishes as a strong white candlestick which closes move than
halfway into the prior black candlestick's real body. Compare to the
on-neck line, the in-neck line, and the thrusting line.
Rain drop-see "Star."

Real body-the thick part of the candlestick line. It is defined by the closing and opening prices of the session. When the close is higher than
the open, the real body is white (or empty). A black (or filled in) real
body is when the close is lower than the opening. See the illustration
under "Candlestick lines and charts."
Rickshaw man-see "Long-legged doji. "
Rising three methods-see "Three methods."
Separating lines-when, in an uptrend (downtrend) the market opens at
the same opening as the previous session's opposite color candlestick
and then closes higher (lower). The prior trend should resume after
this line.
Separating Lines
Bullish

Bearish

Shadows-the thin lines above and below the real body of the candlestick
line. They represent the extremes of the day. The lower shadow is
the line on the bottom of the real body. The bottom of the lower
shadow is the low of the session. The upper shadow is the line on
top of the real body. The top of the upper shadow is the high of the
session. See the illustration under "Candlestick lines and charts."
Shaven bottom-a candlestick with no lower shadow.
Shaven head-a candlestick with no upper shadow.
Shooting Star

l--"-r
L2

Shooting star-a candlestick with a long upper shadow with little, or no
lower shadow, and a small real body near the lows of the session that
arises after an uptrend. It is a bearish candlestick signal in an
uptrend.
Side-by-side white lines-two consecutive white candlesticks which have
the same open and whose real bodies are about the same size. In an
uptrend, if these side-by-side white lines gap higher, it is a bullish
continuation pattern. In a downtrend, these side-by-side white lines

Glossary A: Candlestick Terms and Visual Dictionary

297

gapping lower are bearish since they are viewed as temporary short
covering. Gapping side-by-side lines are very rare.
Side by Side White Lines

I I Bullish
Spinning top-a candlestick with a small real body.
Stalled pattern-a small white real body which is either above the prior
long white real body or near its top. Sometimes there is a short white
candlestick before the long white one. At the emergence of the stalled
pattern, the market's rally should stall. Also called a deliberation pattern.
Star-a small real body (i.e., a spinning top) which gaps away from the
previous long real body. A star reflects a diminution of the force of
the trend preceding the star. Sometimes a star following a long black
line in a downtrend is called a rain drop.
Stars

Tasuki gaps-there are downside and upside tasuki gaps. The downside
tasuki gap is formed when, in a declining market, a black real body
gaps lower. This candlestick is followed by a white candlestick, of
about the same size, which opens in the black session's real body and
then closes above the black's real body. It is a bearish continuation
pattern. The upside tasuki gap is a bullish continuation pattern. It is
formed when a white candlestick which gaps higher is followed by a
black candlestick of about the same size which opens within the
white real body and closes under the white's real body. Tasuki gaps
Tasuki Gaps
are rare.

Stalled Pattern

0

298

Glossary A: Candlestick Terms and Visual Dictionary

Three Buddha patterns-A three Buddha top is the same as the Western
head and shoulders top. In Japanese terms, the three Buddha top is
a three mountain top in which the central mountain is the tallest. An
inverted three Buddha is the same as the Western inverted head and
shoulders. In Japanese terminology, it is a three river bottom in
which the middle river is the longest.
Three Buddha

-

Three Crows

'I,!

Three crows-three relatively long consecutive black candlesticks which
close near or on their lows. A top reversal at a high price level or after
an extended rally.
Three gaps-if a bearish (bullish) candlestick indicator appears after three
gaps higher (three gaps lower), buying force (selling pressure) should
be exhausted.
Three methods-there are two types. The first is the falling three methods
which is a bearish continuation pattern. It is comprised of five lines.
A long black real body is followed by three small, usually white, real
bodies which hold within the first session's range. Then a black candlestick closes at a new low for the move. The second is the rising
three methods which is a bullish continuation pattern. A tall white
candlestick preceded three small, usually black, real bodies that hold
within the white candlestick's range. The fifth line of this pattern is a
strong white candlestick that closes at a new high for the move.
Three Methods

/

Falling ,

Rising

I

Three mountain top-a longer-term topping pattern in which prices stall
at, or near, the same highs. It is also sometimes viewed as three
waves up.
Three Mountain T OP

Glossary A: Candlestick Terms and Visual Dictionary

Three river bottom-when the market hits a bottom area three times.
When the peak of the intervening valleys is exceeded by a white candlestick or with a gap it is confirmation that a bottom has been put in
place.
Three River Bottom

Three white or three advancing soldiers-this is a group of three white candlesticks with consecutively higher closes (with each of the closes
near the highs of the session). These three white candlesticks presage
more strength if they appear after a period of stable prices and at a
low price area.
Three White Soldiers

Thrusting line-a white candlestick which closes in the prior black real
body, but still under the middle of the prior session's real body. The
thrusting line is stronger than an in-neck line, but not as strong as a
piercing line. In a downtrend, the thrusting line is viewed as bearish
(unless two of these patterns appear within a few days of each other).
As part of a rising market it is considered bullish.
Thrusting Line

Towers-there is a tower top and tower bottom. The tower top, a top
reversal formation, is comprised of a tall white candlestick followed
by congestion and then one or more long black candlesticks. It is a
pattern which looks like it has towers on both sides of the congestion
Towers
TOP

Bottom

299

300

Glossary A: Candlestick Terms and Visual Dictionary

band. A tower bottom is a bottom reversal pattern. A long black candlestick is followed by lateral action. Then the market explodes to the
upside via one or more long white candlesticks.
Tri-star-three dojis that have the same formation as a morning or
evening star pattern. An extraordinarily rare pattern and a major
reversal signal.
Tweezers top and bottom-when the same highs or lows are tested the next
session or within a few sessions. They are minor reversal signals that
take on extra importance if the two candlesticks that comprise the
tweezers pattern also form another candlestick indicator. For example, if both session's of a harami cross have the same high it could be
an important top reversal since there would be a tweezers top and a
bearish harami cross made by the same two candlestick lines.
Tops
I

Unique Three
River Bottom

I

Tweezers

Bottoms
I

Unique three river bottom-a rare type of bottom comprised of three lines.
The first is a long black real body, the second is a hammer like session with a black real body which makes a new low, and the third
candlestick is a small real body.
I Upper shadow-see "Shadows."
Upside gap tasuki-see "Tasuki gaps. "

upside Gap
T w o Crows

Upside gap two crows-a three candlestick pattern. The first line is a long
white candlestick which is followed by a black real body that gaps
higher. The third session is another black real body which opens
above the second session's open and closes under the second session's close. It is a top reversal signal.
Window-the same as a Western gap. Windows are continuation patterns. When the market rallies and opens a window, there should be
a pullback to that window. The window should be support. If a winWindows

I,

U

In an Uptrend

In a Downtrend

Glossary A: Candlestick Terms and Visual Dictionary

dow opens in a selloff, there should be a rally to the window. The
window should be resistance. The Japanese expression is that "the
market goes to the window."
Yin and yang-the Chinese name of the black (yin) and white (yang) candlesticks.

301

GLOSSARY B
AMERICAN
TECHNICAL TERMS
This glossary clarifies the Western technical terms used in this book.
It is not meant to be comprehensive or detailed because this book's focus
is on Japanese candlesticks and not Western technical tools.
Bar chart-a graphic representation of price activity. The high and low of
the session define the top and bottom of a vertical line. The close for
the period is marked with a short horizontal bar attached to the right
of the vertical line. The open is marked with a short horizontal bar
attached to the left of the vertical line. Price is in on the vertical scale;
time is on the horizontal scale.
Blow-offs-a top or bottom reversal. Blow-offs occur after an extended
move. Prices, usually with very high volume, sharply and quickly
thrust strongly in the direction of the preceding trend. If the market
reverses after this action, it is a blow-off.
Breakaway gap-when prices gap away from a significant technical area
(i.e., a trendline or a congestion zone).
Breakout-overcoming a resistance or support level.
Change of polarity-when old support converts to new resistance or when
old resistance converts to new support.
Confirmation-when more than one indicator substantiates the action of
another.
Congestion zone or band-a period of lateral price action within a relatively
narrow price band.
Consolidation-the same as a congestion zone. Consolidation, however,
has the implication that the prior trend should resume.

304

Glossary B: American Technical Terms

Continuation patterns-a pattern whose implications are for a continuation
of the prior trend. A flag, for instance, is a continuation pattern.
Crossover-when the faster indicator crosses above (bullish crossover) or
below (bearish crossover) the slower indicator. For example, if a fiveday moving average crosses under a 13-day moving average it is a
bearish crossover.
Divergence-when related technical indicators fail to confirm a price
move. For instance, if prices reach new highs and stochastics do not,
this is a negative divergence and is bearish. If prices establish new
lows and stochastics do not, this is a positive divergence and is bullish.
Downgap-when prices gap lower.
Downtrend-a market that is trending lower as shown by a series of
lower highs and/or lower lows.
Double bottom-price action that resembles the letter W in which price
declines twice stop at, or near, the same lows.
Double top-price action that resembles a M in which price rallies twice
stop at, or near, the same highs.
Elliott Wave-a system of analyzing and forecasting price movements
based on the works of R. N. Elliott. The main theory is that prices
have five waves in the direction of the main trend followed by three
corrective waves.
Exponential moving average-a moving average that is exponentially
weighted.
Fibonacci-Italian mathematician who formulated a series of numbers
based on adding the prior two numbers. Popular Fibonacci ratios
used by technicians include (rounding off) 38%, 50%, and 62%.
Flag or pennant-a continuation formation comprised of a sharp price
move followed by a brief consolidation area. These are continuation
patterns.
Filling in the gap-when prices go into the price vacuum left by a gap.
Gaps-a price void (i.e., no trading) from one price area to another.
Historical volatility-a calculation that provides an expected range of
prices over a specified time. It is based on price changes in the underlying contract.
Implied volatility-the market's forecast of future volatility levels.
Inside session-when the entire session's high-low range is within the
prior session's range.

Glossary B: American Technical Terms

Intra-day-any period shorter than daily. Thus, a 60-minute intra-day
chart is based on the high, low, open and close on an hourly basis.
Islands-a formation at the extremes of the market when prices gap in
the direction of the prior trend. Prices then stay there for one or more
days, and then gaps in the opposite direction. Prices are thus surrounded by gaps which leaves them isolated like an island.
Locals-traders on the floor in the futures markets who trade for their
own account.
Market Profile@-astatistical distribution of prices over specific time intervals (usually 30 minutes).
Momentum-the velocity of a price move. It compares the most recent
close to the close a specific number of period's ago.
Moving average convergence-divergence (MACD) oscillator-a combination of
three exponentially smoothed moving averages.
Neckline-a line connecting the lows of the head in a head and shoulders
formation or highs of an inverse head and shoulders. A move under
the neckline of a head and shoulders top is bearish; a move above the
neckline of an inverse head and shoulders neckline is bullish.
Negative crossover-see "Crossover."
Negative divergence-see "Divergence."
Offset-to get out of an existing position. Longs are said to liquidate;
shorts are said to cover.
On-Balance Volume (0BV)-a cumulative volume figure. If prices close
higher than the previous session the volume for the higher close day
is added to the OBV. On a day, when the close is lower, the volume
for that day is subtracted from the OBV figure. Unchanged days are
ignored.
Open interest-futures contracts which are still outstanding. Open interest is equal to the total number of long or short positions, but not a
combination of the two.
Oscillator-a momentum line that fluctuates around a zero value line (or
between 0 and 100%). Oscillators can help measure overbought1
oversold levels, show negative and positive divergence, and can be
used to measure a price move's velocity.
Overbought-when the market moves up too far, too fast. At this point
the market is vulnerable to a downward correction.
Oversold-when the market declines too quickly. The market becomes
susceptible to a bounce.

305

306

Glossary B: American Technical Terms

Paper trading-not trading with real money. All transactions are only
imaginary with a record of profit and loss on paper.
Pennant-see "Flag."
Positive crossover-see "Crossover."
Positive divergence-see "Divergence."
Protective stop-a means of limiting losses if the market moves against
your position. If your stop level is reached, your position is automatically offset at the prevailing price.
Rally-an upward movement of prices.
Reaction-a price movement opposite to the prevailing trend.
Relative Strength Index-an oscillator developed by Welles Wilder. The
RSI compares the ratio of up closes to down closes over a specified
time period.
Resistance level-a level where sellers are expected to enter.
Retracement-a price reaction from the prior move in percentage terms.
The more common retracement levels are 38%, 50%, and 62%.
Reversal session-a session when a new high (or low) is made for the
move and the market then closes under (or above) the prior session's
close.
Reversal indicator-see "Trend reversals."
Selling climax-when price push sharply and suddenly lower on heavy
volume after an extended decline. If the market reverses from this
sharp selloff, it is viewed as a selling climax.
Selloff-a downward movement of prices.
Simple moving average-a method of smoothing price data in which prices
are added together and then averaged. It is a "moving" average
because the average moves. As new price data is added the oldest
data is dropped.
Spring-when prices break under the support of a horizontal congestion
band and then springs back above the "broken support" area. This is
bullish.
Stochastics-an oscillator that measures the relative position of the closing
price as compared to its range over a chosen period. It is usually
comprised of the faster moving %K line and the slower moving %D
line.
Support level-an area where buyers are expected to enter.
Tick VolumeTM-the number of trades per given intra-day time period.

Glossary B: American Technical Terms

Time filter-Prices have to stay above, or below, a certain price area for a
specific time to confirm that an important technical area has been
broken. For example, the market might have to close above a broken
resistance level for two days before a long position is placed.
Trading range-when prices are locked between horizontal support and
horizontal resistance levels.
Trend-the market's prevalent price direction.
Trend reversals-also called reversal indicators. This is a misleading term.
More appropriate, and more accurate, would be the term "trend
change indicator." It means the prior trend should change. It does
not mean prices are going to reverse.
Trendline-a line on a chart that connects a series of higher highs or
lower lows. At least two points are needed to draw a trendline. The
more often it is tested, and the greater the volume on the tests, the
more important the trendline.
Upgap-a gap which pushes prices higher.
Upthrust-when prices break above a resistance line from a laterally trading zone. If these new highs fail to hold and prices pull back under
the "broken" resistance line it is an upthrust. It is a bearish signal.
Uptrend-a market that is trending higher.
V bottom or top-when prices suddenly reverse direction forming a price
pattern that looks like the letter V for a bottom or an inverted V for
a top.
Volume-the total of all contracts traded for a given period.
Weighted moving average-a moving average in which each of the previous
prices is assigned a weighting factor. Usually, the most recent data is
the more heavily weighted.

307

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Analysis of Stock Price in Japan, Tokyo, Japan: Nippon Technical Analysts Association 1986.
Buchanen, Daniel Crump, Japanese Proverbs and Sayings, Oklahoma City: University of Oklahoma
Press, 1965.
Colby, Robert W. and Thomas A. Meyers, The Encyclopedia of Technical Market Indicators, Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin, 1988.
Dilts, Marion May, The Pageant of Japanese History, New York: David McKay, 1963.
Drinka, Thomas P. and Robert L. McNutt, "Market Profile and Market Logic," Technical Analysis
of Stocks and Commodities, December 1987, pp. 15-18.
Edwards, Robert D. and John Magee, Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, 5th ed., Boston: John
Magee, 1966.
Hill, Julie Skur, "That's Not What I Said," Business Tokyo, August 1990, pp. 46-47.
Hirschmeier, Johannes and Tsunehiko Yui, Development of Japanese Business 1600-1973, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press 1975.
Hoshii, Kazutaka, Hajimete Kabuka Chato wo Yomu Hito no Hon ( A Book for Those Reading Stock Charts
for the First Time), Tokyo, Japan: Asukashuppansha, 1990.
Ikutaro, Gappo, Kabushikisouba no Technical Bunseki (Stock Market Technical Analysis), Tokyo, Japan:
Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha, 1985.
Ishii, Katsutoshi, Kabuka Chato no Tashikana Yomikata ( A Sure Way to Read Stock Charts), Tokyo,
Japan: Jiyukokuminsha, 1990.
Kaufman, Perry J. The New Commodity Trading Systems and Methods, New York: John Wiley and
Sons, 1987.
Keisen Kyoshitsu Part 1 (Chart Classroom Part I), Tokyo, Japan: Toshi Rader, 1989.
Kroll, Stanley, Kroll on Futures Trading, Homewood, lL:Dow Jones-Irwin, 1988.
Masuda, Koh, ed. Kenkyusha's New School Japanese-English Dictionary, Tokyo, Japan: Kenkyusha,
1968.
Murphy, John J., Technical Analysis of the Futures Markets, New York: New York Institute of
Finance, 1986.
Nihon Keisenshi (The History of Japanese Charts), Chapter 2 by Kenji Oyama, pp. 90-102, Tokyo,
Japan: Nihon Keisai Shimbunsha, 1979.
Okasan Keisai Kenkyusho, Shinpan Jissen Kabushiki Nyumon (Introduction to Stock Charts), Tokyo,
Japan: Diamond-sha, 1987.
Sakata Goho Wa Furinkazan (Sakata's Five Rules are Wind, Forest, Fire and Mountain), Tokyo, Japan:
Nihon Shoken Shimbunsha, 1969.
Schabacker, Richard W., Technical Analysis and Stock Market Profits, New York: The Schabacker
Institute.

310

Bibliography

Seidensticker, Edward G., Even Monkeys Fall from Trees and Other Japanese Proverbs, Rutland, VA:
Charles E. Tuttle, 1987.
Seward, Jack, Japanese in Action, New York: Weatherhill, 1983.
Shimizu, Seiki, The Japanese Chart of Charts, trans. Gregory S. Nicholson, Tokyo, Japan: Tokyo
Futures Trading Publishing Co., 1986.
Sklarew, Arthur, Techniques of a Professional Commodity Chart Analyst, New York: Commodity
Research Bureau, 1980.
Smith, Adam, The Money Game, New York: Random House, 1968.
Tamarkin, Robert, The New Gatsbys, Chicago, IL:Bob Tamarkin, 1985.
Taucher, Frank, Commodity Trader's Almanac, Tulsa: Market Movements, 1988.
Technical Traders Bulletin, January 1990, May 1990, June 1990, Rolling Hill Estates, CA: Island View
Financial Group Inc., 1990.
Wilder, J. Welles, New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems, Greensboro, NC: Trend Research,
1978.
Yoshimi, Toshihiko, Yoshimi Toshihiko no Chato Kyoshitsu (Toshihiko Yoshimi's Chart Classroom),
Tokyo, Japan: Nihon Chart, 1989.

Index
A
Abandoned baby top and bottom,
65, 289
Advance block pattern, 144, 289
American Airlines, hanging man
candlestick chart of, 38
American technical terms, 303-7
Analysis of Stock Price i n Japan, 2
AT&T, harami pattern of, 83
Atlantic Richfield, fry pan bottom
pattern of, 114
B
Bar charts, and candlestick charts,
4-5, 8
Barrett resources, shooting star
pattern of, 74
Bearish belt hold, 94, 96-97
Bearish counterattack line, 103-5,
107
Bearish engulfing pattern, 38-42
Bearish falling three methods, 135
Belt-hold lines, 94-97, 290
Black candlestick, 24
Black opening shaven head, 94
Bloomberg L.P., 3
Boeing, piercing pattern of, 51
Bonds, 168-69
confluence of candlesticks, 179
doji after long white candlestick
pattern, 156
doji at tops pattern, 151
Elliott Wave with candlesticks,
256
harami pattern, 84
MACD with candlesticks, 224
Market Profile with candlesticks,
262
rising three methods pattern,
138
shooting star pattern, 73
