
But even if you possess all those traits, there’s no substitute for developing a
comprehensive trading plan (see Chapters 11, 12, and 13, as well as “Developing a Trading
Plan” later in this chapter). You wouldn’t open a business venture without first developing a
business plan (at least I hope not!). So you shouldn’t expect any success in trading if you
don’t develop a realistic trading plan and stick to it. Think of trading as if it were your own
business, and approach it as you would a business enterprise, because that’s what it is.

Above all, try not to take your trading results too personally. Financial markets are prone to
seemingly irrational movements on a regular basis, and the market doesn’t know or care who
you are or what your trade idea is.

Currencies as the trading vehicle
If you’ve heard anything at all about the forex market, it’s probably that it’s the largest financial
market in the world, at least in terms of daily trading volumes. To be sure, the forex market is

unique in many respects. The volumes are, indeed, huge, which means that liquidity is ever
present. It also operates around the clock, from the opening of Asia/Pacific financial centers on
Monday morning to the close of North American markets on Friday afternoon, giving traders
access to the market any time they need it. (In Chapter 2, I give you a sense of the scale of the forex
market and how it operates on a daily basis. In Chapter 3, I look at who the major forex players
are.)
Few trading restrictions exist — no daily trading limits up or down, no restrictions on position
sizes, and no requirements on selling a currency pair short. (I cover all the mechanics and
conventions of currency trading in Chapter 4.)

Selling a currency pair short means you’re expecting the price to decline. Because of the
way currencies are quoted and because currency rates move up and down all the time, going
short is as common as being long.
Most of the action takes place in the major currency pairs, which pit the U.S. dollar (USD) against
the currencies of the Eurozone (the European countries that have adopted the euro as their
currency), Japan, Great Britain, and Switzerland. There’s also plenty of trading opportunities in
the minor pairs, which see the U.S. dollar traded against the Canadian, Australian, and New
Zealand dollars (frequently called the commodity currencies, covered in Chapter 9).
Other minor pairs include the Scandies, referring to the Scandinavian currencies outside the euro
(Sweden, Norway, Denmark), and major emerging economies like Mexico, South Africa, and
Singapore, to name a few. On top of that, there’s cross-currency trading that directly pits two nonUSD currencies against each other, such as the Swiss franc against the Japanese yen. Altogether,
there are anywhere from 30 to 50 different currency pairs, depending on which forex brokerage
you deal with. (See Chapters 8 and 9 for a look at the fundamental and market factors that affect
the most widely traded currency pairs.)
Most individual traders trade currencies via the Internet through a brokerage firm. Online currency
trading is typically done on a margin basis, which allows individual traders to trade in larger
amounts by leveraging the amount of margin on deposit.
The leverage, or margin trading ratios, available to forex traders ranges from 50:1 to as much as
200:1, meaning a margin deposit of $1,000 could control a position size of $50,000 (at 50:1
leverage) to $200,000 (at 200:1). But trading on margin carries its own rules and requirements
and is the backdrop against which all your trading will take place. Leverage is a two-edged
sword, amplifying gains and losses equally, which makes risk management the key to any
successful trading strategy (see Chapter 13).

Before you ever start trading in any market, make sure you’re risking money that you can
afford to lose, what’s commonly called risk capital. Risk management is the key to any

successful trading plan. Without a risk-aware strategy, margin trading can be an extremely
short-lived endeavor. With a proper risk plan in place, you stand a much better chance of
surviving losing trades and making winning ones. (I incorporate risk management throughout
this book, but especially in Chapters 12, 13, and 19.)

Information Affects Currency Rates
Information is what drives every financial market, of course, but the forex market has its own
unique roster of inputs. Many different cross-currents are at play in the currency market at any
given moment — financial crises, central bank interest rate decisions, economic growth data, and
so on. After all, the forex market is setting the value of one currency against another, so at the
minimum, you’re looking at the themes affecting two major international economies. Add in 20 or
more other national economies, and you’ve got a serious amount of information flowing through
the market. But that amount of news flow means that there’s plenty of trading opportunities
popping up regularly. (I focus on identifying trading opportunities in Chapter 12.)

Fundamentals drive the currency market
Fundamentals are the broad grouping of news and information that reflects the macroeconomic
and political fortunes of the countries whose currencies are traded. (I look at those inputs in depth
in Chapters 5, 6 and 7.) Most of the time, when you hear someone talking about the fundamentals
of a currency, he’s referring to the economic fundamentals. Economic fundamentals are based on
Economic data reports
Interest rate levels
Monetary policy
International trade flows
International investment flows
There are also political and geopolitical fundamentals (see Chapter 5). An essential element of
any currency’s value is the faith or confidence that investors place in the value of that currency. If
national events, such as an election or a budget crisis, are seen to be undermining the confidence in
a particular economy, the value of its currency may be negatively affected. The Great Financial
Crisis of 2008–2009 (GFC), which I discuss in greater detail in Chapter 5, revealed the extreme
degree of global market interconnectedness and triggered significant currency market reactions.
Gathering and interpreting all this information is just part of a currency trader’s daily routine,
which is one reason why dedication is put at the top of the list of successful trader attributes (see
“Speculating as an enterprise,” earlier in this chapter; I focus on interpreting news and data in

Chapter 6.)

Unless the technicals are driving the currency market
The term technicals refers to technical analysis, a form of market analysis most commonly
involving chart analysis, trend-line analysis, and mathematical studies of price behavior, such as
momentum or moving averages, to mention just a couple (see Chapter 11).
I don’t know of too many currency traders who don’t follow some form of technical analysis in
their trading. Even the stereotypical seat-of-the-pants, trade-by-your-gut traders are likely to at
least be aware of technical price levels identified by others. If you’ve been an active trader in
other financial markets, chances are you’ve engaged in some technical analysis or at least heard of
it.

If you’re not aware of technical analysis, but you want to trade actively, I strongly
recommend that you familiarize yourself with some of its basics (see Chapter 11). Don’t be
scared off by the name. Technical analysis is just a tool, like an electric saw — you don’t
need to know the circuitry of the saw to know how to use it, but you do need to know how to
use it properly to avoid injury. (Chapter 20 offers several great reading suggestions to expand
your technical trading knowledge.)
Technical analysis is especially important in the forex market because of the amount of
fundamental information hitting the market at any given time. Currency traders regularly apply
various forms of technical analysis to define and refine their trading strategies, with many people
trading based on technical indicators alone. (See Chapters 14, 15, and 16 for how traders really
use technicals.)

Or it may be something completely different
I’m not trying to be funny here. Honest. What I am trying to do is get across the idea of the many
cross-currents that are at play in the forex market at any given time. Earlier in this chapter, I note
that currency trading is just one form of market speculation, and that speculative trading involves
an inherent market dynamic (see “Defining Currency Trading” earlier in this chapter).

Call it what you like — trader’s instinct, market psychology, sentiment, position adjustment,
or more buyers than sellers. The reality is that the forex market is made up of hundreds of
thousands of traders, each with a different view of the market and each expressing his view
by buying or selling different currencies at various times and price levels.
That means that in addition to understanding the currency-specific fundamentals and familiarizing

yourself with technical analysis, you also need to have an appreciation of the market dynamic (see
Chapter 8). And that’s where trading with a plan comes in (see the following section).

Developing a Trading Plan
If your e-mail inbox is anything like mine, you probably get inundated with random penny stock
tips or the next great Chinese stock initial public offering (IPO). (If you’re not, please send me
your spam filter.)
Those are about the only times you’re going to get a message telling you how to trade. The rest of
the time you’re going to be on your own. But isn’t that what trading is all about, anyway?
Don’t get me wrong; I’m not trying to scare you off. I’m just trying to make it clear that you’re the
only one who knows your risk appetite and your own trading style. And very likely, you may not
have even settled on a trading style yet. You need a style before you can develop your plan.

Finding your trading style
Before you can develop a trading plan, settling on a trading style is essential. (See Chapter 11 for
more on trading styles.) Different trading styles generally call for variations on trading plans,
though there are plenty of overarching trading rules that apply to all styles.
What do I mean by a trading style? Basically it boils down to how you approach currency trading
in terms of
Trade timeframe: How long will you hold a position? Are you looking at short-term
trade opportunities (day trading), trying to capture more significant shifts in currency
prices over days or weeks, or something in between?
Currency pair selection: Are you interested in trading in all the different currency pairs,
or are you inclined to specialize in only one or two?
Trade rationale: Are you fundamentally or technically inclined? Are you considering
creating a systematic trading model? Are you a trend follower or a breakout trader?
Risk appetite: How much are you prepared to risk, and what are your return
expectations?

I don’t expect you to have answers to any or all of those questions, and that’s exactly the
point. As you read this book, I hope you’ll be thinking about what trading style you’d like to
pursue. Feel free to experiment with different styles and strategies — that’s why practice

accounts, or demo accounts, are useful. (See Chapter 2 for the best way to utilize practice
accounts.)
At the end of the day, though, zeroing in on a trading style that you feel comfortable with and that
you can pursue on a consistent basis helps. Your own individual circumstances (including work,
family, finances, temperament, and discipline) will be the key variables, and you’re the only one
who knows what they are.

Planning the trade
Whatever trading style you ultimately choose to follow, you won’t get very far if you don’t
establish a concrete trading plan and stick to it (see Chapter 10). Trading plans are what keep
small bad trades from becoming big bad trades and what can turn small winners into bigger
winners. More than anything, though, they’re your road map, helping you to navigate the market
after the adrenaline and emotions start pumping, no matter what the market throws your way.

I’m not telling you that trading currencies is any easier than trading any other financial
market. But I can tell you that trading with a plan will greatly improve your chances of being
successful in the forex market over time. Most important, I want to caution you that trading
without a plan is a surefire recipe for disaster. You may survive a few close calls, but a day
of reckoning comes for any trader without a plan — it’s just what happens in markets.
The starting point of any trading plan is to identify a trading opportunity (see Chapter 12). No one
is going to give you a call or shoot you an e-mail telling you what and when to trade. You have to
devote the effort and gray cells to spotting viable trading opportunities yourself.
Throughout this book, I offer my own observations on how the forex market behaves in many
different respects. I think there are plenty of kernels for spotting trade opportunities in those
observations. (In Chapter 12, in particular, I show you a number of concrete ways to look at the
market with a view to spotting trade opportunities.) Above all, be patient, and wait for the market
to show its hand, which it always does, one way or the other.

Executing the Trading Plan from Start to
Finish
The start of any trade comes when you step into the market and open up a position. How you enter
your position, or how you execute the first step of your trading plan, can be as important as the
trade opportunity itself. (More on getting into a position in Chapter 14.) After all, if you never
enter the position, the trade opportunity will never be exploited. And probably nothing is more

frustrating as a trader than having pinpointed a trade opportunity, having it go the way you
expected, but having nothing to show for it because you never put the trade on.
The effort and resources you invest in researching, monitoring, and analyzing the market come to a
concrete result when you open a trade. You’re now exposed to price fluctuations, and your trading
account will register a profit or loss as a result. But that’s just the beginning of it.
Just because you have a trading plan doesn’t mean the market is necessarily going to play ball.
You need to be actively engaged in managing your position to make the most of it if it’s a winner
and to minimize the damage if the market is not going in your favor (see Chapter 15).

Active trade management is also critical to keeping more of what you make in the market. In
my experience, making money in the forex market is not necessarily the hard part. More often
than not, keeping what you’ve made is the really hard part.
You need to stay on your toes, and keep thinking about and monitoring the market while your trade
is still active. The market will always be moving, sometimes faster than at other times, and new
information will still be coming into the market. In Chapter 15, I look at several different ways you
can monitor the market while your trade is open, as well as how and when you should adjust your
trade strategy depending on events and time.
Exiting each trade is the culmination of the entire process, and you’re either going to be pleased
with a profit or disappointed with a loss. Every trade ends in either a profit or a loss (unless you
get out at the entry price); it’s just the way the market works. While your trade is still active,
however, you’re still in control and you can choose to exit the trade at any time. In Chapter 16, I
look at important tactical considerations to keep in mind when it’s time to close out the trade.
Even after you’ve exited the position, your work is not done. If you’re serious about currency
trading as an enterprise, you need to review your prior trades for what they tell you about your
overall trading style and trade execution. Most important, reviewing your trading results is how
you stay focused and avoid lapses in discipline that could hurt you on your next trade.
Only then is it time to move on to the next trading opportunity.

Chapter 2

What Is the Forex Market?
In This Chapter
Getting inside the forex market
Understanding that speculating is the name of the game
Trading currencies around the world
Linking other financial markets to currencies
Getting a feel for currency trading with a practice account
The foreign exchange market — most often called the forex market, or simply the FX market — is
the largest and most liquid of all international financial markets. I like to think of it as the Big
Kahuna of financial markets. (See the “Getting liquid without getting soaked” section, later in this
chapter, for my discussion of liquidity.)
The forex market is the crossroads for international capital, the intersection through which global
commercial and investment flows have to move. International trade flows, such as when a Swiss
electronics company purchases Japanese-made components, were the original basis for the
development of the forex markets.
Today, however, global financial and investment flows dominate trade as the primary
nonspeculative source of forex market volume. Whether it’s an Australian pension fund investing
in U.S. Treasury bonds, or a British insurer allocating assets to the Japanese equity market, or a
German conglomerate purchasing a Canadian manufacturing facility, each cross-border transaction
passes through the forex market at some stage.
More than anything else, the forex market is a trader’s market without equal. It’s a market that’s
open around the clock from Sunday evening ET to Friday 5 p.m. ET, enabling traders to act on
news and events as they happen. It’s a market where half-billion-dollar trades can be executed in a
matter of seconds and may not even move prices noticeably. Try buying or selling a half-billion of
anything in another market, and see how prices react.

The rise of online currency trading
Online currency trading debuted in the early 1990s when two matching systems were developed
by Reuters and EBS for the institutional “interbank” forex market. Both systems allowed banks to
enter bids and offers into the system and trade on eligible prices from other banks, based on

prescreened credit limits. The systems would match buyers and sellers, and the prices dealt in
these systems became the benchmarks for currency price data, such as highs and lows.
By the mid to late 1990s major, international banks were developing their own online trading
platforms to allow their institutional clients, like corporations and hedge funds, to trade with them
electronically. Around the same time, new companies launched online trading platforms designed
specifically for individual traders. Over the past decade, the increase in electronic trading has been
a major driver of growth of the overall forex market.
Remember: Most online currency platforms offer trade sizes in amounts commonly known as lots,
with a standard-size lot equal to 100,000 base currency units and a minilot equal to 10,000 base
currency units. Some retail brokerages offer trading in micro lots of $1,000 and even odd amounts,
like $250, providing even more flexibility based on an individual’s account size. Online
brokerages offer margin ranging from 25:1 to 200:1 depending on the regulations of the country
you’re in, allowing individual traders to make larger trades based on the amount of margin on
deposit. For example, at 50:1 leverage, a $5,000 margin deposit would enable an individual trader
to control a position as large as $250,000. Retail forex brokerages offer leverage to allow
individual traders to trade in larger amounts relative to the small size of pips.

Getting Inside the Numbers
Average daily currency trading volumes are now estimated to $4 trillion per day, according to the
2010 BIS survey of forex volumes. That’s a mind-boggling number, isn’t it? $4,000,000,000,000
— that’s a lot of zeros, no matter how you slice it. To give you some perspective on that size, it’s
about 15 to 20 times the size of daily trading volume on all the world’s stock markets combined.
That $4-trillion-a-day number, which you may’ve seen in the financial press or other books on
currency trading, actually overstates the size of what the forex market is all about — spot currency
trading.

Trading for spot
Spot refers to the price where you can buy or sell currencies now, as in “on the spot.” If you’re
familiar with stock trading, the price you can trade at is essentially a spot price. Technically, the
term refers to the nearest settlement date on which a transaction can be made and is primarily
meant to differentiate spot, or cash, trading from futures trading, or trading for some future
delivery date. The spot currency market is normally traded for settlement in two business days.
The Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the international supervisory body for banks around
the world, surveys forex market volumes every three years. The April 2010 BIS survey (the most

recent available) revealed daily spot-trading volume of $1.5 trillion, which was up from $1
trillion since the 2007 survey. Spot trading volume accounted for 37 percent of total forex market
volume. The rest of the volume that makes up the $4 trillion figure is comprised of swap and
outright forward currency trading (trades made for settlement dates other than spot) and currency
options.

Speculating in the currency market
Although commercial and financial transactions in the currency markets represent huge nominal
sums, they still pale in comparison to amounts based on speculation. By far the vast majority of
currency trading volume is based on speculation — traders buying and selling for short-term gains
based on minute-to-minute, hour-to-hour, and day-to-day price fluctuations.
Estimates are that upwards of 90 percent of daily trading volume is derived from speculation
(meaning, commercial or investment-based FX trades account for less than 10 percent of daily
global volume). The depth and breadth of the speculative market means that the liquidity of the
overall forex market is unparalleled among global financial markets.
The bulk of spot currency trading, more than 75 percent by volume, takes place in the so-called
“major currencies,” which represent the world’s largest and most developed economies. Trading
in the major currencies is largely free from government regulation and takes place outside the
authority of any national or international body.
Additionally, activity in the forex market frequently functions on a regional “currency bloc” basis,
where the bulk of trading takes place between the USD bloc, JPY bloc, and EUR bloc,
representing the three largest global economic regions.
Trading in the currencies of smaller, less-developed economies, such as Thailand or Chile, is
often referred to as emerging market or exotic currency trading, and may involve currencies with
local restrictions on convertibility or limited liquidity, both of which limit access and inhibit the
development of an active market.
