
You will run out of money
before a guru runs out of
indicators.
Neal T. Weintraub

234

There is little point in
exploring the Elliott Wave
Theory because it is not a
theory at all, but rather
the banal observation
that a price chart
comprises a series of
peaks and troughs.
Depending on the time
scale you use, there can
be as many peaks and
troughs as you care to
imagine.7

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

your hook back in. Are you only after the one that got away? Of
course not, you throw the hook back in to catch a big fish—any big
fish. Ed Seykota has always said to catch more fish, go where the
fish are. Jonathan Hoenig puts the emphasis where it must be:
“I am a trader because my interest isn’t in owning stocks
per se, but in making money. And while I do trade in stocks
(among other investments), I don’t have blind faith that
stocks will necessarily be higher by the time I’m ready to
retire. If history has demonstrated anything, it’s that we
can’t simply put our portfolios on autopilot and expect
things to turn out for the best. You can’t be a trader when
you’re right and an investor when you’re wrong. That’s how
you lose.”

Warren Buffett
Warren Buffett has long been positioned as the single biggest
proponent of buy-and-hold. Like Sir Galahad, he has achieved his
Holy Grail, and I salute his success. However, can you achieve what
he has? Doubtful. He is the exception to the rule. There is only one
Buffett. Unfortunately, many people mistakenly assume Buffett is
just a buy-and-hold investor. It is more complex than that.
SUNW probably has the
best near-term outlook of
any company I know.
James Cramer
September 7, 20009

For example, in an interview in Forbes, Buffett was squarely
against derivatives:
“‘Things are less lucrative in the stock market. We have
more money than ideas,’ he said, adding that 6 percent to 7
percent was a fair rate of return in the current
environment. The company has more than $37 billion in
cash to invest. One place the money certainly won’t go is
derivatives. ‘There’s no place with as much potential for
phony numbers as derivatives,’ he said. Buffett’s 78-yearold billionaire vice chairman, Charlie Munger, couldn’t
resist chiming in. ‘To say that derivative accounting is a
sewer is an insult to sewage.’”8
Sixteen days later, Buffett was saying something different:
“Berkshire Hathaway issues first ever-negative coupon
security: Omaha, Nebraska, May 22, 2002. Berkshire
Hathaway Inc. (NYSE: BRK.A and BRK.B), announced

235

Chapter 9 • Holy Grails

today that it has sold $400 million of a new type of security,
named ‘SQUARZ,’ in a private placement to qualified
institutional investors…‘Despite the lack of precedent, a
negative coupon security seemed possible in the present
interest rate environment,’ said Warren E. Buffett,
chairman of Berkshire Hathaway. Mr. Buffett added, ‘I
asked Goldman Sachs to create such an instrument and
they responded promptly with the innovative security
being announced today.’”10
If Buffett was being forthright the first time he spoke on the
subject what made him change his mind two weeks later and create
an investment instrument so complicated and secretive that not
even his press release could explain it? Even more confusing is that
Buffett contradicted himself again a year later, going against his
financial creation:
“Derivatives are financial weapons of mass destruction,
carrying dangers, while now latent, are potentially lethal…
We view them as time bombs, both for the parties that deal
in them and the economic system.”11
Now in 2008 Buffett has once again been caught in the
headlines for trading derivatives. The Buffett legend of buy-andhold as his one and only strategy has permeated the public
consciousness with literally books by the dozens. But when he
launches a new derivatives strategy that goes against his legend,
either no one notices or those who do notice are reluctant to
criticize in public.

Losers Average Losers
There’s a famous picture of Paul Tudor Jones, the great macro
trader first profiled in Jack Schwager’s Market Wizards, relaxing in
his office. Tacked up on the wall behind him on loose-leaf sheet of
paper is the simple phrase in black magic marker, “Losers Average
Losers.” Jones’ wisdom was obviously lost on James K. Glassman,
judging from the following excerpt from a Glassman Washington
Post stock-picking column:
“If you had Enron in your portfolio and didn’t sell it at $90
or even at $10, don’t feel embarrassed. As Alfred Harrison,

When people say the
market is over-valued
and there’s a bubble,
whatever that means,
they’re talking about just
a handful of stocks. Most
of these stocks are
reasonably priced. There’s
no reason for them to
correct violently anytime
in the year 2000.
Larry Wachtel, Market Analyst,
Prudential Securities
December 23, 199913

Imagine you are at a car
auction hoping to buy a
beautiful red ‘66 Corvette.
Imagine the car that is
being auctioned before
the Corvette is a 1955
Mercedes Gull Wing
Coupe that sells for
$750,000. The Corvette is
up next and the Blue
Book price is $35,000.
What would you bid?
Now imagine the car
before yours was a ‘kit’
car replica of the Gull
Wing Mercedes that sold
for $75,000. What would
you pay now? Research
has shown that incidental
price data can affect
what you are willing to
pay. We have a tendency
to pay more if the
preceding price is
considerably higher!
Jon C. Sundt, President,
Altegris Investments
1st Quarter 2004 commentary

236

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

a money manager at Alliance Capital Management Holding
LP, which owned a ton of Enron, put it, ‘On the surface it
had always seemed to be a fairly good growth stock. We
bought it all the way down.’”12
Glassman and Harrison are both dead wrong. What they call
dollar-cost averaging is really averaging a loser (Enron in this
example) all the way down. Traders should feel sick if they average
losers, not just embarrassed. When you have a losing position, it
must tell you something is wrong. As unbelievable as it seems to the
novice investor, the longer a market declines, the more likely it is
to continue declining. Falling markets must never be viewed as
places to buy cheap.
Harrison violated a cardinal rule of trading. In the zero-sum
world of trading, if the trend is down, it is not a buying opportunity;
it is a selling opportunity—a “time to go short” opportunity. Even
worse, as an active money manager for clients, he admitted to
averaging losers as a strategy. To top it off, Glassman later adds:
“Could the typical small investor have discovered a year
ago that Enron was on the brink of disaster? It’s highly
unlikely. Still, if you looked for the right thing, you would
have never bought Enron in the first place.”14
Actually, there was a way to spot Enron’s problems. The price
going from $90 to 50 cents was a pretty clear clue that the brink of
disaster was just around the corner. Jesse Livermore knew nearly
80 years earlier how to spot losers:

Jan, the bottom line is,
before the end of the year
[2000], the NASDAQ and
Dow will be at new
record highs.
Myron Kandel,
Financial Editor and Anchor
CNNfn/Cofounder, CNN
April 4, 200015

“I have warned against averaging losses. That is a most
common practice. Great numbers of people buy a stock, let
us say at 50, and two or three days later if they can buy it
at 47 they are seized with the urge to average down by
buying another hundred shares, making a price of 48.5 on
all. Having bought at 50 and being concerned over a threepoint loss on a hundred shares, what rhyme or reason is
there in adding another hundred shares and having the
double worry when the price hits 44? At that point there
would be a $600 loss on the first hundred shares and a $300
loss on the second shares. If one is to apply such an

Chapter 9 • Holy Grails

237

unsound principle, he should keep on averaging by buying
200 at 44, then 400 at 41, 800 at 38, 1,600 at 35, 3,200 at
32, 6,400 at 29, and so on. How many speculators could
stand such pressure? So, at the risk of repetition and
preaching, let me urge you to avoid averaging down.’”
Other traders have seen their once great empires scuttled by
averaging losers as well. Julian Robertson ran one of the biggest and
profitable hedge funds ever. However, things ended badly. On March
30, 2000, CNN excerpted a letter Julian Robertson wrote to Tiger’s
investors blaming the fund’s problems on the rush to cash in on the
Internet craze:

If you want a guarantee,
buy a toaster.
Clint Eastwood

“As you have heard me say on a number of occasions, the
key to Tiger’s success over the years has been a steady
commitment to buying the best stocks and shorting the
worst. In a rational environment, this strategy functions
well. But in an irrational market, where earnings and price
considerations take a back seat to mouse clicks and
momentum, such logic, as we have learned, does not count
for much. The result of the demise of value investing and
investor withdrawals has been financial erosion, stressful to
us all. And there is no real indication that a quick end is in
sight.”16
The story of Tiger resembles a Greek tragedy, where the
protagonist is the victim of his own self-pride. Tiger’s spiral
downward started in the fall of 1998 when a catastrophic trade on
dollar-yen cost the fund billions. An ex-Tiger employee was quoted
as saying: “There’s a certain amount of hubris when you take a
position so big you have to be right and so big you can’t get out
when you’re wrong. That was something Julian never would have
done when he was younger. That isn’t good risk-return analysis.”17
The problem with Tiger was its philosophically shaky
foundation. Robertson stated: “Our mandate is to find the 200 best
companies in the world and invest in them, and find the 200 worst
companies in the world and go short on them. If the 200 best don’t
do better than the 200 worst, you probably should go into another
business.”

I am of the belief that the
individual out there is
actually not throwing
money at things that they
do not understand, and is
actually using the news
and using the
information out there to
make smart investment
decisions.
Maria Bartiromo,
Anchor, Reporter, CNBC
March 200118

238

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Assimilating and sifting through vast quantities of information
was Robertson’s forte. According to one associate, “He can look at
a long list of numbers in a financial statement he’d never seen
before and say, ‘that one is wrong,’ and he’s right.” Although that
talent is impressive, being able to read and critique a balance sheet
doesn’t necessarily translate into knowing when and how much to
buy or sell as trend following trader Richard Donchian pointed out
(see Chapter 2, “Great Trend Followers”).

Crash and Panic
What do Julian Robertson, the concept of losers average losers,
the dot-com stock crash, and October 2008 have in common?
Bubbles. The 2008 crash is no different from the tulip bubble made
famous in Holland. In 1720, when the south sea bubble was at its
height, even the greatest genius of his time, Sir Isaac Newton, got
sucked into the hysteria. Investing as if his brilliance in science
carried over to his finances, Newton eventually lost £20,000.
Although bubbles might appear as short-term blips in economic
history, more often the aftermath is long term, resulting in severe
recessions and government intervention that usually makes the
situation worse. The collapse of bubbles of the past 400 years threw
each nation into a recession lasting a decade or longer. What lesson
can we learn from bubbles? Human nature continues to be the way
it has always been and probably always will be.19
You have to say, “What
if?” What if the stocks
rally? What if they don’t?
Like a catcher, you have
to wear a helmet.
Jonathan Hoenig, Portfolio Manager,
Capitalistpig Hedge Fund LLC

Today, especially after the October/November 2008 crash,
investors must do more than simply trust someone else for their
financial decision making or glance at their pension statement once
a quarter. They can no longer pretend it is just “retirement” and
that their nest egg will go back up. Take a quick view of the
Japanese Nikkei 225 stock index (see Chart 9.1).
The index reached nearly 40,000 in 1989. Now, 19 years later,
it hovers around below 10,000. Do you think the Japanese still
believe in buy and hold? Another example reveals a chart (see
Chart 9.2) of the hot tech stocks of 1968.

239

Chapter 9 • Holy Grails

SIMEX NIKKEI 225 NEAREST FUTURES—Monthly Chart

50000
45000
40000
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000

81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04

0

CHART 9.1: Weekly Chart Nikkei 225 1985–2003 Source: Barchart.com

CHART 9.2: 1968 Tech Stocks

Company

1968 High

1970 Low

% drop

P/E at High

Fairchild Camera

102.00

18.00

–82

443

Teledyne

72.00

13.00

–82

42

Control Data

163.00

28.00

–83

54

Mohawk Data

111.00

18.00

–84

285

Electronic Data

162.00

24.00

–85

352

Optical Scanning

146.00

16.00

–89

200

Itek

172.00

17.00

–90

71

University Computing

186.00

13.00

–93

118

Who cares what year it is? Bubbles and busts come and go and
they all look the same. Unfortunately for investors, financial writers
such as Alan Sloan are often too quick to use good metaphors to
describe bad predicaments, which only further damages one’s
ability to ever retire:

240

What makes the Dow at
10,000 particularly
noteworthy for us is that
it means that the index
has to rise a mere 26,000
more points to vindicate
the prophecy of those two
jokers who achieved 15
seconds of fame when we
were in full bubble by
predicting it would hit
36,000. We kind of miss
them; they were always
good for comic relief.
Another 500 points and
we’ve a hunch they’ll be
back peddling the same
old moonshine.
Alan Abelson,
Barrons
December 20, 2003 21

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

“So now, with your portfolio trashed and Social Security
looking insecure, you may be having nightmares about
spending your retirement haunting the mac-and-cheese,
early-bird specials, or about not being able to retire until six
years after you’ve died. With the bull market gone, will the
impending retirement of the post-World War II generation
be the Boomer Bust?—If you work hard, save and adopt
more realistic expectations, you can still retire rather than
die in the harness. Earning maybe 9 percent on stocks isn’t
as good as the 20 percent that you might have grown used
to. But it’s not bad.”20
Saying 9 percent compounded is not bad compared to 20
percent compounded, ignores the pure math. Imagine the last 25
years and two investments of $1,000 each. The first investment
generated 9 percent for 25 years, and the second investment
generated 20 percent for 25 years.
• $1,000 compounded at 9% for 25 years = $8,600.
• $1,000 compounded at 20% for 25 years = $95,000.
Here are two examples of frustration exhibited by not having a
real compounding plan, but rather just trusting buy-and-hold as the
only strategy:
• “What do you do if you find yourself at retirement age without
enough to retire on? You keep working.”—John Rother, AARP’s
policy director.
• “I’ve worked hard all my life and been a responsible citizen and
it’s not supposed to be threatened at this point.”—Gail Hovey,
62, who works for nonprofit groups in Hawaii.
No one wants to see Gail homeless. On the other hand, do we
want to live in a society that rewards one group’s mistakes with
government assistance paid for by a second group who did not make
the same mindless mistakes? Look at all of the bailouts of 2008!
Life must not be contorted into being fair when it isn’t. It is fine for
us to compound our trading gains, but it’s not fine for the
government to compound idiocy. Even the top well-paid
professionals in charge of pension assets were just buy-and-holders:

241

Chapter 9 • Holy Grails

“Every major investor in the nation was heavily invested in
WorldCom. They were one of the largest corporations in
America.” New York State Comptroller22
What was their plan? Their plan was the same as the state
retirement plans of Michigan, Florida, and California that also lost
in WorldCom:
• The State of Michigan reported an unrealized loss of about
$116 million on WorldCom.
• The State of Florida’s reported an unrealized loss of about $90
million on WorldCom.
• The California Public Employees Retirement System (CalPERS)
reported an unrealized loss of about $565 million on
WorldCom.
Referring to $8.4 million in WorldCom stock now worth only
about $492,000, Robert Leggett of Kentucky Retirement Systems
said, “Until you actually sell it, you haven’t lost it.”
Thanks, Bob. Helluva plan you got there. Ed Seykota
philosophically summed up nicely these results:
“The best measure of your intention is the result you get.”24

Analysis Paralysis
In 2000, there were 28,000 recommendations by brokeragehouse analysts. At the start of October 2000, 99.1 percent of those
recommendations on U.S. companies were either strong buy, buy,
or hold. Just 0.9 percent of the time, analysts said sell. Listening to
these analysts for guidance was the public’s conscious decision not
to think for themselves.
A study at Dartmouth College by Kent Womack observed that
analysts often comment on and recommend companies that their
firms have recently taken public. The research shows that stocks
recommended by analysts perform more poorly than “buy”
recommendations by unaffiliated brokers prior to, at the time of,
and subsequent to the recommendation date.

There is no greater source
of conflict among
researchers and
practitioners in capital
market theory than the
validity of technical
analysis. The vast
majority of academic
research condemns
technical analysis as
theoretically bankrupt
and of no practical
value…It is certainly
understandable why
many researchers would
oppose technical analysis:
the validity of technical
analysis calls into
question decades of
careful theoretical
modeling [Capital Asset
Pricing Model, Arbitrage
Pricing Theory] claiming
the markets are efficient
and investors are
collectively, if not
individually, rational.23

242

The biggest cause of
trouble in the world today
is that the stupid people
are so sure about things
and the intelligent folks
are so full of doubts.
Bertrand Russell

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

However, it seems many ignore the data. Analysts still go on TV,
and viewers think to themselves, “She sounds bright; she works for
JP Morgan or Morgan Stanley, and she’s using a lot of financial
jargon that I don’t understand, so she must know something I
don’t.” She doesn’t. The fact that so many analysts told you that you
could buy so many stocks in the middle of the dot-com bubble and
over 2008—and were entirely wrong—must be permanent proof
that analysts’ insight is not the answer. On top of that, the
performance of most of Wall Street’s advice-givers is closely tied to
current market movement anyway. What are you listening for?
Even though there was never any rationale for listening to these
analysts, many people did and became angry when the advice
proved disastrous. At one point, one discredited analyst became a
favorite whipping boy for those investors who refused to accept
responsibility for their losses:

We are what we
repeatedly do. Excellence,
then, is not an act, but a
habit.
Aristotle

• “Every time my broker mentions […], I get nauseous.”
• “For the past few years, every time I’d call them, they’d say,
‘[…] likes WorldCom’ or ‘[…] really likes Global Crossing.’ As a
result, I now own hundreds of shares of these duds.”
• “So now when it comes to investment research, we need to
think twice about the veracity of top-rate advice and stock
picks from someone earning $20 million a year.”
• “[…] should have warned that this epochal bubble was doomed
to burst. After all he was the industry’s greatest seer.”
• “However unfair it is to blame just […], here’s a situation when
one person’s contribution to wholesale disaster is impossible to
overlook.”
• “In the late 1990s, telecommunications stocks were explosive.
New companies went public, old companies saw spectacular
growth, and […] never once warned us that this was all a
mirage.”

No human investigation
can be called real
science if it cannot
be demonstrated
mathematically.
Leonardo da Vinci

Does anyone think this analyst had knowledge that the telecom
bubble was about to burst? I am not defending him, but if investors
had their life savings tied up in the opinion of one man, they were
bound to be in trouble no matter what happened in the market. If
one stock tanks or an entire sector implodes, who was supposed to
warn them? No one was forced to listen to anyone. Anyone who

243

Chapter 9 • Holy Grails

held Fannie, Freddie, AIG, Bear Stearns, or Lehman Brothers all the
way down over the course of 2008 had no one to blame except the
person staring back at them in the mirror.
Yet, people are still unwilling to take responsibility for their own
decisions. Although they might have lost more than half their
portfolio in the past decade, they eagerly accept invitations like this
one from a brokerage firm that imploded in 2008:25
“Merrill Lynch cordially invites you to an educational
workshop…Topics discussed:
• Merrill Lynch Stock Market Forecast for […].
• When will the recession end?
• What do I do now?
• What are the factors of a good stock market?

Forecasts are financial
candy. Forecasts give
people who hate the
feeling of uncertainty
something emotionally
soothing.
Thomas Vician, Jr., student of Ed
Seykota’s

• How did this bear market compare to others?”
If Merrill Lynch produced useless forecasts for the last decade
and had basically gone under in 2008 (they would have folded if not
for a last minute Bank of America buyout), why would they assume
anyone would believe their forecast for “whatever” year? Why
would you ever want to trust a group like this?

Never let the fear of
striking out get in
your way.
Babe Ruth

Final Thoughts
The Nasdaq bubble popped. The real estate bubble popped. The
credit bubble popped. The Dow bubble popped in 2008. Will there
be another bubble anytime soon? No one knows. What you can do
is ride trends up and down using a precise set of rules to get in and
out. If you are watching CNBC for prediction of a trend change, you
are in trouble, ‘Casey Jones,’ as Jerry Garcia of The Grateful Dead
reminds:
“Trouble with you is the trouble with me
Got two good eyes but you still don’t see
Come round the bend, you know it’s the end
The fireman screams and the engine just gleams…”26
