
84

Currency Strategy

Perception and outcome are intrinsically linked in the currency markets; they are both cause
and effect. This creates a self-fulﬁlling and self-reinforcing phenomenon, which becomes more
speculative the longer it lasts, until it becomes unsustainable and the bubble bursts.
Free ﬂoating exchange rates tend to trade and trend in cycles, and ﬂows are both cause and
effect in this regard. Such currency cycles are not of necessity timed with the economic cycle.
It depends why they start. After the bubble bursts, there is usually a period of consolidation
and reversal; the longer the initial trend or cycle, the longer in turn the reversal. Thus, we saw
a weakening trend for the US dollar in the 1970s, followed by a strengthening in the early
1980s, followed by renewed weakening from 1985 to 1987, which again was reversed towards
the end of that decade. The 1990s saw a similar pattern, with the US dollar weak from 1991 to
1995, which was followed by a broad strengthening trend that has lasted from 1995 through
2001. This suggests that at some point the US dollar strength cycle will end and be reversed.
Trying to determine the top is for the most part impossible. It is more important to be able to
understand the cyclical nature of the currency markets and to be able to plan accordingly ahead
of that cycle ending. To prove the point, towards the end of 2001 the US dollar was continuing
to strengthen despite the fact that the Fed funds’ target interest rate was at 1.75%, while the
European Central Bank’s repo rate was at 3.25%. Nominal interest rates are not the primary
incentive for speculative capital ﬂow, never have been and never will be. The exchange rate
itself is the incentive. This is an important realization.

3.3 SUMMARY
In this chapter, we have attempted to examine how “ﬂows” interact with price action. The
assumption of the efﬁcient market hypothesis is that ﬂows cannot affect price because of
perfect information availability, yet as we have seen this assumption is clearly and manifestly
wrong. Testimony to that fact is the subsequent growth of and interest in ﬂow analysis, whether
of the short-term kind as practiced by commercial and investment banks in looking at their
own client ﬂows, or of a more medium-term kind in the form of the US or Euro area capital
ﬂow reports. Just as ﬂow analysis has become relatively sophisticated in analysing developed
market exchange rate ﬂow, so it is increasingly becoming so within the emerging markets. At
this stage, data availability is the only thing holding it back, but this barrier will also fall in
time. In sum, ﬂow analysis is a very important and useful tool for currency market practitioners
in the making of their currency investment or exposure decisions. The tracking of capital ﬂows
of necessity involves looking for apparent patterns in ﬂow movement. Linked in with this idea
is the discipline of tracking patterns in price. This discipline is that of technical analysis, which
we shall look at in the next chapter.

4
Technical Analysis:
The Art of Charting
Technical analysis has much in common with the major principles at work in ﬂow analysis.
Both focus on behavioural patterns within ﬁnancial markets. Both claim that market behaviour
can indeed impact future prices. In addition, both reﬂect a belief that markets must move and
traders must trade irrespective of whether or not there are changes in economic fundamentals.
In this sense, if ﬂow and technical analysis did not exist, they would have to be invented.
Demand will eventually result in supply!
In this chapter, we take a look at the core ideas behind the fascinating and controversial ﬁeld
of technical analysis, its origins, how it works and its main analytical building blocks. For those
looking to study this ﬁeld in more depth, I provide useful references in the footnotes. Whereas
ﬂow analysis focuses on price trends that are created by order ﬂow, technical analysis focuses
on price patterns within those trends. Technical analysis remains a controversial subject for
many people. Despite such controversy, its origins are rooted in mathematics and it has been
around in one form or another for a very long time indeed.

4.1 ORIGINS AND BASIC CONCEPTS
At least in its modern version, technical analysis is generally seen as emanating from the
“Dow Theory” established by Charles Dow at the start of the twentieth century. The core
original ideas of technical analysis focused on the trending nature of prices, the idea of support
and resistance and the concept of volume mirroring changes in price. Though we only touch
on it here, the contribution of Charles Dow to modern-day technical analysis should not be
underestimated. His focus on the basics of security price movement helped to give rise to a
completely new method of analysing ﬁnancial markets in general.
The basic premise behind this is that the price of a security represents a consensus. At the
individual level, it is the price at which one person is willing to buy and another to sell. At
the market level, it is the price at which the sum of market participants is willing to transact. The
willingness to buy or sell depends on the price expectations of individual market participants.
Because human expectations are relatively unpredictable, so the same must be said for their
price expectations. If we were all totally logical and could separate our emotions from our
investment decisions, one should assume that classic fundamental analysis would be a better
predictor of future prices than it currently is. Prices would only reﬂect fundamental valuations.
The fact that this is not the case suggests that other forces may be at work. Indeed, investor
expectations also play a part, both at the individual level and also as a group.
Technical analysis is the process of analysing a currency or ﬁnancial security’s historical
price in an attempt to determine its future price direction. It is founded in the belief that there
are consistent patterns within price action, which in turn have predictable results in terms of
future price action. In contrast to economics, technical analysis requires that ﬁnancial markets
are not perfectly efﬁcient, that there is no such thing as perfect knowledge or perfect information
@Team-FLY

86

Currency Strategy

availability or usage, and also that in the absence of other information market participants will
look to past price action as a determinant of future prices. For precisely this reason, the
economics profession generally has dismissed technical analysis as irrational. However, just
as we have already seen that ﬁnancial markets are not perfectly efﬁcient, so substantial research
has shown conclusively both that technical analysis is widely practiced by market participants
and perhaps more importantly that it has yielded substantially positive results. Traders who have
used technical analysis have frequently made consistently high excess returns. Furthermore,
in the context of the currency markets, technical analysis has a particularly good track record
in predicting short-term exchange rate moves. How can this be so? Simply put, nature abhors
a vacuum and thus in the vacuum left by classic economic analysis, in its inability to predict
exchange rates over the short term, came technical analysis.

4.2 THE CHALLENGE OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Technical analysis has posed a challenge to economic analysis in its ability to predict exchange
rates. As a result, considerable research has been undertaken by the economic community on
how technical analysis works, both in practice and in theory. It is not for here to go through this
research or literature in detail. Rather, we look at one such study as symptomatic of a general
enquiry by the economics profession into the workings of technical analysis. More speciﬁcally,
no less than the Federal Reserve undertook to examine this phenomenon, apparent conﬁrmation
of an ongoing change in the way both private and public institutions are approaching the ﬁeld of
technical analysis. Indeed, the reader can ﬁnd no more useful and detailed investigation of the
subject matter, starting from a macroeconomic perspective, than two reports by Carol L. Osler of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which examine how technical analysis is able to predict
exchange rates.1 These papers go a substantial way in explaining how technical analysis works
and are particularly useful as they undertake this investigation from an economic perspective.
In line with work done on studying order ﬂow, which we looked at in Chapter 3, they suggest
customer orders “cluster” around certain price levels and that such “clustering” creates speciﬁc
price patterns depending on whether or not those levels hold. To a technician, this makes perfect
sense given that a price represents the consensus of market supply and demand at any one time.
Below the price, there should be “support” levels at which demand is expected to exceed supply
and conversely above the price there may be “resistance” levels, where supply may exceed
demand. From my perspective, I would suggest the following reasons why technical analysis
has gradually taken on a more prominent and important role in predicting exchange rates:

r Over the short term, the currency market is essentially trend-following.
r The majority of market participants are speculative, that is they undertake currency transactions that have no underlying trade or investment transaction behind them.

r Nature abhors a vacuum — currency market participants have to trade off something whether
or not there has been any change in macroeconomic fundamentals.

r Traditional exchange rate models have had relatively poor results, therefore another analytical discipline was needed that was able to achieve better results.

r Exchange rate supply and demand create price patterns, which in the absence of other
stimulus may provide clues for future exchange rate moves.
1
Carol L. Osler, Currency Orders and Exchange Rate Dynamics: Explaining the Success of Technical Analysis, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York Staff Report No. 125, April 2001; “Support for resistance: technical analysis and intraday exchange rates”, Economic
Policy Review, 6(2) (July 2000).

Technical Analysis

87

There does appear to be a crucial self-fulﬁlling aspect to technical analysis, which is to say that
because a large number of people see a particular price level as important, therefore de facto it
becomes important. Needless to say, this is an aspect that critics of technical analysis regularly
seize on. While this may be the case to an extent, it does not answer the obvious question of
why such a number of people ﬁnd those levels important in the ﬁrst place. Technical analysis
is the discovery of patterns within price action, patterns which can be used to predict future
prices. The predictive results of technical analysis consistently exceed those suggested by a
random walk theory.2 Indeed, such have been the results achieved that there is now a sizeable
and ever growing community of traders and leveraged funds that trade solely on the back of
technical analysis signals. In short, technical analysis “works” to the extent that it produces
results consistently for market participants who are trying to predict short-term exchange rate
moves. If this is the case, what precisely is technical analysis and how can one use it?

4.3 THE ART OF CHARTING
Technical analysis is founded on the principle of “charting”, which relates to creating charts
to reﬂect price patterns. Once again, this is best explained by the use of a chart. In Figure 4.1,
we are looking at the Euro–dollar exchange rate from April 1998 to October 2001. At this
most basic stage, there are few clear patterns, apart from the one dominant pattern, which is
that the Euro has been in a downtrend for some time! Clearly, in order to try and interpret this
chart, we have to have a set of tools at our disposal, which provide some degree of unbiased,
objective analysis as to likely trends and direction. To start this off, we look at the two most
important building blocks of technical analysis:

r Support
r Resistance
4.3.1 Currency Order Dynamics and Technical Levels
Sceptics may suggest that support or resistance levels can just as easily be randomly picked.
The evidence however does not support such scepticism. Indeed, on the contrary, both academic
and institutional research suggests exchange rate trends are interrupted or reversed at published
support and resistance levels much more frequently than is the case at randomly picked levels.
Such levels are therefore seen as statistically important, most likely because of the clustering
effect mentioned earlier. Customer orders are placed just above or just below previous highs
or lows. As a result, this clustering can have the effect either of pausing or accelerating the
short-term price trend at any one time. This link between capital ﬂows and technical chart
levels can be expressed in the following way:

r “Support” reﬂects a concentration of demand sufﬁcient to pause the prevailing trend
r “Resistance” equally reﬂects a similar concentration of supply
2
While there are a number of studies on the results achieved through technical analysis, readers may ﬁnd particularly useful that
done by Richard M. Levich and Lee R. Thomas, “The signiﬁcance of technical trading-rule proﬁts in the foreign exchange market:
a bootstrap approach”, as published in the Journal of International Money and Finance, October 1993 and also in Andrew W. Gitlin
(editor), Strategic Currency Investing: Trading and Hedging in the Foreign Exchange Market, Probus Publishing Company, 1993.

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec Jan99 Feb

Mar
Apr

May
Jun
Jul
Aug

Figure 4.1 Example of a chart
Source: Reuters. Copyright Reuters Limited, 1999, 2002.

Apr98 May Jun

EUR= , Close(Bid), Line
05Oct01 0.9183

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec Jan00 Feb

Mar

Apr

EUR=, Close(Bid) [Line] Daily

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec Jan01 Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

25Mar98 - 31Oct01

0.82

0.84

0.86

0.88

0.9

0.92

0.94

0.96

0.98

1

1.02

1.04

1.06

1.08

1.1

1.12

1.14

1.16

1.18

1.2

Pr
USD

88
Currency Strategy

Technical Analysis

89

However, this clustering effect on prices can be further broken down into two speciﬁc types of
customer order:

r Take proﬁt
r Stop loss
There are important differences in the way that these two speciﬁc types of customer order
tend to cluster. For instance, take proﬁt orders tend to cluster in front of important support
or resistance levels and thus tend to have the habit of causing the trend to reverse — thus
reinforcing that support or resistance — if they are sufﬁcient in number. By contrast, stop loss
orders tend to be clustered behind important support or resistance levels, thus accelerating
and intensifying the prevailing trend if triggered. Academic research has found that take proﬁt
and stop loss customer orders, which impose some degree of conditionality on the order, can
make up between 10 and 15% of total order ﬂow. As a result, they can have an important
effect on trading conditions and therefore on price patterns. During calm market conditions,
they can further restrict price action. Conversely, during volatile market conditions, they can
exacerbate price volatility when such orders are triggered. Thus, both in calm and volatile
market conditions, they re-emphasize the original importance of the support and resistance
levels.
So far, we have been looking at “spot” foreign exchange orders, that is conditional customer
orders to be executed for spot (T + 2) delivery. However, conditional orders left in the options
market can also impact spot currency price action. More speciﬁcally, “knock-in” and “knockout” levels for exotic options, allowing a client to be knocked-in to the underlying structure or
conversely knocked-out of it, can and do trigger speciﬁc spot currency price activity. Knock-in
and knock-out levels are usually chosen based on previously important highs and lows. In other
words, they are chosen based on technical support or resistance levels. As a result, there can
be — and frequently is — both spot and option customer order clustering around such levels,
further impacting price action.
It is not only customers that place conditional orders in the market. In order to limit a bank’s
balance sheet exposure to overnight price swings in exchange rates, interbank dealers either
close out their positions at the end of the day or alternatively themselves leave take proﬁt or stop
loss orders with their dealing counterparts within the bank in the next time zone. Thus, a dealer
in Singapore may pass on their customers’ conditional orders as well as their own to London
and London may in turn pass on such orders to New York and so on round the time zones, either
until such orders are ﬁlled or conversely are cancelled. If there is a self-fulﬁlling aspect to this
whole idea, it concerns therefore the very microstructure of the currency market itself. Broadly
speaking, currency interbank dealers follow technical analysis more closely than the customer
base of the bank, in part because they have a much shorter time frame than their customers
and in part because they have to trade in order to make a living irrespective of whether or not
there have been changes in economic fundamentals. Currency interbank dealers and short-term
traders follow technical analysis, and because they make up the majority of currency market
participants the levels and types of analysis that they follow automatically become important.
Thus, structural aspects within the currency market may help explain to some degree the success
of technical analysis. What it does not explain however is the superior degree of that success
relative to classic economic analysis or alternatively to random walk theory in predicting shortterm exchange rate moves. Given that take proﬁt orders cause price trends to pause, while stop
loss orders extend such trends, the logical conclusion is that the balance between such orders
in the market place is an important real-time determinant of exchange rates.

90

Currency Strategy

4.3.2 The Study of Trends
At its heart, technical analysis represents the study of price trends (or anticipated trends). In
price terms, at their most basic, these can be divided into uptrends and downtrends. Within such
trends, we see points where little price action occurs and conversely other points reﬂecting
substantial price action and market tension. The idea behind support and resistance is that if
the price action fails to exceed a certain level, then that level becomes important. Thus, if a
price fails to exceed a high and falls back, we call that high a resistance. Equally, if the price
action fails to get below a low price level, then that low price level becomes support. Price
trends reﬂecting a number of support and resistance levels are reﬂected by trend-lines (see
Figure 4.2).
Resistance or support can be formed around such a trend-line. Note that at the bottom right
of Figure 4.2, the price of the Euro–dollar exchange rate breaks up through the trend-line.
From this, we can say that it has broken trend-line resistance. Thus, we can describe support
and resistance levels as levels where a trend may be interrupted or reversed. Because such
levels can determine the continuation or the cessation of a trend, they are seen as important by
market participants. In this example, market participants may well have left stop loss orders to
buy Euro and sell dollars above the trend-line resistance on the view that if such a level broke
it would signal a short-term end to the downtrend. Of course, if enough people leave orders
to buy (sell) above (below) trend-line resistance (support), then the reversal of the previous
trend could well be accelerated. Furthermore, speculative elements could discover such orders
and try to target them in order to cause what might become a self-fulﬁlling move, allowing for
potential proﬁts.
To identify support and resistance levels, technical analysts use a variety of information
inputs, including but not exclusive to chart analysis and numerical rules based on previous
price performance. The rule with support and resistance is that they are important until they
are broken. This may seem like just stating the obvious, but the key thing to note is that there
is no particular time limit to their importance.

4.3.3 Psychological Levels
In addition to the types of support and resistance that are identiﬁed by previous price action
and thus previous lows and highs, there are also other sorts that focus instead on psychological
factors or instead on ﬂow dynamics speciﬁc to that particular exchange rate. In the ﬁrst, market
participants frequently focus on round numbers — such as 0.9400 for the Euro–dollar exchange
rate — hence such levels are termed psychological support or resistance. They are important
not because they represent of necessity a previous low or high, but instead because they reﬂect
the expectation of a future move if they are breached. In the second, there can exist within
speciﬁc exchange rates support or resistance levels reﬂecting anticipated ﬂow dynamics. For
instance, in the dollar–yen exchange rate, some Japanese exporters may prefer also to sell their
receivables forward (selling dollars and buying yen) to achieve a round number. Thus, one
anticipates this by adding the forward points. For instance, if the spot dollar–yen exchange
rate is 120.45/55 and the three-month forward points are −73/−72.5, one might expect some
exporter sales to occur at 120.73 (which would allow an outright level of 120.00 to be achieved).
Consequently, one might see 120.73 as one type of resistance. Of course, the difﬁculty with
this particular type of approach is that as the spot exchange rate and the interest rate differential
move, so the forward resistance point moves.
@Team-FLY

Jul

Aug Sep

Oct

Nov Dec Jan99 Feb Mar
Apr
May Jun

Jul

Figure 4.2 Example of a trend-line
Source: Reuters. Copyright Reuters Limited, 1999, 2002.
