
Trades That I Am Waiting For
The next section in the trading journal lists the possible trades for the day.
Based on an initial overview of the charts, this section is where you should
list the trades that you are waiting to make. A sample entry would be:
April 5, 2005
Buy AUD/USD on a break of 0.7850 (previous day high).
Stop at 0.7800 (50-day SMA).
Target 1—0.7925 (38.2% Fibonacci retracement of Nov.–Mar. bull
wave).
Target 2—0.8075 (upper Bollinger).
Target 3—10-day trailing low.

P1: JYS
c08
JWBK299-Lein

96

September 15, 2008

19:22

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

Therefore, as soon as your entry level is reached, you know exactly
how you want to take action and where to place your stops and limits. Of
course, it is also important to take a quick glance at the market to make
sure that the trading conditions that you were looking for are still intact.
For example, if you were looking for a strong breakout with no retracement
to occur at the entry level, when it does break, you want to make sure that
the scenario that you were looking for plays out. This exercise is used to
help you develop a plan of action to tackle your trading day. Before every
battle, warriors regroup to go over the plan of attack; in trading you want
to have the same mentality. Plan and prepare for the worst-case scenario
and know your plan of attack for the day!

Existing or Completed Trades
This section is developed and used to enforce discipline and to learn from
your mistakes. At the end of each trading day, it is important to review
this section to understand why certain trades resulted in losses and others
resulted in profits. The purpose of this section is to identify trends. I will
use a completely unrelated example to explain why this is important. On a
normal day, most people will subconsciously inject a lot of “ums” or “uhs”
into their daily conversation. However, I bet most of these people do not
even realize that they are even doing it until someone records one of their
conversations and plays it back to them. This is one of the ways that professional presenters and newscasters train to kick the habit of using placeholder words. Having worked with more than 65,000 traders, too often have
I seen these traders repeatedly make the same mistakes. This could be taking profits too early, letting losses run, getting emotional about trading,
ignoring economic releases, or getting into a trade prematurely. Having a
record of previous trades is like keeping a recording of your conversations.
When you flip back to the trades that you have completed, you have a perfect map of what strategies have or have not been profitable for you. The
reason why a journal is so important is because it minimizes the emotional
component of trades. I frequently see novice traders take profits early but
let losses run. The following are two samples of trade journal entries that
could provide learning opportunities:
February 12, 2005
Trade: Short 3 lots of EUR/USD @ 1.3045.
Stop: 1.3095 (former all-time high).
Target: 1.2900.

P1: JYS
c08
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

19:22

Printer: Yet to come

Trade Parameters for Diﬀerent Market Conditions

97

Result: Trade closed on Feb. 13, 2005—stopped out of the 3 lots @
1.3150 (–105 pips).
Comments: Got margin call! EUR/USD broke the all-time high, but I
thought it was going to reverse, and did not stick to stop—kept letting
losses run, until eventually margin call closed out all positions. Note to
self: Make sure stick to stops!
April 3, 2005
Trade: Long 2 lots of USD/CAD @ 1.1945.
Stop: 1.1860 (strong technical support—confluence of 50-day moving
average and 68% Fibonacci retracement of Feb.-Mar. rally).
Target: First lot @ 1.2095 (upper Bollinger and 5 pips shy of 1.2100
psychological resistance).
Second lot @ 1.2250 (former head and shoulders support turned resistance, 100-day SMA).
Result: Trade closed on Apr. 5, 2005—stopped out of the 2 lots at
1.1860 (–85 pips).
Comments: USD/CAD did not continue uptrend and was becoming
overbought; I didn’t see that ADX was weakening and falling from
higher levels and that there was also a divergence in stochastics. Note
to self: Make sure to look for divergences next time!
Unlike many traders, I believe the best trades are where both the technical and fundamental pictures are telling the same story. In line with this
premise, I prefer to stay out of trades that contradict my fundamental outlook. For example, if there is a bullish formation in both the GBP/USD
and the AUD/USD due to U.S. dollar weakness, but the Bank of England
has finished raising interest rates, while the Reserve Bank of Australia has
full intentions of raising rates to tame the strength of the Australian economy, I would most likely choose to express my bearish dollar view in the
AUD/USD rather than the GBP/USD. My bias for choosing the AUD/USD
over the GBP/USD would be even stronger if the AUD/USD already offered
a higher interest rate differential than the GBP/USD. Too often have I seen
technicals thwarted by fundamentals, so now I always incorporate both
into my trading strategy. I use a combination of technical, fundamental,
and positioning and am generally also a trend follower. I also typically use
a top-down approach that involves the following:
1. First I will take an overall technical survey of the market and pick the

currency pairs that have retraced to attractive levels for entry in order
to participate in a medium-term trend.

P1: JYS
c08
JWBK299-Lein

98

September 15, 2008

19:22

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

2. For currencies with a dollar component (i.e., not the crosses), I deter-

mine if my initial technical view for that pair coincides with my fundamental view on the dollar as well as my view on how upcoming
U.S. releases may impact trading for the day. The reason why I look
at the dollar specifically is because 90 percent of all currency trades
involve the dollar, which makes U.S. fundamentals particularly important.
3. If it is a cross-currency pair such as GBP/JPY, I will proceed by determining if the technical view coincides with the fundamental outlook
using Fibonacci retracements, ADX, moving averages, oscillators, and
other technical tools.
4. Then I like to look at positioning using the FXCM Speculative Sentiment index to see if it supports the trade.
5. If I am left with two equally compelling trade ideas, I will choose the

one with a positive interest rate differential.

HAVE A TOOLBOX—USE WHAT
WORKS FOR THE CURRENT
MARKET ENVIRONMENT
Once you have created a trading journal, it is time to figure out which indicators to use on your charts. The reason why a lot of traders fail is because
they neglect to realize that their favorite indicators are not foolproof. Buying when stochastics are in oversold territory and selling when they are in
overbought territory is a strategy that is used quite often by range traders
with a great deal of success, but once the market stops range trading and
begins trending, then relying on stochastics could lead to a tremendous
amount of losses. In order to become consistently profitable, successful
traders need to learn how to be adaptable.
One of the most important practices that every trader must understand is to be conscious of the environment that they are trading in. Every trader needs to have some sort of checklist that will help them to
classify their trading environment so that they can determine whether the
market is trending or range-bound. Defining trade parameters is one of
the most important disciplines of trading. Too many traders have tried to
pick the top within a trend, only to wind up with consistently unprofitable
trades.
Although defining trade parameters is important to traders in any market (currencies, futures, equities), it is particularly important in the currency market since over 80 percent of the volume is speculative in nature.

P1: JYS
c08
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

19:22

Printer: Yet to come

99

Trade Parameters for Diﬀerent Market Conditions

This means that currencies can spend a very long time in a certain trading
environment. Also, the currency market obeys technical analysis particularly well given its large scale and number of participants.
There are basically two types of trading environments, which means
that at any point in time an instrument is either range trading or trending.
The first step every trader needs to take is to define the current trading
environment. The shortest time frame that traders should use in step one
is daily charts, even if you are trading on a five-minute time frame.

STEP ONE—PROFILE
TRADING ENVIRONMENT
There are many different ways that traders can determine whether a currency pair is range trading or trending. Of course, many people do it visually, but having set rules will help to keep traders out of trends that may be
fading or to prevent traders from getting into a range trade in the midst of a
possible breakout. Table 8.2 outlines some of rules that I look for in order
to classify a currency pair’s trading environment.

Range
Look for:
ADX (Average Directional Index) Less Than 20 The average directional index is one of the primary technical indicators used to determine
the strength of a trend. When ADX is less than 20, this suggests that the
trend is weak, which is generally characteristic of a range-bound market.
TABLE 8.2 Trend/Range Trading Rules
Trade

Rules

Indicators

Range

• ADX < 20
• Decreasing implied volatility
• Risk reversals near choice or ﬂipping
between favoring calls and puts

Bollinger bands, ADX, options

Trend

• ADX > 25
• Momentum consistent with
trend direction
• Risk reversals strongly bid for
put or call

Moving averages, ADX,
options, momentum

P1: JYS
c08
JWBK299-Lein

100

September 15, 2008

19:22

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

An ADX less than 20 and trending downward provides a further confirmation that the trend not only is weak, but will probably stay in a range trading
environment for a while longer.
Decreasing Implied Volatility There are many ways to analyze
volatility. What I like to do is actually track short-term versus long-term
volatility. When short-term volatility is falling, especially after a burst
above long-term volatility, it is usually indicative of a reversion to range
trading scenarios. Volatility usually blows out when a currency pair experiences sharp, quick moves. It contracts when ranges are narrow and the
trading is very quiet in the markets. The lazy man’s version of the way I
track volatility is Bollinger bands, which provide a fairly decent measure
for determining volatility conditions. A narrow Bollinger band suggests
that ranges are small and there is low volatility in the markets, while wide
Bollinger bands are reflective of large ranges and a highly volatile environment. In a range trading environment, we are looking for fairly narrow
Bollinger bands ideally in a horizontal formation similar to the USD/JPY
chart in Figure 8.2.
Risk Reversals Flipping between Calls and Puts A risk reversal
consists of a pair of options, a call and a put, on the same currency. Risk reversals have both the same expiration (one month) and the same sensitivity

FIGURE 8.2 USD/JPY Bollinger Band Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)

P1: JYS
c08
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

19:22

Printer: Yet to come

101

Trade Parameters for Diﬀerent Market Conditions

TABLE 8.3 Risk Reversals
14:40 GMT April 19th
1 Month to 1 Year Risk Reversal
Currency

1M R/R

3M R/R

6M R/R

1 YR R/R

USD/JPY
EUR/USD
GBP/USD
USD/CHF

0.3/0.6 JC
0.1/0.3 EC
0.0/0.3 SP
0.2/0.2 CC

0.7/1.0 JC
0.0/0.3 EC
0.0/0.3 SC
0.0/0.3 CC

1.1/1/3 JC
0.0/0.3 EC
0.0/0.3 SC
0.0/0.4 CC

1.3/1.6 JC
0.1/0.4 EC
0.0/0.3 SC
0.1/0.5 CC

JC = Japanese Yen Call
EC = Euro Call
SP = Sterling Put
SC = Sterling Call
CC = Swiss Call

to the underlying spot rate. They are quoted in terms of the difference in
volatility between the two options. While in theory these options should
have the same implied volatility, in practice these volatilities often differ
in the market. Risk reversals can be seen as having a market polling function. A number strongly in favor of calls or puts indicates that the market
prefers calls over puts. The reverse is true if the number is strongly in favor of puts versus calls. Thus, risk reversals can be used as a substitute
for gauging positions in the FX market. In an ideal environment, far out-ofthe-money calls and puts should have the same volatility. However, this is
rarely the case since there is generally a sentiment bias in the markets that
is reflected in risk reversals. In range-bound environments, risk reversals
tend to flip between favoring calls and puts at nearly zero (or equal), indicating that there is indecision among bulls and bears and there is no strong
bias in the markets.
What Does a Risk Reversal Table Look Like? According to the
risk reversals shown in Table 8.3, we can see that the market is strongly
favoring yen calls (JC) and dollar puts over the long term. EUR/USD shortterm risk reversals are near zero, which is what you are looking for when
profiling a range-bound environment. The most readily available free resource that I know of for up-to-date risk reversals is the IFR news plug-in
which can be found on the FX Trading Station at www.fxcm.com.

Trend
Look for:

P1: JYS
c08
JWBK299-Lein

102

September 15, 2008

19:22

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

ADX (Average Directional Index) Greater Than 20 As mentioned
earlier when we talked about range trading conditions, the Average Directional Index is one of the primary technical indicators used to determine
the strength of a trend. In a trending environment, we look for ADX to be
greater than 25 and rising. However, if ADX is greater than 25 but sloping
downward, especially off of the extreme 40 level, you have to be careful of
aggressive trend positioning since the downward slope may indicate that
the trend is waning.
Momentum Consistent with Trend Direction In addition to using
ADX, I also recommend looking for a confirmation of a trending environment through momentum indicators. Traders should look for momentum
to be consistent with the direction of the trend. Most currency traders will
look for oscillators to point strongly in the direction of the trend. For example, in an uptrend, trend traders will look for the moving averages, RSI,
stochastics, and moving average convergence/divergence (MACD) to all
point strongly upward. In a downtrend, they will look for these same indicators to point downward. Some currency traders use the momentum
index, but only to a lesser extent. One of the strongest momentum indicators is a perfect order in moving averages. A perfect order is when the
moving averages line up perfectly; that is, for an uptrend, the 10-day SMA
is greater than the 20-day SMA, which is greater than the 50-day SMA. The
100-day SMA and the 200-day SMA are below the shorter-term moving averages. In a downtrend, a perfect order would be when the shorter-term
moving averages stack up below the longer-term moving averages.

Options (Risk Reversals) With a trending environment, we are looking for risk reversals to strongly favor calls or puts. When one side of the
market is laden with interest, it is usually indicative of a strongly trending
environment or that a contra-trend move may be brewing if risk reversals
are at extreme levels.

STEP TWO—DETERMINE TRADING
TIME HORIZON
Once you have determined that a currency pair is either range-bound or
trending, it is time to determine how long you plan on holding the trade.
The following is a set of guidelines and indicators that I use for trading
different time frames. Not all of the guidelines need to be met, but the more
guidelines that are met, the more solid the trading opportunity.

P1: JYS
c08
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

19:22

Printer: Yet to come

Trade Parameters for Diﬀerent Market Conditions

103

Intraday Range Trade
Rules
1. Use hourly charts to determine entry points and daily charts to confirm

that a range trade exists on a longer time frame.
2. Use oscillators to determine entry point within range.
3. Look for short-dated risk reversals to be near choice.
4. Look for reversal in oscillators (RSI or stochastics at extreme point).
5. It is a stronger trade when prices fail at key resistance or hold key sup-

port levels (use Fibonacci retracement points and moving averages).
Indicators Stochastics, MACD, RSI, Bollinger bands, options, Fibonacci retracement levels.

Medium-Term Range Trade
Rules
1. Use daily charts.
2. There are two ways to range trade in the medium term: position for up-

coming range trading opportunities or get involved in existing ranges:
Upcoming range opportunities: Look for high-volatility environments,
where short-term implied volatilities are significantly higher than
longer-term volatilities; seek reversion back to the mean environments.
Existing ranges: Use Bollinger bands to identify existing ranges.
3. Look for reversals in oscillators such as RSI and stochastics.
4. Make sure ADX is below 25 and ideally falling.
5. Look for medium-term risk reversals near choice.
6. Confirm with price action—failure at key range resistances and

bounces on key range supports (using traditional technical indicators).
Indicators Options, Bollinger bands, stochastics, MACD, RSI, Fibonacci retracement levels.

Medium-Term Trend Trade
Rules
1. Look for developing trend on daily charts and use weekly charts for

confirmation.

P1: JYS
c08
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

104

19:22

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

2. Refer back to the characteristics of a trending environment—look for

those parameters to be met.
3. Buy breakout/retracement scenarios on key Fibonacci levels or mov-

ing averages.
4. Look for no major resistance levels in front of trade.
5. Look for candlestick pattern confirmation.
6. Look for moving average confluence to be on same side of trade.
7. Enter on a break of significant high or low.
8. The ideal is to wait for volatilities to contract before getting in.
9. Look for fundamentals to also be supportive of trade—growth and in-

terest rates. You want to see a string of economic surprises or disappointments, depending on directional bias.
Indicators ADX, parabolic stop and reversal (SAR), RSI, Ichimoku
clouds (a Japanese formation), Elliott waves, Fibonacci.

Medium-Term Breakout Trade
Rules
1. Use daily charts.
2. Look for contraction in short-term volatility to a point where it is

sharply below long-term volatility.
3. Use pivot points to determine whether a break is a true break or a false

break.
4. Look for moving average confluences to be supportive of trade.

Indicators

Bollinger bands, moving averages, Fibonacci.

RISK MANAGEMENT
Although risk management is one of the simpler topics to grasp, it seems to
be the hardest to follow for most traders. Too often we have seen traders
turn winning positions into losing positions and solid strategies result in
losses instead of profits. Regardless of how intelligent and knowledgeable
traders may be about the markets, their own psychology will cause them
to lose money. What could be the cause of this? Are the markets really so
enigmatic that few can profit? Or is there simply a common mistake that
many traders are prone to make? The answer is the latter. And the good

P1: JYS
c08
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

19:22

Printer: Yet to come

Trade Parameters for Diﬀerent Market Conditions

105

news is that the problem, while it can be an emotionally and psychologically challenging one, is ultimately fairly easy to grasp and solve.
Most traders lose money simply because they have no understanding
of or place no importance on risk management. Risk management involves
essentially knowing how much you are willing to risk and how much you
are looking to gain. Without a sense of risk management, most traders simply hold on to losing positions for an extremely long amount of time, but
take profits on winning positions far too prematurely. The result is a seemingly paradoxical scenario that in reality is all too common: the trader ends
up having more winning positions than losing ones, but ends up with a negative profit/loss (P/L). So, what can traders do to ensure they have solid
risk management habits? There are a few key guidelines that all traders,
regardless of their strategy or what they are trading, should keep in mind.

Risk-Reward Ratio
Traders should look to establish a risk-reward ratio for every trade they
place. In other words, they should have an idea of how much they are willing to lose, and how much they are looking to gain. Generally, the riskreward ratio should be at least 1:2, if not more. Having a solid risk-reward
ratio can prevent traders from entering positions that ultimately are not
worth the risk.

Stop-Loss Orders
Traders should also employ stop-loss orders as a way of specifying the
maximum loss they are willing to accept. By using stop-loss orders, traders
can avoid the common predicament of being in a scenario where they have
many winning trades but a single loss large enough to eliminate any trace of
profitability in the account. Trailing stops to lock in profits are particularly
useful. A good habit of more successful traders is to employ the rule of
moving your stop to break even as soon as your position has profited by the
same amount that you initially risked through the stop order. At the same
time, some traders may also choose to close a portion of their position.
For those looking to add to a winning position or go with a trend, the
best strategy is to treat the new transaction as if it were a new trade of
its own, independent of the winning position. If you are going to add to a
winning position, perform the same analysis of the chart that you would
if you had no position at all. If a trade continues to go in your favor, you
can also close out part of the position while trailing your stop higher on
the remaining lots that you are holding. Try thinking about your risk and
reward on each separate lot that you have bought if they are at different
entry points as well. If you buy a second lot 50 pips above your first entry

P1: JYS
c08
JWBK299-Lein

106

September 15, 2008

19:22

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
