
139

c05.indd 139

1/13/09 10:04:54 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

or consolidated in the recent past. This method of visual determination is perhaps one of the most accurate ways of representing
potential support and resistance. As mentioned in Chapter 3, a tenet
of technical analysis is that over time, price will visit and turn at certain levels repeatedly (otherwise known as support/resistance).
Other popular short-term day trading methods for determining
support and resistance include pivot points, Fibonacci retracements,
and trendlines. Day traders will use the levels derived from these
studies to identify either breakouts of the lines or bounces off the
lines. All of these techniques will be discussed in more detail further
on in this chapter.
Day trading appeals to the common human interest in immediate gratification. Many traders who gravitate toward day trading are
lured by the illusory promise of instant profits for little effort. This
particular promise is an empty one. Nevertheless, if approached in
the correct manner with good technique and excellent risk/money
management, day trading can potentially become a profitable pursuit.

T rend Trading — Going with the Flow
Day trading, swing trading, and position trading, as just described,
are general approaches to trading foreign exchange. This trend trading section begins a more in-depth look at the methods and strategies commonly used by foreign exchange traders.
Trend trading, or trend following, is very similar to the general
position trading approach used by longer-term traders/investors.
The main distinction, as mentioned earlier, lies in the types of analysis that are generally emphasized. Position traders will usually utilize

140

c05.indd 140

1/13/09 10:04:54 AM

Tr e n d Tr a d i n g — G o i n g w i t h t h e F l o w

both technical and fundamental analysis in their decision-making
processes. In contrast, trend followers will commonly employ technical analysis almost exclusively.
The goal of trend trading is to jump on a trend when the direction is technically clear, and ride it as long as it is intact. Technical
trend following purists may identify uptrends when clear higher
lows and higher highs begin appearing on a chart. By the same
token, downtrends are identified by lower highs and lower lows.
Trendlines and parallel trend channels will often be used to outline
these trends on a chart.
Another method of measuring the existence and strength of a
trend is the use of moving averages, where the slope of a moving
average may indicate whether there is a current uptrend, downtrend, or neither. Within a trend-trading context, moving averages
can also be used to give crossover signals (as described in Chapter 3).
Using this technique, if price crossed above a certain moving average it would be a buy signal, while a cross below would be a sell signal. Alternatively, a cross of a shorter moving average above a longer
moving average would be a buy signal, while a cross below would
be a sell signal. Moving averages are often used in this way, but the
difficulty lies in the frequent false signals, where several unprofitable
crosses occur in succession, otherwise known as whipsaw.
Yet another trend measurement tool that is widely used, but arguably weaker than the prior two methods, is the Average Directional
Index (ADX), which oscillates to display the strength and existence
of a trend on a currency chart. Many other indicators and studies are
also used to identify trending conditions, but the three methods just
mentioned are probably the most common. Additionally, breakouts

141

c05.indd 141

1/13/09 10:04:54 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

in the direction of the general trend are another way of confirming
trend continuation, but this will be discussed further in the section
on breakout trading.
Once a trend is identified and measured using technical studies,
the stage of the trend needs to be identified. Clearly, getting in at the
beginning or middle of a trend run is vastly preferable to getting in
late. Although there are no clear-cut delineations among the three
stages, each stage can be discerned by its general characteristics.
If higher lows and higher highs begin occurring right after a
well-defined downtrend or prolonged price consolidation, it could
be a sign that an uptrend is in its early stage. Prudent trend traders may prefer to avoid entry at these first signs of trend change. In
hindsight, this stage represents the best possible entry point, but at
the time of decision it is full of uncertainty.
When the trend moves onto its middle stage, it is considered
to be well-established with consistent prior evidence that price is
making progress in one direction. It is at this point that many trend
traders will jump on the trend, fueling it even further in the same
direction. From a day trading or swing trading perspective, this type
of entry in the middle of a trend is simply too late. From a position
trading and trend trading perspective, however, it can be considered
a sensible entry targeting long-term profits.
When it comes to the late stage of a trend, most of the major
market players are already in position and looking to take profits.
This late stage is perhaps the worst possible time to enter into a
trend. But how would a trader know if this stage has been reached,
or if the trend still has enough momentum to move much further?
The answer to this question is difficult. There really is no way of

142

c05.indd 142

1/13/09 10:04:54 AM

Tr e n d Tr a d i n g — G o i n g w i t h t h e F l o w

knowing definitively until one can look back in hindsight and pinpoint the very end of the trend on a chart. At the same time, however, many clues will appear on the chart in real-time that hint at
the near-end of a trend, including failures to reach higher highs in
an uptrend (or lower lows in a downtrend), prolonged consolidations, and significantly diminished volatility. In any event, it is much
better to play it safe by avoiding potential late stage entries altogether rather than risk buying at the highs or selling at the lows.
Once a trend and its stage have been identified, the next step for
a trend trader is to decide on the timing and location of entry.
For trend traders, this decision is not nearly as crucial as it is for
shorter-term swing traders and day traders. Riding long-term trends
is all about letting profits run as far as possible. With this mentality, trend traders are not as concerned about pinpointing a perfectly
timed entry as a shorter-term trader might be. That being said,
however, the better the entry the better the potential profit picture.
Therefore, trend traders generally prefer to enter into a trend at high
probability locations within the trend.
As shown in Exhibit 5.1, this would entail buying on the dips
in an uptrend, or the temporary downward retracements within
the overall uptrend. During a downtrend, it would entail shortselling on the rallies, or the temporary upward retracements within
the overall downtrend. These areas constitute high probability
entries for a very clear reason. In the case of an uptrend, buying
“cheap” when price is steadily appreciating could perhaps be considered the most intelligent way to conduct trades in any type of
business. The same general principle holds true, but in the opposite
direction, for downtrends.

143

c05.indd 143

1/13/09 10:04:55 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

EXHIBIT 5.1

Buying on the Dips

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

Once a trend has been entered, the trend trader must manage
the position, albeit not as actively as a shorter-term trader might
need to. It should be kept in mind here that the primary principle
of trend trading is to let profits run while cutting losses short. This
is the cornerstone of long-term trend following. With short-term
swing trading and day trading, letting profits run is much less of a
focus because these types of traders specialize in exploiting relatively
minor price fluctuations. In contrast, trend traders are generally not
so quick to take profits. These longer-term traders need to establish
an excellent reward-to-risk ratio (as will be discussed in Chapter 6)
in order for their few large profits to surpass the many small losses

144

c05.indd 144

1/13/09 10:04:55 AM

Tr e n d Tr a d i n g — G o i n g w i t h t h e F l o w

that are incurred during up-and-down whipsaws and false trend
moves. So when a good, strong trend is found, the trend trader must
ride it for all it is worth.
This means that perhaps the best way to manage established
trend positions is through the use of trailing stop losses, whether
manual or automated. These dynamic stop losses follow price such
that profits are locked in as the position accumulates gains. With
an automated trailing stop loss, the market is followed by a certain
number of pips predetermined by the trader. A manual trailing stop
loss is often a more preferred method of managing a trend trade. In
an uptrend situation, for example, the trader would actually move
the stop loss manually. A logical location for each move of the stop
loss would be right below the last swing low (or dip). If price continues up, more gains are locked in, and the trailing stop loss gets
moved to progressively higher dips. If price breaks below the last
dip, however, it is a solid indication that the uptrend might possibly be ending. The manual trailing stop loss then promptly takes the
trader out of the position, realizing all of the accumulated profits.
Other ways to manage trend trades besides using trailing stop
losses include scaling in and scaling out of position. Scaling into
position entails entering initially with a small, fractional trade size,
and then adding onto the position as the trend develops further. This
can be a great way to test the waters without being fully committed
from the outset. If the trend fails initially, the loss is not excessive. If,
however, the trend develops significantly, a full-sized position can be
quickly scaled in.
Scaling out is just the opposite. Once a full position has matured,
and there are indications of a possible waning of trend momentum,

145

c05.indd 145

1/13/09 10:04:55 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

parts of the position may be closed in succession. The logic of this
strategy is to lock in and realize profits on part of the position while
allowing another part to take advantage of any further remaining
momentum.
Finally, if the trend trade is not exited due to price hitting a stop
loss (whether static or trailing) or to the trader scaling out of position, a trade exit may also be made when a profit target is hit. In
initially setting the profit target, the trend trader should take into
consideration a minimum reward-to-risk ratio for this type of trade,
as well as the prevailing market conditions evident on the chart.
On longer-term trend trades, the reward-to-risk ratio, as will be
discussed in Chapter 6, should preferably be set as high as possible.
Therefore, the profit target should ideally be set to several times
the magnitude of the initial stop loss. This, by definition, is the manifestation of the popular trading proverb, “Let your profits run and
cut your losses short.” At the same time, however, the market will
give only what it has to give. In other words, a high reward-to-risk
ratio cannot be forced, as profit potential depends solely upon market conditions. For this reason, the trailing stop loss is generally the
preferred method for exiting trend trades over the more arbitrary
profit target method.
Trend trading is one of the most effective strategies for approaching foreign exchange trading. Many of the most successful and wellknown traders, whether they trade stocks, futures, or currencies,
consider themselves long-term trend traders. It is perhaps the best
single method for capturing major currency price movements, especially since foreign exchange is generally considered to be a market
that trends frequently.

146

c05.indd 146

1/13/09 10:04:55 AM

R a n g e Tr a d i n g — B e t w e e n a R o c k a n d a H a r d P l a c e

R ange Trading — Between a Rock and
a Hard Place
If the foreign exchange market trends often, what is it doing when it
is not trending? Most likely, it is trading in a range. Ranges are periods when price moves up and down without a clear directional trend.
Some would characterize the price action during a range as “sideways,”
or horizontal. Generally speaking, this kind of directionless price movement is bounded on a top extreme by a resistance line and on a bottom
extreme by a support line. Exhibit 5.2 illustrates a typical trading range.
It is between these support and resistance boundaries that the
range trading opportunities lie. Range trading simply involves
EXHIBIT 5.2

Trading Range

Source: FX Solutions -– FX AccuCharts

147

c05.indd 147

1/13/09 10:04:56 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

identifying and capitalizing upon the turns within a horizontal trading range. These turns are also considered swings, so the techniques
of range trading are often an important component of a swing trader’s repertoire.
While range trading may be a popular strategy, some traders,
especially those that concentrate on following trends, consider it to
be a much lower probability method. This is primarily because of
the fact that the upside in range trading is necessarily capped at the
other side of the range. By definition, range traders do not let their
profits run the way trend traders do. As this is true, range traders can
increase their potential upside by setting a minimum threshold in
terms of the height of the ranges that they are willing to trade.
For example, a 20-pip range that forms on the GBP/USD pair
during Asian session is not really worth range trading. This type of
range is best reserved for breakout trading, which will be discussed
in the next section. The height of the range is just too diminutive to
make it worthwhile as a range trading opportunity. In other words,
the potential profit is not sufficient to justify the risk. A 300-pip
range, however, can certainly offer range traders an abundance of
good potential trading opportunities that can be very worthwhile.
If stop losses are always placed just beyond the support or resistance
level from which a range trade is initiated, a profit target (on the
other side of the range) that is further away would clearly offer a
higher probability trade from a risk/reward perspective. Therefore,
a prudent range trading approach should include some minimum
criteria for the height of the range.
Once the height of a potential range is established by at least two
approximate touches of both support and resistance, preparation for

148

c05.indd 148

1/13/09 10:04:56 AM

R a n g e Tr a d i n g — B e t w e e n a R o c k a n d a H a r d P l a c e

range trading can begin. Most range traders will use the common
horizontal lines on their charts to denote the support and resistance
levels in a range. Some, however, will use dynamic bands, most notably the Bollinger Bands, to outline these levels. Tools like the Bollinger
Bands can certainly be useful in trading ranges that do not possess very
strictly defined upper and lower bounds. With the use of Bollinger
Bands, however, a range trader should also monitor the slope of the
simple moving average running through the middle of the Bands to
ensure that it is indeed flat or near-flat. Only in this way can the trader
be adequately confident that a horizontal range is indeed in place.
On the establishment of the range using one of the methods
mentioned, the range trader might then simply use a common oscillator like Stochastics or RSI to help indicate potential turns at or
near resistance and support. The most common method of reading
these oscillators is to identify the point at which they cross the line
exiting overbought or oversold, which denotes a possible impending
turn. This is illustrated in Exhibit 5.3.
Besides the oscillator indications, another turn confirmation
can be found at the break of an intra-range trendline, as shown in
Exhibit 5.4.
Although requiring a trendline break confirmation in this fashion
will almost always lead to a relatively late trade entry, it can present
valuable evidence that a turn within the range has indeed occurred.
A tighter stop loss can then be placed on the other side of the trendline break as opposed to the other side of the range support/resistance.
Range trading can be an effective method for trading foreign
exchange during periods when there is no discernible trend in
the market. During these periods when price tends to bounce

149

c05.indd 149

1/13/09 10:04:56 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

EXHIBIT 5.3

Stochastics Turns from
Overbought/Oversold

Source: FX Solutions - FX AccuCharts

repeatedly between horizontal resistance and support, traders must
either utilize methods similar to those described above, or stay out
of the market altogether. If an established range has sufficient height,
trading the bounces can be a potentially effective approach to sustained nontrending market conditions.

B reakout Trading (and Fading) — Shooting for
the Stars
Where range trading attempts to capitalize on turns that respect
established support and resistance levels, breakout trading is just

150

c05.indd 150

1/13/09 10:04:56 AM

B r e a k o u t Tr a d i n g ( a n d F a d i n g ) — S h o o t i n g f o r t h e S t a r s

EXHIBIT 5.4

Intra-Range Trendline Breakouts

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

the opposite. Foreign exchange traders who specialize in breakouts
spend their time looking for violations of support and resistance.
Exhibit 5.5 illustrates a typical forex breakout opportunity.
To many, breakout trading makes more sense than any other
method of trading, as a breakout with strong momentum can potentially yield a great deal of pips for the relatively small amount of risk
involved. For this reason, a lot of traders gravitate immediately to
trading breakouts. But these traders soon realize that it is not as easy
as it may initially appear to be. This is because many of the major
breakouts that occur in today’s foreign exchange markets tend to be
false breakouts. This is when a breakout occurs without any follow

151

c05.indd 151

1/13/09 10:04:57 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

EXHIBIT 5.5

Major Horizontal Support Break

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

through and then reverses, trapping all of the breakout traders who
hastily jumped on the opportunity.
False breakouts of this nature tend to be of two types. The first
can be called a “fakeout,” where a support/resistance line is breached
slightly, but then price just turns back and goes in the opposite direction as soon as most of the breakout traders get trapped.
This type of false break is akin to price respecting support/resistance after breaching it only slightly. The second type of false break
is called a premature breakout, where a slight breakout occurs,
then turns around to go back in the opposite direction, and then
finally turns once again to perform a true breakout on a subsequent

152

c05.indd 152

1/13/09 10:04:57 AM

B r e a k o u t Tr a d i n g ( a n d F a d i n g ) — S h o o t i n g f o r t h e S t a r s

attempt. Both of these types of false breaks can be extremely frustrating for breakout traders.
As a reaction to the proliferation of false breaks on currency
charts, some former breakout traders have transformed into what
are called breakout “faders,” where they fade, or trade against, major
breakouts. Trading against a dominant movement in this way can also
be a risky strategy, but with the proper risk controls and money management in place, it can be an effective approach in many instances.
Whether a trader fades or trades a breakout, the techniques used
to denote relevant support and resistance levels is identical. The simplest, and perhaps most reliable, method involves manually drawing
horizontal lines on a chart that correspond to previous market turns.
As explained in Chapter 3, horizontal support and resistance are partly
derived from traders’ collective memory of a given price level, and
whether the general consensus considers that level relatively high or
relatively low. If a price level is considered relatively low (support),
buying activity at that level should occur. Conversely, if a price level
is considered relatively high (resistance), selling activity should occur.
When these activities occur on a major basis by many market participants, the end result should generally be a turn at support or resistance.
Therefore, drawing a horizontal line extending from a previous turn
makes a lot of sense. Traders’ memories of relative price levels are clearest at the levels of previous market turns. That is one of the reasons that
we frequently see price turn repeatedly at a certain level over a prolonged period of time. Exhibit 5.6 illustrates the technique of manually
drawing horizontal support and resistance lines at market turns.
In the case of breakouts, the logic is equally simple. The reasoning is that price should respect previously established support and

153

c05.indd 153

1/13/09 10:04:57 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

EXHIBIT 5.6

Manually Drawn Horizontal Lines

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

resistance levels under normal circumstances, but if there is a strong
enough catalyst for pushing price to break a given level, that breach
should carry enough momentum to take price to the next further support/resistance level. If the breakout level in question is a
very-long-term or all-time high or low, where a further established
support/resistance level does not exist, the assumption is that price
will subsequently make new highs/lows somewhere significantly
beyond the broken level. As we saw in the case of false breakouts,
however, this assumption does not always hold true.
Besides the technique of manually drawn horizontal lines for
denoting support and resistance levels, there are also several other
