
(as seen by the low deltas), as the market moves towards parity with the
underlying asset.
So the savings of $2,430 must be compensated for by the belief that you
will be able to make at least half that when the market moves in whatever
direction it is going.

Stop-Limit Strangle Using an option strangle is not the only choice
that traders have for taking advantage of potential market volatility. Stoplimit orders can operate in a similar fashion as purchasing a put and a call.
For instance, if you did not want to commit any cash to putting on the
trade, but you wanted to be poised for any potential movement, you can
set a stop-limit order at the same points of support and resistance that you
would have otherwise bought options.
There are three drawbacks to using this stop-limit strategy. First, you
cannot guarantee that your order will be filled, particularly if the market
gaps. Second, the expense of putting on a futures contract or buying shares
outright will typically exceed the price of the option. This makes the strategy less expensive in the short run, but more costly in the long run. Finally,
by using a futures contract or buying shares directly, you eliminate the
benefit of the limited risk that options can afford you. This means that you

Holding the Bull and the Bear by the Tails

75

will need to add a secondary risk management strategy, such as a stop, or
purchase a protective option.

Execution
Neither straddle nor strangle is more effective than the other. The single
most important factor in choosing either is what you hope to accomplish.
When you set out to purchase at-the-money or out-of-the-money options, a
myriad of factors come into play.
If it's an option on a futures contract, ask yourself when the underlying
asset expires. This directly affects how long you are able to hold on to the
option contract. If you are actively trading the option you will want to be
aware of the volume so you can liquidate your option as quickly as possible.
Price, while a concern, is secondary to how relevant it is to the trading
situation at hand and the goals you have in mind.

GETTING THE RIGHT OPTIONS
FOR 1'HE JOB
Understanding option selection, having an idea about delta, and being able
to calculate the savings, values, and gains of the various options form the
essential foundation needed to utilize any of the ideas presented in this
book. By beginning with straddles and strangles you are able to play around
with using puts and calls as a risk management strategy without feeling
like you are betting the farm. As chapters progress, it becomes increasingly
more important that you have a grasp of choosing the right options to work
in tandem with your spot, futures, or margined position.
In this section we complete our review of the gold market and its reaction to the Federal Reserve's interest rate announcement on February
27, 2008; we also discuss the S&P 500's and the euro's reaction to various
other news announcements and whether putting on a straddle or a strangle
is preferable.

Economic Calendars
There is always a debate on whether fundamental or technical analysis is
superior. This is a debate best left to amateurs. The market is a complex
system that can be influenced by news, supply, and demand just as easily
as it can be dissected on the basis of price and time. While many of the
news events may have a temporary effect that can last from a few hours to
a few weeks, they should not be taken lightly nor ignored.

76

BASIC STRATEGIES

Various economic news events have the ability to modify how hedgers
and professional traders plan out their long-tern1 strategies and approaches
to the changing market environment.
This modification can best be seen by looking at the shifting balance of
longs and shorts in the Commodity Futures Trading Commission's (CFTC)
Commitment of Traders Report (COT). The COT report is designed to show
the shifts in various commodity, currency, interest rate, and energy contracts and options. This shift is shown, from week to week, in the fluctuating balance of long and short contract holders. As long and short increase
and decrease their holdings, they are constantly reflecting the real world
changes in supply and demand.
The COT report is one of many resources used to watch fundamental
shifts in the market. Every month there are important economic indicators
that have an impact on the markets. When these reports come out the market can behave in unpredictable ways. A tutorial on Investopedia, written
by Ryan Barnes, outlines 25 different economic indicators and their impact
on the markets. Yahoo! Finance has an economic calendar on their web site
that gives the release dates and times of the 25 economic indicators Ryan
Bames overviews, plus many less-talked-about, lower-profile economic
indicators.
No matter what economic indicator you follow, when the data is released it impacts to some degree how the people in the know react to it.
This means that you can set a straddle or a strangle to take advantage of
the impending news that is released. By solely trading in this way you create multiple opportunities to take a proactive stand in the markets that can
benefit you no matter which direction the wind blows.
Of the various economic indicators there are five that have a significant
impact on how the market moves. The interest rate decisions of the Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC), Consumer Price Index (CPI), Consumer
Confidence Index (CCI), Jobless Claims Report, and Producer Price Index
(PPI) have a significant impact on how the economic health of a country is
perceived. There are also various inventory and weather reports that affect
stock indexes and commodity products as well. The goal is to understand
these various indicators and to find the ones that work for your trading
goals.

Fedel'al Open iU arl{et Committee (FO~'IC) The Federal Reserve
Board has a special branch, the Federal Open Market Committee, that
makes key decisions regarding monetary policy in the United States. Seven
of the twelve members are the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System and the other five are Reserve Bank presidents. The FOMC meets
eight times per year to determine interest rates as well as the discount rate,

Holding the Bull and the Bear by the Tails

77

both of which have a direct impact on whether the money supply is tightened or expanded.
Consumer Price Index (CPI) Consumer Price Index (CPI) is considered one the most definitive economic indicators around. Several other indicators actually use the CPI as a way to determine their own key economic
numbers. The anticipation of what the CPI will say leads many Wall Street
analysts to actively recommend the buying or selling of the equity markets along with having a direct effect on how investors get involved in the
fixed-income markets. The level of impact that the CPI has directly affects
how the FOMC will react in deciding if they will encourage a loose or tight
money policy.
Consumer Confidence Index (CCI) Once a month the nonprofit
group the Conference Board releases the Consumer Confidence Index
(CCI). This information assists the Federal Reserve in determining exactly
what the average consumer is feeling about the economy, as far out as six
months in advance.
Over 5,000 homes are contacted to take part in a survey conducted by
the Conference Board. The survey's sole purpose is to help determine the
financial health and spending power of American families. By gathering
this data, the Conference Board is able to detennine the level of overall
confidence that consumers have in the economy.
Jobless Claims Report Every Thursday at 8:30 A .M. EST the Jobless
Claims report is released. This number is meant to show how many firsttime filings for state jobless claims are being registered around the country.
The data itself is highly volatile. Being a week-to-week indicator based on a
four-week sample, states experience high volumes of claims that can easily
skew numbers upwards. In order to compensate for the spikes a revised
figure is released one week later showing exactly what states had an impact
on the numbers.
Producer Price Index (PPI) The Producer Price Index (PPI) is released by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. It comes out around the 13th of
each month. The PPI measures prices at the wholesale and producer level.
It accumulates the prior months' data and shows whether prices are increasing, indicating inflation, or decreasing, indicating deflation. Broken
up into three parts, it clearly shows exactly what the prices are throughout
the production cycle.
With a separate PPI Index for the crude, intermediate, and finished
stages of a products life cycle, it is easy to see where inflation is occurring
in the production cycle. With all this data, the core PPI number is still seen

78

BASIC STRATEGIES

as the key to understanding the economy. It measures finished goods while
simultaneously removing food and energy from the equation. The reason
being that food and energy are too volatile to provide accurate numbers
when calculating for the real price of finished foods in any given month.

General Economic Indicators There are many economic indicators
that affect commodities across the entire spectrum. From weather predictions to import and export figures, various commodities are positively or
negatively affected. Whether you look at crude inventory indicators, the
Gross Domestic Product, or wait for Central Banks around the world to
make policy decisions, each one can be relevant in setting the stage for
your trading decision.
Oil traders are devoted followers of crude inventory indicators, which
represent the amount of oil currently being stored for future use. The fluctuations in these numbers gives a strong indicator of whether production
is matching consumption, or whether consumption has eased off. The indicator measures the weekly status of U.S. crude oil supplies.
The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is used by traders to determine
the economic health of a country. Strong GDPs have a tendency to buoy
stock markets; weak GDPs have a tendency to pull stock markets down.
Presented on a quarterly basis, GDP numbers have the ability to set the
economic trend for up to four months before any significant change is recognized by the majority of traders. Designed to measure the market value
of all goods and services produced, the GDP is a well-balanced view of
any country's overall competitiveness in a global economy-as long as it
doesn't exceed a 3 percent annual growth rate. If the market moves in excess of that, then investors worry about inflation and potential economic
bubbles. Inversely, if an economy has two negative-growth GDP reports in
a row, an economy is considered to be in a recession.
Whatever the indicator may be, when it is announced it has the ability
to polarize the marketplace significantly. This leaves room for a varied set
of trading opportunities for traders familiar with the straddle and strangle
strategy.

OPTION TUTORIAL
There are many great books on options investing. Many of them are very
detailed in explaining various types of spreads and subtle nuances of options. In this brief tutorial I lay down a basic foundation about options you
can use throughout this book.

79

Holding the Bull and the Bear by the Tails

There are many books and videos available with more details on options investing. See Tables 4.1 through 4.4 to learn about puts and calls, the
underlying asset vs. the strike price, interaction of intrinsic value to time
value, and a cursory overview of the greeks.

TABLE 4.1

Put and Call Defined

Put

Call

An agreement that gives an
investor the right (but not the
obligation) to buy a stock ,
bond, commodity, or other
instrument at a specified price
within a specific time period .

An option contract giving the owner the
right, but not the obligation, to sell a
specified amount of an underlying asset
at a set price within a specified time . The
buyer of a put option estimates that the
underlying asset will drop below the
exercise price before the expiration date.

Excerpted from Investopedia.com

TABLE 4.2

Options Strike Price and Underlying Asset

At·the·moneyoption

In·the·money option

Out·of·the·moneyoption

TABLE 4.3

Call/Put

Call

Put

Price of the asset
matches the option
strike price.
Price of the asset is
greater than the
option price.
Price of the asset is less
than the option strike
price .

Price of the asset
matches the option
strike price .
Price of the asset is less
than the option strike
price.
Price of the asset is
greater than the option
strike price .

Option Intrinsic and Time Values
At·the·Money
Option

In·the·Money
Option

Out-of-the-Money
Option

This type of option
derives its value
solely from time.
Intrinsic value
contributes
nothing to price.

This type of option
finds its time
value decreasing
while
simultaneously
increasing its
intrinsic value.

This type of option
loses time value as
the option's strike
price gets further
from the underlying
assets value. There
is no intrinsic value.

80
Tf\BLE 4.4

BASIC STRATEGIES

Option Greeks

Delta

Theta

Vega

This is a measure of the change
in an option's price resulting
from a change in the
underlying asset . Calls have a
positive delta from 0 to 100,
Puts have a delta range from
-100 to O.
At-the-money options typically
have a delta of approximately
50. In-the-money options rarely
exceed a delta of 80.

This is a measure of
the decline of the
option time value.
As an option's
expiration
becomes closer
the time value
begins to rapidly
decrease.

This is a measure of
the increase or
decrease in implied
volatility. It
successfully
quantifies how much
an option price will
increase or decrease
depending on the
option's level of
volatility.

(;;\IJTION
The trading information that the Greeks provide is purely theoretical. They are
designed to give you an idea of what the volatility and rate of change are at the
time you looking the screen . If new information comes in, or the mathematical
models you are using are not accurate, the projected values can be significantly
different than what you had anticipated.

Event-Based Trading Examples
As we've discussed, the various economic indicators have a significant impact on how the market reacts. Within minutes a market that may have
been meandering sideways all of a sudden bolts in its chosen direction.
In the following examples we look at the tremendous effects that news announcements have on various markets. It will be up to the individual trader
to decide if straddle or strangle is the best choice for trading the scenario.
Event

1: Federal Resel'Ve Announcement February 27th,
2008 On January 7, 2005, I wrote an article entitled "America's
Silent Mortgage Crisis" and posted it online (www.home-Ioan-mortgage
.info/2005/0l/americas-silent-mortgage-crisis.html). At the time it was no
secret that interest rates had reached a historical low of 1 percent and that
adjustable-rate mortgages would not be able to sustain themselves in the
face of any anticipation of a rate increase.
As interest rates increased so did the casual climb in home owner payments, eventually leading up to the fiasco that has been dubbed the Subprime Mortgage Crisis. Attempting to make things right, the FOMC was

Holding the Bull and the Bear by the Tails

81

seen as a driving force in pushing interest rates down in order to stimulate
the economy and help people save their homes. Leading up to the FOMe's
February 27th, 2008 decision, the market moved relatively sideways for
several months. You can see this demonstrated in Figure 4.3.
On February 27th, 2008, Bernanke and the other members ofthe FOMe
clearly stated that they would continue to ease rates in order to stimulate
the U.S. economy. All infiationary pressures on the dollar took a backseat
to achieving that goal. In Figure 4.4 we see gold react positively to the
weakened dollar, moving a total of 566 ticks.
Earlier in the chapter we set up a straddle and strangle for the gold
market a few days prior to the FOMe's announcement. Each one had its
own capital commitment. While we knew that we wouldn't be holding on
to both the call and the put, there was still the initial capital commitment
that had to be made in order for the trade to be initialized. That was a total
of $3,780 for the straddle and $1,350 for the strangle.
In Figure 4.5 we see the gold market move 566 ticks. With each tick
worth $100, a total of $5,660 could have been made on the underlying asset. Since we are dealing with a call option we know that the average maximum delta that an in-the-money option can achieve is 80 or .8 of the actual
underlying asset. Based on that number, our hypothetical returns on the
runup after the announcement would put us at around $4,528.

GC.067: Gold Comex (Pit) CadJ llq (oany bar••

1010,0: ~

Gold Chart
Before February 27th, 2008
Federal Reserve Board

., · jQ(j,Hl
990,0

··· 980.0
910.0

840.Q

FIGURE 4.3 Gold Chart before February 27th, 2008
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

4

82

BASIC STRATEGIES

~dc.06f: Garde""",i IPII) Cadi Llq IOally baro,

~ ' ' >

01107101

tHl22i08

~

F ~_R "~J~oan:l__AmL.~~

FIGURE 4.4 Gold Chart after February 27th , 2008
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved .

dG.oG:7: GordComex (PIt) Cadi Uq (OauYba..,
. U140.0

01JWi06
~tI!!!tcBe C~1 9JXion 9aifls 566 *,~

FIGURE 4.5 Gold Chart Straddle Call Option
Source: T radeNavigator.com © 2007 . All ri ghts reserved .

83

Holding the Bull and the Bear by the Tails

Strangle Call Option
Catches 397 ticks

~+

-T,.
I

'T~-' T ., •••
t
+,. ,

.!IIJ.
)i7ti(:ka

:i;::~"

~

FIGURE 4.6 Gold Chart Strangle Call Option
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

Risking $3,780 in order to gain $4,528 is not the best risk/reward ratio.
And in spite of the fact that we would be releasing the put option as soon
as possible, the costs of the loss adds to our overall call expense. In a fastmoving market it could be difficult to get out of the put option without the
potential for some significant slippage.
In Figure 4.6 we look at the strangle call option and see a better
risk/reward scenario. Putting up an initial $1,350 to catch a move of 397
ticks, $3,970, fits a risk/reward profile of risking one to gain two. Even if
you lose 50 percent on the put option value, you only lose $265, for a total
real capital commitment of $1,085 (see Table 4.5).
Event 2: Consumer ..rice Index Release February 20th, 2008
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) was anticipated to move only 0.3 of a
TABLE 4.5

Straddle versus Strangle

Initial commitment
Hypothetical returns (based on .80
delta of an in-the-money option)

Straddle

Strangle

$3,780
$4,528

$1,350
$3,176

84

BASIC STRATEGIES

- 12lS,Q

FIGURE 4.7 S&P 500 Chart Prior to CPI Release
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007 . All rights reserved.

percent; instead it moved 0.4 of a percent. This had a negative effect on
the overall U.S. economic outlook and fueled inflationary fears. The best
reflection of the CPI's overall impact is the S&P 500 stock index. Representing the top 500 corporations that operate in the United States, the S&P
500 is sensitive to any news, positive or negative.
In Figure 4.7 we see that S&P 500 has leveled off after a steep decline
that lasted a month, from 12/26/2007 until 1115/2008. With the S&P 500 moving sideways, leading up to the CPI's final numbers release, there is an opportunity to put on a straddle and purchase an in-the-money put and call at
the 1350 price (see Table 4.6).

TABLE 4.6

Straddle
Strangle

Straddle versus Strangle
Call Strike
Price/Premium

Put Strike
Price/Premium

Initial Commitment

1350/16.70 ($4,175)
1400/5 .00 ($1,250)

1350/13.80 ($3,450)
1325/9.00 ($2,250)

30 .50/($ 7,625)
14.00/($3,500)

Holding the Bull and the Bear by the Tails

85

The S&P 500 contract comes in both a full-size contract and a mini contract . The
technique can translate to either market . The full -size contract has a value of
$25/minimum movement and the mini contract has a value of $12 .50/minimum
movement and is actually one-fifth the size of a regular contract .

In Figure 4.8 the S&P 500 futures contract penetrates the support line
and falls to a low of 1250. This drop comes five days after the initial report,
generating a total move of 833 ticks. A short of the underlying asset had the
potential to return $20,825. An in-the-money put option had the potential to
return 80 percent of that.
If we were to develop a strangle trade based on the same chart, we
would use the support and resistance lines to set our buy points for our
put and call. In Figure 4.9, we use the support and resistance lines to set up
our strangle trade.
This time when the market drops past the put, it gains only 531 ticks
for a total $13,275 in the underlying asset. The put has the potential to make
approximately $10,620.

SP.o67: S&P 500 Indox (PH) CadJ LIq (Dally bars)

- ·1475..,0

1450.0

1Z5C-.O

I

I Tr~.Vjg~.com
i 1Z107M7

12121107
(111)&'1)6
rtatket's Rea<;,tion to tfigOer Jban ~icipat~ CPI

. . 122:S.O

0'123108

FIGURE 4.8 S&P 500 Breaks Support Line
Source : TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

86

BASIC STRATEGIES

~

SP-067: S&P 600 Index (PIt) Cadj Uq (DailY bars)

i l l li ,,,,,
•

ttH 'It "" C•• '" ......~ Lm.

~::~"--"~'." j!~
5" ''''

~

go.

. . . . . . . . . . . '~~l,t,II. . .. . . . .JI'. .I. . . . . . . .~y:..IIII. .. . ..

;',,,"
..ro.'

.................1:::
till,

., • ~

.. ..... . jlf"tllj/!!
jt'~l:L~~i~litl,I,I . . . . '\ . . .~

,.

I

,,,..
Buy Put on Support Line
1225.0

''''''''

~ .500 Stranma_

'''''''''

OYHW8

FIGURE 4.9 S&P 500 Strangle Setup
Source : TradeNavigator.com © 2007 . All righ ts reserved.

Whether you execute a straddle or strangle, both of them fall well
within an acceptable risk/reward ratio of risking one to gain two (see
Table 4.7).

Event 3: Cl'llde Oil Inventories Febmary 21 st, 2008 On February 21st, 2008, crude oil inventories posted an increase of 4.2 million bar-

rels. At the same time crude oil derivatives, heating oil and diesel, posted a
decrease in reserves of 4.5 million. On the face of it the news had a slightly
bearish undertone on oil prices. This pushed oil prices down for the day.
In Figure 4.10 we see that oil prices shot down for the day on the crude
oil inventory news.
Two days later the crude oil prices begin to accelerate to the magic
$100lbarrel number. From there a huge breakout to the upside occurs,
driving oil prices to new highs, practically reaching $1101barrel (see Figure
4.11). This is a prime example of the markets' not following the news
