
c06.indd 127

11/2/07 12:19:50 PM

128

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 6.1 Dollar Cost Averaging with $250 per Month

contribution smooths out the average price of the stock while
giving us an average number of shares accumulated each and every
month.

A Good Plan Gone Bad
Dollar cost averaging is a very good plan for individuals who are
putting money aside to supplement an existing pension plan or
individual retirement account (IRA). However, as good as it is, you
should not rely on this investment as a sole source of income for your
retirement years unless you are contributing significant amounts of
money each and every month to it (significant meaning percentages
that exceed 15 percent of your gross annual income). Dollar cost
averaging is considered an investment strategy, and although it is

c06.indd 128

11/2/07 12:19:51 PM

The Role Reversal

129

one that is recommended by most financial advisers, you should not
try to combine this strategy with a short-term trading strategy.
Somewhere along the way this good plan went bad when someone decided to apply it to their trading account. What they wound
up with is a common practice called cost averaging down, which is
where amateur traders buy more of a stock that is going down in
order to lower the cost basis of a stock that is hurting them. This is
nothing more than an effort to trade out of a losing position. In the
end, most people wind up with a very bad situation that ultimately
loses very large sums of money. It’s amazing to see just how many
people have bought into this idea as being a good strategy.
The story usually starts off like this:
Trader Bob decides to buy 1,000 shares of ABC stock at $30 per
share. Immediately after purchasing these shares, the stock drops
to $29 and Trader Bob gets a sick feeling in his stomach as he
realizes that he made a bad decision. But does Trader Bob do
anything to fix this problem? No! Instead, he makes a decision
to hold on to this trade because he believes the stock will eventually rebound. The following day the stock drops to $26 per
share, and instead of getting out and limiting his loss, Trader
Bob makes a decision to buy another 1,000 shares at $26 in an
effort to lower his cost basis $28 per share. Now Trader Bob is
long twice as many shares, and the stock drops again, resulting
in a doubling of the losses.

This story is told over and over again around the world, as many
other traders do the same each and every day.

Pursuit of the Breakeven Point
We work hard for our money, and it doesn’t make sense to waste any
of it gambling in the market. This market is too good for us to be
pursuing the breakeven point. If you are planning to invest for your
retirement, then do yourself and your family a favor and make sure
you have a good, solid plan to follow. Dollar cost averaging is one
of those good plans you can use if your plan is to invest a consistent
amount of money in a retirement account each month. Just be sure
that you are buying mutual funds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), or

c06.indd 129

11/2/07 12:19:51 PM

130

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 6.2 The Thoughts of a Cost Averaging Down Trader

index funds that are in upward-sloping trends. However, if your plan
is to trade the markets for profit, then cost averaging down is a very
bad way to go. Understand the differences and you will save yourself
a lot of grief, stress, and money.
We have heard the same stories over and over again from people
who think they are going to beat the market by buying more shares
of the same stock that hurt them. Only gamblers put themselves into
this sort of position, and we hope you will learn from the mistakes
made by others who continue to throw their good money after bad
trades. Figure 6.2 gives us a picture of what goes through the minds
of those who use cost averaging down as a trading strategy.

The Building Blocks of a Role Reversal Pattern
A role reversal occurs when a certain price level, once seen as a support on a price chart, is broken and then changes to an area of resistance. This occurs in a similar way with areas of resistance that change
to support, but let’s look at a typical role reversal pattern on the
downside first.

c06.indd 130

11/2/07 12:19:51 PM

The Role Reversal

131

In Figure 6.3 you see a candlestick chart with a role reversal
identified. In this example you will see that at point A the stock was
holding support around the $40 price range. Here, investors and
traders alike thought that the price of the stock had reached a point
of value. As a result, buyers came in and purchased shares, creating
enough demand to overtake supply. As a result of this new money
moving into the stock, the price moved up. This, as mentioned
before, identifies an area of support. Keep in mind that the traders
who were getting in at this point do so with a goal to take short-term
profits on any price moves greater than $40. The stock rallied to
$75 per share in just a few weeks. This works out to be an 87 percent
price move. This return is good enough to force the swing traders
to take their profits, which is what we see shortly after the $75 level
is reached. This downturn is called profit taking, and it’s something
every trader should expect to see after a significant price rally.
After the profit-taking move, you can see that the stock traded
back down to the $60 level. Another rally to over $90 was followed
by a series of downturns that brought the stock right back down to
the $40 support at point B. Moving on in time, you can see that
after the stock had fallen below the support level of $40, it made one
final attempt to rally before failing completely. After that, the stock
continued to bump its head against the newly established resistance
level.

Figure 6.3 Role Reversal Support to Resistance

c06.indd 131

11/2/07 12:19:51 PM

132

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

The Psychology behind the Move
If you were to study the reasons why this price pattern occurs so often,
you would see that it is nothing more than large groups of people
reacting in a similar way with regard to how they manage risk. Fundamentalist who debate the validity of technical analysis will argue
that this is just self-fulfilling prophecy where herd mentality drives
people to buy and sell at certain price points. The Market Guys have
a good answer for that: “Who cares if it is self-fulfilling prophecy?” If
we can make money because we have a good understanding of this
herd mentality, great! We are simply following the money trail. If we
notice that there are large groups of people getting out of a stock at
a certain point and we know that there is a good chance this stock is
going to hit resistance in the near future, then we just make sure we
are not buyers at these newly established resistance points.
To fully understand why the role reversal is so predictable, you
have to place yourself in the shoes of the person who has just bought
the stock at $41 when it first bounced off of support but didn’t take
a profit when it traded up to $75. In fact, this may have happened
to you at one point in time where you bought a stock and it went up
right after you bought it. Imagine! A stock goes up right after you
buy it and, to your surprise, it continues to go up. How sweet it is
when this happens.
As we play out this scenario, we have to talk about a little driver
called greed. This is the force behind why people don’t take profits
when they should. If you have played out this story in real time, then
you know exactly what we are talking about here. Greed causes us
to hold on even when our brains are screaming, “Take that profit!
That’s an 87 percent profit in weeks! Take it!” However, there is
another side of your brain that is saying, “Let’s go for double or nothing!” Then the stock drops, and you are right back to the place you
first bought it. Almost everyone we know has gone through this pain
when the stock proceeds to drop below the place you first bought
it. What goes through your mind then? Of course, you start telling
yourself that it’s okay. It will go up again.
From there, you can probably finish the rest of the story line.
What happens is that the stock doesn’t go up right away, but instead
it tortures all of those people who are hanging on to their hope strategy. This is the strategy where people hope that the stock will go back
up to the place where they first bought it. All thoughts of profiting

c06.indd 132

11/2/07 12:19:52 PM

The Role Reversal

133

have vanished at this point, and people suddenly find religion. This
is when traders all over the world start praying to the Market God:
“Oh God, please get me out of this trade at breakeven and I promise
I will never again listen to my brother-in-law, who got me into this
stock in the first place. Amen.”
We hope you are saving your prayers for better things in life than
just to get out at breakeven, but the fact is that this is the story behind
why stocks find resistance at the former support levels. People all
over are trying to get out at breakeven. The opposite occurs when
the resistance level is broken and then turns to support. In order to
explain this, you need to know what is going through the mind of a
short trader.

The Role Reversal from the Short Side
As a trader, shorting the market should be as comfortable for you
as taking a long position in the market. Short selling is a strategy that
is used when you think a stock is going to drop in price. You borrow shares from your broker and sell them in the open market.
Once you have sold these borrowed shares, you receive a cash credit
to your account, which will be used later to buy back the shares at
a lower price. If things work out as planned, and the stock moves
lower, you then buy back the shares and return the shares to the
original owner—in this case, your broker. What you are left with in
the end is a profit equal to the difference between the sell price
and the buy price.
Following is an example of short selling:
1. Trader borrows 1,000 shares of XYZ stock from his broker.
2. Trader then sells 1,000 shares at $24 and receives a credit of
$24,000.
3. The stock drops to $22 per share, at which time the trader buys
back 1,000 shares. This transaction costs the trader $22,000.
4. The result is a profit of $2,000, less the commission charged
on both sides of the trade, along with a small amount charged
for margin interest for the loan of the shares.
This is an exciting and profitable strategy because many times
you will see stocks drop twice as fast as they go up. Of course, if the
stock moved up in price after you had sold the shares, you would still

c06.indd 133

11/2/07 12:19:52 PM

134

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

have to repay the loan to your broker, which means you would have
to purchase those shares at a higher price. This would result in a loss,
so it’s important that the short seller watch out for any upside risk.
The act of buying back shares that have been sold short is called
short covering. In order for short sellers to realize their profits, they
need to liquidate their positions by buying back the shares that were
sold. Short selling usually occurs when traders believe a stock has
reached an area of resistance and they think the stock will drop. If
the stock breaks above resistance instead of going lower, short sellers
are squeezed by day traders who generally buy into stocks that are
breaking out to the upside.
The combination of both the momentum buyers and short covering results in an explosive rally we call a short squeeze. After the
short squeeze has taken place, we usually see a drop in price. This is
when the short-term buyers, who originally put the squeeze on the
short sellers, begin to take their own profits. This new selling pressure adds to the supply, and we see the price drop to the original
breakout point, hence the role reversal.
Figure 6.4 shows the points that mark the formation of the role
reversal pattern to the upside. This is the sequence of events that
drives the role reversal pattern, and we challenge you to look for it
in every other chart you look at from now on. It’s amazing how stocks
have a tendency to reverse at the newly established support level,
and many times the price will reverse within pennies of the original
breakout point.

Figure 6.4 Role Reversal Resistance to Support

c06.indd 134

11/2/07 12:19:52 PM

The Role Reversal

135

Figure 6.5 Using a Line Chart to Identify Role Reversals

In our last two examples we used a candle chart to show you
the day-to-day price moves, but you can also use a line chart to
find the reversal points. Many traders prefer the simplicity of the
line chart, and if this is your choice, then make sure you are using
a line chart that is tracking the closing price and not the opening
price. Remember, we put more weight in the closing price for reasons previously mentioned.
Figure 6.5 is an example of how we would use the line chart to
identify role reversal points. You will be able to find many stocks that
are in steady upward trends, so this price pattern is one that you can
use to find entry and exit points for your long-term investments as
well. The short-term swing trader might use a daily chart going back
6 to 12 months, while longer-term investors would use a weekly chart
going back 2 to 5 years. Once you familiarize yourself with this price
pattern, you will find that, over time, your eye will be able to quickly
pull it out of a chart with little effort.
In the chapters that follow, we will show you how to position yourself correctly using this price pattern and, more importantly, how to
properly use the support line to minimize your risk in a trade.

More Traders Drawing the Lines
As time goes on, you will see more and more people talking about
role reversal patterns and their relevance to maximizing profits in
the market. Thanks to organizations like the Market Technicians
Association (MTA) and the International Federation of Technical
Analysts (IFTA), who are both devoting their efforts to using and
expanding the field to technical analysis, people all over the world
are learning skills that help them better manage risk.

c06.indd 135

11/2/07 12:19:52 PM

136

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

More people are talking about the charts today than ever before.
As a result of this, more institutions and brokers are teaching their
clients how to use the charts to minimize loss. There is a wave forming
that is only going to get bigger. People will continue to resist using
charts as a viable tool for selecting good investments, but eventually
the overwhelming majority of people will be at least looking at price
history to make a buy or sell decision. As the signals continue to be
taught, then those very same signals will become more reliable.
The Market Guys started talking about technical analysis with
some of the most popular brokers in the industry years ago. At first,
we were met with heavy resistance, but when they eventually woke up
and smelled the coffee, they realized that this form of analysis was
helping their clients stay around longer. For the brokers, it became
more profitable because their clients were trading longer and not
losing as much money. For the traders, this newfound knowledge
was exciting and profitable, and it gave a big boost to their confidence level. We expect the same to happen to you. Just give it time,
relax with it, and you will see results soon enough.

c06.indd 136

11/2/07 12:19:53 PM

7

C H A P T E R

Seventh-Inning Stretch
MA N A GIN G MAR KET STR ESS

T

he alarm sounded at 6:45 AM with a staccato note that roused Alex
the Trader from his sleep (although, after a restless night of tossing
and turning, it may not have been so much “sleep” as a fitful rest).
There wasn’t anything in particular that was bothering Alex lately;
he just wasn’t able to sleep through the night without waking and
thinking. Usually, his mind wandered to the previous day’s trades or
some news that was coming out in the markets the following week.
After churning the thoughts in his head, he would drift back into a
hazy slumber, only to be jolted by the alarm mere minutes later—or
so it seemed.
Alex roused himself and, in usual fashion, tried to shake off the
sluggishness as he went through his morning routine. His reflection
in the mirror was another reminder that stress and weight gain were
taking its toll on his health. Shower, brush, dress, and walk to the office
in the terrace room to fire up the computers and scan the day’s news.
Alex prided himself on his trading setup; no detail was overlooked in
giving himself every advantage in the markets. If Alex were to miss a
trade, it would not be for want of technology and information.
The screens flashed to life as he loaded his trading software and
news feeds. The approaching market opening increased the rate of
flow of information by the minute. The colors, headlines, charts,
and indicators started painting a picture that would require Alex’s
experience and clear thinking to filter into the trades that he would
execute today. This pretrading ritual consumed Alex’s attention right
137

c07.indd 137

11/2/07 12:20:52 PM

138

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

up to the first trade, when the first pang of hunger caught his attention through the noise of the day. It was too late now for a proper
breakfast, and besides, who has time for that? He knew that after the
first hour settled down, he could break free for a quick snack before
the lunch doldrums hit the market.
Two trades and 90 minutes later, Alex saw that the market was
cooling, and he decided to not ignore his protesting stomach any
longer—especially since his second trade was such a bust. How in
the world could he have forgotten that the company was coming
out with an earnings announcement that morning? Alex reluctantly
acknowledged that he was becoming more forgetful with important
information. He made a quick dash to the pantry and grabbed the
last cherry cheese pastry. The microwaved cup of instant coffee with
two tablespoons of sugar completed his mid-morning snack. Though
Alex felt that familiar heaviness in his stomach, he did notice that his
hunger was satisfied, and yet he felt impatient as the markets refused
to break out of the late-morning trading range. He knew he was
looking for trades that probably weren’t there, but at least he felt
alert—perhaps even jumpy. He blamed it on the coffee and the docile market. He decided not to sit and watch any longer, and he went
long the oil market. When in doubt, he reasoned that oils will rise
eventually with the uptrend that they’ve been riding.
Speaking of oil, Alex was disappointed that there wasn’t any left
over deep-fried fish and chips from yesterday’s dinner. It was clearly
the lunch slowdown now, so Alex decided to run out for a quick bite.
As he waited in line at the café, he scrolled through the news headlines
on his mobile phone. Even away from his office, Alex made sure that
he kept the advantage on the markets. The one that caught his attention was the OPEC announcement; rising oil prices had prompted
an increase in daily production to help stabilize the markets. Alex
instantly knew what that news meant for his open position. He also
knew that his leisurely lunch had just become a fast grab. Moving to
the counter, he ordered the sausage roll (it was premade) and added
a bag of crackers and a 24-ounce cola to the order.
Alex quickly returned to his office, eating his lunch along the way.
As he looked at his position, he was surprised that it had dropped
by only a marginal amount, although it was still trending downward.
Experiencing an energy spike from his lunch break, he decided to
pull his stop and actively manage this position. If it hadn’t collapsed
after the initial news, it would most likely rally later in the day.

c07.indd 138

11/2/07 12:20:52 PM

Seventh-Inning Stretch

139

By 1:30 in the afternoon Alex became increasingly drowsy, wondering what happened to his post-lunch energy surge. “Snap out of
it,” he said aloud as he prepared for some healthy trades. Running
back to the pantry, Alex grabbed a bag of pretzels, two cookies, and
a can of cola to increase his energy and mental focus. Unfortunately,
Alex received only a momentary burst of energy accompanied by an
anxious feeling. Slowly, Alex felt the drowsiness start to wash over
him again. “It’s not fun getting old!” Alex groaned.
Several hours of staring at the screen as the market close
approached showed Alex that the downtrend in oil wasn’t going to
reverse today. It was slow, but it was steady. The only problem was
that he was now so far out of the money that he couldn’t close his
position. He chose to hold it overnight and wait for the morning
pop—or so he hoped. As he closed his trading office for the day, he
knew he would be in a foul mood for the evening.
For dinner, Alex strolled out to his favorite Italian café. He wasn’t
sure if he wanted the double cheese with sausage pizza or the pasta;
however, he was sure that he probably had another restless night
ahead. Later that evening, Alex tried to relax in front of the television as he snacked on his favorite junk foods, potato chips and one
more can of cola.

Analyzing Alex
Let’s revisit Alex’s unfortunate trading day and look for some underlying health and diet issues that are sabotaging his ability to trade
more effectively.
Let’s start at the beginning with Alex’s restless night. The brain
needs sleep! Lack of sleep results in reduced productivity and increased errors throughout the day. Also, Alex is constantly being
reminded by his reflection in the mirror of his stress and weight
gain. What Alex is not aware of is the stress hormone called cortisol
that is released in the brain during stressful situations (fight-or-flight
response). This was an important chemical reaction in the brain
when early humans were attacked by wild animals or in times of war,
and the only choice was to fight for your life or run for your life.
However, we were never created to be in a constant state of cortisol
release. Cortisol is a powerful hormone that shuts down the immune
system, making us more susceptible to illness. An abundance of cortisol also slows the metabolism, inhibits the absorption of protein, and

c07.indd 139

11/2/07 12:20:52 PM

140

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

promotes fat gain. But this is just the beginning of what’s happening
inside of Alex.
By skipping breakfast, Alex’s metabolism slows down even more
as it tries to adapt to long periods without food. By consuming all
that sugar in the cherry cheese pastry and the coffee, Alex’s insulin
level quickly skyrockets and remains high, driving the sugar into the
fat storage areas of his body. Within 20 minutes, Alex experiences an
energy surge followed by lethargy. This unhealthy cycle of not eating for long periods of time and then consuming high-calorie, highsugar foods promotes Alex’s weight gain and prevents his ability to
think clearly and remember important details about key companies
or strategic trades.
Alex’s premade sausage roll and cola lunch was high in saturated
fat and sugar, giving him a temporary energy surge followed by a
slump and more drowsiness. Alex tried to bring himself out of his
mental fog by eating a bag of pretzels, cookies, and more cola. The
afternoon snack gave another boost in energy, but lethargy set in,
creating another food coma.
Alex’s double cheese and meat pizza dinner was over 1,600
calories of saturated fat and simple carbohydrates, creating an
environment of fat gain, clouded thinking, sleeplessness, and, eventually, even depression. Alex concluded his evening with chips and
another can of cola, which packed on more empty calories and fat
gain. This cycle assures no energy and promotes high blood pressure, high cholesterol, heart disease, cancer, obesity, fatigue, and
premature aging.
Alex’s Action Plan
