
381/396

The other possible outcome was only
slightly more hopeful: to hit bottom. To realize what has happened to us, because we
have no other choice. “If we refuse to regulate ourselves, the only regulators are our environment,” says Whybrow, “and the way
that environment deprives us.” For meaningful change to occur, in other words, we need
the environment to administer the necessary
level of pain.
IN AUGUST 2011, the same week that Standard

& Poor’s downgraded the debt of the United
States government, a judge approved the
bankruptcy plan for Vallejo, California.
Vallejo’s creditors ended up with five cents
on the dollar, public employees with
something like twenty and thirty cents on the
dollar. The city no longer received any rating
at all from Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s. It
would take years to build the track record
needed to obtain a decent rating. The absence of a rating mattered little, as the last

382/396

thing the city needed to do was to go out and
borrow money from strangers.
More out of idle curiosity than with any
clear purpose, I drove up again to Vallejo
and paid a call on the fire department. In the
decay of our sense of common purpose, the
firefighters are a telling sign that we are approaching a new bottom. It isn’t hard to imagine how a police department might wind up
in conflict with the community it’s hired to
protect. A person who becomes a police officer enjoys the authority. He wants to stop
the bad guys. He doesn’t necessarily need to
care for the people he polices. A person who
becomes a firefighter wants to be a good guy.
He wants to be loved.
The Vallejo firefighter I met with that
morning was named Paige Meyer. He was
forty-one years old. He had short salt-andpepper hair and olive skin, with traces of
burn marks on his cheeks. His natural expression was a smile. He wasn’t particularly

383/396

either religious or political. (“I’m not necessarily a God guy.”) The closest thing he had
to a religion, apart from his family, was his
job. He was extremely proud of it, and of his
colleagues. “I don’t want this to sound arrogant at all,” he said. “But many departments
in nicer communities, they get a serious fire
maybe once a year. We get them all the
time.” The Vallejo population is older and
poorer than in many surrounding cities, and
older still are the buildings it lives in. The
typical Vallejo house is a charming, highly
inflammable wooden Victorian. “In this town
we fight fires,” says Meyer. “This town rips.”
The department was shaped by its environment: they were extremely aggressive firefighters. “When I came to this department
you rolled to a fire,” he said. “You were not
going to see an exterior water stream from
this department. We’re going in. You have
some knucklehead calling in with a sore
throat—your giddyup is not so fast. But I’ll

384/396

tell you something about this department.
They get a call that there’s a baby choking or
a ten-year-old not breathing, you better get
out of the way, or you’re going to get run
over.”
As a young man, to pay his way through
college, Meyer had worked as a state beach
lifeguard at lakes in central California. He
assumed that there would be little drama in
the work but people would turn up, get
drunk, and attempt to drown. A few of the
times he pulled people from the water, they
were in bad enough shape that they needed
paramedics; the fire department was there
on the spot. He started talking to firefighters
and found that “they all absolutely loved
what they did. You get to go and live and create a second family. How can you not like
that?” He came to Vallejo in 1998, at the age
of twenty-eight. He had left a cushy job in
Sunnyvale, outside San Jose, where there
aren’t many fires, precisely because he

385/396

wanted to fight fires. “In other departments,”
he says, “I wasn’t a firefighter. The first six
months of the job here, I was out at two in
the morning at a fire every other week. I
couldn’t believe it.” The houses of Vallejo are
mainly balloon-frame construction. The interior walls have no firebreaks: from bottom
to top, all four walls carry fire as efficiently
as a chimney. One of the rookie mistakes in
Vallejo is to put the fire out on the ground
floor, only to look up and see it roaring out of
the roof. “When we get to a fire we say,
‘Boom! Send someone up to the attic.’ Because the fire is going right to the attic.”
Meyer actually had made that rookie mistake. One day not long after he’d arrived,
he’d jumped off the truck already breathing
air from a tank and raced into what appeared
to be a burning one-bedroom apartment. He
knocked down the door and put the attack
line on the fire and then wondered why the
fire wasn’t going out. “It should have been

386/396

getting cooler, but it was getting hotter and
hotter.” Right in front of his face, on his
plastic mask, lines trickled down, like rain on
a windshield. The old-school firefighters left
their ears exposed so they could feel the
heat: the heat contained the critical information. Meyer could only see the heat: his helmet was melting. “If your helmet starts to
shrivel up and melt, that’s not cool,” he says.
A melting helmet, among the other problems
it presents, is an indication that a room is
about to flash. Flashing, he explains, “is
when all combustible materials simultaneously ignite. You’re a baked potato after
that.” He needed more water, or to get out;
but his ego was invested in staying inside,
and so he stayed inside. Moments later a
backup arrived, with another, bigger hose.
Afterward, he understood his mistake: the
building was three stories, built on a slope
that disguised its size, and the fire had
reached the attic. “I’m not saying that if the

387/396

backup hadn’t come when it did I’d be dead,”
he says, but that’s exactly what he is saying.
The scar on his face is from that fire. “I
needed to learn to control my environment,”
he said. “I’d had this false sense of security.”
When you take care of something you become attached to it, and he’d become attached to Vallejo. He was extremely uncomfortable with conflict between his union and
the citizens, and had found himself in
screaming matches with the union’s negotiator. Meyer thought firefighters, who tended
to be idealistic and trusting, were easily
duped. He further thought the rank-and-file
had been deceived both by the city, which
lied to them repeatedly in negotiations, and
by their own leadership, which harnessed the
firefighters’ outrage to make unreasonable
demands in the union-negotiated contract
with the city. What was lost at the bargaining
table was the reason they did what they did
for a living. “I’m telling you,” Meyer says,

388/396

“when I started, I didn’t know what I was
getting paid. I didn’t care what I was getting
paid. I didn’t know about benefits. A lot of
things that we’re politicizing today were not
even in my mind. I was just thinking of my
dream job. Let me tell you something else:
nobody cared in 2007 how much I made. If I
made six figures they said, ‘Shit, man, you
deserve it. You ran into a burning building.’
Because everyone had a job. All they knew
about our job is that it was dangerous. The
minute the economy started to collapse,
people started looking at each other.”
Today the backup that may or may not
have saved him is far less likely to arrive.
When Vallejo entered bankruptcy, the fire
department was cut from 121 to 67, for a city
of 112,000 people. The department handles
roughly 13,000 calls a year, extremely high
for the population. When people feel
threatened or worried by anything except
other people, they call the fire department.

389/396

Most of these calls are of the cat-in-the-tree
variety—pointless. (“You never see the skeleton of a cat in a tree.”) They get calls from
people who have headaches. They get calls
from people who have itches where they
can’t scratch. They have to answer every call.
(“The best call I ever had was phantom leg
pain in a guy with no legs.”) To deal with
these huge numbers of calls, they once had
eight stations, eight three-person engine
companies, a four-man truck company (used
only for actual fires and rescue calls), one
fireboat, one confined space rescue team,
and a team to deal with hazardous materials.
They now are down to four stations, four engines, and a truck.
This is particularly relevant to Paige Meyer
because, two months ago, he became
Vallejo’s new fire chief. It surprised him: he
hadn’t even applied for the job. The city
manager, Phil Batchelor, just called him to
his office one day. “He didn’t ever really ask

390/396

me if I wanted the job,” says Meyer. “He just
asked how’s the family, told me he was giving me the job, and asked if I had any problem with that.”
He didn’t, actually. He sat down and made
a list of ways to improve the department. He
faced a fresh challenge: how to deliver service that was the same as before, or even better than before, with half the resources. How
to cope with an environment of scarcity. He
began to measure things that hadn’t been
measured. The number one cause of death in
firefighting was heart attacks. Number two
was a truck crash. He was now in charge of a
department that would be both overworked
and in a hurry. Fewer people doing twice the
work probably meant twice the number of
injuries per firefighter. He’d decided to tailor
fitness regimens to fit the job. With fewer
fire stations and fewer firefighters in them,
the response times were going to be slower.
He’d need to find new ways to speed things

391/396

up. A longer response time meant less room
for error; a longer response time meant the
fires they’d be fighting would be bigger. He
had some thoughts about the most efficient
way to fight these bigger fires. He began, in
short, to rethink firefighting.
When people pile up debts they will find
difficult and perhaps even impossible to repay, they are saying several things at once.
They are obviously saying that they want
more than they can immediately afford. They
are saying, less obviously, that their present
wants are so important that, to satisfy them,
it is worth some future difficulty. But in making that bargain they are implying that when
the future difficulty arrives, they’ll figure it
out. They don’t always do that. But you can
never rule out the possibility that they will.
As idiotic as optimism can sometimes seem,
it has a weird habit of paying off.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

At the end of every book I write there always seem to be people who deserve more
than to be thanked at the end of a book. This
one is no different. Act II of the financial
crisis was set in places it would never have
occurred to me to go. I’d like to thank Graydon Carter and Doug Stumpf, at Vanity Fair,
for encouraging me to go there, and Jaime
Lalinde, for researching these places so well
that I sometimes felt he, not I, should be
writing about them. Theo Phanos offered me
not only friendship and encouragement but
the shrewd views of an interesting money
manager, from start to finish. At W. W. Norton, Janet Byrne has appeared from nowhere

393/396

to improve my prose and, to the extent it is
possible for an editor to do this, save me
from myself. Starling Lawrence remains my
touchstone.

Copyright © 2011 by Michael Lewis
Grateful acknowledgment is made to Vanity Fair, where the
pieces in this book appeared, in slightly different form:
“Wall Street on the Tundra,” April 2009; “Beware of Greeks
Bearing Bonds,” October 2010; “When Irish Eyes Are Crying,” March 2011; “It’s the Economy, Dummkopf!,” September 2011; “Too Fat to Fly,” November 2011.
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
First Edition
For information about permission to reproduce selections
from this book,
write to Permissions, W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.,
500 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10110
For information about special discounts for bulk purchases,
please contact

W. W. Norton Special Sales at specialsales@wwnorton.com or 800-233-4830

395/396

Manufacturing by Courier Westford
Book design by Chris Welch
Production manager: Anna Oler
Ebook Conversion: Kayci C. Wyatt, TIPS Technical
Publishing
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lewis, Michael (Michael M.)
Boomerang : travels in the new Third World / Michael
Lewis. — 1st ed.
p. cm.
ISBN 978-0-393-08181-7 (hardcover)
1. Global Financial Crisis, 2008–2009. 2. International finance. 3. Financial crises—United States—History—21st century. I. Title.
HB37172008 .L49 2011
330.9’0511—dc23

396/396

2011028241
Ebook ISBN: 978-0-393-08224-1
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110
www.wwnorton.com
W. W. Norton & Company Ltd.
Castle House, 75/76 Wells Street, London W1T 3QT
1234567890

