
want or believe? In effect, you would be using the information to suit your hopes,
dreams, wishes, and desires instead of perceiving it in a manner to assess the
market's actual potential to do any of the foregoing.
Thus, what you have in the market environment is a deadly combination
of the market forcing you to confront difficult personal issues to survive,
an event that produces information in a wide variety of forms that can be
used to support any illusion, distortion, or expectation, therefore, making it
easy to avoid confronting these potentially painful issues. Furthermore the
event continues on until you come to terms with whatever is inside of you
to end it. Unless your brokerage firm liquidates your position, you are the
only one who can make it stop.
Among many other factors, to become a consistently successful trader
your objective has to be to learn how to let the market tell you what it may
do next and how much is enough. This is extremely difficult when you
consider there is absolutely no relationship between what the market may
do next and your personal belief system on what it means to lose, what it
means to be wrong, greed (fear founded in a belief there will never be
enough), and revenge.
I can anticipate a lot of readers saying to themselves "I can understand the
loss, being wrong, and greed issues, but where does revenge come into
this?" This can best be illustrated by going back to the gambling game
example. In a gambling game you can only lose what you decide to risk.
You bet the money and it's difficult not to accept the responsibility for any
losses. As a trader, however, you could easily lose far more than you
intended to risk, based on your inability to perceive the possible or your
inability to execute a trade to get out of your position, or a combination of
both.
You may have been willing to take responsibility for what you originally
intended to risk on a trade (although most traders are not willing to take
this responsibility, which I will demonstrate further on); however, it might
not be so easy to take responsibility for losing more than what you intended
to risk. This is where the revenge factor comes into play. If you don't take
responsibility for what you lost, then who or what can you blame—the
markets, of course. The markets took your money. If the markets took from
you more than you originally intended to risk, then you will likely feel
compelled to get it back.
For example, is a 10-tick profit enough in the trade you are currently in
if you lost 20 in the last trade? The market may be giving the objective
observer a very clear indication that where the price is now is all that is
left in the move and the highest probability for success is to take profits
now. If you lost 20 ticks in the last trade and you only intended to risk 5 and the
market is now offering you 10, are you going to take it. If you believe in "getting
back," 10 won't be enough regardless of what the market is doing or telling you.
You will need at least 15 and preferably 20 to make you whole.
Your last trade obviously has nothing to do with the potential that exists in
47

the market at any given moment. When you feel compelled to get back, it puts
you in an adversary relationship with the market. The market becomes your
opponent, it is you against it, instead of being in harmony with it. The market
can't take anything away from you that you don't allow; if you lost money or lost
more than you intended to risk, you gave your money to other traders.
Ultimately, however, revenge creates an adversary relationship with yourself. If
you're the one who gives your money to the market, you are also the one who
gives yourself money out of the market. If you are angry with yourself for letting
the last trade get so out of hand, whatever the market is offering you "now" in
terms of an opportunity won't be enough. From a psychological perspective, you
won't take the opportunity for a profit or otherwise because you haven't
accepted the last trade as being all right. In effect, you will be denying yourself
the current or next opportunity to punish yourself for the past mistake. In reality
you can't get back at the market, and a belief in revenge only allows you to get
back at yourself.
There is a direct correlation between your ability to let the market tell you what
it is likely to do next and the degree to which you have released yourself from the
negative effects of any beliefs about losing, being wrong, and revenge on the
markets. Not being aware of this relationship, most traders will continue to
observe the market from a contaminated perspective until they either make the
association through trial and error or become aware of this relationship through
a book such as this. In any case, by the time those who figure it out do so, they
have usually subjected themselves to so much psychological damage that it adds
a much more difficult dimension to the process of becoming successful.
This is the principal reason why this book had to address the areas of personal
transformation in such depth: you need to know if there is any damage, how to
identify it, and most important, how to release yourself from it.

48

CHAPTER 6

The Market
Is an Unstructured
Environment

Unlike structured social activities that have defined beginnings and endings
and rigid rules to guide your behavior, the market environment is more like
a river constantly flowing, with no beginning or ending with almost no
structure. Once you jump in the river, it can change directions at any
moment. It may have been flowing north when you jumped in; however,
without any notice, it can start flowing south. It's unstructured to the point
where you make up all your own rules to play by, with a great deal of
latitude to do so.
You will have to decide if and when you're going to jump in and with
how much force. If you are already in, you have the option of increasing the
force you apply at any time or of decreasing it. There are no rules
preventing you from jumping out at any moment to change your intended
direction to flow with the market, or you can jump out and stay out, and
the market just keeps on flowing.
In an unstructured and unlimited environment, it is essential that you
establish rules to guide your behavior. You will need to create definition
and give yourself direction. Otherwise, you will feel overwhelmed with too
many possibilities. Without these rules one of the most likely possibilities is
that you will create devastating losses for yourself. The big psychological
problem here is, if you make up and have to play by your own rules, you
also have to take total and complete responsibility for your actions as well
as the outcome of your actions. The degree to which you do assume
responsibility is the same degree to which you can't shift it to the market
49

and be its victim.
The typical trader will do most anything to avoid creating definition and
rules because he does not want to take responsibility for the results of his
trading. If he knows exactly what he is going to do and under what
conditions, then he would have something by which to measure his
performance, thus making himself accountable to himself. This is exactly
what most traders don't want to do, preferring instead to keep their
relationship with the market somewhat mysterious.
This creates a real psychological paradox for traders, because the . only
way to learn how to trade effectively is to make oneself accountable by
creating structure; but, with accountability comes responsibility. The
typical trader desperately wants to make money, but he has to do it in a
way where there is no direct connection between what he does and the
outcome that it produces, thereby avoiding responsibility if things don't
turn out satisfactorily.
To develop a plan, you have to anticipate events to some extent relative
to the depth of your plan. When you plan your trades in advance, you are
putting your vision of the future and creative abilities on the line, so to speak,
and making yourself accountable to yourself. Your plan either works or it
doesn't; you either have the ability to execute your plan or you don't. In any
case, it is your plan and your ability to follow it and, therefore, it is difficult
to shift responsibility and lay the blame somewhere else if things don't work
out.
Now, when a trader doesn't understand market behavior well enough to
know what he is going to do and under what market conditions he is going
to do it—but if at the same time, he is very attracted to the action and the
opportunities he knows exist and if he is also impatient with the learning
process—his impatience and attraction will make him feel compelled to do
something, even if he doesn't know what he should do. How do you think
the typical trader will resolve this dilemma? He will play follow the leader,
rationalizing that everybody else is doing something and, furthermore, all
these people waving their hands and screaming can't be as afraid and
unknowing as himself, so they must know what they are doing or at least they
know more than him. If he does what they do, or better yet, identifies the most
successful trader and does what that trader does, then he too can make money.
This type of rationale creates a herd mentality (extremely prevalent on the floor
of the exchanges), where most everyone is looking for direction, assuming
everyone else must know something they don't, otherwise why would they be
doing anything. In a group, this collective mentality is very volatile, where one
key trader can start an endless series of chain reactions where everyone mirrors
everyone else, all assuming that the other guy must have some rational reason for
doing what he is doing.
In fact, I wouldn't even describe what goes on down on the trading floor as
follow the leader. It is actually better described as "follow the follower," because
most traders don't know what the leader is doing or who the leader may be at any
50

given moment. Therefore, the group's behavior is like these endless waves of
back and forth movement, where the traders closest to the leaders (the leaders
being those who know exactly what they want to do and why they want to do it)
will have the first opportunity to get on the bandwagon at the best price and
those next closest have diminished opportunities and so on down the line until
you get to the least skilled trader, who doesn't have much of a chance at all.
When there is no leadership in the market, the prices usually drift back and forth
in a small range until someone who knows what he is doing comes into the
market.
If the prices have made any significant move during or at the end of the trading
day, all the crowd followers get together to find any reason or rationale that
might explain their (the market's) behavior and put it into some understandable
context. Basically, what they come up with is a consensus reason for the
market's behavior that day. However, the leaders (those traders who take
responsibility for their trades and know exactly why they did what they did) do
not feel compelled to talk to anyone and usually don't. The typical crowd
follower feels compelled to find reasons outside of himself because these reasons
don't exist inside of himself and he doesn't want to think he is irrational and acts
randomly.
For the crowd follower, trading this way serves many functions. It keeps his
relationship with the market mysterious. If he makes money, he must have
done something right. If he loses money, he can blame the market, which is
obviously very acceptable behavior among traders, since so many of them
do it. The rational or logical explanation for the individual's part in the
collective behavior will be decided on later (after the fact) by the
consensus opinion of the group. This way he can maintain an illusion of
being rational and responsible and whatever happened to him also happened
to a lot of other traders, so at least he knows he is not alone, which
then creates a sense of comradeship among competitors.
Outside of the world of trading, most people think that traders are
rugged individualists, associating them with the characteristics of the
entrepreneurial types, like being decisive and persevering. Most outside
people would be shocked to learn that except for a small minority of
successful traders, the rest fall into a group that, at any given moment,
have no idea about what they are going to do next or know why they are
even doing what they are doing. If you asked them to tell you
specifically how they make money or lose money, they couldn't tell you.
In addition, as a group, traders (except for the leaders) are indecisive and
impatient to an extreme. It isn't too difficult to determine why, if you
consider that under normal conditions, the frame of mind of the average
trader is one notch away from unrestrained terror. Getting organized and
creating structure is one obvious solution to the many psychological
problems the typical trader heaps on himself. But that would also force him
to cross that psychological boundary line into the realm of accountability
and responsibility.
51

Besides the outright refusal to plan trades, most traders go to great
lengths to put as much psychological distance as possible between what
they do and the outcome of their actions. I know many traders who can do
extremely good market analysis on their own but still seek opinions of
other traders on what to do and then take those trades instead of their
own, simply because they don't want to take responsibility if the trade
doesn't work out. And, more often than not, sticking with their own
analysis would have produced far better results.
There are many floor traders who trade hundreds of contracts a day, and
although they have to record each trade on a trading card, they will not
keep an accurate account of their net trading position, claiming they get too
busy or that they added wrong. At the end of the day, they count their
cards with intense anxiety, hoping or praying to whatever unseen forces
that they are flat (not carrying a net long or short position).
Obviously, if they were that concerned, the simple solution to their problem
would be to trade only at a volume level where they can always keep track of
where they are at and if they lose track to stop trading until they get a correct
count. But they wouldn't want to do that because, if they kept track of their
position, then they would have to take the responsibility for what they end up
with. What if they inadvertently end up with a net long position at the end of
the day and the market opens several ticks higher the next morning? The unseen
market forces have thus blessed these traders with a winning position, or
conversely if the market opens lower, they can always find someone or
something to blame for their bad fortune. Maybe their lucky tie was sent to the
dry cleaners by mistake or they hit three red lights in a row on the way to the
exchange. Any reason or excuse to shift responsibility will do. These reasons can
range from the most eloquent academic jargon to the most superstitious beliefs,
but in essence, they all focus blame outside of oneself for unsatisfactory results.
In an unlimited environment, the less structure you create for yourself, the
less accountable you are, the more easily you will be swept along by the force of
events, and the less control you seem to have over your life. However, having less
structure has the benefit of shifting the responsibility for the events in your life to
other unidentified forces. This is precisely why so many traders have such a
strong belief in superstitions. If a person refuses to make any connection between
his thoughts, intents, skills, and results, then it is very easy to associate one's
success or failure to something like the tie one had on that day or inadvertently
making some gesture and then finding oneself in a losing trade and associating
the gesture with the loss.
I have a personal story to illustrate a typical superstitious belief that traders
have. One morning I went into the men's bathroom at the Chicago Mercantile
Exchange, and as I approached the only urinal not in use, a floor trader using the
urinal next to the one I was about to use turned his head, looked at me, and said
in a very cautious tone, "Don't use that one, you can wait for mine, I'll be done
in a second." I gave him a puzzled look, and he then pointed to a penny that was
at the bottom of the urinal. I gave him another puzzled look because I didn't
52

have the slightest idea about what he was trying to communicate to me. As
I proceeded to use the urinal with the penny in it, he turned with a nervous
expression on his face and strode away from me as quickly as he could.
Later on that day, I told one of my floor trader clients about this
experience and asked if he knew what was going on. He said certainly, that
it was very common knowledge that money at the bottom of a urinal is a
bad omen and certainly something to be avoided. After I thought about it
for a moment, I wondered what would happen if I went through the entire
exchange and put pennies in all the urinals.
This story illustrates how the typical trader is caught in a psychological
trap of refusing to plan and create structure for his trading activity, so that
he can avoid taking responsibility for his results. And by doing so, he is
subjecting himself to being tossed around by the whims of the crowd, at
the mercy of his own unrestrained impulses, finding himself in winning
and losing positions, not knowing why or what to do next. This trap is
extremely negative because it creates a potentially damaging psychological
condition I call random winning and random losing. If you can't define
your own behavior and that of the markets, you can't learn how to repeat
your wins or prevent your losses.
When you win it is so pleasurable, it creates a need to repeat it and
compels you to try again. When you follow the crowd (instead of
anticipating the crowd, which would take planning) or trade off news items,
tips, or isolated signals from technical systems, the anticipation of the next
attempt to win automatically produces fear and anxiety.
Why? Because, you can't define the market conditions or the decisionmaking process that produced the last win, and so you can't assure yourself
of the next.
If you don't know what you did to win the last time, you obviously don't
know what to do to keep from losing this time. The end result is intense
anxiety, frustration, confusion, and fear. You feel out of control,
experiencing a sense of powerlessness as you are swept along by the
ensuing events and wondering what is the market going to do to you today.
Consider that the markets can't do anything to any trader who
completely trusts himself to act appropriately, in his best interests, under all
market conditions. And before people can trust themselves in this manner,
they would first have to define all those conditions and be able to recognize
them.
Understandably, taking responsibility is something that is extremely
difficult to do. We don't live in a society that has a highly evolved concept
of the growth process, and as a result, we learn to become very intolerant of
"mistakes." I say this because we are basically taught as children and,
therefore, in turn teach our children through our ridicule of them that
mistakes are something that diminish one as a person. Ridicule does not
enhance a child's willingness to accept responsibility, and if he doesn't, the
typical parent will then criticize the child for being irresponsible.
53

Taking responsibility is a function of self-acceptance. You can measure
this degree of self-acceptance by how positively or negatively you think of
yourself when you make what you perceive as a mistake. The more
negatively you think of yourself, the greater your tendency to avoid taking
responsibility, so you can avoid the pain of your harsh thoughts, thus
generating a fear of making mistakes. However, the greater the degree of
self-acceptance you have for yourself, the more positive your thoughts will
be and the greater the degree of insight you will be able to extract from an
experience, instead of generating fear. The more self-accepting you are,
the easier it is to learn because you are not trying to avoid certain
information.
I don't know of any national prerogative to teach children how to accept
themselves in spite of their "shortcomings" as perceived by the adults in
their lives. If people had a more accepting attitude about the outcome of
their actions, they wouldn't have a need to avoid taking responsibility.
To be successful, the market forces you, as a trader, to be responsible in
completely new ways. For example, you can't put on a trade and then
release your responsibility to the market to do something for you, like give
you money. The market is a fluid, ever-changing event, where at any
moment some other trader may decide to jump in with enough force to
change the expectations of other traders participating to the point where
they reverse their positions and as a result completely negate the potential
you believed existed a moment ago, when you put on your trade.
In our everyday lives, objects are very stable, and day-today events do not
change at anywhere near the rate and frequency that conditions change in
the market environment. Relative to the nature of the market environment, all
of us take it completely for granted that the buildings, trees, traffic lights,
and streets we all know are completely stationary and will be there from one
moment to the next. You didn't walk out of your front door this morning to
discover the street you live on doesn't look just as it did the previous
evening when you walked inside your home. If getting to the office or your
place of employment represents an opportunity to make money, you would
take it completely for granted that it would be possible to get there in familiar
ways.
However, as a potential opportunity to make money comparable to that
afforded in the markets, what if the location changed on a moment-tomoment basis, what if the streets also changed their location in
relationship to each other, and, furthermore, what if no one cared if you
ever found your way there, making you and you alone completely
responsible for where you end up?
It just makes sense that to function in the market environment
effectively you will need to make yourself accountable. Otherwise, how
could you ever learn how to trade, if you allow yourself to be swept into or
out of something by forces outside of you and inside of you that you can't
identify and don't want to? The market's behavior will seem mysterious
54
