
of lapses. Still, this feature would theoretically allow for easier redress and oversight.
Seek references: Even if you don't have a trusted referral source, search online for references and
credentials of the advisor. The greater the number of years and money invested in the business
and its reputation, the more the advisor has to lose. For example, if you want forex exposure via
ETFs and have the funds needed to get started with the likes of a Tom Lydon or Roger Nusbaum,
or anyone else who has clearly invested a lot in building a business and reputation, you should be
fine with them.
If you find this search process intimidating or lack a trusted advisor, there's a new alternative to
traditional managed accounts with significant advantages that make it much better suited for most
investors—forex social trading. As we'll discuss in the next chapter, the list of advantages inclues:
Much better transparency: They provide rankings and extensive performance, risk, and trade style
information on which to base your selection, and you can then monitor your chosen trader's
performance in real time.
Lower entry costs: With some vendors you can start with a few hundred dollars and have a
proven expert trading for you.
Ability to easily switch to different expert traders: You've a variety to choose from and can
easily move funds between them.
Active Trading for Passive Investors: Using the social trading site's software, you link your
account to your chosen expert traders, and the software automatically matches that trader's every
trade.
See Chapter 11 for further details on social trading and another innovation in forex for a smarter,
simpler way to trading success---binary options.

Notes
1. Content by John Nyaradi, publisher of Wall Street Sector Selector, wallstreet sectorselector.com,
an online newsletter specializing in sector rotation trading using Exchange-Traded Funds. Used with
permission.

CHAPTER 11
Newer, Smarter Methods
For those seeking simpler ways to tap the potentially faster profits from short- to medium-term
(ranging from minutes to weeks) trading of forex, with more controlled risk, we introduce two new
and very useful instruments:
Forex social trading.
Forex binary options.
Both have come out only over the past few years, and are the fastest-growing sectors of the forex
industry for good reason. They meet an important need of traders to tap forex trading in ways that are
easier and less time-consuming, and for many traders they offer a better chance of profiting.

FOLLOW THE LEADERS: FOREX SOCIAL
NETWORKS AND TRADING
Between 2007 and 2009, the first social networks and social trading sites showed promise for stock
investors,1 so it was natural that the idea of tapping crowd sentiment via social networks, and copying
the moves of top traders via social trading, would quickly be applied to the rapidly growing forex
trading scene.
The first social trading networks appeared in late 2010 and are on their way to becoming ideal
solutions for many investors seeking forex exposure and diversification but who lack the time or
expertise to trade successfully on their own.
The trading networks evolved from an only slightly older and equally valuable new tool, forex
social networks.

What Are Forex Social Networks?
As retail forex trading gained popularity over the past decade, forex social networks arose to fill a
massive information vacuum. Compared to other financial markets like stocks, retail forex is still in
its infancy and is still largely unknown to mainstream investors. It's neglected by the mainstream
media, and whatever coverage it gets tends to be superficial and often misinformed, as noted earlier
in Chapters 1 and 2. Retail forex trading was born online; it was only natural that this information
vacuum would be filled by online sources. These were filled by a combination of:
Dedicated forex content sites: DailyFX.com, ForexFactory.com, Forexpros.com,
DailyForex.com, and others.
Content sections of forex broker sites: Some provided good analysis, some little more than news
summaries. Unlike the content sites, however, they avoided specific trading advice given

brokers' legal and liability concerns.
A huge part of any professional's on-the-job training is the input from mentors and co-workers.
Because most forex traders typically work alone at home, online forex social networks have filled
much of that workplace role as a source of practical advice and news. Whether they're seeking new
opportunities or trading the same pairs and time frames, traders can easily share information and
critique or validate each other's trade ideas or methods.
The first to attempt to fill these voids were Forex forums found on some of the content sites like
BabyPips.com, ForexFactory.com, ForexP eaceArmy.com, Forexpros.com, and DailyFX.com. They
offered a venue for exchange of information and advice among traders but lacked the more personal,
user-profile-oriented interface of a true social network like Facebook. There are also sites such as
ZuluTrade and Tradency that solely offer automated strategies, which could be seen as a kind of
social trading, but these still lack the complete social interaction of the forums. Then, over the past
three years, came the first true forex social networks that better filled these needs. The most
prominent are such websites as Currensee, eToro's OpenBook, FxStat, and Myfxbook.
While the definition of a social network is not clear-cut, for the purposes of this discussion we'll
loosely define it as a website that puts greater emphasis on user profiles and trading credentials than a
typical trader forum does.
In their original forms as of 2009, these nascent forex social networks offered lots of advice and
interaction, but they still lacked a way to distinguish the real experts from the mere posers who were
better at getting attention than at trading. The sites lacked a means of accountability, an easy way for
users to identify who was worth following and who was just good at getting attention.

What Is Social Trading?
Then in late 2010, Currensee and eToro took social networks to the next level. They went from being
marketplaces of actionable ideas to those of actual traders. They began offering social trading, a
service that allows your account to automatically mimic the trades of one or more chosen expert
traders. To help you identify the top traders most suitable for your needs, these services include
trader rankings complete with detailed data on their styles, performance, maximum drawdown, and
other risk data, experience, and so on.
Most major brokers are either linking up with existing social trading services or building their own.
Why? Because social trading fills an important unmet need, a shortcut to trading success without
needing to trade yourself, but with better transparency and lower entry costs than with traditional
managed accounts.
As we'll see later, you're more likely to actually make money by letting an expert do it for you. For
those interested in becoming star traders themselves, they can raise their chances of making money
sooner by using a portion of their accounts to trade via experts until they reach a similar level of
performance. For those who just want some exposure to forex trading without as much work, here's
the solution.

How It Works: The Highest Form of Flattery
Basically, you select one or more of your favorite experts based on the data available on them, and

set up an account that mimics their every trade, either automatically or only after your approval
(depending on the broker).
Experts are compensated based on performance measures that vary from site to site, such as
profitability and number of followers.
We'll focus on the two big players, Currensee and eToro.
EToro is a forex broker, and requires having an eToro account in order to follow its experts.
Currensee is not a broker; it's a pure social network and social trading site. You set up an account,
or part of an account, with a third-party broker and link that account to Currensee. You then select the
trader(s) that your account will mimic.
When that star trader makes a trade, your linked account simultaneously makes the same trade
automatically, or notifies you and awaits your approval. This use of hired expertise makes social
trading similar to managed accounts, with the advantages of lower entry costs, greater accountability,
more transparency, and far greater ease of switching between experts. You always know how your
chosen traders are performing in real time by a variety of measures and how they compare to others.
If you see that a chosen trader is underperforming, you can switch over to another.

Risks of Social Trading
In theory, having a proven pro trade for you should vastly improve your odds of making money. There
are still risks, though. Because pros focus on risks before profits, let's consider risks first.

Trade Replication Risk
Will your results accurately reflect those of your chosen experts? That is, do these accounts
accurately mimic the trades of the expert trader you're following? Because currency prices can change
so quickly, followers' trades might be executed at slightly different prices than those of the trader
they're following. For trading styles that seek to eke out very small gains from minute-to-minute
moves, that difference could turn a profitable trade into a loser for the followers.
Different sites deal with this trade replication risk differently. For example, Currensee.com doesn't
accept this style of trading when selecting its trade leaders.2 Even by eliminating this style of trading
from the mix, CEO Dave Lemont admits there can still be minor differences in the price received by
the Trade Leader and that subsequently received by the followers at both the open and close of the
position. He notes:
All of this is transparent for you in the portfolio performance page in the platform. A negative
number in parentheses [see the Open Price and Close Price columns in Figure 11.1] indicates a
better price for the Trade Leader and a positive number in parentheses indicates a better price
for the investor. In addition, all of these prices and their correlation to the Trade Leader can be
exported to Excel for further analysis.3
FIGURE 11.1 Portfolio Performance

EToro.com does allow you to follow Guru traders using this approach and attempts to minimize any
differences in execution time and thus price. With eToro's social trading, the accounts of both the
experts and followers are all in-house under one integrated trading platform. That tighter integration
may better minimize any time lag between the actions of the experts and the accounts that are linked to
them.

Selection Process and Quality of Experts Vary
As with managed accounts, your success depends on your ability to pick winning traders and know
when to switch to others. That gets easier if you have all the information you need to make that choice,
a range of choices from a qualified pool of applicants, and an ability to move to different experts
quickly and easily without needing to close and open different accounts. Both Currensee and eToro
fill these requirements, though in distinctly different ways.
To get an initial feel for the quality of the selection of experts, it pays to be familiar with:

The rigorousness of the selection process
EToro allows traders to become Guru traders, who can then recruit followers, if they:
Have a documented “positive trading history” in the three months prior to admission.
Continue to meet certain performance, trade frequency, and recruiting targets.
At last count, eToro has about 400 Guru traders with around 200 having at least 10 followers,
between 50 and 100 of whom are full-time professional traders.4
Currensee takes a much more selective approach. It accepts only about 2 percent out of thousands
who apply. There are typically between 10 to 20 selected Trade Leaders available at any one time
that have both survived that screening process and met ongoing performance goals needed to remain
in this very exclusive club. At the time of this writing, 11 of the 14 Trade Leaders were full-time
professionals or trading firms rather than solo traders.5 Currensee is clearly the more selective of the
two. As we discuss later, that's no guarantee that you will succeed, though it should improve your
odds.
If Currensee's more limited selection of traders doesn't suit your needs, you'll have a wider
selection at eToro, though you'll have many more to sort through and most won't sport the same level

of credentials.
Note that because both Currensee's and eToro's programs began in late 2010, the track records of
most experts in the programs are measured in months rather than years. While Currensee may have
checked farther back, keep in mind that you're dealing with shorter, hence less reliable, performance
records than you'd normally see with other asset classes. That should improve over time as these
services mature.

How well the expert compensation system aligns trader interests with
yours
Logically, we want to see compensation systems that:
Connect the experts' earnings directly to those of their followers.
Pay very well for good performance in order to attract better expert traders. You get what you
pay for, so if the network can provide a handsome income for top traders, it should in theory
attract them.
Both eToro and Currensee attempt to do this, but in different ways.
EToro pays its Guru traders $10 per follower per month up to a maximum of $10,000 per month
while they have live accounts that can be copied, its theory apparently being that top performers will
attract more followers. Assuming the system quickly makes that performance well known throughout
the network, then that would connect performance and reward. If not, then this method is rewarding a
mix of the trader's marketing skills as well as performance. The advantage of this approach is that it
encourages top traders to respond to questions or comments and serve a mentor role. That could be a
real plus for educating traders, as long as top traders aren't put off by this extra demand on their time.
Currensee pays 15 percent of the amount by which the expert trader actually increases a follower's
account measured from its highest value (high-water mark). So if the account loses money in a given
month, the experts don't start getting paid again from that follower until they recoup those losses. They
then get 15 percent of any additional gains beyond the prior high water mark. There are no limits on
how much a Trade Leader can earn.
This method appears to more directly connect reward with performance, and in theory allows for a
higher income than from eToro. Currensee does not reward or encourage Trade Leaders to be
mentors. Indeed the Currensee website explicitly states that users should not expect to have contact
with Trade Leaders. This makes sense given that Currensee seeks only a very small, elite group of
mostly professional traders who may well be unwilling or unable to commit the time needed to
assume the correspondence and mentoring roles of eToro Gurus.

Your costs to participate
EToro is a forex broker and earns its money from your trading volume, without charging anything to
follow another trader.
Currensee is not a brokerage but rather a pure forex social network and trading business. It charges
an annual service fee of 2 percent charged monthly, based on the average capital in your account, plus
a 20 percent performance fee paid to your Trade Leaders on whatever profits they generated for you. 6
For example, if you had an average monthly balance of $10,000 and earned $1,500 for 15 percent

annual profits:
EOY balance:

$11,500 (assuming the 2% fee is collected only at EOY for sake of illustration)

Annual service fee:

200

Performance fee:

300

Total EOY:
Net annual yield:

$11,000
11%

To participate in Currensee's social trading program, you need a minimum $3,000, though a
Currensee spokesperson told me the average account is around $25,000, increasingly from satisfied
customers starting with small accounts and subsequently adding funds in the hope of averaging up,
like one would do with any other winning investment in a firm uptrend.
EToro's initial deposit for the social trading is a much easier to digest $100, and you're not
permitted to have more than 20 percent of your account balance at risk from one trade or one guru
trader.
Note that with either site, you're ultimately using the same leverage as the trader you follow for a
given trade. Given that most traders use significant leverage (anywhere from 20:1 to 400:1), you'd
need the appropriate cash reserves in your account, and very good risk and money management
(RAMM) skills, to have any realistic chance of surviving normal price fluctuations and account
drawndowns expected if following the more leveraged traders, as we covered in Chapter 5 on
RAMM.

Regulation
The sites are essentially unregulated, so there are some gaps in oversight. As this industry matures,
we expect that situation to get better as firms seek to improve their standing as legitimate alternative
investment vehicles and so work with relevant regulatory agencies like the National Futures
Association (NFA), in the case of U.S.-based firms, on their risk disclosures and marketing materials.

Success at Social Trading Still Ultimately Depends on Your Own Skill
and Judgment
Though social trading is a huge shortcut to success, it's far from an idiot-proof solution. There's skill
involved in knowing how to select expert traders, how long to stick with them, and how to deal with
one's own psychological, risk, and money management issues. You are still responsible for these.
These issues are critical, yet they are difficult to master and often neglected in the mistaken focus on
finding the magical mix of trade setups or analytical tools.
In other words, you still need enough of a background in analysis, trader psychology, risk, and
money management to be able to:
Select the experts that best fit your own risk tolerance, account size, style preferences, and
current market conditions, and know how long to stay with them even when normal drawdowns
tempt you to switch prematurely to another expert.
Be responsible for your own RAMM.
In sum, there are plenty of decisions left in your hands once you've selected your expert(s). For
example:

As a senior manager of one social trading venue told me, most profitable traders tend to use the
riskiest strategies. When selecting which expert(s) to follow, you can't just rely on the sites'
rankings or one profitability metric. You need to consider whether you can psychologically and
financially accept large drawdowns that might not ever be recovered. The experts are human, and
thus liable to have cold streaks and at some point lose their touch altogether, as with managed
accounts.
You need to assess which traders might be best for current market conditions. Like top hedge
fund managers, star expert traders tend to have their winning and losing streaks, and tend to do
better in certain kinds of markets. At minimum, you need to be able to have some idea about
whether the coming weeks or months are likely to favor risk or safety assets, and to trend strongly
or stay within a range. Then you need to assess whether a given expert's track record was formed
under similar market conditions to those you anticipate, or you have some reason to believe that
the trader will succeed under the likely coming market conditions. As every site warns, past
performance is no guarantee of future returns. You should be able to clearly articulate why your
chosen expert(s) should continue to perform in current and near-term market conditions.
You are still fully responsible for your own money management. The available performance
metrics can tell you about the likely risk and maximum drawdown of given experts; however,
these traders are making decisions based on their own account balances and risk tolerance, not
yours. That is, you must still be sure you have enough funds in your account to cover those
possible drawdowns. This is especially true for those following multiple experts, because their
accounts must be able to absorb their combined losses at any one time or risk facing margin calls.
As we noted earlier, you must be clear that you have enough cash in your account to be able to
survive the possible drawdowns of your chosen experts given what you know about their
leverage and maximum drawdown data. If you have any doubt, back off until you are clear that
you have the cash. Otherwise it's very possible you will hit a margin call and lose your money
just as your expert starts to turn around and get profitable.
Huge red flag and flashing lights warning: Before linking with any expert, you should first be
very clear on how much leverage they use, what is their expected and maximum drawdown, and
therefore how much cash you need to keep in your account to avoid a margin call and survive a likely
worst-case scenario losing streak that most traders hit at one time or another. If in doubt, ask:
The customer service reps: My experiences with them at both eToro and Currensee have been
good.
Fellow traders in the social network: This is exactly what they are there to do—provide advice.
As easy as social trading appears, don't even think about trying it until you know you have the
needed cash to ride out possible drawdowns and losing streaks of your chosen expert. Otherwise you
are so not ready for this.
To eToro's great credit, it has recognized that too many new traders make far too many mistakes
with RAMM (not having read this book yet), and has actually done something to help these poor
innocents. It has taken a number of steps to promote more responsible, less reckless trading. These
include:
Adjustable leverage and default leverage settings to reduce the risk of excessive leverage. Note:
Unless regulations of the user's country of residence are lower, eToro's default leverage is 100:1.

That's still quite high.
Real-time “Guardian Angel” guidance system: an automated trading guide to help traders avoid
some of the worst mistakes that can kill accounts and self-esteem. While the system is mentioned
on the homepage, there's no easy-to-find link to more information on this. Instead, just do an
online search (eToro and Guardian Angel) for full details.
Maximum 20 percent of available balance with any given trader. That is a good diversification
for most, who may not be both very well capitalized and very capable of identifying the right
trader at the right time.
Maximum 20 percent of available balance on any one trade. That may still be high (depending on
account size and available balance), but does allow for an exceptional situation when a trader is
willing to take on more risk than usual. In the end, users must be responsible for their own
RAMM, and eToro wants to keep its rules simple.
Users can not only copy others' trades but also automatically allocate the same proportion of their
account to that trade as the expert trader's allocation, allowing users to not only copy trades of
Gurus but also at least some of their risk management.
The ability to practice social trading even on demo accounts. Currensee allows social trading
only with real accounts.
Exceptionally detailed screening tools to allow users to set criteria for selecting whom to copy
or follow. That makes it far easier to find safer, lower-risk traders that suit your needs among the
thousands of possibilities in the social network. Ease of use raises the chances that users will
make the effort to do careful screening and selection. Users can even choose only one instrument
of a given trader to copy. For example, if that trader is really an expert only in the AUDJPY or
gold, you can choose to copy only trades in these instruments.
We hope more forex brokers will invest in providing these kinds of safety features, as well as in
quality analysis, training, and other tools to help you survive and prosper, and so prove that they want
to make money with you rather than from you.
So while using expert traders should improve your results (see the following page for details), until
you attain a similar level of expertise, you still need a background in forex, analysis, and RAMM in
order to best exploit social trading, even with the aforementioned safety features.
