
Bar charts are expressed as vertical lines, with the left and right handles
representing the opening and closing levels. Candle charts, on the other
hand, are plotted as vertical rectangular boxes that connect the opening and
closing prices, and with vertical lines that extend from the rectangles to
encompass the extreme high and low. Bar charts treat all data more or less
equally. It is also important to differentiate between which is higher, the
Open or the close.

Candle charts can be plotted only for markets in which opening prices
as well as closes, highs, and lows are known. Proponents of this system
believe that it provides all the information contained in bar charts as well
as additional ideas contained only in candle charts. Candle charts are not
the Holy Grail, but they are certainly a useful adjunct to the technical

Major Technical Principle In candlestick charting, the greatest
.. &mphasis is:given to the opening and closing prices and the trading
Tange between them. os .

257



258 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

arsenal. In this description, we will refer to days since they are the most com-
mon timeframe, but bear in mind that candle charts can be constructed for
any time period.

A typical candle consists of two parts: the real body, that is, the rectan-
gular part, and the shadow or wick, that is, the two vertical extensions. The
top and bottom of the rectangle are determined by the opening and clos-
ing prices for the day. If the closing price ends up above the opening (the
real body), it is plotted in white. When it closes below the opening, it is plot-
ted in black [see Figs. 13-1(a) and (4)]. The top of the real body represents
the opening price, the bottom the close. This is reversed in the case of a
white rectangle where the close is plotted at the top and the open at the
bottom.

The thin, vertical shadow lines that protrude from the real body reflect
the high and low for the day. Since the closing and opening prices can be
identical, or identical with the high or low, there are a number of possible
combinations that need to be represented. Some of them are shown in
Fig. 13-1.

Candlesticks provide essentially the same information as bar charts, but
their more pronounced visual representation of the material enables tech-
nicians to identify characteristics that are less obvious on bar charts. Certain
phenomena illustrated in bar charts have been given their own names, such
as key reversal days or island reversal days, likewise, with candle charts. Because
of the large number of potential variations for both individual days and price
formations encompassing several days, it has been common practice to give
exotic names to the various possibilities. The characteristics of the more
cormmon candles are also shown in Fig. 13-1.

Figure 13-1(a) shows the long white line, a wide trading range where the
opening is close to the low and the high is near the close. This candle has

high

close and high
close

N
seal ~ ~eren /
Bod t | | “~\. open ” o
7 open close
Sew 4
© @ @& «)

@ ©) (C) @ om

Figure 13-1 Selected one-bar candles.

Candle Charts 259

a bullish tendency. Figure 13-1(0) is the long black line, a wide trading range
where the opening is close to the high and the close near the day’s low. This
candle has a bearish tendency. Figures 13-1(c) to (¢) show doji lines, where
opening and closing prices are identical. Interpretation depends upon the
context in which they appear, but they essentially indicate a balance between
buyers and sellers. Figures 13-1(/) and (g) illustrate umbrella lines, where the
real body is narrow and develops at the high end of the day’s trading range.
Umbrella lines are bullish at bottoms and bearish at tops. Figures 13-1 (h)
and (1) show spinning tops, representing days when the trading range is very
small. They do not have any significance in trading ranges, but are impor-
tant in some of the price formations discussed later.

Candle charts offer indications of both reversal and continuation phe-
nomena, just as bar charts do. Some examples in this chapter demonstrate
candlestick formations (see Charts 13-1 to 134). Candlesticks really come
into their own in the identification of shorter-term reversals and continua-
tion situations.

Chart 13-1 Financial Times Stock Exchange 100 cash, 1990. (From www.pring.com.)

180.0

ENGUCFING PATTERN” 2380.0

2300.0 [> surf 2200.0

2850.0 2280.0

DARK CLOUD

2200.0 2200.0

BAS. O PE ee ee 2180.0

BOO. be oe 2100.0

t099 oki.

2050.0

2000 9} 2000.0

50.5

sof taso.0

HAMMERS ¢

"36 see ber nou pec



260 Part 1: Trend-Determining Techniques

Reversal Phenomena

Hammers and Hanging Men (Takuri and Kubitsuri)

These formations [see Figs. 13-1(f) and (g)] have probably gained more
notoriety than all the others because of their imposing titles. A hanging man
is an umbrella line that develops after a rally. It looks rather like the body
of a man with dangling legs and, as its name implies, is a bearish pattern.
If a hanging man appears after a prolonged upmove, it should be treated
with respect, especially if it occurs after a gap. A hanging man can be iden-
tified by the fact that the shadow, or wick, is at least twice the height of the
real body. The color of the body is not important.

A hammer is identical to a hanging man, but occurs after a market decline
when it is a bullish sign. It gets its name from the idea that the price is “ham-
mering out” a bottom. In effect, it represents the kind of trading day when
the price temporarily slips quite sharply, because there is a run on the sell-
ing stops. Nevertheless, the technical position is sufficiently constructive to
cause buyers to come into the market and push the price back up toward
or above the opening level.

Chart 13-2 New York light crude three-month perpetual, 1989-1990. (From
www.pring.com.)

arse 22.50

22.00 48.00

21.50 24.80

2a .00 21.00
20.80

20-60

20.00 20-00

PIERCING

33.58 49.80

19.00

49.08

te.8e 050

Candle Charts 261

Chart 13-3 Microsoft, 2000-2001, candle volume. (From www.pring.com.)

80-4

Merck
tit +
hey af , |
Dark Cloud

*
il \ ' Healy
w| , ‘ey Ita

784

70+

fois ba Bir [14 2 Bele fis Roe
= J00 __lrebruary

Chart 13-4 Treasury bonds, 1990. (From www.pring.com.)

veoe b 39.00

37.00 |

woe t i: i
rn gen

48.00

"F200 L

95.00

+ 400

4 33.00

4 e7.00

‘oe L L 86.90

"90 nau DEC



262 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Dark Cloud Cover (Kabuse)

In real life, dark clouds (see Fig. 13-2) hint at the possibility of rain, so a
dark cloud candlestick formation implies lower prices. Its bearish connota-
tions are most pronounced during an uptrend or in the upper part of a con-
gestion zone. It is a form of key reversal, since the price closes down on the
day after a gap’s higher opening. It consists of 2 days. The first is a strong,
white real body, and the second is a black body, in which the close occurs
in the lower half of the previous white real body.

Piercing Line (Kirikorni)

This pattern (see Fig. 13-3) would be more aptly named “sunny sky” because
it is the exact opposite of the dark cloud and is therefore bullish. It is impor-
tant to note whether the second day’s white body closes more than halfway

above the previous body. If it does not, conventional wisdom indicates that
additional weakness is likely.

Figure 13-2 Dark cloud cover.

Figure 13-3 Piercing line.

Candle Charts 263

Engulfing Pattern (Tsutsumi)

This formation (see Fig. 13-4) develops significance after a prolonged price
move. It is characterized by two consecutive more or less shadowless real
bodies, in which the second day “engulfs” the first. It is bullish in a down-
trend, when the second day is a white body, and bearish in an uptrend, when
it appears as a black one.

Stars (Hoshi)

Stars (see Fig. 13-5) are common phenomena in candle charts and come
in four different reversal varieties. Stars are combinations of wide real bod-
ies and spinning tops. The morning star heralds a new day (upmove) and is
bullish. It consists of two long real bodies separated by a spinning top. The
star is represented by the spinning top, which is made on a gap. The third
body should be white and should result in a closing price more than
halfway up the body of the first the dotted horizontal line in Fig. 13-5. The
evening star is a precursor of night. It has the opposite characteristics and
implications of a morning star.

Butish Bearish

ee

Figure 13-4 Engulfing patterns.

Evening Star Morning Star Doji Star Shooting Star

Figure 13-5 Stars.



264 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

A doji star is a bearish sign and occurs after a lengthy rally. It consists of a
gap and a doji line. A shooting star is like a short-term top where the daily
price action experiences a small gap and the black real body appears at the
end of a long wick or upper shadow.

Upside Gap Two Crows (Narabi Kuro)

This bearish formation (see Fig. 13-6) consists of a long white line followed
by two black lines. The first black line gaps to the upside. The third day often
closes the gap, but because it is a black line where the close is below the
open, its implication is bearish.

Three Black Crows (Sanba Garasu)

The three black crows pattern in Fig. 13-7 consists of three declining black can-
dlesticks that form after an advance. They indicate lower prices. Each black
candle should open within the real body of its black predecessor and close

+.

Figure 13-6 Upside gap two crows.

|

Figure 13-7 Three black crows.

Candle Charts 265

at or close to its session low (see Fig. 13-8). You can see that none of the
candles have a lower wick (see Fig. 13-9) and each of the three real bodies
opens within the range of the previous session's real body.

Tweezer Tops and Bottoms (Kenuki)

If you hold a tweezer upside down, you will see that the two points are at
identical levels (see Fig. 13-10). The same is true of a tweezer top, which con-
sists of two candles that the high of the day is identical to. Actually, it’s pos-
sible for a tweezer to consist of more than 2 days with an identical top. Make
no mistake about it, we are talking about the high, which can be a shadow
or real body close or open. This pattern is short-term bearish because the
first day's high acts as resistance; when the second day is unable to punch

g Three black crows close al, or

very close to. the session low

Figure 13-8 Three black crows.

a han 7 Three black crows open within
- | the previous candle's real body

; ae i

Figure 13-9 Three black crows.

yt


266 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

through the horizontal line that marks the area of the top, it indicates a loss
of upside momentum. In this example, the second day is also an engulfing
pattern, which is an important point since a tweezer often contains a price
pattern as part of its formation.

A tweezer bottom occurs when, after a decline, two or more candles make
an identical low. This again indicates a loss of downside momentum since
the price finds support in the area of the low. In Fig. 13-10, we see a tweezer
literally hammered out because the second low to touch the horizontal line
is a part of a hammer candle.

One factor that will increase the significance of a tweezer is the nature of
the pattern being formed. For example, if the second day of a tweezer top
isa hanging man, as in Fig. 13-il, we have two pieces of evidence that the
trend may be about to reverse: the tweezer and the hanging man.
Alternatively, the second day might be a doji, so the tweezer is really a harami
cross (see Fig. 13-20). It could also be a shooting star. Finally, a tweezer bot-
tom may also be a morning star, harami, hammer, and so forth.

Belt-Hold Lines (Yorikiri)

A bullish belt hold (see Fig. 13-12) is a one-candle pattern consisting of a long
candle in which the price opens on the session low and then works its way
higher throughout the session. The price does not have to close at the high,
but the longer the real body, the more positive the candle. Also, if a belt
hold has not appeared on the chart for quite a while, it is therefore an

Figure 13-10 Tweezer tops and bottoms,

Candle Charts 267

Hanging Man

Figure 13-11 Tweezer top and a hanging man.

Sait

Figure 13-12 Bullish belt hold.

Bullish belt hold
usally opens
+— onthe low

unusual phenomenon. As a result, it gains in importance. This is because
traders are making a very strong statement about their feelings towards the
market with a belt hold compared to the smaller candles that were previ-
ously the norm. Just think of a crowd murmuring, and then a loud voice
Comes from within the crowd. It is obviously a person who wants to be heard.
Well, the belt hold following a long period of smaller candles amounts to
the same thing. It’s a 1-day pattern that says loudly, “Listen to me because
am telling you the short-term trend has changed.” :

A bearish belt hold (see Fig. 13-13) is the opposite. It is a long black can-
dle in which the price opens at the high and then works its way lower as the
Sssion progresses. Belt holds are often important pivotal days since the high



268 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Bearish belt hold
usally opens
4— on the high

aut I

Figure 13-13 Bearish belt hold.

and low occasionally act as support and resistance areas in subsequent price
action. The halfway point of the real body of a belt hold should also be mon-
itored for a possible price reversal during later price swings.

Counterattack or Meeting Lines (Deai Sen/Gyakushu Sen)

A bullish counterattack line (see Fig. 13-14) develops when, after a decline, a
black candle is followed by a white candle and both close or “meet” at the
same level. This is why this 2-day pattern is sometimes referred to as a meet
ing line. The first day is usually a long black candle. The second day opens
sharply lower, leading most traders to believe prices will continue to give way-
However, by the end of the day, the price has regained everything lost (a
counterattack by the buyers) and closes unchanged. The meeting line
therefore indicates that the downside momentum has probably dissipated
and a reversal in trend is likely.

A bearish counterattack or meeting line (see Fig. 13-15) is formed when,
after an advance, a white candle is followed by a black candle and both close
at the same level. The psychology behind this one is fairly evident. The
sharply higher opening on the second day has the bulls in a euphoric Mo
since these new gains come on top of an already sharp rally. However, eupho-
ria turns to disappointment as the price unexpectedly returns to the
unchanged level.

Figure 13-14 Bullish counterattack line.

WA Bearish counterattack line

wy

Figure 13-15 Bearish counterattack line.

More specific rules for identifying these patterns are as follows:

* The first day is colored in the direction of the prevailing trend and the
Second day forms in the opposite color (white/black for tops and
black/white for bottoms).

* Both real bodies extend the prevailing trend and are long.

€ closes are identical.



270

Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Continuation Formations
Upside Gap (Tasuki)

A tasuki gap (see Fig. 13-16) occurs after an advance. The requirement is
an upside, white line gap followed by a black line that does not close the
gap. This type of pattern is usually followed by higher prices. However, if

the gap is filled, the formation deteriorates into an upside gap with one crow
and therefore loses its bullish portent.

Rising and Falling Three Methods (Uwa and
Shita Banare Sanpoo Ohdatekomi)

These formations [see Figs. 13-17(a) and (6)] are very similar in concept to
a flag in bar charting, except that they take only a few days, not weeks, to
develop. The rising method is a bullish pattern and consists of a powerful
white line followed by a series of three or four declining small black lines.
These lines should be accompanied by a noticeable contraction in volume
that indicates that a very fine balance is developing between buyers and sell-
ers. The final part of the pattern is a very strong white line that takes the
price to a new closing high. If volume data are available, this final day should
record a significant increase in activity. The bearish falling three method is
exactly the opposite except that volume characteristics are of no significance
on the last day. An example is featured in Fig. 13-17(b).

Windows (Ku)

Japanese chartists refer to gaps as windows (see Fig. 13-18). Whereas gps
are said to be “filled” in traditional bar charts, windows are “closed” in can-
dle charts. Windows therefore have the same technical implications as gaps.

(Refer to Chapter 7.)

Upside Gap
(tasuki)

Aff

Figure 13-16 Upside gap.

Candle Charts 271

om

a

Bullish Rising

ca
L.°

Bearish Falling

Figure 13-17 Rising and falling three methods.

Window.—+

\ Closed

Window

:

_,, Figure 13-18 Windows.

Harami Lines (Yose)

In Chapter 8, it was mentioned that trendline violations are followed either
bya reversal or a temporary consolidation. The harami formation, shown in
Fig. 13-19, is similar to the consolidation trendline break in that it indicates
aloss of momentum. The main difference is that harami lines are of much
shorter duration and consist of 2 days’ price action. The second one, the
harami, forms a real body that is sufficiently small to be engulfed by the prior
day's long real body. If the harami is also a doji, as in Fig. 13-20, it is called
4 harami cross. After a sharp rally or reaction, these patterns indicate a bal-
‘nce between buyers and sellers after one or the other has predominated.
; This means that haramis often warn of an impending trend change. In some

stances, this will be from up or down to sideways and in others an actual
"Sersal.



272 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

"

Harari

Figure 13-19 Harami.

+

Harami Cross

Figure 13-20 Harami cross.

Candle Charts and
Western Techniques

There is a tendency among many technicians to look at candlesticks in iso-
lation. My preference, remembering the weight of the evidence approach
discussed earlier, is to combine selected Western charting techniques with
candlesticks. This involves, amongst other things, the inclusion of price pat-
terns, trendlines, and oscillators into the analysis.

Chart 13-5, for instance, shows a head-and-shoulders (H&S) top for
Microsoft that was completed in November 2000. Note the sell off during
the right shoulder was an identical three crow pattern. Later, we see a dou-
ble bottom. The rally from the second low consisted of a bullish belt hold,
which in itself indicated that prices were headed higher. This bottom was
also associated with a reverse H&S in the RSI. Finally, the H&S top in the
RSI was confirmed with a harami.

One important question is where to draw the trendlines. Should they
touch the wicks, real bodies, or a combination of both? The answer lies in
applying common sense. Since the opening and closing prices are gene
ally more important than the high and low, lines that exclusively touch real
bodies will generally be more significant than those only touching the wicks.
However, a longer line that has been touched on more occasions and only

touches the wicks will probably be more significant than one that is relatively -

short and only touches two real bodies.

Candle Charts 273

Chart 13-5 Microsoft, 2000-2001, candles and an RSI. (From www.pring.com.)

70] Microsoft wally Bly é 4— H&S and three Harami
66 i. f ; identical black crows ;
; a
a | 4, Double bottom |

My Rising three methods * |
ising jods i

454 Vat
9-day RSI if

S ns
iS)

a
oi [fv ~~
04
405
oi pl A

204 $ H
Vis Bs 0 6 V3 Ror |e Ti fe pee fe ye be poy B [12 Bo
er [November [December 001 February
Candle Volume Charts

Candle volume charts are the same as regular candle charts with one impor-
tant difference. The width of the real bodies varies with the level of volume
during that particular session. The greater the volume, the wider the real
body and vice versa. This is a very useful way of presenting the data because
the signals from the regular candlesticks are preserved, yet the width of the
real bodies offers a quick and simple overview of the volume pattern. We
will have a lot to say on volume in Chapters 22 and 23, including the con-
cept of equivolume on which the candle volume technique is based.

Chart 13-6 shows a candle volume chart for Wal-Mart. Notice how the early
November window following the bullish engulfing pattern was closed soon
after. However, the very thin candles that were involved in the retracement
Move indicated a lack of volume, which is precisely the type of thing that is
Tequired in a pullback of this nature. Heavy volume in such a situation would
indicate selling pressure as opposed to the situation here where prices were
clearly falling because of a lack of buying interest.

previous rally experienced a series of very thin candles, which indi-

_ tated that prices were rising on lower volume. This is opposite to the norm,

Where rising prices and volume are healthy. The very thin candles therefore
warned that the days of the rally were numbered.


psmniciameilalesion diattncibtitiste ane e+

274

Chart 13-6 Wal-Mart, 2000-2001, and candle volume. (From www.pring.com.)

Candle Charts

Chart 13-7 Microsoft, 2000-2001, and candle volume. (From www.pring.com.)

275

wed Wal-Mart (Candle Volume) 4— High volume, long white line

experiences no follow-through

i" a
pee \

Low volume and
small, real bodies ® i

bh
if ‘ / ;

Correction on falling

WN volume closes the window
Window
6 [13 Bol 4 [ii fis pe 16 2
November December ‘ebruary (March

The late November/early December rally was associated with wider can-
dies, which was a good sign. However, as we reach the week of the fourth,
the candles move sideways, but are very thin. This indicates that the balance
between buyers and sellers was more evenly matched. The doji on the day
of the high also reflects the even balance. This characteristic is often fol-
lowed by a trend reversal, especially if volume picks up on the downside.
That’s precisely what happened here, as the up trendline is violated and the
candles thicken up.

The long white line that developed at the very end of December looked
good at the time, since this candle was a pretty wide one, indicating heavy
volume. However, there was no followthrough on the upside, which indi-
cated that the long white line was a buying climax. This was confirmed first
with the establishment of a harami on the subsequent day and by a long
black candle that retraced all of the ground gained by the long white line.
